Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AB
ABE
AC
ADP
AF
AFD
AfDB
AFI
AOS
Agent Bank
Agricultural Bank of Egypt
Agricultural Cooperative
Agricultural Development Plan
Adaptation Fund
Agence Française de Développement
African Development Bank
Alliance for Financial Inclusion
Annual Outcome Survey
BMGF
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
BMS
CB
CBE
CC
CDA
CFI
CGC
CIB
CPMI
CW
ECM
EDHS
EGP
EMFF
ESC
FC
FIGI
FM
FRA
FSS
GA
GDM
GFA
GoE
GPC
Business Development and Marketing Specialist
Commercial Banks
Central Bank of Egypt
Credit Cooperatives
Community Development Association
Cooperating Financial Institution
Credit Guarantee Company
Commercial International Bank
Community Production and Marketing Institution
Credit Wholesalers
Environment and Climate Manager
Egypt Demographic and Health Survey
Egyptian Pound (1USD=16.6EGP)
Egyptian Micro Finance Federation
Executive Steering Committee
Finance Coordinator
Financial Inclusion Initiative
Finance Manager
Financial Regulatory Authority
Financial Services Specialist
GPCU Agronomist
Governorate Deputy Manager
GPCU Accountant
Government of Egypt
Governorate Programme Coordinator
GPCU
Governorate Programme Coordination Unit
GSC
GSM
HRA
Governorate Steering Committee
Gender and Social Inclusion Manager
HR and Administration Assistant
HRM
HR and Administration Manager
IAMP
Irrigation Asset Management Plan
IAS
ICB
IDB
IE
IGE
IIS
ITU
KM
KYC
LSP
M&E
Irrigation Advisory Services
Institutional Capacity Building
Industrial Bank of Egypt
Infrastructure Engineer
Income generation and enterprise
Irrigation improvement Sector
International Telecommunications Union
Knowledge Management
Know your Customer
Lead Service Provider
Monitoring and Evaluation
MAPS
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
MA
Marketing Association
MALR
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reforms
MF
MFI
MFP
MIC
MKIS
MKM
MKS
MoF
MoSIT
MoSS
MSME
Microfinance
Micro Finance Institution
M&E Focal Point
Ministry of investment and International Cooperation
M&E, KM and ICT Specialist
M&E and KM Manager
M&E and KM Specialists
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Supply and Internal Trade
Ministry of Social Solidarity
Micro/Small Medium Enterprise
MSMEDA
Micro and Small Medium Enterprises Development Agency
MWRI
Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation
NBFI
NC
NGO
Non-Bank Financial Institution
National Coordinator
Non-Governmental Organisation
NGO-MFI
NGO Microfinance Institutions
NPCU
National Programme Coordination Unit
NPL
NPM
OFIDO
ORMS
PAR
PB
PCR
Non-Performing Loan
National Programme Manager
On-farm Irrigation Development Project in Old-lands
The Operational and Results Management System
Portfolio at Risk
Participating Bank
Project Completion Review
PM
PMA
PRIDE
PRIME
PS
PSC
SAIL
SC
SCS
STS
SYP
ToT
VC
VIP
Procurement Manager
Production and Marketing Association
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments
Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement Project
Procurement Specialist
Programme steering committee
Sustainable Agricultural Investments and Livelihoods
Subcomponent
Social and Community Mobilization Specialist
STAR Technical Specialist
Star Young Professional
Training of Trainers
Value chain
Village Implementation Plan
WRMP
Water Resources Management Plan
WUA
YCF
Water Users Association
Young Community Facilitators
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/31
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$16,570,000
$0
$16,570,000
Introduction[1]: The Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience (STAR) programme aims to contribute to improved living standards of
smallholder farmers and poor and vulnerable women and youth in the rural areas in Upper Egypt. The target households will develop resilience to
future water scarcity and climate risks by increasingly adopting efficient production and irrigation technologies, improving the quality and productivity
of their produce, enhancing their profitability through better market linkages and diversifying their income through a range of microenterprises. The
programme duration is Seven years. The target outreach is 240,000 households (1.2 million household members) comprising 160,000 households
who will directly benefit from STAR interventions and 80,000 households who will indirectly benefit as their farmlands are located in the STAR
rehabilitated command areas. STAR will reach the target households across 160 villages in 24 irrigation command area based clusters (refer para 6
below)
Benefits: Key impacts/outcomes of the STAR programme include: i) 20% reduction in percentage of rural households living below the national
poverty line in the targeted areas, ii) 50% increase in average HH income, iii) 12,555 new jobs (full time equivalent) created, iv) 50% of rural
producers’ organizations reporting increase in sales, v) 60% of households reporting increase in production, vi) 60% of households reporting
reduced water shortage vis-à-vis production needs, vii) 2 policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment, viii)
an increase in social welfare (multiplying effect) of Egyptian Pound (EGP) 1.04 billion, ix) an incremental tax revenue of EGP 324 million, and x) a tax
recovery index of the programme of 75%.
Programme area: STAR will implement its activities in three governorates of upper Egypt: Menya, Asyut and Sohag. The geographic area is
identified based on high poverty and food insecurity levels. Around 12 million people live in rural regions of these governorates, and 6.7 million (56%)
are poor and cannot meet their basic needs. The poverty levels for the three governorates are, Asyut (66%), Sohag (66%) and Menya (57%). Within
these areas STAR will follow a programmatic approach as described below.
Programmatic approach: STAR will aim at rural transformation in the selected governorates following a programmatic approach. The current IFAD
funding cycle of seven years will support STAR Phase 1 which will enable STAR benefits to reach 160 villages, or 20% of the 850 villages in the three
governorates. The subsequent phases will be implemented with the objective of building on the Phase 1 success stories and expanding the STAR
benefits to the other villages and other governorates in a systematic manner. STAR Phase 1 will facilitate smooth transition to subsequent phases by
strengthening Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reforms (MALR’s) capacity and readiness to continue, convening donor and government resources to
support subsequent phases, leveraging STAR credit funds to crowd-in additional financial resources from private financial institutions, widely
disseminate success stories and their implementation mechanisms using digital technologies, strengthening community level institutions and human
capacities; and developing a network of service providers capable of scaling up STAR’s achievements.
Implementation stages: STAR Phase 1 will have two implementation stages, the ‘calibration stage’ and the ‘scaling up’ stage. In the calibration
stage (Years 1 to 3) STAR will focus on consolidating and showcasing the achievements of other donor and IFAD projects and implementing the full
range of STAR demonstrations and other interventions in 20-30 model villages (across the 24 clusters) where strong CDAs and community
institutions are already present. Year 1 will be devoted to programme start-up, focusing on preparatory activities, embedding the STAR innovations
in the programme delivery structures and strengthening the partnerships with the development partners, with limited thrust on achieving village level
outreach.The calibration stage will also mobilise and strengthen CDAs and community institutions in the remaining STAR villages (130-140 villages in
the 24 clusters) and prepare them for full implementation in the next stage. The scaling-up stage (Years 4 to 7) will support the implementation of the
full range of STAR interventions in the remaining 130-140 villages which fulfil a set of preconditions that demonstrate their readiness for STAR
implementation
Irrigation command area-based village cluster selection: STAR will follow an irrigation command area based clustering approach whereby
programme interventions will be focused on 24 clusters each comprising a group of 6-8 villages that are served by the same branch canal (mostly
third and fourth order) that needs rehabilitation. The IFAD supported On-farm Irrigation Development Project in Old-lands (OFIDO) along with the
directorates of MALR, Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) and Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS) in each governorate will identify
the STAR clusters by superimposing the map of branch canals (third and fourth-order which need rehabilitation) in the governorate on the map of
villages with high or medium presence of poor population.
Target group: STAR direct beneficiaries will be classified into six target groups, described mainly based on poverty level, land ownership and
access to market. These are i) Very poor households (20% of direct outreach) who are worse-off, landless and near landless households with less
than 0.5 feddan; ii) Poor subsistence households (50% of direct outreach) who practice subsistence agriculture (0.5 -1 feddan), with a low surplus for
selling and low income due to low prices; iii) market-oriented smallholder households (25% of direct outreach), who own 1 to 3 feddans and are
considered borderline poor as they are above the poverty line but at risk to slide back into poverty due to stress and external shocks; iv) better off
households (5% of direct outreach) who are lead farmers (3 feddan plus), agro-enterprises and processors who can serve as aggregators and
transformation agents and demonstrate the viability of new approaches; v) youth (18-35 years - 41% of direct outreach) comprising those currently
engaged (full time or part time) in rural activities and those unemployed (or seasonal workers at minimum wage) interested to explore, identify and
engage in better opportunities; and vi) women (45% of direct outreach) with limited opportunities for economic engagement.
STAR Components: STAR has two inter-related technical components namely Component 1: Strengthening rural institutions, enterprises and
markets and Component 2: Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and resilience. Component 3 focuses on Programme management and policy
engagement.
Component 1: Strengthening rural institutions, enterprises and markets: This component will increase the marketing of produce and
profitability of target households’ by strengthening their community institutions (CI) and microenterprises and linking these to domestic and export
markets. There are two subcomponents (SC): SC 1.1: Strengthening marketing institutions and partnerships; and SC 2.2: Microenterprise
development.
Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening marketing institutions: This sub-component will increase the profitability of the target households by i) developing
and strengthening around 160 Community Development Associations (CDA) and Agricultural Cooperatives (AC) and 1,000 PMAs; ii) facilitating the
development of 2,850 business plans (BPs) and credit support to at least 150,000 farmers to facilitate the implementation of these BPs, iii) brokering
improved marketing linkages (exporters and domestic market buyers) benefitting at least 85,000 farmers supporting and iv) facilitating improved
access to marketing infrastructure and post-harvest technologies for at least 50,000 farmers. The implementation of this subcomponent will involve
preparatory studies and capacity assessments, awareness and training module development, preparing a pool of master trainers through ToTs,
selection and institutional strengthening of partner CDAs and ACs, mobilisation of Production and Marketing Associations (PMAs), Water Users
Associations (WUAs), Income Generation and Enterprise Groups (IGEs), BP development by these groups, supporting these groups to implement
BPs by facilitating their market linkages, access to credit funds and technical implementation support. Digital marketing and financing technologies
will be developed such as STAR market platform comprising (market players inventory, e-market place, STAR input dealer connect and STAR
payments), visual agricultural marketing, and digital finance technologies.
2/31
Sub-component 1.2: Microenterprise development: This subcomponent will reduce women and youth dependence on their families and increase
smallholder family resilience to income shocks by i) engaging them in income generation and microenterprise activities through 1,500 IGE groups,
200 collective youth enterprises and 50 Small and Medium Enterprises (SME), ii) providing entrepreneurship and skills training to about 40,000
women and youth, iii) creating around 12,555 full time equivalent job opportunities. Women IGEs will be promoted in areas such as poultry and small
ruminants (e.g. ducks, goats, sheep), homestead processing and services, roof and homestead gardens, complemented with nutritional awareness
campaigns and food conservation. Youth IGEs will include processing and value addition, e.g. dried basil, tomato paste, sun dried tomatoes,
pomegranate processing; provision of agricultural services (nurseries, equipment repairs, agro dealership, transport services, mechanisation, agro-
dealers and other input provision), marketing information and digital technologies. Digital microenterprise solutions will be promoted such as i)
development of mobile based and on-line ordering system for delivery of fresh local produce to the consumers, ii) an ''uber'' model to aggregate
village level produce to the urban markets, or sharing farm technology such as tractors, and iii) e-commerce activities involving rural youth in
doorstep (field) delivery of the inputs.
STAR will also support the development of 200 collective youth enterprises such as dairy processing and food processing units which will create 1-9
full time youth jobs each and have supply chain linkages to 20-200 target households. STAR will also support around 50 MSMEs operating as
independent enterprise CDAs or companies. Each MSME will create 10-99 jobs (based on MSMEDA classification for MSMEs) and will have supply
chain linkage to 50-300 target households. Collective youth enterprises can graduate to MSMEs. STAR will support the SMEs in a similar way to the
collective youth enterprises. Collective youth enterprises can graduate to MSMEs. STAR will facilitate the IGEs and enterprises with institutional and
entrepreneurial capacity development, BP development, access to credit, technical capacity building and implementation support to implement the
BPs successfully.
Component 2 Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and resilience: This component will improve the resilience to climate change of
smallholder crop producers by: securing their access to water resources, active participation in WUAs; enhancing the efficiency and sustainability of
their use of soil and water resources, and lower production costs; ensuring compliance with market standards including good agricultural practices
(GAP) and safe pesticide residues free food. It will have two subcomponents: SC 2.1 Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management; and
SC 2.2 Improved crop farming practices.  
Subcomponent 2.1: Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management:  This subcomponent will improve water management and supply in
branch canals and on-farm irrigation efficiency in the 24 selected command areas consisting of connected third and fourth order branch canals and
mesqas (mesqa typically serves an area of 50 to 200 feddan or 20 to 80 hectares) in one water unit. This will be achieved through: i) improved
irrigation water planning and asset management at governorate level for equitable and reliable water distribution considering current and future
challenges from climate change; ii) establishment and strengthening of at least 320 WUAs to enhance participation of water users in irrigation
investments, operation, maintenance, and management for sustainability; and iii) improved irrigation systems at on-farm level, for more efficient use
of irrigation water benefitting at least 30000 farmers. The Sub Component is a continuation of the interventions implemented under OFIDO building
on lessons learnt and introduction of digital technologies in water management. The intended results are irrigation command areas with reliable
water supply for farmers (especially at the tail end), improved irrigation efficiency, increased land values at the tail end of the canals and piped
mesqas, and water, energy, land and labour saving at programme completion. The implementation of the subcomponent will involve selection of
irrigation command areas, improved planning and asset management for equitable and reliable water distribution at governorate level, digitalisation of
water management, rehabilitation of branch canals and drainage systems, establishment and strengthening of WUAs to enhance participation of
water users in irrigation investments and management and improved irrigation systems at mesqa and on-farm for more rational use of irrigation
water.
Subcomponent 2.2: Improved crop farming practices: This subcomponent will facilitate smallholder’s adoption of improved crop cultivation practices
mainly identified in the business plans under subcomponent 1.1. The improvements will consider market product requirements as well as current and
future challenges from climate change and the sustainability of the use and management of soil and water resources. This will be achieved through: i)
strengthening of public, private and digital extension services; ii) participatory analysis of crop production challenges and identification of options for
tolerant crop varieties and improved practices and technologies; iii) training of 500-750 farmers’ groups stimulating their experimental learning; iv)
technical and financial support for at least 640 demonstration farmers; and v) improved access to machinery. The intended results are farmers
accessing timely and scale adapted advice and technical assistance for improving their cropping systems and produce quality and safety, increasing
nutrient and biomass recycling, soil sustainability and reducing costs for agrochemical inputs, and adopting practices that builds resilience against
heatwaves and actions responding to early warning of reduced water availability in years with low Nile flow. The implementation of the
subcomponent will involve i) the strengthening of extension services through STAR young professional (SYP) program, training of CDAs and
government extension staff, digital extension services and private extension services; ii) analysis of challenges and identification of solutions; iii)
modules for farmers group training and learning; iv) demonstration farmers; and v) access to agricultural machinery services
Component 3: Programme management and policy engagement
Component 3.1: Programme management: The Government’s lead agency will be the MALR. A high ranking inter-ministerial Programme Steering
Committee (PSC) would be set up for overall policy decisions and guidance at the National level. A Governorate Steering Committee (GSC) will be
formed in each STAR Governorate to oversee planning, review progress, facilitate linkages between programme stakeholders. A two-level
organisational structure will be established. A National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU) at the National level and three Governorate
Programme Coordination Units (GPCU) (one in each Governorate) will be established for implementing STAR.
 The NPCU will be established in Cairo at the MALR as a unified coordination unit for consolidated management of all IFAD projects/programme in
the country overseeing implementation of STAR along with three other IFAD projects (PRIDE, PRIME, SAIL). All NPCU staff members will be
competitively recruited from the professional labour market and will work on a full-time basis for managing all the project/programmes in the NPCU. A
National Programme Manager (NPM) will head the NPCU day to day operations. STAR will establish three GPCUs, one each in Menya, Sohag, and
the Asyut Governorates. The GPCUs will be dedicated only to the implementation of STAR. The GPCUs will be established as separate offices
within the Directorate of MALR and will be headed by a Governorate Programme Coordinator (GPC) from the MALR Directorate. The GPCUs will
carry out programme implementation at the village level with the support of partner CDAs, Young Community Facilitators (YCF) and STAR Young
Professionals (SYP).
Component 3.2: Policy engagement: IFAD will engage with the Government of Egypt in evidence-based policy dialogue, with key decision makers in
MALR, MWRI and Ministry of Supply and Internal Trade (MoSIT). This is in line with the COSOP Strategic Objective 2 supporting the development of
enhanced policies for inclusive and sustainable rural transformation. More specifically, STAR can play an influencing role in (i) strengthening
cooperatives and marketing associations and their regulatory environment; (ii) promoting inclusive rural financial systems for smallholder farmers; (iii)
fostering collaboration between MALR, MWRI and WUAs on irrigation water management; and (iv) provide digital solutions for agricultural and rural
development. Policy briefs are to be prepared, based on the analyses and results of programme interventions, and shared in learning and policy
dialogue events. To that end, at the request of the government, FAO in cooperation with IFAD are in discussion to revise the National Sustainable
Agriculture Strategy (SADS) 2030 for Egypt. This policy document, together with a Medium-Term Action Plan to be prepared, determine the national
agricultural development strategy and respective investments for a 5-10 year period. Developing policy engagement mechanisms and inter-
ministerial coordination are a key part of programme management and will be handled by the NPCU in close collaboration with the IFAD Country
Director.
3/31
Programme costs:
 The total programme cost is EUR 246 million of which around i) approximately EUR 190.9 million (77%) is mobilized as loans from STAR co
financing partners (EUR 57.5 million from IFAD, EUR 65.8 million from European Investment Bank, EUR 49.4 million from African Development
Bank, EUR 18.2 million from OFID); ii) EUR 29.2 million (12%) is mobilised as grants from STAR co-financing partners (EUR 1.2 million from
IFAD,EUR 16.4 million from EIB, EUR 2.6 million from Financing Gap, EUR 9 million from World Food Programme); iii) EUR 14.1 million (6%) is
contribution from the government and iv) EUR 11.6 million (5%) is beneficiary contribution (in saved cash, kind, credit accessed from private financial
institutions).
 Out of the total budget, about EUR 172 million (70% of investments) will be used to support very poor and poor smallholder households and EUR 74
million (30% of investments) will be directed at market oriented and better off households included as transformation drivers.
 STAR will be highly youth sensitive with around EUR 101 million (41% of investments) invested on youth and also highly gender mainstreamed with
around EUR 111 million (45% of investments) invested on women.
 About EUR 190.9 million (77% of loans to GoE from STAR co financing partners) will be recoverable through repayment of preferential credits to
cooperating financial institutions, repayments to revolving fund schemes set up at the CDA level and assessment and recovery of dues through
government departments (mainly for irrigation improvement investments where CFI credit is not available). All target groups will be clearly informed
about the recoverable nature of the STAR investments (wherever relevant) and STAR support will commence only after receiving the prior consent of
the beneficiaries on this issue. To avoid any ambiguity about the recoverable nature of STAR support, 75-90% of the recoverable investments will be
channelled as credit in preferential terms (refer section 1.A.a, rural financial services)  through cooperating financial institutions (CFIs). Non
recoverable costs e.g. climate-change related capacity development, demonstration plots, and support to livelihoods of the poorest beneficiaries, will
be covered from the grant resources (e.g. from IFAD and AF), to the extent possible. The nature of activities supported for different target groups and
broad mechanism for recovery of these investments is presented in the table below.
Target group
Investment
(EUR mn)
% of investment 
Direct
outreach
Activities supported
Recovery mechanism
Very poor
households
49
20%
32,000
Income generation activities (ducks, goats,
sheep); homestead processing,
roof/homestead gardens, food
conservation; Training and capacity
building, Capacity building of CIs
Repayment of loans to CFIs;
Revolving funds repayments to
CDAs; support through grants.
Poor smallholder
subsistence
households
123
50%
80,000
Irrigation improvement; Adoption of
improved agricultural technology; access
to marketing infrastructure, post harvest
technologies; Digital marketing and
production, Capacity building of CIs
Repayment of loans to CFIs;
Assessment and recovery of
share through government
departments; some support
through grants.
Market-oriented
smallholder
62
25%
40,000
Irrigation improvement; Adoption of
improved agricultural technology,
Demonstrations, Digital marketing and
production, Capacity building of CIs
Repayment of loans to CFIs;
Assessment and recovery
through govt departments;
Fees and charges (e.g. for
infrastructure use)
Better off
households
12
5%
8,000
Demonstrations
Digital marketing and production
Repayment of loans to CFIs;
Fees and charges (e.g. for
marketing infrastructure use)
Total
246
100%
160,000
Target group
Investment
(EUR mn)
% of investment 
Direct
4/31
outreach
Activities supported
Recovery mechanism
Youth
(41% investment
& outreach)
101
41%
65,000
Women
111
45%
72,000
Microenterprises: value addition, e.g. dried
basil, tomato paste, pomegranate
processing, ag. services e.g. nurseries,
equipment repairs, agro dealership
transport services; input provision,
marketing information and digital
technologies.
Repayment of loans to CFIs
Women will be supported in all the above
mentioned categories. Special focus will
be on supporting women from the very
poor category on income generation and
nutrition improvement activities
Repayment of loans to CFIs;
Revolving funds repayments to
CDAs; support through grants
for women from very poor
category.
Exit strategy and sustainability: STAR’s exit strategy and sustainability is built on developing the capacity, readiness and resources of the STAR
partners, to continue their services in the STAR clusters, driven by market forces, even after Phase 1. This will involve i) strengthening MALR’s
capacity to continue STAR implementation on programmatic basis by establishing separate NPCU/GPCUs offices, deploying full-time staff and using
a mix of seconded staff and competitively recruited staff from the market which will develop technical excellence ii) leveraging the STAR credit funds
to crowd-in additional finance to support STAR oriented, pro-poor business opportunities; iii) strengthening community level institutions and human
capacities by supporting institutional development, financial sustainability and technical capacity so that they can continue providing services in the
programme areas; iv) widely disseminating success stories and their implementation mechanisms using digital technologies; and v) developing a
network of service providers to continue supporting STAR’s achievements in phase 1 clusters and also support STAR development in future clusters.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
Governance and administration: The Arab Republic of Egypt has four regions of which the Nile Valley and Delta Region is the only cultivable
part of the country. Though this region covers just 5% of the total land area, about 95% of Egypt’s population of 98.5[2] million live here. The Nile
valley part of this region is located towards the South and is referred to as upper Egypt, while the delta part, situated towards the North, is known
as lower Egypt. The country has 27 Governorates subdivided into many districts and numerous villages.
Political and economic context: Following the revolution in 2011, Egypt underwent political and economic turmoil which slowed down the
annual GDP growth rate to 2.5%, increased inflation to 33% and increased the current account deficit alarmingly[3]. The present government,
sworn-in in 2014, initiated a series of reforms to spur the economy which included passage of the VAT law, reducing energy subsidies, currency
liberalisation and containing wage bills. The changes have gradually restored economic confidence, increased stability, promoted investments
and enhanced exports. In 2018, Egypt reported an increased GDP growth rate of 5.4%, reduction of inflation to 14% and lowering of the
unemployment rate to 11%[4]. Much of Egypt’s economic reform has unfortunately come at the cost of taking on more debt. In December 2018,
Egypt’s foreign debt totalled to an all-time high of US$ 96.6 billion[5], compounded by domestic debt of US$ 240[6] billion. In response, the
government has introduced austerity measures, including liberalising the price of bread flour, slashing fuel and transportation subsidies and an
in-depth review of new external and domestic debt proposals to reduce non-productive borrowings.
State of fragility: The total cultivated area of 3.7 million[7] Ha comprises ‘old-lands’ (two-thirds) which are farmlands adjoining the Nile, and
‘new-lands’ (one-third) which are reclaimed lands developed away from the Nile, to ease the demands on the old-lands. The pressure on the
natural resources in the old-lands has increased rapidly over the last two decades, from the fast-paced population increase from 65 million in
1998 to 98.5 million people in 2018. Furthermore, the population is projected to increase to 150 million in the next 20 years, causing growing
concerns about water scarcity, land scarcity, low productivity and widespread food shortages. The population pressure has caused i) high levels
of land fragmentation with 43% (upper Egypt) and 30% (lower Egypt) of all farms falling below one feddan (0.42 Ha) land-holding size and ii)
incidences of water salinity and increased water shortages mainly affecting the smallholders at the end of the irrigation networks. Irrigation
systems, suffers from inadequate investments and maintenance and, are unable to respond to the increased demand for irrigation water. The
availability of Nile water is likely to suffer future fluctuations due to climate change and upstream dam construction in Ethiopia. To develop
resilience against potential water shortages, the government has identified some command areas that are suitable for shifting to drip irrigation
practices. However, at the farm level, there is still little impact of these threats (water shortage) and policies (for water conservation), and
farmers continue to use surface irrigation resulting in water application efficiency of only 50%[8]. The main factors which challenge the adoption
of water-saving technologies are the lack of awareness, demonstration, finances, technical support in managing salinity and adjusting drip
irrigation equipment and practices to specific soil types and crops, and marketing support for input supply and selling of outputs.
Poverty: The national poverty line is EGP 736 per person per month. Poverty has increased steadily since the beginning of the millennium from
17% (1999-00) to 27.8%[9] (2015-16). Another 25% of the population lives just above the poverty line[10] and may slide back into poverty with
minor shocks. Disparities in poverty follow geographic and gender lines. Around 57% of the population lives in rural areas, and 33% of them are
poor. However, in upper Egypt, 75% of the population live in rural areas, and 52% of them are poor. Around 16% of the rural population is
landless. Poverty in upper Egypt is driven by high population pressure, land fragmentation, illiteracy, unemployment and low levels of investment
in infrastructure and human capital. Women, experience multi-dimensional poverty, with women head of households (11%[11] of rural
households) being most vulnerable. Youth unemployment (34%) and the lack of women’s economic engagement (51% unemployment) have
caused high levels of dependency, leading to poverty. Poverty incidences vary widely across governorates, with income poverty most critical in
Asyut (66%), Sohag (65.8%) and Menya (56.7%) governorates in Upper Egypt.
5/31
National poverty reduction programs: In 2015, the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS) launched the “Takaful and Karama” (solidarity and dignity)
scheme targeting the poor and most vulnerable, children under 18 years, elderly poor above 65 years and disabled persons. The scheme
transfers cash to the eligible families to subsidise costs of children's education, mothers and children health care, healthy nutrition and family
planning. The impact evaluation on the scheme show that 90% of the 9.4 million beneficiaries so far are poor and ultra-poor rural women.
Agriculture development: Agriculture accounts for 13% of GDP, 20% of export revenue and 55% of rural employment. Around 25%[12] of the
national, and 55%[13] of the upper Egypt labour force is engaged in agriculture. However, the sector is affected by low productivity, low
efficiency, gaps in market information, weak linkages to high-value markets, weak rural institutions and limited access to affordable finance.
Some of the crops such as wheat, rice, maize, sugar cane and sugar beet are designated as strategic crops. Potatoes, tomatoes, oranges,
onions, grapes, and dates constitute 60% of the total fruits and vegetable production. The main exports are cotton, potatoes, onions, tomatoes,
legumes, citrus, grapes and melons[14].  Economic opportunities related to the production, processing and supply of agricultural produce are
growing both in export and the domestic markets. Fruits and vegetables exports have increased 40% from 2.0 to 2.8 million tons over the last
decade due to supportive policies, improved quality standards and finding new markets e.g. in EU, China and South Africa. The export of
Medicinal and Aromatic plants (MAPS) such as basil, chamomile, fennel, cumin and caraway has increased 10-12% annually over the last 4-5
years. The domestic fruits and vegetable market is expected to grow from the current US$ 5.5 to 6.2 billion in 2023. (refer PIM, Annex 3,
background note on markets and value chains).
Smallholder farmers: Around 38% farmers own less than one feddan resulting in a large group of smallholder farmers. Smallholders’ production
practices are not market oriented and yields are below potential affected by outdated technologies, deteriorating irrigation infrastructure, limited
access to quality inputs, services and post-harvest support. These factors combined with, overuse of water resources and agrochemicals, also
lead to high production costs, decreased soil fertility, wastage and losses. Smallholders mainly depend on village middlemen (commission
brokers) to sell their produce. They are unable to access large traders and exporters directly due to the limited quantity and quality of their
produce, individual rather than collective marketing efforts and lack of access to market information such as price, volumes and quality
requirements. Studies show that 10-30% of the total harvest by smallholders is affected by deterioration, perishability and wastage due to lack of
access to post-harvest technologies and marketing infrastructure such as collection centres, cold storage, storage and packing houses.
Smallholders are also affected by the limited access to technical guidance through public extension services which are inadequately funded and
have limited capacities. Digital solutions for improved water and soil management, integrated pest management, and sharing and accessing
technical and market intelligence information are rarely used. These factors contribute to low farm income for smallholders. A major fallout of the
low farm income is the lack of incentive for smallholders for adopting water conservation technologies and improving irrigation efficiencies in
addition to the overuse of agrochemicals due to limited knowledge on integrated soil and pest management practices. Consequently, there is
very little preparation or resilience against future shocks mainly expected from the increased fluctuations in the flow of the Nile water.
Rural financial services: The MFI law 2014 considers credit upto EGP 100,000 as microfinance loans. The formal rural microfinance sources
are banks (10 out of 40 banks offer microfinance services), MFI companies (10), NGO-MFIs (901) and ACs. MFIs, NGO-MFIs and ACs cannot
collect deposits and must borrow from credit wholesalers (CA) such as Agricultural Development Plan (ADP) and Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Agency (MSMEDA) for on-lending. NGO-MFIs have the largest share of rural clients. A wide range of financing options
are available for different farming activities at preferential interest rates of 12-15% for individual loans and 5-10% for MSMEs. However, farmers
are not aware of the many possibilities and how to use them according to their needs. The NGO-MFIs have limited financial capacity to serve the
needs of their clientele quickly which has created the perception of credit unavailability. To bypass the long waiting lists of the NGO-MFIs
farmers often opt to get non-preferential credit from MFIs at 25-30%. Perceptions are also not well-grounded on collateral requirements. Despite
an array of options to access credit with soft guarantees (without collateral, promissory checks, communal guarantees) farmers express
concerns about collateral issues. Cases of lack of collateral hindering access to finance, are exaggerated through word of mouth.
 The two main credit wholesalers (CWs) are i) the ADP, a revolving fund (from EU, IFAD, GoE, etc) under the Ministry of Agriculture and Land
Resources (MALR supporting agricultural credit activities and ii) MSMEDA, a successor of the Social Fund for Development (SFD) offering both
financial and non-financial services. The Agricultural Bank of Egypt (ABE) has been restructuring since 2016 and is a critical supplier with 1,210
branches. The Credit Guarantee Company (CGC) is a private company offering guarantees to encourage financial institutions to lend in the rural
sector. The agricultural insurance market is underdeveloped with limited crop and livestock insurance services. MSMEDA is working with AfDB
to develop indexed crop insurance products, and JICA is working to identify micro-enterprise insurance products (refer PIM, Annex 6,
background note on rural finance sector).
National strategies policies and lead institutions: In line with the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 2030 the Government of Egypt
(GoE) has a working plan called the Sustainable Development Strategy (SDS) (Egypt vision 2030) which encompasses the economic, social
and environmental dimensions of development. All development plans in the country are incorporated under the SDS. In line with the SDS 2030,
the MALR has developed the Sustainable Agricultural Development Strategy (SADS) 2030, aimed at modernizing Egyptian agriculture,
achieving food security and improving the livelihood of the rural population. SADS 2030 promotes the reduction of rural poverty through
sustainable use of natural resources, increased land and water productivity, increased food security, promote competitive agricultural products in
local and international markets, more agricultural investments and higher income from rural livelihoods. The GoE has also launched specific
projects that address the needs of youth, women and individuals with special needs. The National Water Resources Plan (NWRP 2017-2037)
aims at developing water security based on the four pillars of enabling environment, water resources development, enhancing water quality and
rational water use. The European Union (EU) is supporting the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI) and its key stakeholders in MSME and
Entrepreneurship National Strategy Implementation. MSMEDA is currently revising the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Strategy.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
12.
Gender and Social Inclusion: Egypt ranks 135 out of 149 countries in the 2018 Global Gender Gap Index. The female literacy rate is 65.5%
compared to 76.5%[15] for male, and female labour participation is 24% compared to 42%[16] for male. The illiteracy and difference between
men and women’s access to education are higher in rural areas in particular in Upper Egypt where 82% of men have ever attended school,
compared with 66% of women. Educational attainment is also associated with wealth index, with the largest difference between males and
females observed in the lowest two wealth quintiles.[17] Women, and even more so rural women. Women suffer from limited mobility and lack of
access to skill development training, entrepreneurial opportunities, finance, financial education, market information, nutritious food and dietary
diversity. Women’s social and economic marginalisation has also led to lower access to education, health, employment, vulnerability to poverty,
food security, ill-health and violence. Women have a critical role in Egyptian agriculture, but their contribution is invisible. While men carry out
the land preparation, planting, weeding, irrigation, and pest control, women are mostly engaged in animal husbandry (95% in Upper Egypt),
13.
14.
15.
fattening small ruminants, and generate additional income from milk, cheese, butter, eggs and poultry. The products are usually used for
consumption with a minimal amount sold in the village market. When women are allowed to work outside the homestead they are involved in
harvesting, handling, sorting and packing processes within the post-harvest activities. The project aims at 45% of the total direct beneficiaries
will be women by supporting productive opportunities that are suitable for them, increasing women’s access to skills, knowledge and business
orientation, and promote women’s leadership and representation. Women are vulnerable to poverty, food security, ill-health and violence. For
every 100,000 live births, 33 women die from pregnancy-related causes; the adolescent birth rate is 50 births per 1,000 women aged 15-19. 
6/31
Youth: With 24% youth population (ages 18-35) Egypt is facing a youth bulge. The youth population is higher in rural areas. About 34% of youth
are unemployed[18] compared to the 13% national unemployment rate. About 38% of the unemployed youth hold university degrees, and
unemployment rates are double for young women (51%) compared to young men (24%).  In recognition of the problem of youth unemployment,
the GoE has initiated youth employment schemes in agriculture and agribusinesses, e.g. new land plots reserved for youth from poor families
and unemployed graduates. The labour-intensive traditional agricultural practices do not attract the youth to agricultural production activities.
The main concern for rural youth is their lack of access to entrepreneurial opportunities, finance, upskilling training and job qualifications. Youth
are also more keen to engage with digital solutions improving efficiency and opening new business opportunities in production, processing and
marketing. The project aims at 41% of total direct beneficiaries will be youth (18-35 years old) by providing training on entrepreneurial skills,
agribusiness, trade, services provision and digital solutions, access to youth financing schemes, and implementing a STAR young professional
program.   
Nutrition: Malnutrition is a growing public health concern, with high rates of stunting, micronutrient deficiencies, overweight and obesity. The
number of undernourished has increased from 3.7% to 4.6% over the last decade. A recent ‘Cost of Hunger’ analysis in Egypt concludes that
the total losses associated with malnutrition can be as high as 26.8 billion EGP by 2025 without measures to address this issue[19]. Obesity is
on the rise, compounded by high prices of healthy food, changing lifestyles, and poor nutritional awareness. Around 15% of children are
overweight. Also, 31% of adults and 48% of rural women older than 15 are obese. Rising poverty has resulted in increasing dependence on
cheaper, calorie-dense foods, including subsidised commodities, all of which correlate with obesity. The project will contribute to improved diet
among the target population by supporting smallholder farmers in increasing their production of healthy food and most importantly through
nutrition awareness training as an integral part of training offered to women and youth. The project will undertake a detailed nutritional
assessment at baseline taking into account specific nutritionally vulnerable populations considering nutrition requirements by age, gender and
poverty status.
Climate and environment: Agriculture in Egypt is very sensitive to climate change. Analysts forecast a temperature increase of 1.5-2°C by
2040, which can decrease the production of wheat by 12%, maize by 47%, rice by 26 to 47% and vegetables by 28%[20]. It can reduce the
production of livestock and affect the productive potential of many agricultural zones. The marginal agrarian areas will be negatively affected,
and desertification will increase, including in the margins of the new lands. High temperatures would increase evaporation and crop and animal
water needs, cause acute water scarcity and lead to soil degradation and loss of soil fertility. A rise in sea levels will have negative impacts on
coastal areas, tourism and agricultural land in the Nile Delta region[21]. Climate change impacts on increased variation in the Nile water flow is
already felt. Egypt suffers from an annual 21 billion cubic meters between water consumption and production. This gap is exacerbated by a
decrease of 5 billion cubic meters in Nile waters in 2019 due to decreasing rate of annual rainwater in Ethiopian highlands. The high population
pressure increases the pressure on the natural resources causing water scarcity to strike much faster, pushing a high percentage of poverty
vulnerable people further into poverty. The project will support smallholders in implementing changes in technologies and practices increasing
water and land productivity and livelihood diversification in order to develop their resilience to climate change. Adaptation measures will include
improvements in irrigation techniques and know-how, the introduction of drought and salinity tolerant cultivars, the introduction of renewable
energy alternatives for water pumping, as well as improving production, post-harvest and marketing facilities. 
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
16.
17.
18.
About 56% of the population in Upper Egypt are poor (compared to 19% in the Nile Delta) due to the prevalence of traditional farming practices
in highly fragmented land areas with 77% of agricultural land owned by smallholders where some have 1-3 feddan but the majority have less
than 1 feddan. The smallholder farmers in this region have little marketable surplus that weaken their bargaining power and increase their
dependence on individual selling in local markets and on commission-based middlemen, leading to low incomes. Moreover, they suffer from
limited access to market information, limited value addition opportunities, underdeveloped marketing infrastructure and feeble participation in
collective marketing initiatives. The low farm incomes together with the lack of access to affordable finance and limited savings constrain their
ability to invest in upgrading their production technologies and adopting market-oriented production practices. Their production capacity is
further affected by weak extension services, slow adoption of resources-use efficient and sustainable production practices, deteriorating
irrigation infrastructure, especially at the end of the irrigation systems, and limited access to mechanised services.
 Smallholders are increasingly vulnerable to two slowly intensifying stress factors; namely the population growth and climate change putting
pressure on land and water resources. The lack of incentives for adopting water conservation technologies (in the old lands), where surface
irrigation still predominates, results in low preparedness and resilience against livelihood risks from increasing temperatures and expected
fluctuations in the Nile water flow (due to climate change and the construction of dams upstream). Other key challenges, contributing to limited
diversification of family incomes and low resilience capacities, are limited economic opportunities for women, high levels of youth unemployment
and moderate levels of malnutrition and lack of dietary diversity. Women’s involvement in agriculture production is relatively low due to social
norms limiting their movement and farmlands located distant from the village settlements. At the same time there are limited income generation
opportunities for women in the villages. The youth are not attracted to agricultural production activities due to labour-intensive traditional
agricultural practices generating only limited income. Youth engagement in microenterprises and rural sector jobs are restricted due to limited
skills and skill development opportunities and limited access to finance. The project seeks to address these challenges building on the
government’s and IFAD’s experiences and comparative advantages and engagement in Upper Egypt. 
 IFAD has since 1979 accumulated a vast experience from rural development programmes in Egypt, particularly in the areas of developing rural
institutions and marketing associations, productivity improvement, supporting resilient livelihoods, improving marketing linkages, and
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure. IFAD co-financed programmes have benefitted around 1.3 million households and covered about
447,000 feddan. They have mainly focused on two groups of activities: a) support for settlements in lands reclaimed from the desert (the new-
lands); and b) support for productivity improvement in old-lands in the Nile Valley and Delta. E.g. the West Noubaria Rural Development Project
(WNRDP), helped to increase the settlement rate in new lands from 25% to 100% through social infrastructure and local institution development
and creating market linkages. The Upper Egypt Rural Development Project (UERDP) increased incomes, assets and expenses on key items
such as education, health and food, and enhanced the resilience of livelihoods of 40,000 beneficiaries.  
19.
IFAD also has long engagement with the government in supporting smallholders in addressing their production and marketing constraints in
Upper Egypt. The IFAD supported PRIME project (completion in 2020) has resulted in several success stories related to marketing and
increasing productivity in the STAR programme area. PRIME has capacitated 126 marketing associations (FA) and linked 50% of them (4,000
members) directly to buyers through contract farming. These linkages increased the net income of the farmers by at least 15%. The IFAD
supported OFIDO project has rehabilitated irrigation for 20,000 feddans by replacing numerous uncontrolled small lifting diesel pumps, located
at multiple points along the branch canals, with single-lift electrically powered collective pumping stations. Open earth canals have been
replaced by low pressure buried pipes distributing directly water to farmer plots through outlet hydrant valves reducing the loss of water. STAR
will build on lessons learned and integrate and consolidate the achievements of these projects where relevant and expand the outreach of the
benefits to other poverty pockets in Upper Egypt.
7/31
20.
21.
22.
 STAR will contribute to the successful implementation of the COSOP (2019-2024) for Egypt as STAR’s goals and development objectives are
aligned to the COSOP. The COSOP focuses at the lack of incentives for adopting conservation oriented irrigation technologies, the dependence
on traditional marketing linkages, lack of access to rural finance and growing threats from climate change and has two inter-related Strategic
Objectives (SOs). SO1, is oriented to improve the livelihoods of the rural households enhancing the productivity and profitability of agricultural
related activities and SO2 aims to develop policies that support sustainable rural transformation. STAR is also in line with the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2016-2025 and relevant IFAD policies. In particular, it is in line with the SO1 of the Strategic Framework ‘Increase poor rural
people’s productive capacities’ through improved access to agricultural technology, rural finance and capacity building and SO2 ‘Increase poor
rural people’s market participation’ through strengthening of farmers organisations, marketing infrastructure and strengthening of the rural
investment environment. The design of STAR activities, implementation arrangements and M&E system complies with IFAD Targeting Policy,
the Rural Youth Action Plan 2019-21, IFAD rural finance policy and IFAD policy on gender equality and women’s empowerment. STAR is also
aligned to the IFAD mainstreaming priorities of climate and environment, gender and youth inclusion. 
 STAR will benefit from IFAD’s convening capacity to support the government in leveraging and coordinating partnerships with other developing
agencies (AfDB, OFID, WFP, etc) to contribute to making STAR a comprehensive programme, supporting the government's strategy to invest
jointly in developing the rural sector in Upper Egypt and scale up good practices. Although donor programmes have several success stories, the
lack of harmonisation of these initiatives has diluted continuation and consolidation of achievements. The number of poor families in Upper
Egypt is very high. Limited time and resources available to the individual donor projects often constrain them from reaching the critical mass
needed for triggering transformation and achieving sustainable and scalable results. STAR will provide a platform for multiple donors working on
similar themes to collaborate towards achieving a unified objective, with each partner focusing its implementation efforts on its areas of
comparative advantage. The STAR platform will facilitate different partners to harmonise their planning, financing and implementation activities
and adopt the STAR supported clustering approach for a systematic development of the governorates instead of disbursing  resources without
coordination.  
The STAR interventions will capitalise on the existing opportunities created by development trends and other donor and government projects to
address the critical developmental challenges in the programme area. The delta region, which is the main agricultural production basin, is facing
increasing competition, partnership costs and water salinity issues, causing agribusinesses to explore partnership opportunities in the Upper
Egypt region, which has fertile lands, limited competition and fewer water quality and availability issues. Donor projects (e.g. IFAD-PRIME,
USAID-Feed the Future) have responded to these opportunities and have demonstrated that it is possible to connect smallholders to export and
domestic markets. Similarly, WFP has started land consolidation and joint production among farmers activities, thereby increasing productivity of
fragmented land. Youth are increasingly interested in entrepreneurial activities instead of regular jobs. Responding to this attitude, some donors
(UNIDO, WFP) have promoted youth enterprises such as honey production, fruits and vegetable processing and agricultural residue-based
handicrafts making. Similarly, WFP has successfully supported women’s income generation and nutrition-related activities, e.g. poultry, small
ruminants and roof gardens. However, the overall outreach of these success stories is limited. STAR will harmonize, consolidate and upscale
the successful experiences of previous projects.
23.
 Telecommunication network and mobile phones have high penetration which opens up new opportunities for digital solutions, that the project
seeks to promote. Farmers are increasingly using social media for agronomic and market-related support. The growing familiarity with digital
technologies and social media in the villages provides possible platforms for a range of digital services including digital extension, aggregation,
market identification, price transparency, financial inclusion and agronomic support services tailored to smallholders. STAR will build on these
opportunities and support developing a set of digital interventions to assist production, marketing, youth employment leading to innovations,
efficiency, and scaling up of successful experiences.
B. Lessons learned
24.
Lessons from PRIME and OFIDO: STAR design is based on the following lessons learned from the implementation of OFIDO and PRIME: 
25.
26.
27.
Geographical concentrated focus within governorates: The PRIME project implemented its activities in different parts of the governorates without
following any specific pattern. Village selection was made mainly based on the presence of strong partner Community Development
Associations (CDAs which are NGOs) or cooperatives and not based on poverty targeting or marketing-based criteria. At the same time the
investments done through credits are  geographically disconnected from the Marketing Associations (MAs) supported and also the OFIDO
investments in water infrastructure has not been coordinated with PRIME activities and beneficiaries. STAR will overcome these challenges by
following a command area (water unit) based geographical clustering approach in which the poor villages located in the command areas of
branch canals (requiring more significant, urgent rehabilitation), will be prioritised for STAR interventions. The model will be replicable in other
branch canals. The STAR villages in a cluster will receive the full package of interventions, including credit, water management, production
improvement, and marketing support, to create synergies and higher levels of poverty alleviation impacts, using a territorial approach. 
Joint planning of village-level interventions. The PRIME supported credit investments were disconnected geographically from the supported
MAs. The gap occurred as MSMEDA and ADP, the CWs which implemented the rural finance component, selected CFIs without coordination or
consultation with the PRIME implementation units. The selected CFIs were often located far from the PRIME core villages and they did not
select credit beneficiaries based on poverty targeting criteria. STAR will overcome this challenge by involving all partners (CFIs, private sector
actors, community institutions and government agencies) engaged in village level implementation of STAR activities to jointly develop a village
implementation plan (VIP) at the beginning of each year which will identify the activities of each partner and coordination mechanisms between
them (refer component 1.1). Further, the CWs will select the final CFIs from a list of pre-screened CFIs already identified by STAR. Thus, only
CFIs that are aware of the STAR objectives and are willing to deliver services in the STAR supported villages will be selected. 
Business plan-based approach. PRIME and OFIDO developed community institutions such as Water Users Associations (WUAs), CDAs and
MAs, as community level implementation partners, but there was not enough emphasis on the long-term vision and financial sustainability of
these institutions. STAR will follow a participatory institutional and business plan development approach for engaging with the community
institutions. The business plans will identify the future goals and objectives and provide a blueprint of activities for achieving these through the
successful STAR partnership. No investments will be done before these plans have been agreed by the assembly of the beneficiaries in the
group. The institutional development and business plan approach will improve the capacity of the community institutions to sustain and further
develop the achievements of STAR interventions. 
28.
Separate STAR offices managed by full-time STAR staff: MALR implemented PRIME and OFIDO using government staff members who also
29.
30.
31.
32.
had other responsibilities. Project implementation quality was affected by capacity gaps and the absence of dedicated staff attention to project
needs. To address this challenge, IFAD and the GoE will set up a National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) in Cairo for dedicated management
of all IFAD projects including STAR using competitively hired full time technical staff. STAR will establish separate Governorate Programme
Coordination Units (GPCU) offices within the MALR directorates, with full time staff to facilitate STAR implementation in the governorates.
These changes will provide more time, continuous support and better quality of STAR implementation at the community level.  
8/31
Strengthen STAR procurement: The review of MALR’s procurement system (applied to OFIDO and PRIME) has indicated: i) low procurement
capacity; ii) lack of clarity in instructions to bidders, qualification, evaluation, award criteria, and contract management; iii) inequitable balance in
the contract conditions between the employer and contractor; and iv) lack of application of a post-qualification process on the nominated
contractor. STAR will address these shortcomings by hiring two qualified procurement specialists on full-time basis at the NPCU. IFAD will
provide procurement-related international and national TA during the start-up phase and implementation to strengthen procurement capacity
and strengthen the procurement procedures. 
Improve coordination with other Ministries: The ground level implementation of OFIDO was affected by ineffective coordination between
different Ministries, e.g. MALR and MWRI. STAR will overcome this by developing a Governorate Steering Committee (GSC) in each STAR
Governorate to oversee planning, review progress, facilitate linkages between programme stakeholders and remove bottlenecks affecting
smooth implementation. The GSC will meet quarterly. The GSC will also constitute a GSC Technical Committee from within the GSC members
to meet whenever needed to resolve any programme implementation bottlenecks encountered. Additionally, participatory AWPB preparation will
be followed involving all stakeholders from the beginning.  
Transparent and efficient engagement with the communities: In many locations, OFIDO delayed the development of WUAs, held limited
consultations with the communities before implementation, and informed them about the recoverable nature of the project investments only after
implementation. These delays and limitations in the consultations have limited the capacity of the WUAs to manage the new infrastructures
sustainably and generated resistance to repayments. STAR will address these challenges by developing and strengthening WUAs as the entry
point for irrigation related activities. The GPCUs will hold detailed consultations with the WUAs as a part of the process for developing technical
specifications for irrigation works. WUAs will also be involved in the development of the village AWPBs and joint village investment plans. Water
investment works will only be started when an agreement, detailing investment types and planning and post investment maintenance and
operation arrangements, has been achieved with the WUAs. Further, the recoverable investments will be delivered through CFIs to avoid any
misconception about the recoverable nature of the investments. 
Lessons from the other partners: STAR design includes many features based on the lessons learned by other development partners. WFP
has developed a land consolidation/joint cultivation model (where individual farmers retain their land titles) that incentivises smallholders to
merge their lands to support efficient production practices. STAR will partner with WFP for the replication of this model in STAR areas. The
USAID ‘Feed the Future’ project has shown that produce selling contracts have the risk of delayed payments to producers. STAR will guide
farmers to develop buffer mechanisms through savings, overdraft accounts and other means to mitigate for late-payments and enjoy higher
prices. The USAID experience has also shown little awareness amongst smallholders of regulatory standards, particularly for exports
(traceability, pesticide-free, etc). STAR will strengthen physical extension services and introduce digital extension practices for developing
farmer awareness and capacity building related to the above-mentioned areas.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
33.
Programme goals and objectives:
34.
The programme goal is to contribute to improved living standards of smallholder farmers and poor and vulnerable women and youth in the rural
areas in Upper Egypt.
35.
STAR’s development objective is to improve the income and resilience of smallholder and landless families. This will be done through better
marketing linkages, sustainable and climate change adapted agricultural intensification, development of small rural businesses and inclusive
policies and strategies, building on women and youth potentials as untapped resources for family resilience. 
36.
Programme duration: The STAR programme duration is seven years. 
37.
Programme outreach: STAR will provide services to 240,000 poor rural households (1.2 million individuals with an average of 5 members per
household), across 160 villages in 24 command area based clusters in the three Governorates of Menya, Asyut and Suhag. The target
households are divided into ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ categories. The direct target group consists of 160,000 smallholder households (800,000
individuals) who will receive the full set of STAR services. These producers will be drawn mainly from the categories of extra small (less than 1
feddan) and small landholders (less than 3 feddans) with special emphasis on the inclusion of women, women-headed households and youth
(aged 18-35). The indirect target group comprises 80,000 households (400,000 individuals) with farmlands located within the command areas
who will also benefit from the STAR supported rehabilitated water infrastructures and their inclusion as transformation drivers in STAR
supported WUAs and Production and Marketing Associations (PMA). However, many of these households will possibly the relatively better-off
(above three feddans), who can forge linkages to markets, financing institutions, input suppliers and agricultural service providers on their own. 
38.
Key outcomes and impact indicators: Key impacts/outcomes of the STAR programme include: i) 20% reduction in percentage of rural
households living below the national poverty line in the targeted areas, ii) 50% increase in average HH income, iii) 20% increase in Pro-WEAI
score over baseline, iv) 12,555 new full time equivalent jobs created, v) 50% of rural producers’ organizations reporting increase in sales, vi)
60% of households reporting increase in production, vii) 30% of women reporting improved quality of their diets, viii) 60% of households
reporting reduced water shortage vis-à-vis production needs, and ix) 2 policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification
or amendment.
39.
STAR supported commodities: STAR investments will support activities related to fresh and processed fruits and vegetables, medicinal and
aromatic plants, field crops relevant to smallholders and other livelihood diversification options such as poultry, small ruminants and beekeeping.
To a limited extent, STAR will support dairy, fisheries and other farm-based opportunities with relevant profitability for the target groups. STAR
will prioritise commodities with higher nutrition improvement potential in addition to market and income generation potential.
40.
Geographic area of intervention
41.
STAR will implement its activities in three governorates of Upper Egypt: Menya, Asyut and Sohag. The geographic area is identified based on its
42.
43.
44.
45.
high poverty and food insecurity level. Around 12 million people live in rural regions of these governorates, and 6.7 million (56%) are poor and
cannot meet their basic needs. The poverty levels for the three governorates are, Asyut (66%), Sohag (66%) and Menya (57%). The largest
population with poor access to food in upper Egypt is registered in Asyut with 2.4 million, followed by Sohag with 2.1 million (WFP, 2013). STAR
will follow a programmatic approach for further geographical targeting and planning of interventions within these three governorates as
described below. 
9/31
Programmatic approach: STAR will aim at rural transformation in the selected governorates following a programmatic approach. The current
IFAD funding cycle of seven years will support STAR Phase 1 which will enable STAR benefits to reach 160 villages, 20% of the 850 villages in
the three governorates. The subsequent phases will be implemented with the objective of building on the Phase 1 success stories and
expanding the STAR benefits to the other villages and other governorates in a systematic manner. The key aspects embedded in the
implementation arrangements of Phase 1 to enable STAR to make a smooth transition to the next phase are: i) strengthen MALR capacity,
coordination with MWRI, and develop their readiness for the next phase; ii) develop standardized implementation arrangements for the
successful interventions identified for the next phase; iii) convene government and donor resources to support the next phase; iv) capacitate and
orient the CFIs to expand their STAR oriented portfolios to potential clusters for the next phase; v) widely disseminate success stories and their
implementation mechanisms using digital technologies; vi) develop the digital agriculture infrastructure and services delivery models necessary
for supporting the rapid scaling up of these technologies in the next phase; vii) support policy dialogue based on Phase 1 implementation
experiences and strengthen the enabling environment for implementing the next phase; viii) facilitate the strong partner CDAs and ACs to
mentor other CDAs/ACs in potential clusters for the next phase; and ix) develop a network of service providers to continue strengthening
STAR’s achievements in the next phase (refer section on ‘exit strategy’ for more details). 
Implementation stages: STAR Phase 1 will have two implementation stages, the ‘calibration stage’ and the ‘scaling up’ stage. In the calibration
stage (Years 1 to 3) STAR will focus on consolidating and showcasing the achievements of other donor and IFAD projects and implementing the
full range of STAR demonstrations and other interventions in 20-30 model villages (across the 24 clusters in the three governorates) where
strong CDAs and community institutions are already present. Year 1 will be devoted to programme start-up, focusing on preparatory activities,
embedding the STAR innovations in the programme delivery structures and strengthening the partnerships with the development partners, with
limited thrust on achieving village level outreach. Thereafter, STAR will i) mobilise and strengthen CDAs and community institutions in the
remaining STAR villages (130-140 villages in the 24 clusters); ii) expose the target households in the new villages to the demonstrations in the
model villages using physical study trips and digital extension methodologies, iii) stimulate business ideas and develop readiness of community
institutions to prepare BPs that can be implemented in the next stage with STAR support. In the scaling-up stage (Years 4 to 7)  STAR will
support the implementation of the full range of STAR interventions in the remaining 130-140 villages which fulfil a set of preconditions that
demonstrate their readiness for STAR implementation (e.g. presence of already strengthened CDAs and community institutions, willingness of
target households to participate and adopt new technologies demonstrated). 
Irrigation command area-based village cluster selection: STAR will follow an irrigation command area (water units) based approach for
clustering villages focusing programme interventions on a group of 6-8 villages that are served by the same branch canal (mostly third and
fourth order) that needs rehabilitation. STAR will select the irrigation command areas based on criteria including (i) higher concentration of
poverty; (ii) the main and second order branch canals and the drainage system are in good working condition and there is no need for major
investments for their upstream improvements; (iii) there are no major social and environmental problems that would require substantial
mitigation interventions by the programme; and (iv) there is willingness by farmers served by the command area and mesqas (mesqa typically
serves an area of 50 to 200 feddan or 20 to 80 hectares and may be subdivided in Merwas, which are canals going into the fields) to participate
in the programme including forming WUAs, participate in the management of the branch canal, and agree on cost recovery mechanisms. The
IFAD supported OFIDO along with the directorates of MALR, MWRI and MoSS in each governorate will identify the STAR clusters by
superimposing the map of branch canals (third and fourth-order which need rehabilitation) in the governorate on the map of villages with high or
medium presence of poor population. The cluster selection process will also consider that: i) the selected clusters are distributed across the
poorer districts and not concentrated in just 1-2 districts; and ii) some of the clusters in each governorate are located in the edges of the old
lands that can allow STAR to develop models and interventions aimed at expanding the green belt at the edges of the old lands. 
Community institutions in the programme area: The different community institutions (CI) present in the programme area are i) Agricultural
Cooperatives (AC), present in each village and used by MALR to supply subsidized agricultural inputs to farmers. Their marketing function is
very weak, and their management is dominated by larger farmers; ii) Community Development Associations (CDA) are NGOs, registered and
supervised by the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS). They have a general assembly with 50-400 community members and partner with larger
NGOs and donors projects to implement development programmes at the village level; iii) Marketing Associations (MA) are special interest
groups supporting members’ produce marketing. They lack legal status and are function under the umbrella of the village CDAs. STAR will refer
to these groups as Production and Marketing Associations (PMA) to reflect both production and marketing related functions carried out by them;
iv) Income generation and enterprise groups (IGE) are informal groups focused on savings, internal loans, income generation and
microenterprise activities. They too function under the CDA; v) Water Users Associations (WUA) are legal entities established under Ministerial
decrees as specialized associations performing functions related to water management. They are not involved in marketing activities (refer PIM,
Annex 4, background note on community based organisations). 
46.
Target groups
47.
Direct beneficiaries can be classified into six target groups, described mainly based on poverty level, land ownership and access to market.
These are i) very poor households; ii) poor subsistence households; iii) market-oriented smallholder households; iv) better off households and v)
youth (age 18-35) and vi) women. The table below summarises target group characteristics;
Target group
Very poor
households
Direct
outreach
% of
outreach
Land ownership
Productivity and access to
markets
Other characteristics
32,000
20%
0.5 feddan
Limited agricultural and other
productive assets
Landless & near landless, living below
the poverty line, ranking amongst the
poorest
Poor smallholder
subsistence
households
80,000
50%
Less than 1
feddan
Experiencing very limited
access to market and income
generation due to low surplus
Farming on very limited land holding
Living below the poverty line,
Market-oriented
smallholder
households
40,000
25%
10/31
1-3  feddan
Access to market but limited
return due to low prices, high
production and transaction
costs, low bargaining power
Farming on small land holding size
Slightly above the poverty line but
vulnerable and transitory poor due to
the risks of sliding back into poverty
Better off
households
8,000
5%
More than 3
feddan
Commercial involvement in
value chains
Offers potential market
linkage to other target groups
medium and large holder farmers,
traders, processors, aggregators and
other actors along the value chains;
transformation drivers
Total
160,000
100%
Youth (18-35)
65,000
41%
skilled, graduated as well as unskilled
low opportunities of employment and self-employment
in agriculture (either as farming as a business or skilled/unskilled labours) and
allied sector (agro-entrepreneurship, service provision, extension).
Women
72,000
45%
low opportunities of employment and self-employment
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
Landless, near landless, very poor and women headed households: They are worse-off landless and near landless households with less than
0.5 feddan. They have high number of family members/dependants, limited productive capacity and livelihoods focused on animal husbandry
(eggs, poultry, ducks), low-income off-farm activities and farm labour. STAR, in line with principles of leave no one behind will include 32,000
such households (70% women, 30% youth). 
Poor subsistence smallholders’ households (less than 1 feddan): Farmers in this category practice subsistence agriculture (0.5 -1 feddan), with
a low surplus for selling and low income due to low prices. Adult men are involved in land preparation, planting, weeding, irrigation and pest
control while women engage in animal husbandry, dairy activities, cheese and butter processing, and occasional informal selling activities.
STAR will target 80,000 such households with minimum 30% women inclusion. STAR will consider specific activities for men (land
consolidation, improved agriculture practices) and women (on-farm and off-farm) along the value chains. 
Market-oriented smallholders’ households (1-3 feddan): Farmers in this category are considered borderline poor as they are above the poverty
line but at risk to slide back into poverty due to stress and external shocks. They typically own 1 to 3 feddans, 1 to 2 cows and buffalos and 5 to 6
small ruminants. They have sufficient labour skills but lack affordable inputs, connectivity to profitable networks and markets, technical capacity,
scale and bargaining power. Their produce is sold at a low price through formal and informal outlets such as neighbours, domestic markets,
brokers, aggregators. Women practice animal husbandry, small animals fattening, ducks rearing, dairy production for informal sale to
complement household income. STAR will target 40,000 market-oriented smallholder households with minimum 30% women inclusion. 
Better off households: These include actors at least one step higher in the agriculture value chain. They include lead farmers (3 feddan plus),
agro-enterprises and processors who can serve as aggregators and demonstrate the viability of new approaches. STAR will engage them as
transformation agents and will consider their influence and potential to serve other producers with market linkages/services. STAR will target
8,000 better-off households including a smaller percentage of women and youth mainly young men and women graduated from universities and
interested in agriculture from agronomic, business and market perspectives. 
Youth: STAR will be highly youth sensitive with around USD 111 million (41% of investments) invested on youth. Youth will comprise 41% of
total direct beneficiaries (21% women and 20% men). The target group includes (i) youth (18-35 years) currently engaged (full time or part time)
in rural activities at subsistence level with an interest to further develop their activities as a business, making use of technologies  and increase
their income, and (ii) unemployed (or seasonal workers at minimum wage) youth interested to explore, identify and engage in better employment
and self-employment opportunities in agri-business, service provision and allied sectors; and (iii) young graduates interested to apply their skills
in the agriculture sectors as professionals service providers.
53.
Women: STAR will be highly gender sensitive with around USD 122 million (45% of investments) invested on women. Women will comprise
45% of total direct beneficiaries. Details of women’s roles and responsibilities and opportunities are presented in the PIM. 
54.
55.
56.
Youth mainstreaming strategy: Young beneficiaries can be economically active by: i) receiving training on agribusiness, trade and services
provision; ii) improving entrepreneurial capacities through training, skill building and access to youth financing schemes; iii) STAR young
professional program which will develop their field experience, CVs, farmer engagement experiences and capacities to engage in rural sector
projects.
Gender mainstreaming strategy: Women will comprise 45% and men 55% of the total outreach. STAR will address gender disparities by: i)
ensuring that women have equal access to capacity building, training, and economic opportunities by deploying facilitators to create an
environment and ensure their mobility and participation; ii) promoting productive opportunities that are suitable for women; iii) increasing
women’s access to skills, knowledge and business orientation through financial literacy, digital literacy and saving habit development; iv)
promote women’s leadership and women representation in the community institutions; and v) improving household’s nutrition by providing
women with nutrition education. 
Targeting Strategy: STAR will apply a combination of self-targeting and direct targeting mechanisms. Specific entrepreneurial opportunities
(e.g. poultry, small ruminants fattening) will be promoted for the landless and vulnerable households. Poor subsistence households will benefit
from interventions such as land consolidation/joint cultivation. Market oriented smallholders will receive support to improve production systems,
and irrigation efficiencies and better-off farmers will be more oriented towards demonstration of new technologies which require higher
investments and risk-taking behaviour. The type of financing will be aligned to the nature of the above-mentioned interventions. Low-income
subsistence households, including unemployed youth and women, will have assured access to affordable credit through revolving fund grants
(from WFP resources) to CDAs. Market-oriented smallholders and better off households (transformation drivers) will adopt new processing and
packaging facilities, agricultural practices and technologies using STAR credit support extended at preferential terms through collaborating
financial institutions (CFI). Refer PIM for detailed description of target groups and targeting strategies, youth and gender mainstreaming
strategies, implementation modalities including social assessment, village level profiling, group formation and training and technical assistance
for women and youth mainstreaming. 
11/31
D. Components/outcomes and activities
57.
STAR is designed with two inter-related technical components and a programme management and policy engagement component: Component
1: Strengthening rural institutions, enterprises and markets; ii) Component 2: Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and resilience and iii)
Component 3: Programme management and policy engagement. 
58.
Component 1: Strengthening rural institutions, enterprises and markets
59.
This component will increase the marketing of healthy and nutritious produce and profitability of target households’ by strengthening their
community inatitutions (CIs) and microenterprises and linking these institutions to domestic and export markets. There are two subcomponents
(SC): SC 1.1: Strengthening marketing institutions and partnerships; and SC 2.2: Microenterprise development. 
60.
Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening marketing institutions
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
This sub-component will increase the profitability of the target households by i) developing and strengthening around 160 CDAs and ACs and
1,000 PMAs; ii) facilitating the development of 2,850 business plans and credit support to at least 150,000 beneficiaries (farmers, women, youth)
to facilitate the implementation of these BPs, iii) brokering improved marketing linkages (exporters and domestic market buyers) benefitting at
least 85,000 beneficiaries (farmers, women, youth) supporting and iv) facilitating improved access to marketing infrastructure and post harvest
technologies for at least 50,000 beneficiaries (farmers, women, youth). 
Preparatory studies and assessments: STAR will contract Lead Service Providers (LSPs) to carry out a set of studies/surveys to: i) assess
the capacities and institutional needs of the CIs; ii) prioritise the commodities with more ‘market potential’, asses their value chains, market
channels, competitiveness and marketing infrastructure needs; iii) pre-screen agribusiness with more potential to partner with the STAR
supported CIs; iv) identify business opportunities for value addition, agricultural service provision (e.g. nurseries, rental of farm equipment) and
income generation for youth and women (refer SC 1.2); v) pre-screen potential CFIs; vi) identify potential digital agricultural services; vii) assess
potential climate risks and develop a preliminary list of measures to address these (financed by Adaptation Fund resources).) and viii) identify
dietary practices and opportunities for improving family nutrition. STAR will select the LSPs from available private, public, university, and NGO
resources through competitive bidding with performance-based contracts (refer PIM, Annex 1 for profile of LSPs). The project will undertake a
detailed nutritional assessment at baseline taking into account specific nutritionally vulnerable populations considering nutrition requirements by
age, gender and poverty status.
Develop a pool of master trainers through ToTs: The LSPs will develop a range of training modules based on the findings of the
studies/surveys. The STAR NPCU team in consultation with the GPCU teams will review and approve these modules. The modules will address
community sensitisation and mobilisation needs, CI institutional development needs, nutrition sensitive agriculture development needs,
enterprise and business development needs. STAR will collaborate with the LSP to organise a series of Training of Trainers (ToT) to prepare
“master trainers” to roll out the training modules in the STAR villages. The master trainers will include STAR staff members, MALR officers,
STAR Young Professionals (SYPs) recruited by STAR, 5-10 Young Community Facilitators (YCFs) nominated by CDAs and ACs in the STAR
villages, potential CFIs (for finance, business management modules), other NGOs, donor programs and private consultancy firms (refer PIM for
details). 
Select and strengthen partner CDAs and ACs: In most villages CDAs will be selected as STAR partners with some cases where ACs will be
selected, when ACs are active in marketing activities. The partner CDAs and ACs will serve as the STAR entry points in a village. STAR will
select the partner CDA and ACs from a shortlist prepared by the LSP, based on the initial survey of CIs applying criteria such as partnership
track record, governance and management, poor women and youth members; support to PMAs and microenterprises, financial linkages and
agriculture and climate related experiences. MoSS will be consulted for final selection of the CDAs. STAR will sign partnership agreements with
selected partner CDAs and ACs. STAR will engage the master trainers to strengthen CDAs and ACs focusing on, stronger governance,
leadership, management, transparent financial system, pro-poor orientation, enhanced business inclination, climate risks management,
orientation to food safety, dietary diversification and nutrition standards (providing knowledge of food sources and their intake requirements for
maintaining healthy diets); STAR will also support the partner CDAs and ACs with registration, bank account opening, office furnishing,
equipment supply and payment of allowances and engage a YCFs to implement STAR related activities in the villages (refer PIM for details). 
Village Implementation Plans: STAR will begin its collaboration with the partner CDAs and ACs by supporting the development of a Village
Implementation Plan (VIP) for each village. The VIP will present how the vision for the development of economic and productive opportunities in
the village will be achieved through the STAR supported interventions. It will present the overall scope of the STAR related activities in the
village, the target groups, implementing partners and overall budget estimate. It will also present needs for nutrition awareness raising and how
training on healthy diets can be included in capacity building activities for different groups. Against this overall framework the partner CDA and
AC will prepare detailed annual VIPs at the beginning of each year with physical and financial targets to be achieved in the village during the
year. These can be related to activities such as formation of groups, BP development, training and technical assistance needs in areas such as
marketing, production, business development, entrepreneurship. food safety, dietary diversification and nutrition standards. The partners
responsible for implementing each activity will be identified along with the village level coordination mechanisms between them. STAR will direct
support to the villages based on the activities identified in the VIPs.
66.
Community sensitisation and mobilisation: STAR will mobilise PMAs (C 1.1), IGEs (C 1.2) and WUA (C 2.1). The table below summarises
the expected outreach of STAR beneficiaries in these institutions;
Type of community institution
Members/beneficiaries
Approximate STAR
outreach
(households)*
Women and
youth
Poor and
very poor
-  Water user associations (refer C2.1)
150-500
12/31
-  Production and marketing associations
25-75
30,000
55,000
-  Income generation and enterprise groups (refer
C 2.2)
20-30
40,000
60%
70%
-  Youth enterprise groups (refer C 2.2)
20-200
-  MSMEs (enterprise CDAs, companies)
50-300
22,500
12,500
Total
160,000
67.
*Some beneficiaries can be members in many community institutions. They are counted only once in the above estimates. 
68.
69.
70.
The partner CDAs and ACs will carry out intense community sensitisation and mobilisation activities in the STAR villages through the
engagement of YCFs, appointed at the village level, and support from GPCU staff members and SYP appointed at the village level. The activities
will include, communication campaigns including social media and rural radio  programmes; capacity building of youth volunteers; meetings with
local authorities and special communication events on market days, harvest days; visits to more mature CDAs, ACs, WUAs and PMAs; and
usage of digital communication methods to support multi-channel communication and reinforce the key messages. Health and nutrition
education, targeting in particular women and youth as agents of change, will feature prominently in the community sensitization activities from
the onset.
Forming and strengthening production and marketing associations: The PMAs will comprise 25-75 members in newly formed or existing
groups. They can be loosely structured at the beginning but with the potential to develop into more structured entities with a 3-5 member
steering committee. The PMAs will be informal groups housed in the partner CDAs and ACs referred to as the host CDAs/ACs. All PMA
members will be members of the general assembly of the host CDA/AC. The PMAs will establish membership fees, regular savings and credit
activities, and the practice of retaining some profits to support next cycle investments. PMAs will provide its members with both marketing and
production related services. The marketing services will include identification of remunerative markets, negotiating attractive marketing contracts
and payment terms, developing marketing/delivery/selling arrangements for supplying the produce to the buyers, and facilitating certification,
packaging, grading, branding and labelling of the produce to improve their market appeal.
PMA institutional development and graduation: PMAs will be trained on, farming as a business and crop budgeting; market analysis, access to
market information, partnerships, contract negotiation, financial literacy, access to credit and repayment, public-private producers’ partnerships
(4Ps) provision of business advisory services; food safety standards; productivity and production efficiencies (under SC 2.2); and technologies to
address climate change and environment related challenges and issues of water availability (also under sc 2.2).. They will also be trained to plan
crop production for domestic consumption according to nutritional aspects and dietary diversification factors. A graduation model will be
developed to facilitate the progression of mature PMAs from operating as sub-entities of the CDAs into independent income generating
associations and private companies. The graduation steps will include capacitating the PMA steering committees to manage independently the
PMA’s marketing, financial and production related linkages, increase in membership/beneficiaries (e.g. from 25-75 members/beneficiaries to
100-300 members/beneficiaries); increase in the volume of business and accumulated internal capital. 
71.
Business plan development: Two categories of BPs will be developed; i) BPs focused on PMAs (and WUAs) offering marketing support and
production linkages to its members and ii) BPs developed by IGEs, youth enterprises and larger graduated enterprises focusing on a range of
income generation and microenterprise activities along different agricultural value chains. The total number of BPs prepared and implemented
over STAR programme will be as follows;
VIPs
Year 2*
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Year 6
Year 7
Total
CDAs and ACs (Total)
30
80
50
160
BPs
PMAs and WUAs
60
180
350
340
200
20
1,150
IGEs, youth enterprises, graduated enterprises
90
330
565
480
225
10
1,700
Total
150
510
13/31
915
820
425
30
2,850
*year 1 will be devoted to preparatory activities and partnership building with limited village level outreach 
72.
73.
74.
75.
 The main elements and structure of both categories of BPs will be similar. The BPs will include, description of the business concept/business
model, targeted market opportunities, strategic, operational and financial elements of the businesses, target beneficiaries (particularly women
and youth) outreach of benefits; measures to improve production efficiencies and compliance with market standards, address the effects of
climate change and adopt digital technologies; specific measures to increase the impacts on the income, nutrition and resilience of target
households. YCF and SYPs will assist CIs interested in preparing a BP to draft and submit a short concept note (1-2 pages). After the concept
note is approved by STAR and the relevant STAR CFI, the CIs will develop and submit detailed BPs. STAR will form a BP review committee
which will meet quarterly to review and approve submitted BPs (refer PIM for details). 
Contract agreement and partnerships: STAR will support the CIs with approved BPs to develop marketing linkages and partnerships through:
i) access to market information involving buyer linkage workshops to connect interested buyers to the STAR supported PMAs, investment in
developing the digital STAR market platform (detailed later) to increase producers’ knowledge of market prices, standards required, and
volumes demanded, and CDAs and PMAs participation in trade fairs and information campaigns to boost their linkages with larger VC actors
and institutional buyers; ii) marketing partner identification involving STAR support to PMAs to identify marketing partners based on assessment
of information such as quality, quantity of produce demanded, delivery logistics, pricing and price transparency; iii) partnership brokering
involving STAR assistance to PMAs to negotiate contracts, establish 4-Ps, receive fair and timely payment from buyers; and (iv) start-up the
partnerships through partnership financing, monitoring timely quantity and quality of produce, PMAs’ institutional capacity building to develop
production work plans, farmers mobilisation, linkages to agro-dealers, machinery services and extension services.
Other market development and marketing support interventions: STAR will invest in other market development and linkages activities such
as: i) produce certification, including organic certification, basic certification (e.g. pesticide free) for local, domestic and export markets; ii) post-
harvest support and market infrastructure development, comprising technical assistance and investments in equipment and technologies for
improving post-harvest practices (cooling, cleaning, sorting etc) and support product identity, brand development, packaging and labelling related
initiatives; and iii) Market infrastructure development, involving investments in market infrastructure including collection centres, cold chains,
storage facilities and market outlets. These investments will be prioritised based on their locations, additional benefit to the target households
and volume of produce handled. Various operations and maintenance models will be explored (community, PPPs and private). STAR will
collaborate with the Ministry of Supply and Internal Trade to promote domestic trade through development of District level mobile markets,
Governorate level wholesale markets and rehabilitation of state-of the-art market places at selected strategic locations. 
Financing business plan implementation: STAR will inject credit funds in Cooperating Financial Institutions (CFI) comprising Commercial
Banks (CB), Microfinance Institutions (MFI), Credit Cooperatives (CC), and NGO-MFIs to enable them to offer credit support at preferential terms
to CIs with approved BPs. STAR credit funds will enable the CFIs to leverage additional credit funds from their own sources and support the
STAR oriented activities by applying the best available preferential interest rates (5-15%) and flexible collateral practices (no collateral, third
party guarantees, promissory cheques, group guarantees, formal credit guarantee). STAR credit will support five investment categories: i) on
farm irrigation improvement; ii) production improvement, iii) income generating activities; iv) youth enterprises and v) SMEs. Summary of STAR
supported investments is presented below.
Type of
investment
Investment
Size (EGP)
Access
through
Tenure
(years)
Grace
period
(months)
No, of
HH*
Target
bens.
(approx.
%)
STAR credit
investments
(%)
Items financed
Agricultural production
On farm
Irrigation
improvement
10,000 –
60,000
WUA
5-6
12
Production
improvement
7,000-15,000
PMA, CDA,
Coops
2-3
6
Microenterprises
85,000
55%
70%
Income
generating
activities
1,000 – 20,000
IGE groups,
CDA
1-2
3
40,000
25%
20%
Pumps, pipes, civil works,
hydrants, water meters,
digital technologies and
model irrigation systems (drip
or sprinkler) for improving
irrigation efficiency
Inputs, mechanized services;
technology adoption (solar,
greenhouse, digital); post-
production (packaging,
branding, labelling);
Certification.
Poultry, small ruminants,
honey, homestead
production; trading; fruits,
vegetables, herbs drying and
processing; dairy produce;
roof garden.
Collective youth
enterprises
100,000-
500,000
youth
enterprise
gps., CDA
14/31
3-5
12
35,000
20%
10%
MSMEs
0.5-1.0 million
CDA, coops
company
agro-processing and agro-
allied production e.g.
handicrafts from agri-residue;
dairy, fishery; agro-inputs and
machinery services; digital
solutions and aggregation
models; processing (jam,
jelly, tomato paste);
commercial operation of cold
storage, storage, etc.
Total
160,000
100%
100%
76.
* Some beneficiaries can be members in many community institutions. They are counted only once in the above estimates. 
77.
78.
79.
Partnership and credit delivery using Credit Wholesalers and CFIs: STAR will use credit wholesalers (CWs – MSMEDA and ADP), and engage
with ABE (and any other commercial bank or eligible financial institution) to manage the STAR credit activities. STAR will disburse credit lines
on performance-based criteria to the CWs selected through a competitive process. The CWs will on-lend the funds to CFIs comprising CBs,
MFIs, CCs and NGOs-MFIs, which in turn will offer specified loan products to STAR beneficiaries. The CWs will select CFIs in consultation with
STAR from a list of shortlisted CFIs prepared by STAR. The CFIs will lend to STAR beneficiaries at market terms. STAR will not interfere on
credit risk assessment, ceilings on interest rates and collateral requirements. STAR will orient the competitive process to favour avenues offering
milder and more effective credit terms. By maintaining a neutral position, and not distorting the credit market STAR will allow the financial sector
to respond positively and crowd-in additional financing resources to support the beneficiaries and sustain the credit-lines for future STAR phases
(details in PIM). 
Other rural financial interventions: Other STAR rural finance interventions will include: i) Credit guarantee, wherein STAR will cooperate with the
CGC to structure a credit guarantee product to support access to credit by high risk segments of the target group; Savings culture, STAR will
promote savings culture within the target group and amongst all institution types and also offer training on planning for future investments
through retained earnings from current business cycles and accumulated savings; Non-financial services, STAR will train the CFIs as ‘master
trainers’ for training beneficiaries on topics such as business development, financial management, buffer mechanisms (savings, overdraft
accounts) to mitigate delayed payments risk from buyers; Revolving funds grants, STAR will use WFP resources to establish revolving fund
grants in the selected partner CDAs as an avenue to provide financial support to the very poor target households organized as IGEs (women
and youth). The CDAs will deliver affordable income generation credit products as a buffer source of financial support to help the very poor
households if they are unable to get STAR credit support through the CFIs due to high risk associated with their new businesses. 
Digital technologies: STAR will support digital marketing and finance technologies such as i) STAR market platform, The STAR market
platform will be web based and mobile based system consisting of, a market players inventory, in which a database of market players, potential
players and commodity wise demand supply data will be maintained, E-market place, which will digitally connect farmers to the online
marketplace, compare the prevalent market prices for the commodity, determine farmer revenues and profitability and suggests the most
optimal market price, enable entrepreneurs, agri-business players to view the details of the farmers produce on dynamic basis; STAR input
dealer connect, which will provide a digital display of inventory data of some of the most reliable agro-input providers and STAR payment,
through which, in the later stages of STAR (years 3 or 4), the market platform will be linked to the payment gateways, subject to feasibility; ii)
Visual agriculture marketing: “Visual agriculture” refers to the use of the internet, cloud computing, radar and video technology to present
models, means and methods of cultivation. Agri-business/merchants may use “visual agriculture” to remotely observe the entire cultivation and
management process of vegetables, fruits, etc. Photographs of critical growth stages of the crop will be uploaded in the platform which will
provide assurance about the quality of the produce and attract buyers (exporters, merchants). The CDAs or the youth entrepreneurs can take
the responsibility for taking and uploading the pictures with low cost digital camera or a smart phone; iii) Digital Finance, Digital finance will offer
granular farmer level data (generated from the STAR Platform) to financial service providers for credit profiling and issuing STAR finance cards
to provide users with access to a minimum amount of credit for buying inputs at outlets that accept the cards/digital money. In due course, from
2023, STAR money and STAR wallets will be introduced during the 2nd tier of digital strategies (refer PIM for details).
80.
Sub-component 1.2: Microenterprise development
81.
82.
The objective of this subcomponent is to reduce women’s and youth dependence on and increase their contributions to their families and
increase smallholder family resilience to income shocks by: i) engaging them in income generation and value addition microenterprise activities
through 1,500 income generation and enterprise groups, 200 collective youth enterprises and 50 MSMEs; ii) providing entrepreneurship and
skills training to about 40,000 women and youth; and iii) creating around 12,555 full time equivalent job opportunities. It will: i) ensure that trained
youth and women interested in starting or expanding small agri-business receive business development and financial support; ii) promote private
agricultural services to complement public extension services, improve the provision of inputs, and other agricultural services, such as compost
making, nurseries and renting of machinery; and iii) promote processing and value addition of agricultural commodities thereby also reducing
post harvest losses. 
Formation and strengthening of income generation and enterprise groups. The CDCs will mobilise the IGEs with support from the YCF
and the YPs at the village level. There will be a special focus on the formation of women’s IGEs. The IEGs will comprise between 20-30
individuals, be informal in nature, and developed under the umbrella of the host CDA. All the IGE members must be members of the general
body of the CDA. The CDAs will also support the IGEs to develop the IGE bylaws, description of activities and rules and regulations. There will
be special focus on training the IGEs on family nutrition and dietary diversification standards. The IGEs will be encouraged to adopt activities
which directly enhances family nutrition and dietary diversification. Members will also be trained on how to invest the additional family incomes
from the IEG activities on a variety of nutrition rich food items specially for women and children. IGEs will start operations with regular savings
activities and investment in internal credit and collective income generation activities. Based on the performance the CDAs will facilitate the
IGEs to develop their BPs and access external credit to expand their business activities. Women’s IGEs will promote BPs in areas such as
poultry and small ruminants (e.g. ducks, goats, sheep), homestead processing and services, roof and homestead gardens, complemented with
nutritional awareness campaigns and food conservation. 
83.
Youth IEGs will include nutrition training and healthy eating habits, processing and value addition, e.g. dried basil, tomato paste, sun dried
tomatoes and pomegranate processing; as well as the provision of agricultural services including nurseries, equipment repairs, agro dealership
and other input provision, transport services, mechanisation, agro-dealers and other input provision, marketing information and digital
technologies. The above-mentioned activities can be carried out by individual group members or collectively by the group. 
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
Digital microenterprise solutions. Among microenterprises ideas STAR will support digital microenterprise solutions such as: i) development
of mobile based and on-line ordering system for delivery of fresh local produce to the consumers; ii) an ''uber'' model to aggregate village level
produce to the urban markets, or sharing farm technology such as tractors; iii) e-commerce activities involving rural youth in doorstep (field)
delivery of the inputs, animal husbandry products, which at a scale will prove to be an income generation activity; iv) digital support to small and
medium enterprises through services such as reporting, business risk assessment, bank loan feasibility analysis to support their business
growth. 
15/31
Collective youth enterprises and SMEs: STAR will support the development of 200 collective youth enterprises such as dairy processing unit
and food processing unit. STAR will support them through technical training to improve back-office functions such as book keeping and finance
management, networking and marketing development support, certification (where relevant), access to credit and outreach to target households.
The collective youth enterprises can emerge from IGEs or they can be existing initiatives in the STAR clusters. They will create 1-9 full time
youth jobs and have supply chain linkages to 20-200 target households. STAR will also support around 50 Small and Medium Enterprises (SME)
operating as independent enterprise CDAs or companies. Each SME will create 10-99 jobs (based on MSMEDA classification for SMEs) and will
have supply chain linkage to 50-300 target households. Collective youth enterprises can graduate to SMEs. STAR will support the SMEs in a
similar way to the collective youth enterprises. 
Institutional and entrepreneurial capacity development: STAR will facilitate specialised entrepreneurial training for development of business
ideas and business skills such as: (i) tailored entrepreneurial training, for example Start and Improve Your Own Business; (ii) technical capacity
building in production, processing and agricultural services and the marketing of these products; (iii) applied skills and practical training through
apprenticeship programs with established agribusiness; and (iv) mentoring and coaching from experienced entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurial
training modules will be developed by SPs with specific expertise in these areas. These will include: i) CFIs which will incorporate the
entrepreneurship and income generating training as a part of their outreach strategy; ii) specialised technical service providers such as
MSMEDA, NGOs, hired through a competitive bidding process, to diversify its existing training curricula, developing new modules on sources of
finance and repayment; iii) ARC, MoI, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) to diversify curricula, developing new modules
on (pre) processing, post-harvest, food conservation and processing, agricultural services, and digital agriculture; iv) UNIDO, on agro-
processing such as tomato paste, sun dried tomatoes, and pomegranate; v) WFP technical training on processing; vi) Innovation and
Technology Centres of the Ministry of Industry (Refer PIM, Annex 5 for profile of potential service providers). 
Enterprise graduation models: STAR will incentivise a microenterprise graduation model to motivate leading microenterprises to grow and
expand the outreach of their businesses. For example, the model will support the IGE enterprises to develop into collective youth enterprises
and independent companies on achievement of a set of conditions such as i) a certain level of internal capital; ii) expanding membership base;
ii) number of jobs supported; iv) proportion of very poor and poor, women and youth members; v) readiness to form independent credit linkages
and other institutional linkages. STAR will incentivise the enterprise graduation process by facilitating access to larger credit volumes, facilitating
access to marketing infrastructure support, supporting technical and institutional capacity building needs, assisting the legal formalities and costs
for registering and facilitating larger credit linkages.
Business plan preparation: Microenterprises must develop BPs in order to benefit from STAR credit support and other services. The BP
development, review and approval process will be the same as described in SC 1.1. The SYPs and the CYFs responsible for facilitating the BP
development process will encourage, where possible, joint proposals between the entrepreneur/s and the marketing association, with
contracting arrangements and joint resources already in place. These joint proposals could potentially benefit from additional programme
support, both financially and in terms of technical assistance. 
Access to finance. STAR will support the approved microenterprise BPs to access credit support from CFIs. The process for gaining access to
finance, potential products, interest rates, collateral mechanisms and access to guarantee fund support will be the same as described in SC 1.1.
STAR will use IFAD resources as well as co-financing resources from AfDB to support the relatively large 200 collective youth enterprises and
the 50 SMEs.
90.
Component 2 Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and resilience 
91.
The objective of this component is to improve the resilience of smallholder crop producers by: securing their access to water resources and
active participation in WUAs; enhancing the efficiency and sustainability of their use of soil and water resources, and lower production costs; and
ensuring compliance with market standards including good agricultural practices (GAP) and safe pesticide residue free food. It will have two
subcomponents: SC 2.1 Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management; and SC 2.2 Improved crop farming practices. 
92.
Subcomponent 2.1: Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management
93.
94.
The objective of this SC1 is to improve water management and supply in branch canals and on-farm irrigation efficiency in the 24 selected
command areas consisting of connected third and fourth order branch canals and mesqas in one water unit. This will be achieved through: i)
improved irrigation water planning and asset management at governorate level for equitable and reliable water distribution considering current
and future challenges from climate change; ii) establishment and strengthening of at least 320 WUAs to enhance participation of water users in
irrigation investments, operation, maintenance, and management for sustainability; iii) rehabilitation of 24 branch canals and upgrading of 320
mesqa level irrigation systems; and iv) improved irrigation systems at on-farm level, for more efficient use of irrigation water benefitting an
estimated 30,000 farmers. 
The SC is a continuation of the interventions implemented under OFIDO. The intended results are irrigation command areas with reliable water
supply for farmers (especially at the tail end), improved irrigation efficiency, increased land values at the tail end of the canals and piped
mesqas, and water, energy, land and labour saving at programme completion. Irrigation efficiency will be improved primarily through reduction
of losses in the water delivery system (branch canals mesqas and marwas) and at field level. These achievements will be complemented by SC
2.2 results and lead to more stable and increased production and productivity for smallholder farmers increasing their access to food and surplus
for marketing. Well defined models of water management, investment cost recovery, and on farm irrigation improvement interventions will be
documented for scaling up by the three project governorates and by the national Government in other governorates. The SC will be
implemented lead by the Irrigation Improvement Sector (IIS) of the MWRI and their Directorates at governorate level, in close collaboration with
the MALR and its Directorates at governorate level, and building on the lessons learned from OFIDO. It will support the following activities:
95.
Selection of irrigation command areas. As explained under geographical targeting water units/command areas comprising a third and fourth
order branch canals and the connected mesqas will be selected for improvement under the programme. Improvement efforts would cover the
whole command area, in order to be able to demonstrate impacts of the interventions on production and water productivity and water saving.
The criteria for selection of command areas are included in the geographical targeting section. It is expected that an estimated 24 branch canal
command areas including 320 mesqas will be improved. To be confirmed based on the ongoing water infrastructure rehabilitation needs and
poverty mapping exercise.
96.
97.
Improved planning and asset management for equitable and reliable water distribution at governorate level: To assist in the planning and
management of water resources at governorate level, the programme will finance technical assistance for the development of a water resources
management plan (WRMP) and an irrigation asset management plan (IAMP) in each governorate participating in the programme. The WRMPs
will provide for the implementation of a local water management system that covers all irrigation water used in the governorate and ensures high
levels of water use efficiency and equitable distribution are achieved. The WRMPs will consider the challenges from climate change with
increased inter-year variability in the Nile water flow and plan for water distribution management in normal water flow years as well as years with
low flows combined with an early warning system and advice to farmers on production related decisions and adaptive measures to take due to
reduced water allocations. In addition, the irrigation assets serving each command area in each of the governorates will be identified, mapped
and their condition ascertained. An asset management plan will be developed that will identify the necessary frequency for maintenance,
rehabilitation, required costs and financing. GIS based interactive maps of the water distribution networks, with key layers and features, will be
prepared. 
16/31
Digitalisation of water management. To support the effective implementation and continuous updating of the WRMPs and GIS asset maps,
digital water meters will be installed at strategic points in the selected branch canal command areas. The digital water meters will be virtually
connected through smart phones/data logging systems with the IIS/MWRI and the MWRI Directorate staff at governorate level. The data will be
synced with the digital water module of the STAR Platform. The water quantity and quality and time of operation and many other parameters of
importance will be collected from 400 installations and analysed to improve the efficiency of irrigation systems in project command areas
involving 50 WUAs. Empirical evidence of irrigation efficiency impacts will lead to data driven irrigation management and crop planning. The
system could subsequently be moved upstream to second order and primary canals at project midterm. At the farm level, digital water
management will be introduced to interested WAUs including phone based automated pump starters which will enable farmers to operate the
motor pump set from anywhere anytime using mobile or landline. This activity will bring efficiency in irrigation scheduling, remote access, motor
running status, warning alerts, accurate timing of irrigation, precision farming and will transform the irrigation management in the long run. Each
governorate will be encouraged to pilot this technology through at least one pilot areas of 1-3 branch canals command areas served by the same
second order canal (refer PIM for more details). 
98.
Rehabilitation of branch canals and drainage systems. The third and fourth level canals in the project command areas will be improved through
reinforced concrete intakes, stone pitching, control structures (head and cross regulators if any), tail ends. Stone pitching of canals will be done
in all areas where the soil conditions are prone to high levels of water infiltration. Drainage systems will be improved including cleaning of large
drains and installation of in-field subsurface drains as needed. Feasibility studies and environmental and social impact assessments for the
rehabilitation work will identify any eventual social and environmental risks and comparison of alternative designs will support the identification of
possible avoidance or appropriate measures to address these risks. The works will be contracted based on competitive bidding processes and
social and environmental risk mitigation measures will be included in the contracts as identified. 
99.
Establishment and strengthening of WUAs to enhance participation of water users in irrigation investments and management. Rehabilitation and
upgrading needs for the mesqas in the selected branch canals will be mapped and discussed with the concerned farmers together with
investment and improved irrigation management options. Farmers sharing the same mesqa and expressing interest in forming a WUA and
investing in improvement of their mesqa as well as willingness to invest in improved field level irrigation systems will be selected (as a part of
Sub Component 1.1 actions) for programme support by the governorate project team including representatives from the IIS/MWRI. 
100.
In accordance with the Law No 213, formation of WUAs by the beneficiary farmers is a prerequisite for the Government support for mesqa
improvement. No mesqa improvement will be implemented unless the WUA is formed and involved in planning and decisions on the design of
the improvements and the subsequent management and cost recovery mechanisms covering both investments, operation and maintenance
costs. An implementation agreement will be signed between the WUA, IIS/MWRI and MALR agriculture Directorates at governorate level
including the design of the improved irrigation infrastructures and works to be procured, and budget and cost recovery conditions and
mechanisms (refer PIM for more details). 
101.
It is estimated that about 320 WUAs will be developed under the Management Transfer Model. This Model gives the full water management
responsibilities and its financing (at mesqa level) to the WUAs and minimizes the need for government control. The role of the MWRI staff
(District Engineers) will be transformed from implementers to technical advisors and monitors. The WUAs will, within the Law and terms and
conditions of the MWRI (as indicated in the implementation agreement), operate, maintain, rehabilitate and improve the water management
infrastructure under their responsibility and provide the required resources from their own members and/or from external sources (e.g. MWRI,
Local Government, MSMEDA, etc.). 
102.
WUAs will be trained in irrigation system operation and management tasks, water use efficient technologies and irrigation practices, and climate
change impacts on Nile river flows, crop water requirements, and early warnings for periods with low river flows and crop planning actions to
take in years with reduced water allocations. The WUAs will be supported in setting up a water management and fee system. The WUAs may
also undertake activities that are indirectly linked to water management such as waste management to reduce the waste dumping in the canal
system, which causes high maintenance costs. They may also decide to request training and technical advice from the programme for improving
their crop farming (see SC 2.2).
103.
Improved irrigation systems at mesqa and on-farmfor more rational use of irrigation water. STAR will finance (credit financing) the installation of
electric pumps and pipe delivery systems (replacing open canals, that cause loss of land and water, and individual diesel-based pumping, that
increases operation costs and pollution) to serve a group of farmers sharing a mesqa covering between 50-200 feddan. Where solar electricity is
feasible, this will be considered instead of connection to the grid for water pumping. In the periods where the solar energy is not needed for
pumping other alternative uses will be considered, such as for cold storage rooms. 
104.
As much as possible, lands under the improved command areas will be levelled using laser guided equipment. The programme will provide
training in water-use efficient technologies and practices. In each WUA willing farmers will be identified as demonstration farmers to make the
shift from surface irrigation to more water-use efficient technologies such as drip irrigation, punched holes and others. This will be done as on-
farm demonstration plots covering at least 10% of land in each selected command area seeking at least one plot in each mesqa. The willing
demonstration farmers will receive technical assistance and a demonstration credit to cover 50% of the price for installing the system on 1.5
feddan. This credit will be channelled through the selected CFI serving the project villages and shall only be repaid based on actual pumping
cost savings (maintaining the same yields and as such increasing the income) demonstrated through a data log over water use time per week,
crops cultivated, and their yields kept by the farmer and monitored by the WUA. The demonstration credit will facilitate that also risk averse small
and extra smallholder farmers can participate as demonstration farmers which is important for creating examples to be taken up by other
farmers with the same conditions.  With the implementation of digital water meter systems, the whole distribution network can be continuously
monitored real time by any specified interval reads. This will allow for an incentive mechanism where WUAs compete against each other in
reducing water use and increase use efficiency in their mesqas. The most successful WUAs in a branch canal area will be rewarded (e.g. in
form of extra inputs or reduction in their credits). 
105.
Investment cost recovery. STAR investments in mesqa improvements will be fully recoverable. STAR will facilitate the WUAs to partner with
CFIs and access credit support to implement the mesqa improvement activities. Where credit linkages are not possible or can be delayed,
MWRI is authorized to finance up-front and recover the full capital costs of mesqa improvement from the beneficiaries without interest over a 20
years period. Before any investments, arrangements will be discussed and put in place with the WUA for the full cost recovery and included in
the implementation agreement, in accordance with the current legal framework. The WUA should be fully aware of the cost of improvements
and the terms of the cost recovery prior to any improvement taking place. To create ownership up-front by the WUAs, a new approach for
contracting the works and installation of equipment will be considered where the WUAs are made responsible for managing their own
procurement process guided by the MWRI. As mentioned earlier, an implementation agreement will be signed, that clearly outlines the
conditions and expectations from all parties. No mesqa improvement should be started without the implementation agreement is in place.
17/31
106.
Subcomponent 2.2: Improved crop farming practices
107.
The objective of this subcomponent is to facilitate smallholder’s adoption of improved crop cultivation practices mainly identified in the business
plans under SC 1.1. The improvements will consider market product requirements as well as current and future challenges from climate change
and the sustainability of the use and management of soil and water resources. This will be achieved through: i) strengthening of public, private
and digital extension services; ii) participatory analysis of crop production challenges and identification of options for tolerant crops and varieties
and improved practices and technologies; iii) training of 500-750 farmers’ groups stimulating their experimental learning; iv) technical and
financial support for at least 500 demonstration farmers; and v) improved access to machinery. 
108.
The intended results are farmers accessing timely and scale adapted advice and technical assistance for improving their cropping systems and
produce quality and safety; increasing nutrient and biomass recycling, soil sustainability, and reducing costs for agrochemical inputs; and
adopting practices that build resilience against heatwaves and actions responding to early warning of reduced water availability in years with low
Nile flow[22]. These achievements will be complemented by SC 2.1 results and lead to more stable and increased production and productivity for
smallholder farmers increasing their access to food and surplus for marketing. Given the importance of planned training related to conservation
agriculture and the high demand for credit for water-efficient irrigation at field level, it is then anticipated that a considerable share of the credit
line will be spent on climate-focused activities. Building on the findings of SAIL’s MTR mission that confirms that 80% of credit applications were
for modern irrigation systems, we can conservatively foresee that at least 40% of activities financed by the credit line and credit guarantee will
be climate-focused. The implementation of the subcomponent will be led by the MLAR directorates of agriculture at the governorate level in
partnership with the public Agriculture and IAS/MWRI extension services, farmer producer groups (PMAs or WUAs), Agricultural Research
Institutions and Universities, and private providers of extension services. 
109.
The SC will provide training and assistance to farmers through two types of farmers’ groups formed and/or selected under SC 1.2 and SC 2.1: 1)
PMAs organized under CDAs or CAs and with a business plan (developed under SC 1.1) identifying their main crop production development
needs, and where farmers may have their plots in different mesqas in the programme intervention area; and 2) farmers organized in WUAs
(supported under SC 2.1) sharing the same mesqa who do not necessarily initially want to do joint marketing but who have a common interest in
joint cultivation (land consolidation but conserving individual benefits from their own plots), adopting new crops and agronomic practices, or
improving their soil, water and irrigation management technologies and practices. The approach to facilitating farmer’s adoption of new crops,
practices and technologies will focus on building their analytical and experimental learning skills, knowledge and skills in accessing quality
information sources, and mutual sharing as a way to empower them to seek advice and inspiration beyond the public extension system
recognizing its limited outreach. The SC will support the following activities: 
110.
Strengthening of extension services: The capacities and outreach of public extension services to smallholder farmers, bringing in innovations
and jointly with farmers addressing barriers for adoption of new practices, are limited. With retirements of extension staff and the moratorium on
hiring new staff, there are no prospects of generational renewal and improvements in these limitations. The SC will therefore support new and
innovative solutions for providing access to extension services and quality, timely and implementable information relevant for smallholder
farmers. These will include:  
111.
Young professional program. To expand the capacity of extension service providers and support STAR targeted PMAs in adopting new crops,
practices and technologies a SYP program for at least 180 newly agricultural and irrigation graduates from the programme governorates will be
established. The program will give the SYPs an opportunity to rapidly gain substantial field experience and build their CV and capacities in
working with farmers. An additional advantage of giving this opportunity to SYPs, interested in agriculture and irrigation and linking them to the
project, is their ability to bring in new ideas including digital solutions and adapt these to the conditions and needs of smallholder farmers. It is
expected that after the program a part of these graduates will be able to establish private extension services or join companies or NGOs
providing these services in the three governorates. They may also establish agribusinesses strengthening the agro value chains in Upper Egypt.
Each participant will be supported with subsistence allowances and complete a one to two years program with the STAR assigned to and
spending most of their time in Star supported villages. They will periodically be gathered in one of the governorate main cities to share
experiences and receive complementary training. The first of the programme will be training in facilitation methodologies and simple instruments
that can support PMAs in building their analytical and learning skills for adoption of new crops, practices and technologies. Another feature in
their training program will be the digital solutions that the programme is proposing to introduce, including their further development as lessons
are learned with farmers ensuring their continuous adaptation to farmers’ needs and ways of appropriating and using the tools. 
112.
Training of CDAs and government extension staff. To further strengthen the supply of facilitators at least 160 CDA, irrigation and agricultural
extension staff will be encouraged to participate in the facilitation training provided to the SYPs. They may also be trained in other modules for
PMAs training and experimental learning including in climate resilient cropping systems (see proposed modules later in this section). 
113.
Digital Extension Services. Digital extension services will include i) STAR digital knowledge platform accessible through various digital (smart
phones, television) and non-digital means (field schools, CDAs) providing digital content to enable farmers to access critical knowledge and
advice on production, marketing and related produce requirement, finance, post-harvest, nutrition and climate change awareness; ii) STAR
Mobile App will be developed to provide the farmers with personalized climate-sensitive advisory on good agricultural practices based on the
individual farmers data, integrated with feeds like weather, market price, etc; iii) video extension will use low-cost technology (pico/neat
projectors with low cost handycams) to disseminate information through short videos; iv) STARSMS gateway will be used to push alerts to
farmers mainly early warning signals related to weather forecasts; v) IFAD / IFPRI’s Agricultural Investment Data Analyzer (AIDA) will be
customized to help farmers, entrepreneurs, agri-business and policy makers to make decisions on crop mix; vi) social media and whatsapp will
be used to provide moderated digital forums for problem solving using WhatsApp groups and facebook. vii) massive open online courses
(MOOCs) will be used to support e-learning- including climate and nutrition awareness courses- to help SYPs and other prospective
entrepreneurs and farmers to consult with industry players; vi) climate resilience with digital solutions will be delivered using the STAR platform
to provide an inventory of climate resilient crops or varieties available, water allocation and heatwave alerts, contingency advisories; and vii)
organise digital hackathons to identify the potential digital agri-start ups with the best ideas nurtured and piloted in target area (refer PIM for
details). It is foreseen that one third of digital extension services will directly address climate change, bridging an adaptation gap through
enhanced awareness, access to practical skills and weather information including early warning. 
114.
Private extension services. The programme will strengthen the capacity and outreach of private extension services through three main avenues:
(i) through agribusiness partnerships, embedded private extension services will be provided to small holder farmers (at subsidized rates) to
ensure compliance with market requirements and/or food safety standards; (ii) regulated extension services by input providers and agro-dealers;
and (iii) agricultural services provided by rural youth, supported under SC 1.2. 
18/31
115.
Analysis of challenges and identification of solutions. Each PMA/WUA will be supported by a SYP and CDA staff backed up by agriculture
and irrigation extension staff in a participatory analysis of their production challenges and capacity gaps in terms of: introduction of high value
and climate resilient crops and varieties; meeting market standards and producing safe produce; integrated pest management reducing use and
costs of agrochemicals; improving the integration of soil quality (salinity, nutrients and physical characteristics) and irrigation management; and
reducing production costs by maintaining healthy soils and cropping systems, minimizing the need for chemical fertilizers, and reducing water
pumping costs through water use efficiency linked to management of soil salinity. To identify suitable solutions, the groups will be presented and
discuss different options using: technical guidelines already developed for different high value crops and crop rotation systems; videos with
farmers demonstrating their adoption of different practices, and by visiting or bringing successful demonstration farmers. The groups will be
trained in how to do cost/benefit estimates of different practices and crop rotation systems, which will help them to make final decisions on which
practices to adopt and in keeping simple logs and monitor their actual cost/benefits as they are applying the practices. This will enable them to
adjust the practices or combination of practices as they gain experience. 
116.
Modules for PMA/WUA’s training and learning. Depending on needs and demands resulting from the business plans and the exercise
analysing crop production challenges and solutions, different modules for PMA/WUA trainings will be developed taking advantage of what
already exists, and featuring climate adaptation requirements. The development and implementation of the different modules will mainly be done
through specialized service providers and partners from agricultural research institutions and universities, NGOs, and private service providers.
(refer PIM for list of modules). 
117.
Demonstration farmers. When challenges and solutions are established in an area, the programme will connect farmers with already
successful farmers and demonstrations in the area and support additional demonstration farmers in adoption of a full package of changed
cropping system. Like for the demonstration of more efficient irrigation practices and technologies, demonstration farmers will be supported with
a special demonstration credit covering the cost for 1.5 feddan. The credit will be channeled through the selected CFI serving project villages
and the repayment will be based on actual increase in profits from the introduction of the new practice demonstrated through a data log over
crop cultivated, inputs, costs, yields and sails kept by the farmer and monitored by the supporting agricultural extension staff. Different
demonstration plots relevant for the different groups (extra small, small and larger landholders) will be developed as well as for livestock
activities (animal husbandry practices, fattening, poultry among others). PRIME experience showed that smallholder farmers with limited land
available are not willing to use their land for demonstration, due to the potential risk associated. In order to overcome this barrier and have
demonstrations relevant for all farmers with different holding sizes, the programme will consider using demonstration crop or animal loss
insurance schemes for those willing to be demonstration farmers. 
118.
Access to agricultural machinery. As part of improving crop production practices and overcome productivity barriers, farmers’ access to
machinery may need to be facilitated, such as tractors and different implements, silage machines, residue cutters for composting, etc. The
programme may train PMA and young entrepreneurs in setting up machinery sharing schemes (using digital solutions e.g. ‘uber’ model)
including the development of use, operation and maintenance regulations, and budget and fee systems to cover operation, maintenance, repair
and depreciation costs. When these arrangements have been agreed and put in place and cash co-financing from beneficiaries have been
raised (minimum 30%) the project may facilitate the CDA in accessing finance through the credit lines channelled through CWs (see SC 1.1)
and managing the procurement process.
119.
Component 3: Programme management and policy engagement
120.
Component 3.1: Programme management
121.
This SC will support STAR programme management including M&E and Knowledge management.
122.
The Government’s lead agency will be the MALR. A Programme Steering Committee (PSC) would be set up for overall policy decisions and
guidance at the National level. A Governorate Steering Committee (GSC) will be formed in each STAR Governorate. A two-level organisational
structure will be established. A National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established at the National level (in Cairo) to serve as the
unified coordination unit for managing all IFAD projects in Egypt including STAR. A National Programme Manager (NPM) will head the NPCU.
The NPCU staff members will be competitively recruited. Three Governorate Programme Coordination Units (GPCU) will be established one in
each STAR Governorate. The GPCUs will be separate offices within the Directorate of MALR, headed by a Governorate Programme
Coordinator (GPC) and dedicated to the implementation of STAR. Details are presented in section 4. Implementation. 
123.
The STAR programme management structure is based on the management lessons learned from past IFAD projects. For example, in the past
projects implementation was carried out by government staff members, who also had other responsibilities and sometime suffered from limited
capacities. These factors affected the quality of the results. STAR will overcome this challenge by recruiting all NPCU staff members
competitively from the market. Amongst other benefits, this arrangement will address the issue of weak financial management capacity
encountered in past projects. A dedicated accountant and an accounts assistant will support the STAR financial controller in all financial
management activities. They will be recruited on a competitive basis from the market and offered competitive salaries to reduce the risk of staff
turnover. The new implementation structure will also benefit procurement functions. In the past, part-time, seconded, government procurement
staff were engaged in managing procurement functions which often led to delays. The NPCU will address this problem by engaging a full time
Procurement Manager who will be assisted by two qualified and experienced Procurement Specialists. These positions will be hired from the
open professional jobs market at competitive salaries to ensure quality and prevent turnover.
124.
Previous IFAD projects used part time governorate staff to manage governorate level project implementation which led to incoherence between
AWPB and implementation. The STAR GPCUs will address this shortcoming by appointing a dedicated Governorate Deputy Manager (GDM),
competitively recruited from the professional labour market, to lead STAR implementation in the Governorates. The GDMs will be supported by
full-time GPCU staff members operating from separate GPCU offices dedicated to STAR management. In order to ensure that the new
management structure responds to the expectations, the NPCU in consultation with the IFAD country office will develop clear management
performance indicators during the start-up year to be monitored on an annual basis.
125.
Component 3.2: Policy engagement
126.
IFAD will engage with the Government of Egypt in evidence-based policy dialogue, with key decision makers in MALR, MWRI and Ministry of
Supply and Internal Trade (MoSIT). This is in line with the COSOP Strategic Objective 2 supporting the development of enhanced policies for
inclusive and sustainable rural transformation. At the request of the government, FAO in cooperation with IFAD are in discussion to revise the
National Sustainable Agriculture Strategy (SADS) 2030 for Egypt. Together with the MALR. To this end, 6 thematic working groups have been
established.  This policy document determine the national agricultural development strategy up to 2030, and together with the a Medium-Term
Action Plan to be prepared  a 5 year period. More specifically, STAR (and IFADs portfolio in Egypt) can play an influencing role in evidence-
policy making specifically on (i) strengthening cooperatives and marketing associations and their regulatory environment, with a particular focus
on increasing women’s and youth’s participation and leadership roles in these institutions; (ii) promoting inclusive rural financial systems for
smallholder farmers, addressing the demand and supply side challenges faced by women and youth; and (iii) provide digital solutions for
agricultural and rural development. Furthermore, the government has requested that IFAD take a leading role in policy engagement in water
management. IFAD was the first development partner tackling water issues in reclaimed lands, and pioneering on-farm irrigation in Upper Egypt.
STAR aims to now focus on modernising irrigation systems, and strengthening Water Use associations, for collective water management and
planning. Furthermore, policy briefs are to be prepared, based on the analyses and results of programme interventions, and shared in learning
and policy dialogue events both nationally and regionally. Developing policy engagement mechanisms and inter-ministerial coordination are a
key part of programme management and will be handled by the NPCU in close collaboration with the IFAD Country Director.
19/31
E. Theory of Change
127.
As described in section 1 A c Rationale for IFAD Involvement, the two key developmental challenges in the programme area are i) high poverty
levels, limited economic opportunities for women and youth, moderate levels of malnutrition and lack of dietary diversity in small holder farmer
households and ii) Threat of severe water scarcity and groundwater depletion. High level of poverty is caused by the prevalence of traditional
farming practices in highly fragmented land areas, weak extension services, deteriorating irrigation infrastructure, limited access to quality
agricultural inputs and mechanised services, traditional skills and capacities, lack of access to affordable finance, limited savings habits, limited
access to marketing information, limited value addition opportunities, underdeveloped marketing infrastructure, feeble participation in collective
marketing initiatives. There are also livelihood risks arising from heat waves, prolonged droughts, pest and diseases, water quality, high post-
harvest losses and difficult access to irrigation. These factors lead to low crop productivity, slow adoption of improved practices, lack of nutritious
diet, high level of wastage, poor quality of produce, little marketable surplus, weak bargaining power, and dependence on individual selling
through middlemen and low income. Threat of severe water scarcity is caused by dam building activities in upstream areas, climate change
factors and fluctuating rainfall in the Ethiopian highlands causing shortages in the Nile water flows. Economic marginalisation has limited
smallholders’ ability and motivation to invest in efficient production and irrigation technologies causing predominance of surface irrigation
practices and little preparation or resilience against imminent threats of water scarcity. 
128.
The STAR will address the above mentioned causes driving high rural poverty rates and vulnerabilities among rural families to achieve the
STAR programme goal: to contribute to improved living standards of smallholder farmers and poor and vulnerable women and youth in the rural
areas in Upper Egypt. The STAR will do so by building on the important opportunities existing in the Upper Egypt context: i) increasing
agribusinesses interest in the Upper Egypt region, which has fertile lands, limited competition and fewer water quality and availability issues
compared to the delta region; ii) successfully tested development concepts and techniques (by donor projects e.g. IFAD-PRIME, USAID-Feed
the Future, WFP, UNIDO) e.g. agribusinesses for domestic and export markets linkages to farmers, contract farming, developing market places,
collective marketing through marketing associations, land consolidation/joint farming, creation of youth and women enterprises, improved
irrigation systems, equal voice and balanced workloads; and iii) opportunities for digital solutions for extension, aggregation, market
identification, price transparency and financial inclusion supported by increase in telecommunication network, mobile phones and use of social
media for agronomic and marketing support. 
129.
Component 1 will improve the income and resilience of smallholder and landless families through better value addition and marketing linkages
supported through promoting smallholders’ organization in PMAs to strengthen their bargaining power and business management, strengthened
marketing associations, digital marketing, visual agriculture and increased access to marketing infrastructure; strengthening farmer
organizations for managing sustainable landscape management; facilitating marketing,with a priority on nutrient-dense foods (e.g. fruit,
vegetables, lentils, beans) strengthening market access (price, more market channels, value addition); improving access to credit supported
through business plans, increasing credit availability, business training and savings habit; reduced wastage, achieved by introducing post-
harvest processing, storage and packaging practice, equipment, and infrastructure; supporting women’s economic engagement to ensure
livelihood diversification of smallholder landless families by introducing income generation activities relevant for women supporting value addition
and processing; and developing awareness about family nutrition and dietary diversity. Additionally, supporting equal voice through steps such
as increasing women’s representation in leadership positions in CIs and simultaneously promoting balanced workloads through technology
driven interventions; youth job creation achieved through youth enterprises, youth access to credit, skills training, and the SYP scheme. 
130.
The increase in quality crop production sustaining many of the activities and benefits generated in component 1 will come from Component 2
supporting improved productivity, sustainability and will improve the resilience of smallholder crop production systems. This will be done by:
securing efficient management of and access to water resources, through water system management at governorate level supported by digital
solutions and adapting to challenges from increased inter-year variability in Nile water flow; branch canal rehabilitation and investments in water
saving equipment and management at mesqas and farmer-field levels, all with active participation of farmers through strengthened WUAs;
Secured access to irrigation water - which involves rehabilitation and upgrading of physical infrastructure to minimize losses and improve spatial
distribution will serve as a key structural adaptive response to water scarcity; enhancing efficiency and sustainability of water resources through
improved irrigation water planning, asset management, efficient irrigation systems at on-farm level; demonstrating and promoting the adoption of
a range of innovative services, practices and technologies such as introduction of climate resilient and nutrition friendly cropping practices e.g.
beans and lentils (potential strategic crops) that could locally enhance resilience (diversification, inter-cropping, conservation agriculture) and
enhance access to plant-based protein-rich food; introduction of adapted varieties of existing crops (e.g. hybrid sorghum or yellow maize) or
non-traditional crops (e.g. beans and lentils), introduction of specific nutrition-focused activities for the poorest such as hydroponics,
greenhouses, agricultural services; services that reduce exposure and vulnerability to the impacts of climate change and enhance productivity
and profitability of smallholder farming; integrated soil and water management practices; consolidated production, laser levelling, drip irrigation
practices; increasing the production of crops with higher potential to contribute to family nutrition; supporting sustainable agricultural
intensification by strengthening extension services (public, private and digital) to provide essential technical assistance for adaptive/productive
management; Introducing digital agriculture solutions (e.g. targeted weather forecasts, crop-specific technical advisory services, market
information, e-finance, etc.) to reduce implementation costs, improve knowledge management, and sustain the transformational impact of the
development model; facilitating access to inputs, mechanised services and post-harvest machinery; lowering production costs, training PMAs
and WUAs in adaptive actions to be taken on early warnings on reduced water allocations and heatwaves, integrated water, soil fertility and pest
management, introduction of heatwave tolerant and less thirsty varieties and crops, enabling financial support, improving access to machinery,
and compliance with market standards.  
131.
The above set of interventions will be implemented in an integrated manner within a coherent landscape to increase marketing of nutritious
produce and profits of poor smallholders and facilitate the poorest to develop healthier and resilient livelihoods. Further, STAR will follow a
programmatic approach and leverage its credibility to forge partnerships with the government and other donors and achieve transformative
impact.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
132.
Alignment and ownership: i) Alignment: STAR is aligned with SDG 1 (end poverty) particularly 1.2 (reduce poverty by at least 50%) and 1.5
(build the resilience of the poor); SDG 2 (achieve food security) particularly 2.3 (double agricultural productivity and incomes) and 2.4 (ensure
sustainable food production systems); SDG 5 (gender equality) particularly indicator 5.5.a (women’s equal rights); SDG 6 (availability and
sustainable management of water) particularly 6.4 (increase water-use efficiency); and SDG 15 (sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems)
particularly 15.3 (restore land affected by desertification, drought and floods); ii) Country ownership: STAR is aligned with the development
strategies of the GoE SDS 2030 and SADS 2030. It is also aligned with IFAD11 Replenishment commitments and its Strategic Framework. The
approach and target area are also in line with the Egypt UNDAF and Rome-based agencies approaches. 
20/31
133.
Synergies and partnerships: The STAR partnerships with other donor projects and initiatives will be as follows: i) World Food Programme:
WFP’s rural development initiatives in upper Egypt focus on community mobilisation to support nutritional systems, lower malnourishment,
smallholders land consolidation, CDAs and marketing associations development, women’s income generation activities, youth enterprises and
revolving financing schemes. WFP will partner with STAR to sensitize and mobilize CDAs, ACs, IEGs and PMAs. It will support demonstrations
related to climate resilient microenterprises, women’s income generation and youth enterprises focusing on innovative production, processing
and post-harvest technologies. It will establish CDA level revolving funds to support the adoption of these technologies by women and youth.
These activities will be carried out by the WFP teams at the governorate level in collaboration with the STAR GPCUs; ii) African Development
Bank: AfDB will partner with STAR to invest in the design, construction and rehabilitation of the branch canals which define the STAR clusters;
support recoverable investments for on-farm irrigation improvement works and support STAR partner SMEs to increase their physical capacities
and increase demand pull. AfDB investments will be managed from the STAR NPCU and GPCUs through the deployment of additional human
resources (if needed) as assessed by AfDBs detailed design mission. 
134.
Other STAR partners will be i) OFID: OFID will partner with STAR to support marketing infrastructure investments such as development of
market outlets, storages and cold storages. OFID activities will be managed from the NPCU and GPCUs without additional staff; iv) Adaptation
Fund (AF): AF will support STAR to carry out climate risks analysis and to develop the capacity of community institutions to respond to these
risks. It will support demonstration and adoption of innovative climate resilient microenterprises, water-efficient irrigation, production technologies
and digital tools for early warning outreach v) Private Financial Institutions will crowd in financial resources (already available at preferential
terms) to support STAR oriented activities through financial products, systems and partnerships catalysed through injection of STAR credit. 
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
This section describes the assumptions underlying the derivation of costs, estimated costs and financing plan for the programme.
Total programme costs are based on June 2019 prices.
The STAR programme will be financed over a seven-year period starting from beginning 2020.
The base rate of domestic inflation has been set at 8 per cent throughout programme duration while international inflation is estimated at 1.7
per cent during the first year of implementation and increases to 1.8 per cent at programme end.
The exchange rate was fixed at 1 EUR = 21.9445 as per average market forex rate during 2018/2019.
The total amount of IFAD climate finance for this project is preliminarily calculated as US$ 16.57 million, representing 26 per cent of IFAD's
total investment.
Both price and physical contingencies are taken into account in the costing of programme. In particular, the category “works” present a 5 per
cent physical contingency in light of the higher degree of uncertainty normally affecting infrastructure interventions.
Taxes and duties have been considered for each cost item.
The value added tax (VAT) in Egypt reached 14% and is levied on all imported and locally procured goods and services.
135.
Figure 1: Programme cost by expenditure accounts and components (EUR '000)
136.
Figure 2: Programme cost by expenditure category and financier ('000 EUR)
21/31
137.
Figure 3: Programme cost by component and by year (‘000 EUR)
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
138.
Total programme cost (investment cost and incremental recurrent cost, including physical and price contingencies) is estimated at about EUR
246 million, 58.6  million (24% of the total cost) of which will be financed by IFAD through a loan and a grant. The Arab Republic of Egypt (GoE)
would provide EUR 14.1 million (5.7% of total cost) to the entire programme. Contribution from GoE will mainly finance salaries of programme
staff as well as taxes of any related expense. In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the
IFAD Loan/Grant, any future changes in the rates and/or structures of taxes and duties would have to be met by the Government. The African
Development Bank (AfDB) will co-finance STAR with EUR 49.4 million (22% of total cost) that will be allocated mainly to the financing of
infrastructures entailed in component 2 for a total cost of EUR 44.4 million (20% of total cost). The Opec Fund for International Development
(OFID) will contribute about 18.2 million (7.4% of total cost) to the financing of infrastructure development under component 1 and 2. The World
Food Programme (WFP) will co-finance the STAR programme with about EUR 9 million (3.7% of total cost) supporting the strengthening of rural
institution and the development of micro-enterprises. Grant resources of the Financing Gap  for about EUR 2.6 million (1.1% of total cost) will be
allocated across all three components. The STAR programme would also be supported by European Investment Bank (EIB) loan and grant
contributing about EUR 82.2 million (33% of total cost) to be allocated mainly for the co-financing of component 2. Contribution from
beneficiaries, both in-kind and in-cash, are expected to amount to EUR 11.6 million (4.7% of total cost). The foreign exchange component is
estimated at EUR 38.5 million. Taxes and duties are estimated at EUR 10.2 million. Funds allocated to the Programme Management Unit are of
EUR 5.7 million, equal to 2.3% of the total cost. Tables below summarizes Programme costs and financing. Detailed cost tables and estimates
are provided in appendix 3
c. Disbursement
139.
Funds from IFAD will be disbursed as follows: i) NPCU: Funds from IFAD (IFAD Loan, IFAD Grant, AF and OFID) will be transferred to the MoF
Treasury Single Account (TSA) where it will be managed on a ring-fenced basis using unique codes for each source of finance. A dedicated MoF
accounting unit based within MALR will make payments electronically from the TSA on behalf of STAR using the Government Payment System,
subject to approval by MALR and MoF authorised signatories. Disbursement to the TSA will be managed on an imprest basis. The NPCU will
submit quarterly WAs or once 30% of the advance is utilised (whichever occurs earlier); ii) Credit Wholesalers (CW e.g. MSMEDA and ADP): A
part of the IFAD Loan will be utilised as credit lines to CAs (e.g. MSMEDA and ADP). IFAD will disburse funds to USD designated accounts
(DA), opened at bank(s) suitable to the Borrower. The CWs will disburse to CFIs from the respective DAs. The CFIs will lend to beneficiaries.
The DAs will be managed on an imprest basis and all transfers from the DAs will require 2 authorised signatories. The CWs will submit quarterly
WAs or once 30% of the advance has been utilised (whichever occurs earlier); iii) Credit Guarantee Company (CGC): A part of the IFAD Loan
will be disbursed directly to the CGC. The CGC will open a USD designated account at a bank suitable to the Borrower. Disbursement to CGC
will be in tranches, subject to forecasted increase in the volume of credit guaranteed. Flow of funds from the DA will be for settling claims from
CFIs. Refer to PIM, Annex 6 for overview of CGC.
140.
Other disbursements will be as follows: i) Counterpart contribution: Counterpart contributions will be disbursed from the National Investment
Bank on behalf of the Government into the Ministry of Finance Treasury Single Account and ring-fenced for the project using a unique TSA
code. Disbursement is subject to written request from the MALR to the Ministry of Planning in line with pre-approved expense categories; ii)
Beneficiary contributions: Beneficiary cash contributions are required for purchase of machinery, irrigation infrastructure, etc. In all instances,
beneficiaries will transfer their cash contributions to selected suppliers before CFIs release their credit contribution to the supplier; iii) WFP and
AfDB will be responsible for implementing flow of funds arrangements for their respective funds. (use of bank accounts, withdrawal applications
etc.); iv) The detailed flow of funds diagram is outlined in the PIM.
22/31
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
1.  Benefits to the STAR target group would accrue from: (i) increased water availability for productive use; (ii) diversification of productive
activities and sources of income thanks to access to finance; (iii) increased food availability for rural poor, (iv) increased value-added of
agricultural outputs; (v) enhanced processing efficiency through innovative technology and improved infrastructure; (vi) improved quality of
processed products, thus attracting higher prices at local market; (vii) increased employment either for hired or family labour, for both on-farm
and off-farm activities; and (viii) tax revenues as a result of increased volume of taxable production.
2.  This section presents the Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) of project’s interventions through the use of indicative activity models. The
analysis builds upon the precautionary principle, accounting for programme benefits in a realistic and conservative manner. A cash-flow
analysis is finally carried out to present the “with” and “without” programme analysis. The key-indicators used to carry out the analysis are Net
Present Values (NPVs), Financial and Economic Internal Rate of Return (FIRR - EIRR), Benefit-cost ratio (BCR), payback periods and
switching values for both benefits and costs.
3.  Financial analysis. The primary objective of the financial analysis is to determine the financial viability and incentives for the programme
target group as a result of their engagement in programme activities, and hence to determine the economic impact on family labour, cash
flow and household incomes. A number of indicative economic activities to be supported by programme were identified during the programme
design mission. The following activities are considered in the elaboration of household models: (i) Maize production; (ii) Wheat production; iii)
Clover production; iv) Onion production; v) Tomato production; vi) Fava beans production, vii) Goat keeping and viii) duck rearing. These
production models are used as building blocks for the elaboration of seven household models where differentiation is made both in terms of
land holding, source of income and production systems[1]. Finally, a tomato processing unit model is also considered to describe the
expected benefit related to agro-processing. All the technical assumptions within the models have been elaborated jointly with the team
members on the basis of field surveys, national statistics, international and national expert consultation and technical studies. The diagram in
figure 1 provides a logical sketch of the adopted approach while summary results from the financial models are presented in table 1.
141.
Figure 1: EFA diagram
142.
Table 1: Summary of financial models' results
MODELS
NPV (EGP)
@ 12%
Return to
family
labour
(EGP)
IRRf
B/C
ratio
23/31
Switching
value
Benefits
Switching
value
Costs
SML-DI-
FC
SML-FI-
FC
4,060
252
25% 1.06
-5%
6%
3,576
224
23% 1.05
-5%
5%
AVG-DI-FC 5,408
261
29% 1.07
-7%
7%
AVG-FI-FC 9,089
296
40% 1.11
-10%
11%
AVG-DI-HV 18,439
569
39% 1.51
-34%
51%
CAP-FI-FC 5,758
421
16% 1.08
-7%
8%
CAP-FI-HV 105,740
582
35% 1.27
-21%
27%
Tomato
processing
unit
4,135,160
n/a
33% 1.08
-7%
8%
143.
4. Project target group and beneficiaries. The primary target group for the Programme will be commercially-orientated smallholder farmers -
particularly women and young entrepreneurs. The programme will have a poverty focus and it is estimated that the number of direct
beneficiaries will be 160,000 HHs of whom 84,179 HHs are directly accounted for in the production models considered in the EFA. The
aggregation for production models is based on the number of HHs directly engaged in the activity. This approach could not be used in the
accounting of processing units - given the different nature of the investment. In this case, the aggregation is based primarily on the number of
plan/facilities established. The total number of HHs benefitting of the newly formed agro-processing units are finally calculate and based on
an estimated outreach of 243 HHs per unit.
144.
5. Overall the programme will benefits women, youth and men directly involved in farm and off-farm activities proposed by the programme as
well as indirect beneficiaries employed in the value adding activities and benefitting from the rehabilitated infrastructure. The inclusion pattern
of the EFA modes and beneficiary is described the table below.
145.
Table 2: Beneficiaries and investment phasing
146.
6. In the economic analysis of the project we will: (i) examine the overall Project viability; (ii) assess the Project’s impact and the overall
economic rate of return; and (iii) perform sensitivity analyses upon risks and variables affecting project’s results.
147.
7. Key Assumptions. Production and activity models considered in the financial analysis are used as building blocks for determining the
viability of the whole project, once addressing for market distortion and opportunity costs for inputs and outputs. The economic analysis of the
programme hinges on the following assumptions: (i) Programme life has been assumed at 20 years in light of investments lifecycle; (ii)
programme inputs and outputs are valued at their economic parity prices estimated upon international prices as reported by the World Bank
commodity outlook, and on the basis of custom duties and taxes rates as provided by the national bureau of international trade; (iii) an
economic discount rate of 10% has been calculate as the weighted average of saving interest rates, long term bonds yields and the real
interest rate; (iv) family labour is valued at its opportunity cost; (v) the shadow exchange rate factor (SERF) of 1.02 is calculated upon
international trade statistics and applied for the conversion of tradable commodity prices; vi) conversion factors for main inputs and outputs
are calculated starting from international prices and on the basis of import and export taxes and duties in Egypt; and (vii) the shadow
exchange rate (SER), estimated upon international trade data, is equal to EGP 17.
148.
8. Economic Profitability. The programme is a technical and economically viable investment to the economy as a whole. The programme
economic NPV of the net benefit stream, discounted at 10%, is EGP 941 million (EUR 52 million) producing an EIRR of 18% for the base
case scenario.
149.
9. Sensitivity analysis. Switching values and critical threshold have been identified for key variables. In particular, the project would no longer
be viable in case: a) investment cost increases by 38%; b) operating cost increases of 13%; b) benefits decline by 10%; c) input cost
increases by 11%; d) output prices fall by 10% e) programme beneficiaries involved in productive activities are less than 38,772 HHs.
150.
10. Finally, the sensitivity analysis allows to examine the effects of a simultaneous variation in some of the pre-identified key variables on the
overall project profitability, hence determining all possible combinations of variables’ changes that would result in a negative (or positive)
NPV.
24/31
151.
Figure 2: Simultaneous sensitivity analysis (EGP ‘000)
152.
11. Fiscal analysis. The fiscal analysis also show that the STAR programme is expected to increase social welfare. Further the
implementation of the project would represent a sustainable investment opportunity for the GoE. In fact, project cost borne by the Government
will be largely offset - over the analysis period - by an increase in tax revenues, hence resulting in a cost recovery index of 66 per cent.
153.
Table 3: Fiscal analysis (EGP '000)
Category
Society
Government
Farmers
Income
Costs
             1,938,206
             1,938,206
Family labour
               (713,219)
               (713,219)
Taxes on income
                             -  
                 110,177
               (110,177)
VAT
                             -  
                 175,839
               (175,839)
Project costs
               (435,630)
               (435,630)
                             -  
Net benefit
                 789,357
               (149,614)
                 938,971
Cost recovery index
66%
154.
[1] The features considered in the elaboration of household models are based on the survey results conducted by IFPRI and described in Nin
Pratt et al. (2018), Farm households in Egypt - A typology for assessing vulnerability to climate change, IFPRI, Washington DC.
155.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
25/31
156.
STAR’s exit strategy and sustainability is built on developing the capacity, readiness and resources of i) the STAR partners, to continue their
services in the STAR clusters, driven by market forces, even after Phase 1 and ii) the government, to adopt a programmatic approach and
expand the STAR benefits to new clusters and governorates after the current IFAD cycle of 6 years. 
157.
This will involve i) strengthening MALR’s capacity to continue STAR implementation on programmatic basis and strengthen its cooperation with
other relevant ministries e.g. MWRI and MoSIT: STAR will a establish a separate NPCU/GPCUs offices, deploy full-time staff and use a mix of
seconded staff and competitively recruited staff from the market which will develop technical excellence, committed work culture and support the
programmatic approach. Young officers from different departments will serve as STAR trainees for 6 to 12 months to develop their capacity to
handle STAR responsibilities in the future; standardized, streamlined, documented implementation arrangements for the successful interventions
will be identified to guide high performance standards; ii) leverage the STAR credit funds to crowd-in additional finance to support STAR
oriented, pro-poor business opportunities; STAR will not interfere with credit risk assessment, ceilings, interest rates and collateral
requirements. By maintaining a neutral position, and not distorting the credit market STAR will allow the financial sector to respond positively
and crowd-in additional financing resources to support the beneficiaries and sustain the credit-lines for supporting STAR expansion in
subsequent phases. The linkage between the CFIs, marketing partners and  community institutions (PMAs, CDAs) will continue to function in
the Phase 1 clusters driven by market forces even after STAR; iii) strengthen community level institutions and human capacities by supporting
institutional development, financial sustainability and technical capacity so that they can continue providing services in the Phase 1 clusters after
6 years and simultaneously mentor other CDAs/ACs in potential clusters for the next phase; iv) widely disseminate success stories and their
implementation mechanisms using digital technologies; and vi) develop a network of service providers to continue supporting STAR’s
achievements in phase 1 clusters and also support STAR development in future clusters (refer Annex 10).
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
158.
The key risks and mitigation measures are presented below. Refer Annnex 9, integrated risk framework, for more details.
Risk
Risk Mitigation
Rating
Institutional capacity for sustainability
and implementation: Weak rural
institutional capacities, and weak business
capacity of smallholder communities, are
major risks, coupled with the reluctance of
GoE to include capacity-building support in
project designs. Low capacity of
government staff implementing previous
IFAD projects which also carrying out other
duties in the Ministries.
The government is re-evaluating its policy of limited investments for capacity building
support. Grants mobilised by STAR from different sources will mitigate this risk. The risk
of weak capacity of the programme staff will be addressed by establishment of a
separate centralised NPCU will technical staff hired from the open market with
competitive salaries to manage STAR. STAR’s financial management will be
strengthened by appointing a dedicated, competitively recruited, accountant and an
accounts assistant to support the Financial Controller. Similarly, procurement functions
will be led by a Procurement Manager assisted by two qualified and experienced
procurement Specialists, all competitively hired from the professional labour market. In
the governorates STAR will mitigate the risk by establishing separate STAR offices
(GPCUs) with full-time staff, led by a Deputy Governorate Manager recruited
competitively from the professional labour market.
Medium
Technical aspects of programme: 
Previous IFAD projects covered large areas
and sometimes failed to develop synergies
between irrigation infrastructure, rural
finance, market access and community
institutions which lowered sustainability. In
previous projects the credit wholesaler
(MSMEDA) selected CFIs without project
participation. The CFIs often operated far
from the core project villages and could not
respond well to the project needs.
Financial management: reliance on
financial management structures (staffing)
within the Ministry resulted in weak
financial management capacity.
(Refer Annex 9 for detailed financial risk
assessment)
STAR will be implemented in a relatively smaller area (3 contiguous governorates). Joint
village implementation plans will be developed participatory by different implementation
partners responsible for different components. This will harmonize actions and mitigate
the risk. CFIs will be selected by the credit wholesaler from a shortlist already prepared
by STAR based on assessment of the suitability of the CFIs in the programme area.
Medium
This risk is mitigated by the establishment of a centralized, ring-fenced NPCU which will
be responsible for overall coordination. The financial management staff in the NPCU will
be recruited competitively from the market. The NPCU will also other IFAD projects (e.g.
PRIDE) and will be operational before STAR becomes effective. The NPCU accounting
software will have a module dedicated to STAR.
Medium
Climate Change: Extreme weather events
mainly heat waves, pests and diseases,
water scarcity can have an impact on
agriculture productivity.
This risk is mitigated by a range of measures such as digital early warning systems,
introduction of heat and pest and disease resistant varieties, early maturing varieties
(details in SECAP review note)
Medium
Financial management:
i)              Historical reliance on financial management
structures (staffing) within the Ministry resulted in weak
financial management capacity.
ii)             First-time use of MoF Treasury Single Account
System for an IFAD project. Potential inability to trace/ring-
fence project funds.
iii)            Reliance on 3rd CWs and CFIs increase fiduciary
risk.
iv)           Implementation via 2 Ministries – MALR and
MWRI.
26/31
i)              Establishment of a centralized, ring-fenced NPCU with staff
recruited competitively from the market. The NPCU will be operational
before STAR becomes effective.
ii)             MoF confirmed TSA is ready for use and allows and has
functionality to ensure traceability of project funds. Allocation of a
dedicated MoF controller to NPCU to ensure smooth operation of TSA.
Include disbursement condition – MoF to confirm use and suitability of
TSA for use by the project.
Medium
iii)            Enter into MOUs/Subsidiary agreements with CWs/CFIs
once selected which outlines roles and responsibilities.
iv)           Central project management via NPCU and monthly
monitoring of advances to MWRI.
v)            Lack of coordination between MoP and MALR with
regards to budget finalisation and access to Government
contribution.
v)            Introduction of PSC to improve inter-ministerial collaboration.
Detailed budget process outlined in PIM.
I. Environment and Social category
159.
The main environmental challenges identified in Upper Egypt are uncertain water availability in downstream canal areas, varying water quality,
and soil salinity in some areas in Asyut and Sohag. On the other hand, the main social issues in the target areas are the exclusion of women
from crop production, economic and income generating activities, increasing poverty, moderate malnutrition, youth unemployment and lack of
youth interest in traditional agricultural production activities. The proposed rehabilitation of branch canals and on-farm irrigation systems will help
to ensure that sufficient water can reach remote lands downstream in addition to enhancing the efficiency of water use and conservation in the
system. Marketing interventions will have youth and gender sensitive approaches through targeted financing for small enterprise development
and capacity building. The project targets smallholder farmers. It will also invest in large-scale water conservation measures; rehabilitation of
damaged irrigation systems; facilitation of adoption of integrated pest and soil fertility management to reduce the use of agrochemicals; and
enhancing marketing capacities mainly for smallholders, youth and women. STAR is deliberately intended to address an adaptation gap and
prevent irreversible or unprecedented social or environmental adverse impacts. Hence, STAR is classified as a moderate risk project:
category B according to IFAD's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures Guidelines. An Environmental and Social
Management Plan is required for each of the project components. In particular branch canal rehabilitation works will need an environmental
assessment with mitigation measures included in the design and implementation of the works and subsequent management of the canals.
(Refer to SECAP and PIM annexes).
J. Climate Risk classification
160.
Egypt is vulnerable to climate change impacts mainly due to increasing temperature, sea level rise across coastal areas, inter-annual variability
in the Nile flow and increase in the frequency of extreme events in particular heat waves. Historic data shows that for the period between 1901
and 2017, average maximum temperature increased by 0.95%, 1% and 0.93% between May and October in Assiut, Menya and Sohag,
respectively. It has also been observed that the frequency of heat waves have increased in the three governorates and are already being felt by
the farmers. These changes have negative impacts on agricultural productivity, crop water needs and as such water use, use of pesticides, and
livestock health and production and exacerbates the water scarcity challenges in these governorates. STAR’s interventions will not increase the
vulnerability of target populations and resources to climate hazards. On the contrary, the components will contribute to increasing the adaptive
capacity of smallholder farmers and their families through improved water-efficient irrigation systems, economic diversification mainly through
investing in women and youth, use of digitalized early warning systems and training of farmers on related adaptation action options, and poverty
alleviation through enhanced access to markets. Hence, the STAR project’s Climate Risk Classification is Moderate according to IFAD's Social,
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures Guidelines. The SECAP annex includes a climate risk and vulnerability analysis and design
has mainstreamed climate change adaptation measures.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
161.
Programme management and coordination: The Government’s lead agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR)
with close collaboration with the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) and the Egyptian Financial Regulatory Agency (FRA), the
oversight body for all non-banking institutions (MFIs) and the Ministry of Supply and Internal Trade (MoSIT). STAR implementation will rely on a
mix of community, public and private sector and technical service providers. Beneficiary households will play a lead role through community
institutions (CDAs, ACs, WUAs, PMA and IEGs). 
162.
Programme Steering Committee (PSC): A high ranking inter-ministerial Programme Steering Committee (PSC) would be set up for overall
policy decisions and guidance at the National level. The Minister of MALR will designate the Chair of the PSC. The PSC members will include
representatives of the STAR governorates, the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation (MIC), MWRI, MoSIT, CW, private sector
representatives (agribusinesses, exporters). The PSC will meet at least once quarterly, and as and when necessary. Its roles will include
ensuring compliance of STAR activities with Government’s policies, approving the STAR AWPBs, overseeing effective coordination between
different STAR components, ensuring STAR coordination with other development programmes, and recommending changes in STAR
implementation where necessary in coordination with IFAD (refer PIM for details). An Executive Steering Committee (ESC) will be constituted at
the National level comprising members drawn from the PSC. The ESC will serve as a standing committee empowered to meet whenever
needed to resolve implementation bottlenecks that cannot be settled at the Governorate level and requires immediate attention.
163.
Governorate Steering Committee: A Governorate Steering Committee (GSC) will be formed in each STAR Governorate to oversee planning,
review progress, facilitate linkages between programme stakeholders and remove bottlenecks affecting smooth implementation. The Head of
MALR in the Governorate will Chair the GSC. Other members will include the governorate level representatives of MALR, MWRI, MoSS, partner
CWs, representatives from STAR clusters and the private sector. The GSC will meet on a quarterly basis. The GSC will constitute a GSC
Technical Committee (GTC) from within the GSC members to meet whenever needed to resolve any programme implementation bottlenecks
encountered within the Governorates.
27/31
164.
Implementation structure: A two-level organisational structure will be established. The National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU) and the
National level and Governorate Programme Coordination Units (GPCU) (total 3, one in each Governorate) at the Governorate level will be
established for implementing STAR (Refer PIM for organizational structure at both levels). 
165.
NPCU: The NPCU will be established in Cairo at the MALR as a unified coordination unit for consolidated management of all IFAD
projects/programme in the country. Initially NPCU will oversee the implementation of STAR along with three other IFAD projects (PRIDE,
PRIME, SAIL). All NPCU staff members will be competitively recruited from the professional labour market and will work on a full-time basis for
managing all the project/programmes in the NPCU. The ESC will designate one of its members are the NPCU National Coordinator (NC) to
provide oversight and strategic direction to the NPCU. A National Programme Manager (NPM) will head the NPCU day to day operations. The
NPM will be assisted by a National technical support team and a National operations support team with the following composition.
National technical support team: This team will carry out overall technical planning, implementation oversight and technical guidance to the
Governorates for STAR implementation. A STAR Technical Specialist (STS) hired from the open market will be dedicated for STAR
implementation only at the National level. The rest of the NPCU technical team will manage STAR and other IFAD projects and will comprise:
i) one M&E and KM Manager (MKM) assisted by two M&E and KM Specialists (MKS) and one M&E, KM and ICT Specialist (MKIS); ii) one
Environment and Climate Manager (ECM); iii) one Gender and Social Inclusion Manager (GSM) and iv) one digital agriculture specialist.
National operations support team: This team will perform financial planning, management and control; programme procurement, contracting
and contract management and staff evaluation. It will monitor, record and report community and government levels. The team will manage all
NPCU projects including STAR and will consist of i) one Finance Manager (FM) assisted by one Finance Coordinator (FC), an accountant
(dedicated to STAR) and an assistant accountant (dedicated to STAR); ii) one Procurement Manager (PM) supported by two Procurement
Specialists (PS); and iii) one HR and Administration Manager (HRM) supported by a HR and Administration Assistant (HRA).
166.
Governorate Programme Coordination Unit (GPCU): STAR will establish three GPCUs, one each in Menya, Sohag, and the Asyut
Governorate. The GPCUs will be dedicated only to the implementation of STAR. The GPCUs will be established as separate offices within the
Directorate of MALR and will be headed by a Governorate Programme Coordinator (GPC) from the MALR Directorate. A Governorate Deputy
Manager (GDM) will be competitively recruited from the professional labour market to manage STAR at the GPCU level on a full time basis. The
GPC and GDM will be supported by a set of seven full-time staff members seconded by the MALR with IFAD’s final approval. These positions
will be i) one GPCU Agronomist (GA); ii) one Business Development and Marketing Specialist (BMS); iii) one Infrastructure Engineer (IE); iv)
one Social and Community Mobilisation Specialist (SCS) v) one Financial Services Specialist (FSS) vi) one M&E Focal point/data collection
officer (MFP) and vii) one STAR Accountant (SA). 
167.
IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints with respect to alleged sexual exploitation and
abuse (SEA). More information can be obtained from IFAD webpage: https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40738506. 
168.
Village level implementation: The GPCUs will carry out programme implementation at the village level with the support of partner CDAs, YCF
and SYP. STAR will train (through ToTs) a pool of 5-10 YCFs in each village. Based on needs, the partner CDAs will engage the YCFs to
support STAR implementation at the village level and pay allowances supported by STAR. Additionally, STAR will train young graduates and
deploy one SYP in each village to support STAR implementation in coordination with the partner CDAs and the YCFs. The SYPs will be
capacitated through training and technical assistance support, paid allowances, and provided with SYP certificate at the end of the programme.
The support to the SYPs will contribute to IFAD’s youth inclusion priority. After their engagement with STAR the SYPs can join the CDAs to
continue community level services, become independent service providers or join agribusinesses and enterprises in the programme area. The
GPCU with the support of the SYPs and YCFs will facilitate the development of a Village Implementation Plan (VIP) in each village on an annual
basis through participation of all the implementing partners. The GPCU will monitor and ensure that implementation is coordinated in each
village according to these plans leading to harmonisation of resources and interconnectivity of the components. 
169.
Programmatic orientation of the NPCU and GPCUs: The NPCU and the GPCUs will be capacitated and oriented to support the continuation
of the STAR activities on programmatic basis. Towards this objective the NCPU and the GPCU will adopt a set of specific initiatives such as: i)
contract short-term technical specialists in specific areas (rural finance, marketing, community mobilisation) from the open market to join the
STAR implementation teams periodically with the responsibility to assist with work volumes, examine and improve the existing technical work
processes, share knowledge, suggest improvements, and upgrade the knowledge and skills of the GPCU staff; ii) operate a “STAR programme
support” initiative in the NPCU and GPCUs which will involve the MALR deputing young officers from different departments to these Units for 6
to 12 months on a rotational basis for orientation and hands-on experience of STAR implementation and iii) establish standardised, well
documented implementation procedures regularly update the PIM, including staff roles, responsibilities and decision making authorities, to
enable the smooth continuation of these units on programmatic basis.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
170.
The NPCU will be established to remove the reliance on past PMU structures that delivered weak financial management results. The NPCU
Finance Manager, with assistance from a Finance Coordinator, will oversee all NPCU projects (PRIDE, STAR, SAIL and PRIME). The NPCU will
also appoint an accountant and an accounts assistant dedicated to STAR. Each of the 3 GPCUs will have an accountant. NPCU finance staff
will be recruited on a competitive basis from the market and offered competitive salaries to reduce the risk of staff turnover. GPCU staff will be
seconded from the government. The STAR finance function will be supported by a dedicated MoF Controller at the NPCU, creating a linkage
with the MoF accounting unit (based at MALR) which will process payments on behalf of the NPCU via the Government Payment System. In
addition, a MARL internal auditor will be involved in the payment cycle, reviewing payment requests on a sample basis before processing.
171.
The financial management in other implementing partners will be as follows: i) Rural finance implementing partners: MSMEDA, ADP (managed
via CIB as fund manager) and CGC have existing financial management structures with capacity to manage project funds. They will receive
disbursements directly from IFAD (IFAD Loan) and operate independently from the NPCU. They will contribute to the consolidated AWPB and
submit interim/annual financial reports to NPCU. Arrangements for other CWs and CFIs selected after project start-up will be considered and
detailed roles/responsibilities outlined in MOUs/Subsidiary agreements entered into at that time. ii) MWRI: MWRI will lead implementation of
subcomponent 2.1 in close collaboration with MALR. In order to maintain centralised financial management, MWRI will receive advances via the
NPCU. Monthly reporting on advances will be required for the purposes of justifying related expenditures (refer PIM for details).
172.
Budgeting, accounting and reporting: These include, i) budget preparation and monitoring: The NPCU Financial Coordinator will be overall
responsible for AWPB preparation using a bottom-up approach for all sources of finance (IFAD, WFP, AfDB). The AWPB template will be
disseminated to all implementing partners for preparing inputs to the AWPB. The financial coordinator will monitor monthly budget to actual
performance and prepare monthly/ quarterly budget reporting (refer PIM for details); ii) Accounting policies, procedures and software: The
NPCU will develop an accounting software with separate modules for each project on a stand-alone basis. The TOR for procurement of the
software is included in the PIM. MSMEDA and CIB (ADP) currently have fully automated, centrally managed, accounting systems with the ability
to generate suitable financial reports, for consolidation at the NPCU. MWRI and other implementing partners’ transactions will be recorded
directly by the NPCU; iii) Financial reporting: The NPCU will prepare and submit consolidated quarterly Interim Financial Reports and Annual
Financial Statements. STAR will adopt the IPSAS Cash Basis of Accounting. IFAD will take play a central role in managing financial reporting
from the NPCU to financiers. All financiers’ specific financial reporting requirements will be incorporated into a single reporting template (refer
PIM).
28/31
173.
Audit systems will involve: i) Internal audit: The NPCU will not have a dedicated internal audit function. To mitigate the related risk, reliance will
be placed on the MALR internal auditor who is responsible for review of payment requests on a sample basis. In addition, the Central Auditing
Organisation (CAO) is responsible for auditing Government projects. The NPCU Financial Manager will refer to CAO reports with regards to
control weaknesses identified and implement recommendations for improvement of the internal control environment. MSMEDA and CIB (ADP)
have dedicated internal audit functions which follow a risk-based approach and include donor-funded projects in the scope of the internal audit
function. ;ii) Statutory Audit arrangements: A private sector auditor will audit the Project on an annually in line with International Standards on
Auditing and the IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed projects. The auditor will provide an audit opinion on the
consolidated project financial report (including all sources and uses of funds). The auditor draft TOR is outlined in the PIM. The draft TOR (in
PIM) outlines agreed upon procedures which are specifically required by IFAD to 1) place reliance on IFAD-specific disclosures in the financial
report, and 2) confirm eligibility of expenditure of a sample of rural finance expenses incurred via CFIs/CWs.
174.
Other financial management aspects: These include, i) Reliance on country systems: STAR’s reliance on country systems will involve mainly
the reliance on the MoF controller and MALR internal auditor in NPCU; NPCU flow of funds managed via the TSA and reliance on CAO reports
with regards to identification of internal control weaknesses. Reliance on country systems are significant, specifically in relation to the mandatory
use of the TSA system for management for NPCU flow of funds; ii) Implementation readiness and disbursement conditions: The disbursement
conditions in the financing agreement will include, the need for implementation of the STAR accounting software module; appointment of the
NPCU Finance Manager and STAR NPCU Accountant; MoF confirmation that the TSA is ready for use by STAR and allocation of dedicated
MoF controller at the NPCU iii) Anticorruption and good governance framework: IFAD’s anticorruption and good governance framework will be
applicable to the Project. Details thereof are outlined in the PIM.
175.
Procurement: The STAR procurement features will be; i) Organisational structure: The NPCU will be established to remove the reliance on past
PMU structures with part-time seconded government procurement staff and ‘high risk’ procurement functions. The NPCU will have a
Procurement Manager who will be assisted by two qualified and experienced Procurement Specialists. These positions will be hired from the
open professional jobs market at competitive salaries to ensure quality and prevent turnover. The procurement staff will receive training on IFAD
and other relevant procurement procedures. Procurement planning will be integrated during budgeting and STAR Procurement Plan will be
prepared using the IFAD new template; ii) A STAR procurement committee (SPC) will be established to support planning, fast tracking,
monitoring, following up and take corrective action on the overall procurement processes to assure accuracy and timely procurement; iii)
Procurement Plan will be continuously updated and monitored for quality control; iv) A contract management and monitoring team will be led by
the NPCU PM, for contract supervision and monitoring; v) A Third-Party Quality Assurance/Quality Control service provider (consultant) will be
hired to provide independent assurance of the quality of civil works; vi) training on FIDIC contracts and contract management will be conducted
to build implementation capacity for works and consultancy contracts; vii) IFAD will undertake reviews to ensure that the procurement process is
carried out in conformity with IFAD procurement guidelines.
176.
Thresholds for Procurement Methods: While eventually the specific thresholds for procurement financed under the Programme will be stipulated
in the Letter to the Recipient (LTR), following are the recommended thresholds:
Type of procurement
Thresholds
Procurement method
1
Works
-  More than USD 200,000
-  ICB*
-  USD 50,000-200,000
-  NCB
-  Less than USD 50,000
-  National shopping
2
Goods
-  More than EUR 100,000
-  ICB*
-  USD 25,000-100,000
-  NCB
-  Less than USD 25,000
-  National shopping
3a
Consulting services (firms)
-  More than USD 100,000
-  International request for proposal
-  Less than USD 100,000
-  National request for proposal
3b
Consulting services (individual)
-  Individual consultant selection procedures
177.
*using the WB’s standard bidding documents; Refer PIM for details
178.
Procurement Regulations applicable to STAR: STAR will adopt the new Egypt Public Procurement Law No 182 for 2018, the Procurement
Regulations (to be issued soon), and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines 2010. National systems will apply to all procurement except international
competitive bidding (ICB). ICB procurement will follow World Bank procedures. Egyptian national procurement systems will be followed for
procurement below ICB thresholds.
29/31
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
179.
Planning: The main planning tool for STAR will be the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) prepared using a participatory bottom-up
approach within the clusters. Once the priorities have been set at the cluster level and activities defined, the AWPB will be compiled for each
governorate and the 3 GPCUs will combine the drafted AWPBs for their respective governorates and submit to the NPCU. The NPCU will
consolidate and streamline the three AWPBs and submit it to PSC for review and approval. The PSC will insure the inclusion of STAR under the
national budget. The draft AWPB will be sent to IFAD for review and no-objection 60 days prior to start of each year of implementation. The
AWPB will be in line with the logical framework and guide implementation of activities in the clusters against benchmarks for measuring annual
implementation progress (refer PIM for contents of AWPB). 
180.
M&E: The results-based approach will be adopted through the M&E system. This will be through accounting for progress against AWPB targets;
and periodic assessments of movement towards achievement of beneficiary impact. The key responsibilities of the M&E system will rely on the
M&E unit at the NPCU, while all other implementation agencies at governorate, district and cluster level will play important roles in collecting and
analysing data to assess outcomes and impact of programme activities. The Operational and Results Management System (ORMS) will be
incorporated within the M&E system along with the Annual Outcome Survey (AOS) tool which would allow for effective monitoring of the
different programme indicators. The M&E activities will take into consideration the following: i) a resilience index develop based on the context
specific vulnerabilities for rural families in Upper Egypt and capacities the project is building to reduce these vulnerabilities and increase the
resilience of rural smallholder households (index to be included in the PIM); ii) data will be disaggregated by sex, age category, governorate,
and targeting groups; iii) progress reporting will be in comparison with appraisal targets and the AWPB; iv) monthly meeting at the NPCU with
the presence of GPCU M&E focal points to discuss implementation progress versus targets; v) regular field visits from M&E specialist and
component officers; vi) documenting of stories from the field for different component beneficiaries; and vii) reporting on lessons learned and best
practices and working on scaling-up. 
181.
Key M&E activities will comprise the i) PIM; ii) baseline survey will provide baseline data for the programme M&E indicators, cover both
beneficiary villages and control villages (representative sample size), be updated on an annual basis to track the different project indicators over
time and support analysis to ensure that STAR activities are on the right directions to achieve the target indicators. The baseline ​and impact
surveys will employ the Progaramme -level Women Empowerment in Agriculture Index ​
​(Pro-WEAI) which measures women’s empowerment
relative to that of men within their ​households (details is presented under the M&E section in the PIM).​ iii) progress reports, involving physical
and financial progress reporting tied to the AWPB targets. Quarterly progress reports will be prepared by each GPCU and send to the NPCU for
consolidating the STAR quarterly progress report. The reports will compare actual achievements against planned, including expenditures, and
explain variations. Semi-annual physical progress will be record in tabular spreadsheet form activities, quantitative inputs and outputs, number
of beneficiaries disaggregated by sex and activities they have participated in. The consolidated progress report will identify the implementation
constraints and corrective actions taken. The progress reports will serve as knowledge products; iv) mid-term review; v) programme completion
survey (impact evaluation) using the same questionnaires used for the baseline to allow for comparison against baseline results, enable
qualitative analysis (by beneficiary status, region and gender of household head) of programme impact by interviewing a panel of households;
vi) a programme beneficiaries database will be established by NPCU with detailed information about each beneficiary. The database will be
consolidated at the NPCU by the M&E unit and utilized for different purposes including sampling for the different surveys, tracking the
beneficiaries outreach as well as selection of beneficiaries to visit during the supervision missions; vii) Geo-referencing will support
implementation and M&E processes;
182.
Learning, KM and Communication: Building on lessons from IFAD country programme, STAR will ensured that: (i) programme launch is
effective for visibility (ii) KM indicators are included in the M&E system; (iii) solid information management systems (e.g. electronic archives) are
set up; (iv) KM related roles and responsibilities are clear in the NPCU and GPCUs; (v) internal programme learning and cross-project
exchanges are facilitated; (vi) organising exchanges occur with other projects and agencies through SSTC, organising targeted workshops, and
other activities to disseminate results, attract interest of other partners, replicate and scale up tested and documented innovations. A KM and
communication strategy will be developed and integrated into STAR management. The strategy will include which thematic areas of learning
(e.g. economic development cluster approach, multi-stakeholders platforms, access to markets, credit guarantee schemes, etc). and outline
how the knowledge generated will be disseminated through appropriate channels. Knowledge management will play a central role in the
programme. Both GoE and IFAD perceive STAR as a significant learning and KM investment in addressing economic and social imbalances
between urban and rural areas. STAR has the potential to bring immense field experience into the policy discourse on digital agriculture, rural
youth and women agribusiness development in Egypt and disseminate that to a wider international audience. Knowledge generated by this
programme will contribute significantly to the design and implementation of youth empowerment agricultural interventions within the agriculture
sector as a whole with support from the GoE. Therefore, knowledge generation will be the main scaling up pathway. STAR will help GoE to
generate knowledge on the impact of cluster investment partnerships and inform programme pipeline development and best use of subsidies to
benefit rural upland farmers.
b. Innovation and scaling up
183.
STAR will introduce a set of process innovations, technical innovations, and partnership innovations to overcome past challenges, increase
employment, increase profitability and support the scaling-up and programmatic approach. Process innovations will include establishment of the
NPCU and GPCUs, deployment of full-time technical staff (in NPCU) hired from the market, command-areas based clustering of villages to
prevent scattering of resources, CWs selecting CFIs from a STAR prepared shortlist to ensure CFI services in STAR villages, development of
village implementation plans for harmonised implementation of different components and financing on-farm irrigation through CFIs to avoid
confusing about the credit nature of support; Technical innovations will support STAR digital market platform; visual agricultural marketing, on-
line produce ordering, rural e-commerce, digital finance, digital water meters, digital pump starters, digital extension (STAR mobile app, video
extension, STAR SMS gateway, social media and what's app, digital climate resilience solutions). The digital technologies will increase target
groups’ opportunities and incomes, scaling-up and programmatic approach. STAR will introduce competitions of WUAs on water use efficiency
and rewarding the best performers, post-harvest technologies, youth skilling (in digital solutions, SYP program, YCFs) for skills building of young
graduates, youth enterprises along the agricultural value chains, microenterprise graduation and women’s savings schemes; Partnership
innovations will include coordination partnerships with other ministries such as MWRI, MoSIT; co-financing partnerships with other donors;
‘STAR programme support’ to develop capacity of MALR young officers to manage STAR as a programme; and avoiding credit market distortion
to crowd-in financial resources to support STAR scaling-up.
M. Implementation plans
30/31
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
184.
The IFAD country office (ICO) will take the following steps to ensure STAR readiness for implementation: i) NPCU establishment will be
completed including securing office space, furnishing and office equipment procurement, competitively recruiting and training all staff members;
ii) Office space for the GPCUs will be secured and identification of seconded staff will be completed; iii) Command areas based village clusters
will be selected for STAR implementation in coordination with partners such as MALR, MWRI, OFIDO, PRIME complete the; iv) Partner
Ministries at all levels will be oriented to the command area based clustering approach, programme implementation and coordination details; v)
The branch canals and command areas which are to be rehabilitated in year 1 will be selected in coordination with AFDB and all technical
studies related to their rehabilitation will be completed; vi) The STAR villages for year 1 will be selected in the command areas (point v above) in
coordination with WFP; vii) The credit wholesalers (MSMEDA, ADP, ABE) will be oriented to the partnership modalities and process for selecting
CFIs; viii) Accounting software procurement/implementation will commence once the financing agreements enter into force. A proposed ToR for
the accounting software is included as an annexure to the Financial Manual section of the PIM and specifies the requirement for ongoing
technical support and software updates.
Footnotes
[1] The mission consisted of Ms. Rikke Grand Olivera (Project Technical Lead, PMI/IFAD); Ms. Ms. Myriam Fernando (Senior Regional Rural
Finance, Markets and Enterprise Specialist, PMI/IFAD); Mr. Swandip Sinha (Team Leader and Rural Development Specialist); Mr. Mohamed El
Ghazaly (Country Programme Officer, NEN/IFAD); Mr. Nicolas Tremblay (Lead Regional Environment and Climate Specialist, ECG/IFAD); Mr.
Mawira Chitima (Lead Global Rural Infrastructure Specialist, PMI/IFAD); Mr. Tarek Abdel Monem (Environment and Climate Specialist, IFAD); Ms.
Chiara Romano (Gender and Targeting Specialist); Mr. George Polenakis (Rural Finance Specialist, Consultant); Mr. Enrico Mazzoli (Economic and
Financial Analyst Specialist); Mr. Shaik N Meera (Agriculture Digitalization Specialist); Mr. Mohamed Abdelatif (Procurement Specialist); Ms Bianca
Van Vuuren (Financial Management Specialist); GOVT PARTICIPANTS Ms. Dina Saleh (Director, IFAD sub-regional hub) supervised the mission
and provided overall guidance to the design team.
[2] CAPMAS, 2019
[3] Atlantic Council, Issue brief, June 2016
[4] Central Bank of Egypt, Monthly Statistical Bulletin February, 2019
[5] https://tradingeconomics.com/egypt/external-debt
[6] Central Bank of Egypt, Monthly Statistical Bulletin June, 2019
[7] FAO estimate, 2016
[8] ICARDA working paper, water and agriculture in Egypt, 2011
[9] https://data.worldbank.org/topic/poverty?locations=EG
[10] CAPMAS 2012
[11]CAPMAS, Income expenditure and Consumption Survey, 2015
[12] https://tradingeconomics.com/egypt/employment-in-agriculture-percent-of-total-employment-wb-data.html
[13] https://www.usaid.gov/egypt/agriculture-and-food-security
[14] International Trade Center Statistics 2018
15] http://uis.unesco.org/country/EG
[16] World Bank (2017)
[17] CAMPAS census 2017
[18] Educated but Unemployed: The Challenge facing Egypt's Youth; Brookings Policy Brief, July 2016
[19]https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp257981.pdf
[20] Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency. Cairo, 2016.
[21] Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency, 2014.
[22] https://www.egypttoday.com/Article/2/73285/Egypt%E2%80%99s-annual-water-share-declines-by-5-billion-cubic-meter
[23] The features considered in the elaboration of household models are based on the survey results conducted by IFPRI and described in Nin Pratt
et al. (2018), Farm households in Egypt - A typology for assessing vulnerability to climate change, IFPRI, Washington DC. 
[24] This includes interest charges for loans repayments
31/31
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
1/6
Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result %
(2020)
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Household
members
0 400 000 800 000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Households
0
80 000 160 000
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
0
0
0
0
72 000 144 000
88 000 176 000
65 600 131 200
94 400 188 800
0 160 000 320 000
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Total
number of
persons
receiving
services
Political stability,
Macro-economic
conditions remain
stable or
improve.No major
political shocks in
the region
Programme
Reports
Annual
Programme
Reports
Annual
NPCU M&E
unit and GPCU
M&E focal
points
NPCU M&E
unit and GPCU
M&E focal
points
Project Goal 
Contribute to improved living standards
of smallholder farmers and poor and
vulnerable women and youth in the rural
areas in upper Egypt
Percentage reduction in the number of rural households living below the poverty
line in the Programme supported Governorates
0
10
20
Reduction
% of HH
living below
poverty line
CAPMAS/
Baseline and
completion
surveys
Baseline,
MTR and
completion
NPCU M&E
unit
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
2/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result %
(2020)
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Development Objective 
Improve the income and resilience of
smallholder and landless families
through better marketing linkages,
sustainable and climate change adapted
agricultural intensification, small rural
businesses and inclusive policies
2.2.1 New jobs created
New jobs
0
4 000
12 555
Percentage increase in Pro-WEAI score over baseline
Increase
0
10
20
Percentage increase in average HH income as a result of services provided by the
programme
0
30
50
Increase in
average
HH
incomes
Baseline and
completion
surveys
NPCU M&E
unit
Baseline,
mid-term
and
Completion
survey,
Annual
outcome
surveys
Baseline MTR
and
completion
surveys
MTR and
completion
NPCU M&E
officer
Baseline and
completion
surveys
Baseline,
MTR and
completion
NPCU M&E
unit
Outcome 
Outcome 1. Increased marketing of
produce and profits to smallholder
farmers
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in sales
Percentage
of rural POs
0
20
50
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW)
Women (%)
0
10
30
Output 
Output 1.1 Marketing institutions
strengthened
2.1.3 Rural producers’ organizations supported
Rural POs
supported
0
580
1 160
Baseline,
midterm and
Completion
survey/
Annual
outcome
surveys
Baseline and
completion
survey/
Annual
outcome
survey
M&E Data
Component
reports
MTR and
completion
NPCU M&E
unit
Positive framework
conditions for
investment into
agriculture and rural
institutions
Annually
NPCU M&E
unit
Quarterly
GPCU M&E
focal points
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
3/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result %
(2020)
2.1.4 Supported rural producers that are members of a rural producers'
organization
Total
number of
persons
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
0
75 000 150 000
0
0
0
0
46 500
93 000
28 500
57 000
30 750
61 500
44 250
88 500
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition
Household
members
benefitted
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
0
75 000 150 000
0
0
0
0
46 500
93 000
15
28 500
57 000
30 750
61 500
44 250
88 500
Source
Frequency Responsibility
M&E Data
Component
reports
Quarterly
GPCU M&E
focal points
M&E Data /
Component
reports
Semi-
annually
M&E officer
/Component
officer
Output 
Output 1.2 Microenterprises developed
2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business development services
Rural
enterprises
800
1 650
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business management
Females
Males
Young
0
0
0
15 000
30 000
5 000
10 000
10 000
20 000
M&E Data
Component
reports
Quarterly
GPCU M&E
focal points
M&E Data and
Training
reports
Quarterly
GPCU M&E
focal points
Active participation
of women and youth
in programme
activities and
willingness to
engage in
microenterprise
development
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
4/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result %
(2020)
Source
Frequency Responsibility
0
0
10 000
20 000
20 000
40 000
Not Young
Persons
trained in
IGAs or BM
(total)
Number of persons reporting improved knowledge, attitudes and practices on
nutrition
Males
Females
Young
Total
number of
people
0
0
0
0
10 000
25 000
30 000
50 000
20 000
40 000
40 000
75 000
M&E Data and
Training
reports
Quarterly
GPCU M&E
focal points
Outcome 
Outcome 2 Improved resilience of
smallholder crop producers
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Households
0
30
60
1.2.3 Households reporting reduced water shortage vis-à-vis production needs
Households
0
20
60
Output 
Output 2.1 Improved irrigation
infrastructure and management
1.1.2 Farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated
Hectares of
land
0
6 000
12 600
Sufficient
implementation
capacity to develop
infrastructure in
Upper Egypt -
Substantial
improvements in
climate resilient
production as
foundations of
growth.
Baseline, mid-
term and
Completion
Survey/Annual
outcome
survey
Baseline, mid-
term and
Completion
survey/
Annual
outcome
survey
M&E Data
Component
reports
MTR and
completion
MTR and
completion
NPCU M&E
unit
Annually
GPCU M&E
focal points
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 2.2 Improved crop farming
practices
Source
Frequency Responsibility
M&E Data
Component
reports
Annually
GPCU M&E
focal points
M&E Data and
Training
reports
Quarterly
GPCU M&E
focal points
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
5/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result %
(2020)
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources and climate-
related risks
Groups
supported
0
190
320
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or technologies
0
0
15 500
31 000
9 500
19 000
0
10 250
20 500
0
14 750
29 500
0
25 000
50 000
Men trained
in crop
Women
trained in
crop
Young
people
trained in
crop
Not young
people
trained in
crop
Total
persons
trained in
crop
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or technological packages M&E Data
Annually
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Total rural
producers
0
0
0
0
0
9 500
19 000
15 500
31 000
10 250
20 500
14 750
29 500
25 000
50 000
Component
reports
GPCU M&E
focal points
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
6/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result
(2020)
Cumulative
Result %
(2020)
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 3.1 Engagement in Policy
dialogue and knowledge management
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
0
2
5
Knowledge
products
Annually
NPCU KM and
ICT specialist
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Appendix 3: 
Programme Cost and Financing 
A.  Programme  Costs 
Main assumptions 
1.  Introduction. This annex describes the assumptions underlying the derivation of costs, 
estimated costs and financing plan for the programme. Total programme costs are based 
on June 2019 prices. 
2.  Programme Period. The programme will be financed over a seven-year period starting 
from beginning 2020. 
3.  Inflation.  The  base  rate  of  domestic  inflation  has  been  set  at  around  8  per  cent 
throughout programme duration while international inflation is estimated at 1.7 per cent 
during the first year of implementation and reaches 1.8 percent at programme end. 
Table 1:  International Inflation (%) 
Domestic Inflation Rate 
1.7 
1.7 
1.8 
1.8 
1.8 
1.8 
1.8 
2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026 
4.  Exchange Rate. The exchange rate was fixed at 1EUR = 21.9445 EGP as per average 
market fluctuation in 2018/2019. Programme costs are presented in both EGP and USD 
currency.  
5.  Physical and price contingencies. Both types of contingencies have been taken into 
account and included in the costing of programme. In particular, in the category “works” 
a 5 per cent physical contingency is considered.   
6.  Taxes and Duties. There is VAT of 14% levied on all imported and locally procured 
goods  and  services.  The  Government  would  finance  the  cost  of  all  taxes  on  goods  and 
services procured under the programme. Most items procured under the programme would 
be purchased locally.   
7.  Expenditure Accounts. Programme ’s expenditure accounts will be the following:  
Technical Assistance and Consultancies 
Trainings, Workshops and Meetings 
Civil Works 
i. 
ii.  Goods, Services and inputs 
iii. 
iv. 
v.  Grants and Subsidies 
vi. 
vii.  Operating costs 
Salaries and Allowances 
8.  Total cost  and Financing.  Total programme  cost (investment cost and incremental 
recurrent cost, including physical and price contingencies) is estimated at about EUR 246 
million, EUR 58.6 million (24% of the total cost) of which will be financed by IFAD through 
a loan and a grant. Ifad contribution will finance all programme components as follows: 
EUR 21 million (9% of total cost) to finance Component 1, EUR 34.4 million (14% of total 
cost) for Component 2, and EUR 3.2 million for component 3 (1% of total cost).  
1 
9.  The Arab Republic of Egypt (GoE) would provide EUR 14.1 million (5.7% of total cost) 
to the entire programme. Resources amounting to around EUR 2.7 million (1.1% of total 
costs) will be used to finance component 1. About EUR 9.4 million (almost 3.8% of total 
cost)  will  be  financing  component  2,  while  EUR  2  million  (0.8%  of  total  cost)  will  be 
dedicated  to  Component  3.  Contribution  from  GoE  will  mainly  finance  salaries  of 
programme staff as well as taxes of any related expense. 
10.  In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties would be financed out of the 
proceeds  of  the  IFAD  Loan/Grant,  any  future  changes  in  the  rates  and/or  structures  of 
taxes  and  duties  would  have  to  be  met  by  the  Government.  The  estimate  of  taxes  and 
duties was based on the rates prevailing at the time of the design. 
11.  The  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB)  will  co-finance  STAR  with  EUR  49.4  million 
(20% of total cost) that will be allocated mainly to the financing of infrastructures entailed 
in component 2  for a total  cost of  EUR 44.4  million (18% of total cost). Another  EUR  5 
million (2% of total cost) will support the financing of micro-enterprises under component 
1.  
12.  The  Opec Fund for  International Development  (OFID) will contribute to financing of 
infrastructure development under component 1 and 2. Contribution from OFID will amount 
to about EUR 18.2 million (7.4% of total cost). 
13.  The World Food Programme (WFP) will co-finance STAR programme with about EUR 9 
million  (3.7%  of  total  cost)  supporting  the  strengthening  of  rural  institution  and  the 
development of micro-enterprises.  
14.  Grant resources of the Financing Gap for about EUR 2.6 million (1.1% of total cost) 
will be allocated across all three components with a financing of about EUR 0.7 million to 
component 1, EUR 1.4 million to component 2 and EUR 0.4 million to component 3 (8% 
of total programme costs). 
15.  The STAR programme would also be supported by European Investment Bank (EIB) 
contributing  about  EUR  82.2  million  (33.4%  of  total  cost),  allocated  mainly  to  the  co-
financing of component 2. Contribution from beneficiaries, both in-kind and in-cash, are 
expected to amount to EUR 11.6 million (4.7% of total cost). 
16.  The foreign exchange component is estimated at EUR 38.5 million. Taxes and duties 
are estimated at EUR 10.2 million. Funds allocated to the Programme Management Unit 
are  of  EUR  5.7  million,  equal  to  2.3%  of  the  total  cost.  Tables  below  summarizes 
Programme costs and financing. Detailed cost estimates are provided in annex A and B to 
this appendix. 
2 
Table 1: Programme cost by components (EGP ‘000 / EUR ‘000) 
Table 2: Programme expenditure accounts by components (EUR ‘000) 
Table 3: Financing Plan by Components (EUR ‘000) 
3 
%% Total(EGP '000)(EUR '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 249.28443.118292.40111.3601.96513.3251562. Micro enterprises development 674.50634.818709.32430.7371.58732.324514Subtotal 923.79077.9361.001.72542.0973.55145.648820B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 2.413.348158.1132.571.461109.9757.205117.1806512. Production related investments under business plans 780.667552.7931.333.46035.57525.19160.7654127Subtotal 3.194.015710.9063.904.921145.55032.396177.9451878C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 96.4297.152103.5814.3943264.720722. M&E and Knowledge Management 13.7316.62320.35462630292833-Subtotal 110.16013.775123.9355.0206285.648112Total BASELINE COSTS 4.227.965802.6175.030.581192.66636.575229.24116100Physical Contingencies 115.298-115.2985.254-5.254-2Price Contingencies 1.623.962336.7721.960.7349.3361.92311.259175Total PROJECT COSTS 5.967.2251.139.3897.106.613207.25738.498245.75416107Improvement of smallholdersproductivity and resilienceStrengthening RuralProductionInstitutions, EnterprisesrelatedProject Management,and MarketsInvestments ininvestmentsM&E and KMStrengtheningMicroirrigationunderProjectM&E andmarketingenterprisesinfrastructurebusinessManagementKnowledgeinstitutionsdevelopmentand managementplansUnitManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 2.89544113.7772.93615973320.940B. Goods, Services and Inputs 4013.4011.61858.659504-64.583C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 4.9722541.437912536.782D. Civil Works 3.620-113.288---116.907E. Grants and subsidies 2.19428.612-966--31.772Total Investment Costs 14.08332.479128.68663.998753985240.985II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances ----3.137-3.137B. Operating costs /c --793-840-1.633Total Recurrent Costs --793-3.977-4.770Total PROJECT COSTS 14.08332.479129.47963.9984.730985245.754  Taxes 1.4144753007.74119412110.245Foreign Exchange 2.0291.6427.59626.58132932138.498 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance(EUR '000)IFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%AmountA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 4.61932,81.1528,2--2.21015,7----5.23637,26074,32581,814.0832. Micro enterprises development 15.22246,9--6291,94751,52.2917,14.96815,3--8.41325,94811,532.479Subtotal 19.84142,61.1522,56291,42.6855,82.2914,94.96810,75.23611,29.02019,47391,646.562B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 8.7936,828-7.6185,91.6061,277.15359,621.27816,413.00310,0----129.4792. Production related investments under business plans 25.60640,0--3.3965,37.74112,12.7434,323.10636,1----1.4062,263.998Subtotal 34.39917,828-11.0145,79.3474,879.89641,344.38422,913.0036,7--1.4060,7193.477C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 2.35349,7----1.90440,2--------47410,04.7302. M&E and Knowledge Management 84786,0----13814,0----------985Subtotal 3.20056,0----2.04235,7--------4748,35.716Total PROJECT COSTS 57.44023,41.1800,511.6434,714.0745,782.18733,449.35120,118.2397,49.0203,72.6201,1245.754 
Table 4: Financing Plan by Expenditure Accounts (EUR ‘000) 
4 
(EUR '000)IFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%AmountI. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 6.55231,33211,5--1.4446,912.24058,5----330,23501,720.940B. Goods, Services and Inputs 21.70533,63800,63.3965,38.93713,82.7434,223.10635,8--3.0024,61.3142,064.583C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 4.69669,24787,1--1.01915,0------5888,7--6.782D. Civil Works 6.4755,5--7.6186,55780,564.91355,521.27818,216.04513,7----116.907E. Grants and subsidies 15.81249,8--6292,00-2.2917,24.96815,62.1946,95.39717,04811,531.772Total Investment Costs 55.24022,91.1800,511.6434,811.9785,082.18734,149.35120,518.2397,69.0203,72.1460,9240.985II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 2.19570,0----66821,3--------2748,73.137B. Operating costs /c 50,3----1.42887,5--------20012,31.633Total Recurrent Costs 2.19946,1----2.09643,9--------4749,94.770Total PROJECT COSTS 57.44023,41.1800,511.6434,714.0745,782.18733,449.35120,118.2397,49.0203,72.6201,1245.754 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Annex A:  Summary Cost Tables 
Table of Contents 
Table 1A:   Components Programme Cost Summary (EGP ‘000 / EUR ‘000) 
Table 2A:  Expenditure  Accounts  by  Components  –  Total  Including  Contingencies  (EUR 
‘000) 
Table 2AA: Expenditure  Accounts  by  Components  –  Total  Including  Contingencies  (EGP 
‘000) 
Table 3A:   Programme Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000)  
Table 3AA: Programme Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000)  
Table 4A:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000) 
Table 4AA: Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000) 
Table 5A:   Programme Components by Financiers (EUR ‘000) 
Table 5AA: Programme Components by Financiers (EGP ‘000)  
Table 6A:   Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (EGP ‘000) 
Table 6AA: Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (EUR ‘000)   
5 
Table 1A:  Components Programme Cost Summary (EGP ‘000 / EUR ‘000) 
6 
%% Total(EGP '000)(EUR '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 249.28443.118292.40111.3601.96513.3251562. Micro enterprises development 674.50634.818709.32430.7371.58732.324514Subtotal 923.79077.9361.001.72542.0973.55145.648820B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 2.413.348158.1132.571.461109.9757.205117.1806512. Production related investments under business plans 780.667552.7931.333.46035.57525.19160.7654127Subtotal 3.194.015710.9063.904.921145.55032.396177.9451878C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 96.4297.152103.5814.3943264.720722. M&E and Knowledge Management 13.7316.62320.35462630292833-Subtotal 110.16013.775123.9355.0206285.648112Total BASELINE COSTS 4.227.965802.6175.030.581192.66636.575229.24116100Physical Contingencies 115.298-115.2985.254-5.254-2Price Contingencies 1.623.962336.7721.960.7349.3361.92311.259175Total PROJECT COSTS 5.967.2251.139.3897.106.613207.25738.498245.75416107 
Table 2A: Expenditure Accounts by Components – Total Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000) 
7 
Improvement of smallholdersproductivity and resilienceStrengthening RuralProductionInstitutions, EnterprisesrelatedProject Management,and MarketsInvestments ininvestmentsM&E and KMStrengtheningMicroirrigationunderProjectM&E andmarketingenterprisesinfrastructurebusinessManagementKnowledgeinstitutionsdevelopmentand managementplansUnitManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 75.19411.204414.64267.8463.98419.746592.617B. Goods, Services and Inputs 11.36694.70644.8981.759.15711.893-1.922.021C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 142.23159211742.2992.5015.948193.689D. Civil Works 109.439-3.452.625---3.562.065E. Grants and subsidies 64.032631.603-29.259--724.894Total Investment Costs 402.263738.1063.912.2831.898.56218.37825.6946.995.286II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances ----68.831-68.831B. Operating costs /c --24.054-18.443-42.496Total Recurrent Costs --24.054-87.274-111.327Total PROJECT COSTS 402.263738.1063.936.3371.898.562105.65225.6947.106.613  Taxes 40.68313.0798.573229.5644.4783.155299.532Foreign Exchange 54.90945.166226.968795.8097.8778.6601.139.389 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Table 2AA:  Expenditure Accounts by Components – Total Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000) 
8 
Improvement of smallholdersproductivity and resilienceStrengthening RuralProductionInstitutions, EnterprisesrelatedProject Management,and MarketsInvestments ininvestmentsM&E and KMStrengtheningMicroirrigationunderProjectM&E andmarketingenterprisesinfrastructurebusinessManagementKnowledgeinstitutionsdevelopmentand managementplansUnitManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 2.89544113.7772.93615973320.940B. Goods, Services and Inputs 4013.4011.61858.659504-64.583C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 4.9722541.437912536.782D. Civil Works 3.620-113.288---116.907E. Grants and subsidies 2.19428.612-966--31.772Total Investment Costs 14.08332.479128.68663.998753985240.985II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances ----3.137-3.137B. Operating costs /c --793-840-1.633Total Recurrent Costs --793-3.977-4.770Total PROJECT COSTS 14.08332.479129.47963.9984.730985245.754  Taxes 1.4144753007.74119412110.245Foreign Exchange 2.0291.6427.59626.58132932138.498 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Table 3A:  Programme Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000) 
9 
Totals Including Contingencies (EGP '000)2020202120222023202420252026TotalA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 41.04569.338117.757115.19154.5814.350-402.2632. Micro enterprises development 25.546152.375168.018144.875127.25064.48455.558738.106Subtotal 66.591221.714285.774260.066181.83268.83455.5581.140.368B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 16.376116.5301.327.9261.516.931771.603186.972-3.936.3372. Production related investments under business plans 40.48783.138192.947508.276519.693399.122154.8991.898.562Subtotal 56.863199.6681.520.8732.025.2061.291.296586.094154.8995.834.899C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 32.53615.39313.29412.71812.74412.7726.195105.6522. M&E and Knowledge Management 3.5652.4622.9382.6632.7693.3057.99125.694Subtotal 36.10117.85516.23315.38115.51316.07714.185131.346Total PROJECT COSTS 159.555439.2371.822.8802.300.6541.488.641671.005224.6427.106.613 
Table 3AA:  Programme Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000) 
10 
Totals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)2020202120222023202420252026TotalA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 1.7532.6934.0983.7471.667125-14.0832. Micro enterprises development 1.1026.7167.1736.3235.7422.8922.53232.479Subtotal 2.8559.40811.27110.0707.4093.0172.53246.562B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 6944.39246.11749.34323.5715.364-129.4792. Production related investments under business plans 1.7353.4327.23917.68716.98612.3154.60363.998Subtotal 2.4297.82453.35667.03040.55717.6794.603193.477C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 1.4356836035765765762824.7302. M&E and Knowledge Management 161108127112114134229985Subtotal 1.5967917296886907105125.716Total PROJECT COSTS 6.88018.02465.35677.78748.65621.4057.646245.754 
Table 4A:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000) 
11 
Totals Including Contingencies (EGP '000)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 54.89446.230188.843188.73987.83211.52914.550592.617B. Goods, Services and Inputs 38.277116.347233.992505.723495.469383.874148.3391.922.021C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 27.79634.75643.78139.23035.36712.759-193.689D. Civil Works 10.26094.6981.170.9751.385.489716.888183.754-3.562.065E. Grants and subsidies 10.511129.664167.274163.624134.78063.48455.558724.894Total Investment Costs 141.738421.6941.804.8652.282.8051.470.336655.399218.4476.995.286II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 11.69710.77010.77010.17010.17010.1705.08568.831B. Operating costs /c 6.1206.7727.2447.6798.1355.4361.11042.496Total Recurrent Costs 17.81717.54218.01417.84818.30515.6066.195111.327Total PROJECT COSTS 159.555439.2371.822.8802.300.6541.488.641671.005224.6427.106.613 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Table 4AA:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EUR ’000) 
12 
Totals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 2.3681.8836.6546.2402.80046752820.940B. Goods, Services and Inputs 1.6214.6328.59317.51816.14811.7674.30464.583C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 1.1791.3161.5291.2861.092379-6.782D. Civil Works 4353.56940.66645.06721.8995.271-116.907E. Grants and subsidies 4655.8607.1486.9325.9722.8632.53231.772Total Investment Costs 6.06817.26064.59077.04547.91120.7487.364240.985II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 5334914914634634632323.137B. Operating costs /c 279273276279282194511.633Total Recurrent Costs 8127647677427466572824.770Total PROJECT COSTS 6.88018.02465.35677.78748.65621.4057.646245.754 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Table 5A:  Programme Components by Financiers (EUR ‘000) 
13 
(EUR '000)IFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%AmountA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 4.61932,81.1528,2--2.21015,7----5.23637,26074,32581,814.0832. Micro enterprises development 15.22246,9--6291,94751,52.2917,14.96815,3--8.41325,94811,532.479Subtotal 19.84142,61.1522,56291,42.6855,82.2914,94.96810,75.23611,29.02019,47391,646.562B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 8.7936,828-7.6185,91.6061,277.15359,621.27816,413.00310,0----129.4792. Production related investments under business plans 25.60640,0--3.3965,37.74112,12.7434,323.10636,1----1.4062,263.998Subtotal 34.39917,828-11.0145,79.3474,879.89641,344.38422,913.0036,7--1.4060,7193.477C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 2.35349,7----1.90440,2--------47410,04.7302. M&E and Knowledge Management 84786,0----13814,0----------985Subtotal 3.20056,0----2.04235,7--------4748,35.716Total PROJECT COSTS 57.44023,41.1800,511.6434,714.0745,782.18733,449.35120,118.2397,49.0203,72.6201,1245.754 
Table 5AA:  Programme Components by Financiers (EGP ’000) 
14 
(EGP '000)IFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%AmountA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 127.87231,831.6077,9--64.30316,0----155.99838,816.3914,16.0911,5402.2632. Micro enterprises development 335.19445,4--13.8051,913.0791,850.2676,8109.01014,8--202.45427,414.2971,9738.106Subtotal 463.06640,631.6072,813.8051,277.3826,850.2674,4109.0109,6155.99813,7218.84519,220.3891,81.140.368B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 263.8886,7652-233.0425,946.6091,22.343.45759,5650.90916,5397.77910,1----3.936.3372. Production related investments under business plans 748.00639,4--102.8135,4229.56412,180.9754,3699.81736,9----37.3872,01.898.562Subtotal 1.011.89517,3652-335.8555,8276.1724,72.424.43241,61.350.72723,1397.7796,8--37.3870,65.834.899C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 52.08749,3----43.15940,8--------10.4069,8105.6522. M&E and Knowledge Management 22.13286,1----3.56213,9----------25.694Subtotal 74.21956,5----46.72135,6--------10.4067,9131.346Total PROJECT COSTS 1.549.18021,832.2600,5349.6604,9400.2755,62.474.69934,81.459.73620,5553.7777,8218.8453,168.1821,07.106.613 
Table 6A:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (EGP ‘000) 
15 
(EGP '000)IFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Technical assistance and Consultancies 165.95428,08.2301,4--38.5686,5370.64762,5----9520,28.2661,4592.6178,3Goods, Services and inputs DA 676.01133,510.8370,5102.8135,1262.07513,080.9754,0699.81734,764.0323,283.5404,135.2131,72.015.31228,4Grants and subsidies 325.79851,6--13.8052,20-50.2678,0109.01017,3--118.42718,814.2972,3631.6038,9Training, workshops and meetings 135.06569,713.1936,8--29.50415,2------15.9278,2--193.6892,7Civil Works_DA 198.0865,6--233.0426,517.4740,51.972.81055,4650.90918,3489.74513,7----3.562.06550,1Salaries and Allowances_DA 48.16670,0----14.65321,3--------6.0128,768.8311,0Operating costs_DA /a 1000,2----38.00289,4--------4.39510,342.4960,6Total PROJECT COSTS 1.549.18021,832.2600,5349.6604,9400.2755,62.474.69934,81.459.73620,5553.7777,8218.8453,168.1821,07.106.613100,0 
Table 6AA:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (EUR ‘000) 
16 
(EUR '000)LocalIFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesTechnical assistance and Consultancies 6.55231,33211,5--1.4446,912.24058,5----330,23501,720.9408,59.07811.001861Goods, Services and inputs DA 22.67133,53800,63.3965,08.93713,22.7434,023.10634,12.1943,23.0024,41.3141,967.74327,629.41930.4397.885Grants and subsidies 14.84651,9--6292,20-2.2918,04.96817,4--5.39718,94811,728.61211,6-28.612-Training, workshops and meetings 4.69669,24787,1--1.01915,0------5888,7--6.7822,8-6.059723Civil Works_DA 6.4755,5--7.6186,55780,564.91355,521.27818,216.04513,7----116.90747,6-116.329578Salaries and Allowances_DA 2.19570,0----66821,3--------2748,73.1371,3-3.137-Operating costs_DA /a 50,3----1.42887,5--------20012,31.6330,7-1.435199Total PROJECT COSTS 57.44023,41.1800,511.6434,714.0745,782.18733,449.35120,118.2397,49.0203,72.6201,1245.754100,038.498197.01110.245 
Annex B:  Detailed Cost Tables 
Table of Contents 
Table 1B:  Strengthening marketing institutions (EUR ‘000) 
Table 2B:   Microenterprise development (EUR ‘000) 
Table 3B:   Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management (EUR ‘000) 
Table 4B:  Production related investments under business plans (EUR ‘000) 
Table 5B:   Programme management (EUR ‘000) 
Table 6B:   M&E and knowledge management (EUR ‘000) 
18 
Table 1B: Strengthening marketing institutions (EUR ‘000) 
19 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 1.1. Strengthening marketing institutions Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Studies and traninig material developed by service providers Service provider for preparation of training material /a lumpsum29------29Community mobilization, awareness package, training material preparation and guidelines /b lumpsum69-36----105Istitutional need assessment /c no. of studies3------34.57014------14Market studies /d no. of studies3-3----64.57014-14----28Agribusiness landscape and opportunities /e no. of studies3-3----64.57014-14----28Quantitative assessment on access to finance, demand and supply no. of studies1------17.3107------7Analysis of climate risks local VC40------401.83074------74Subtotal 221-64----285B. Sensitisation and mobilisation for CDAs, cooperatives, women groups and MAs Training of trainers /f training sessions3444---154.57014191919---71Communication and mobilisation campaign /g lumpsum141477---42Community mobilisation meetings and training roll-out /h no of meetings/trainings18247048---1604568113323---76Community mobilisation meetings for women no of meetings/trainings25------2591023------23Sensitisation events and exposure meetings /i no. of visits23688--272.74068172324--78Targeting and gender Training of Gender and Social Inclusion experts / Social Focal Points at CDAs people100-100----200273-3----6Development of training material for TOT trainings on targeting and gender /j lumpsum3------3Exchange for Women's groups /k no. of people-60-60-60-18055-3-4-4-11Women's leader participate to exibition ( agri-food product ) no. of people-25-25-25-7555-1-1-2-4Gender / targeting / Nutrition mainstreaming training for Gender and Social Developemnt expert at Governorate level no. of people3-3----6370-0----0Leadership training for Women in VSC&L Groups no. of people500-500----1.0003719-19----38Finance Literacy Training /l no. of people2.000-2.000----4.0003775-77----152Women enterprise development trainings ( 10 per villages) /m no. of people1.0001.000-----2.000373738-----75Institutional support to partner CDAs and Ag coops (office refurbishment, and equipment) no.18247048---1602.2804156167116---380Support registration costs for new businesses lumpsum0,050,050,40,40,050,05-191.31955383955-96Other specialized training lumpsum12234142---117Subtotal 2581794222752910-1.173C. Market related investments under the business plans Certification costs /n lumpsum-210102--2410.960-2613013327--316Participation to Expos, trade fairs and other fora lumpsum-64656668--263Post-harvest specialized technical assistance lumpsum262710911156--328Financing of post-harvest equipment /o no. of business plan1501501.0001.000---2.300910138140950967---2.194Market structures and outlets no. of structures-222---618.260-474848---143Collection centres /p no. of centres-21282--2418.260-4728619449--576(Cold) storage facilities /q no. of facilities-26106--2491.320-2347141.212740--2.901Subtotal 1645842.3022.731941--6.721D. Demonstration plots Nutrition Demo Plot ( Roof-Garden) established at cluster level no. of demos1010-----209101011-----21Home ( roof top) garden demonstrations no. of demos1010-----2045655-----11Subtotal 1616-----32E. Capacity development of rural institution Capacity building on climate change issues lumpsum210------210F. Digital agriculture setup Development of Digital market Platform and Customization of Bashaier of KEF lumpsum10236152----516Digital Finance STAR Wallet and Mobile Money - Platform Integration lumpsum10236152----516Visual agriculture marketing Module, Uber Model and Aggregation lumpsum19358238----615Mobile Interface of Digital Market Platform lumpsum--109----109Content development and inventory on digital agriculture /r no. of trainings/ meetings303030303010-1609.132315320326332338115-1.745Business Meetings, Hackathon for Digital market Solutions, Handholding /s meetings-12----39.130-1122----32Implementation of Digital Solutions at village level no.1040404040--1707.30584342348354360--1.487MOOCs platform lumpsum105------105Certified courses for operationalising capacity building on digital technology no30303010---1004.56615716016355---536Subtotal 8851.9131.310741698115-5.662Total 1.7532.6934.0983.7471.667125-14.083 _________________________________\a Responsible also for the training of trainier\b Done by the service provider; related to community mobilisation, development of rural institutions, business plan development; including farming as a business and crop budget module, marketing modules, business modules, financial management modules;     revisi\c One per governorate\d One per governorate\e One per governorate\f Training workshop 30 members per w/s, SP trains Yps, and CDTs.\g Per cluster; carried out by the mobilisers in CDTs, CDT and Yps based on awareness package developed by the service provider\h Per village; roll out carried out by the CDAs and Yps and CDTs\i 20 women per village; this will also include buyers orientation workshops\j this includes guidance on Wealth ranking Exercise\k Learning village to village on diferent topics: agriculture/off-farm enterprise\l 20 women per village\m 10 people per village\n per cluster\o Machinery and equipment\p Estimated one collection centre per cluster\q One per cluster\r Including campaigns, publicity, group discussions\s Mentoring 3 pilot projects 
Table 2B: Microenterprises development (EUR ‘000) 
20 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 1.2. Micro enterprises development Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Studies Gender / nutrition sensitive Value Chain analysis as part of VC / Market analysis no. of studies1------14.5705------5Gender Impact Assessment /a no. of studies1-1--1-34.5705-5--6-16Poverty Impact Assessment /b no. of studies1-1--1-34.5705-5--6-16Subtotal 16-11--11-38B. Demonstrations Small income generation activity by women (innovative businesses) /c no.4510515060---36054828679840---233Collective youth enterprises (processing and agro-residue based enterprises) /d no.614208---4822.830157374543221---1.296Individual youth loans through youth groups (innovative  technology adoption) /e no.15355020---1201.14020476828---162Collective VC enterprises through MAs, CDAs Etc (energy saving technolgy etc) /f no.37104---2445.660157374543221---1.296Support to individual farmers in the MAs (innovative production technologies, climate resistant varieties etc) /g no.80185265110---6405485011917373---415Subtotal 4139801.425583---3.401C. Financial support for MSME Credit line for small income generation by women lumpsum1422.8402.8402.8402.8401.4201.27814.202Credit line for collective youth enterprises lumpsum244764764764762382142.381Credit line for individual youth loans through youth groups lumpsum1032.0702.0702.0702.0701.03593110.349Credit line for collective VC enterprises through MAs, CDAs Etc lumpsum122402402402401201081.199Entrepreunership and financing specialist pers.year333333-184.570161616171717-99Training in business management to beneficiaries lumpsum25------25Study on opportunities for microinsurance lumpsum73------73Assessment and mapping of the demand for credit lumpsum73------73International technical assistance on rural finance issues /h lumpsum157------157Subtotal 6275.6425.6425.6435.6432.8302.53228.559D. Support to innovations for climate adaptation Development of innovative climate-resilient micro-enterprises no. of grants102020202010-1004.570469495979950-481Total 1.1026.7167.1736.3235.7422.8922.53232.479 _________________________________\a At start, mid-term and completion\b At start, mid-term and completion\c 15 demos per cluster identified\d 2 demos per cluster identified\e 5 demos per cluster identified\f 1 demo per cluster identified\g 15 demos per cluster identified\h expertise on insurance, credit guarantee, secured transactions 
Table 3B: Investments in irrigations infrastructure and management (EUR ‘000) 
21 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 2.1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Technology demonstration Irrigation rehabilitation (use of modern technology) /a no307010040---2402.28072172250102---596B. Irrigation related investments under the business plans Irrigation rehabilitation no of HH1501.2509.75011.1005.7502.000-30.0002.2803623.06924.35928.23114.8875.271-76.181Development of Water User Associations /b no.5050909040--3204.500227231423430195--1.505Rehabilitation of branch canals no. of branches--10104--241.369.761--15.01015.2806.222--36.511Branch canal design no of branches--10104--24241.080--2.5162.5611.043--6.120Branch canal construction and supervision no of branches--10104--24241.080--2.5162.5611.043--6.120Subtotal 5893.30044.82349.06323.3905.271-126.437C. Digital solutions to water management Digital water DashBoard, server and software lumpsum31------31Digital water meters /c no. of units-200200----4003.200-748761----1.510Irrigation automation with Smart Phone based automated Pump Starters /d no. of units--100----100910--108----108Workshops, meetings, group discussions /e no. of meetings666666-3691111111-4Subtotal 32749870111-1.653Total Investment Costs 6944.22145.94349.16623.3915.272-128.686II. Recurrent Costs A. Operational expenses Implementing digital strategies for water management lumpsum-4040404020-1803.650-17117417718092-793Total Recurrent Costs -17117417718092-793Total 6944.39246.11749.34323.5715.364-129.479 _________________________________\a 10 demos per cluster identified\b This involves, mobilisation, training, capacity building and institutional development support to WUAs\c Electromagnetic flow meter model ex: FM600 / 6"), IoT master control RTU, communication booster, servo Stabilizer and an online UPS\d Electromagnetic flow meter model ex: FM600 / 6"), IoT master control RTU, communication booster, servo Stabilizer and an online UPS\e Two for each governorate 
Table 4B: Production related investments under business plans (EUR ‘000)  
22 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 2.2. Production related investments under business plans Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Demonstrations Establishment of demonstration plot for climate resilience businesses no. of demo plots2525-----5010.960315320-----635B. Production related investments Credit line for collective youth enterprises ( direct agricultural production and marketing related) no.-101520201068145.660-5258011.0861.1065633444.425Credit line for individual youth loans through youth groups ( direct agricultural production and marketing related) no.-5001.5004.5004.0003.00050014.0001.140-6551.9996.1035.5234.21771519.213Credit line for collective VC enterprises through MAs, CDAs Etc( direct agricultural production and marketing related) no.-2466632768.490-1573204894985072582.229Credit line for support to individual farmers in the MAs no.-2.0006.00020.00020.00014.0006.12768.127365-8392.5618.6858.8416.3002.80730.033Production related training and capacity building lumpsum131354552814-179Establishment of water efficient irrigation at plot level no. of feddan150150250250---800910157160271276---863Contribution to credit guarantee funds lumpsum--0,50,250,25--1913.174--476243247--966Subtotal 1702.3506.48316.93716.24311.6014.12457.907C. Digital solutions to support production Digital Platform development (STAR Platform), Dashboard, Databases, Design, Development, Hosting lumpsum1791801801801801801801.261Data logging systems for Project Staff and the Collaborators (Tabs) lumpsum0------0Video extension strategy, digital green model lumpsum2992992992992992992992.092STAR integrated app development design development and content development lumpsum315------315SMS Gateway - Customising the Existing gateway of WFP or development afresh lumpsum31------31Overall implementation of digital strategies in production component no. of meetings161616161616-969.131168171174177180183-1.053MOOCs platform development and course development execution. Input dealer certified training lumpsum5253-----106Social media and whatsapp components - Content development and network graph theory implementation lumpsum474849505152-296AIDA tool customization and implementation lumpsum52------52Digital hackathon for pitching 3 ideas - POC to pilot and handholding lumpsum-112211---43Input dealer certified courses - private extension model - linking it to input supply - extension performance /a lumpsum--151515--451.826--333334--100Development of digital tools for early warning outreach lumpsum105------105Subtotal 1.2507627567507447144795.456Total 1.7353.4327.23917.68716.98612.3154.60363.998 _________________________________\a Piloted in 5 locations in each governorate every year 
Table 5B: Project management (EUR ‘000) 
23 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 3.1. Project Management Summary DivisionsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Office supplies MIS System & Istallation no.1------136.53042------42STAR specific accounting software /a no.1------19.13010------10Vehicles vehicle10------1018.260210------210Laptops no.30------3036513------13Printers no.5------54573------3Photocopier No2------29102------2Fax / telephone No10------10911------1Tabs with open data kits no.400------400274126------126Handicam and video production equipments no.160------16036567------67Pico projectors / neat projectors no.80------8027325------25Other office equipment sets30------301375------5Subtotal 504------504B. Meetings and workshops Project startup lumpsum1------113.70016------16Financial management training workshops /b lumpsum111111-68.22091010101010-59Subtotal 251010101010-75C. Advisory services Digital technology advisor /c Lumpsum11-----268.4907980-----159D. Policy dialogue Policy dialogue platforms lumpsum1------113.70016------16Total Investment Costs 6239010101010-753II. Recurrent Costs A. National Programme Coordination Unit - NPCU National programme manager person.month6121212121267291051111111111566STAR programme technical specialist person.month612121212126722.28014272727272714164Adaptation Fund Programme management lumpsum274------274M&E and KM manager person.month612121212126721.64010202020202010118M&E and KM specialist person.month122424242424121441.28015313131313115184M&E and ICT specialist person.month612121212126721.28081515151515892Gender and social development manager person.month612121212126721.460918181818189105Digital agriculture specialist person.month121212----362.280272727----82Financial manager person.month612121212126722.01012242424242412145Financial coordinator person.month612121212126721.460918181818189105Procurement manager person.month612121212126721.83011222222222211132Procurement coordinator person.month612121212126721.37081616161616899Accountant person.month612121212126721.83011222222222211132Accountant assistant person.month612121212126721.10071313131313779Human resources and administrative manager person.month612121212126721.64010202020202010118Human resources and administrative assistant person.month6121212121267291051111111111566Office assistant person.month61212121212672731499999453Office clerk person.month61212121212672183122222113Driver person.month61212121212672365244444226Subtotal 4433103102832832831412.052B. Governorate Programme Coordination Unit - GPCU Governorate Programme Coordinator person.month1836363636361821645781616161616899Deputy manager person.month1836363636361821691016333333333316197Agronomist person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Gender and social development experts person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Business development, marketing and M&E person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Digital agriculture specialist person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Digital agriculture facilitators / volounteers person.month3672727272723643291377777339Infrastructure Engineer specialist person.month1836363636361821641171515151515789Accountant person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Social and community mobilization specialist person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Young professionals person.month90180180180180180901.08022821414141414121246Subtotal 90181181181181181901.084C. Operating costs Car fuel and maintenance lumpsum510101010105604.57026525252525226313Office supplies lumpsum0,5111110,562.280133333116Office operating costs lumpsum0,5111110,5638.35022444444444422262Travel allowances lumpsum0,5111110,562.740133333116Annual maintenance of softwares lumpsum-11111-5910-11111-5Adaptation Fund agency fees lumpsum228------228Subtotal 27910210210210210251840Total Recurrent Costs 8125935935665665662823.977Total 1.4356836035765765762824.730 _________________________________\a Access to 5 users\b Attended by 6 project staff and 1 IFAD employee /consultant - in Cairo\c International consultant 
Table 6B: M&E and knowledge management (EUR ‘000) 
24 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 3.2. M&E and Knowledge Management Summary DivisionsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. M&E studies and activities Baseline survey lumpsum1------191.320105------105Completion survey lumpsum------1191.320------115115Annual Outcome surveys lumpsum-11111-522.830-2727282829-138Annual M&E and planning workshop lumpsum-11111-59.130-1111111111-55Knowledge management activities lumpsum-11111-518.260-2122222323-111M&E data collection activities lumpsum111111-64.570555666-33Technical assistance lumpsum1-1--1-313.70016-16--17-49Website and social media lumpsum111111-62.740333333-20Impact assessment study------1191.320------115115Communication and KM products on success stories lumpsum333333-189.130313233333434-197Audit audit-11111-57.850-99101010-48Total 161108127112114134229985 
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
APPENDIX 4: 
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
A. 
Introduction 
The STAR programme is expected to generate substantial benefits for farmers, rural 
1. 
entrepreneurs and rural households in the programme area. Benefits would directly accrue 
to  farmers,  women  and  youth  through  activities  aimed  at:  i)  diversifying  productive 
activities  for  rural  poor,  ii)  boosting  agriculture  production  and  productivity  thorough 
increased  access  to  water;  iii)  strengthening  climate  adaptation  capacity,  iv)  facilitating 
access to market and access to finance v) promoting entrepreneurship and value-addition 
in agriculture.  The programme  would be applying a holistic and systematic approach to 
the  enhancement  and  improvement  of  the  several  sectors  and  productive  activities 
identified during the programme design mission. 
Benefits to the STAR target group would accrue from: (i) increased water availability 
2. 
for productive use; (ii) diversification of productive activities and sources of income thanks 
to access to  finance; (iii) increased food availability for rural poor, (iv) increased  value-
added  of  agricultural  outputs;  (v)  enhanced  processing  efficiency  through  innovative 
technology and improved infrastructure; (vi) improved quality of processed products, thus 
attracting  higher  prices  at  local  market;  (vii)  increased  employment  either  for  hired  or 
family labour, for both on-farm and off-farm activities; and (viii) tax revenues as a result 
of increased volume of taxable production.  
Increase  in  income  would  be  largely  dependent  on  rural  household  and  producers 
3. 
groups  adopting  improved  technologies  which  the  programme  will  promote  through 
technical  assistance,  development  plans  and  infrastructure  investments,  thereby 
improving  market  access,  supporting  marketing  linkages  and  generally  creating  a 
favourable economic environment that encourages farmers/rural entrepreneurs to produce 
more competitive products and expand production. 
This  annex  presents  the  Economic  and  Financial  Analysis  (EFA)  of  project’s 
4. 
interventions through the use of indicative activity models. The analysis builds upon the 
precautionary principle, accounting for programme benefits in a realistic and conservative 
manner.  A  cash-flow  analysis  is  finally  carried  out  to  present  the  “with”  and  “without” 
programme  analysis.  The  key-indicators  used  to  carry  out  the  analysis  are  Net  Present 
Values (NPVs), Financial and Economic Internal Rate of Return (FIRR - EIRR), Benefit-cost 
ratio (BCR), payback periods and switching values for both benefits and costs.  
B. Methodology, assumptions and data 
Financial analysis. The primary objective of the financial analysis is to determine the 
5. 
financial  viability  and  incentives  for  the  programme  target  group  as  a  result  of  their 
engagement  in  programme  activities,  and  hence  to  determine  the  economic  impact  on 
family labour, cash flow and household incomes. A number of indicative economic activities 
to be supported by programme were identified during the programme design mission. The 
following  activities  are  considered  in  the  elaboration  of  household  models:  (i)  Maize 
production; (ii) Wheat production; iii) Clover production; iv) Onion production; v) Tomato 
production;  vi)  Fava  beans  production,  vii)  Goat  keeping  and  viii)  Duck  rearing.  These 
production  models  are  used  as  building  blocks  for  the  elaboration  of  seven  household 
models where differentiation is made both in terms of land holding, source of income and 
production  systems1.  The  table  below  summarizes  the  key  characteristics  of  each 
household model. Finally, a tomato processing unit model is also considered to describe 
the expected benefit related to agro-processing.   
Table 1: Key characteristics of household models 
HHs type2 
SML-DI-FC 
Feddan3 
0.3 
SML-FI-FC 
AVG-DI-FC 
AVG-FI-FC 
AVG-DI-HV 
CAP-FI-FC 
CAP-FI-HV 
0.4 
0.6 
1.1 
1.2 
2.4 
3.1 
Summer 
crop 
Clover 
Maize 
Maize 
Clover 
Maize 
Maize 
Winter 
crop 
Wheat 
Wheat 
Wheat 
Wheat 
Other summer/winter 
crop 
Maize 
Clover 
Clover 
Maize 
Wheat 
Onion, tomato, fava beans 
Wheat 
Clover 
Clover 
Wheat 
Onion, tomato, fava beans 
Livestock 
Goat & duck 
Goat & duck 
Goat & duck 
Goat & duck 
- 
- 
- 
The economic evaluation of the entire  programme is based on the aggregated net 
6. 
incremental benefits for the target population. All the technical assumptions considered in 
the models are sourced from field surveys, national statistics, international and national 
expert  consultation  and  technical  studies.  The  diagram  in  figure  1Error!  Reference 
source  not  found.  provides  a  logical  sketch  of  the  adopted  approach  while  summary 
results from the financial models are presented in Table 2. 
1 The features considered in the elaboration of household models are based on the survey results conducted by IFPRI and 
described in Nin Pratt et al. (2018), Farm households in Egypt - A typology for assessing vulnerability to climate change, IFPRI, 
Washington DC.   
2 SML-DI-FC = Small producer, diversified income, producing field crop; SML-FI-FC = Small producer, farm income, producing 
field crop; AVG-DI-FC = Average producer, diversified income, producing field crops; AVG-FI-FC = Average producer, farm 
income, producing field crops; AVG-DI-HV= Average producer, diversified income, producing high-value crops; CAP-FI-FC = 
Capitalized producer, farm income, producing field crops; CAP-FI-HV = Capitalized producer, farm income, producing field 
crops;  
3 One feddan is equivalent to 1.037 acres or 0.42 hectares 
Figure 1: EFA diagram 
Table 2: Summary of financial models' results 
MODELS 
 SML-DI-FC  
 SML-FI-FC  
 AVG-DI-FC  
 AVG-FI-FC  
 AVG-DI-HV  
 CAP-FI-FC  
 CAP-FI-HV  
 Tomato processing unit  
NPV 
(EGP) @ 
12% 
4,060 
3,576 
5,408 
9,089 
18,439 
5,758 
105,740 
4,135,160 
Return to 
family 
labour 
(EGP) 
IRRf 
B/C 
ratio 
Switching 
value 
Benefits 
Switching 
value 
Costs 
252 
224 
261 
296 
569 
421 
582 
n/a 
25% 
23% 
29% 
40% 
39% 
16% 
35% 
33% 
1.06 
1.05 
1.07 
1.11 
1.51 
1.08 
1.27 
1.08 
-5% 
-5% 
-7% 
-10% 
-34% 
-7% 
-21% 
-7% 
6% 
5% 
7% 
11% 
51% 
8% 
27% 
8% 
Programme  target  group  and  beneficiaries.  The  primary  target  group  for  the 
7. 
Programme will be commercially-orientated smallholder farmers - particularly women and 
young entrepreneurs. The programme will have a poverty focus and it is estimated that 
the number of direct beneficiaries will be 160,000 HHs of whom 843,179 HHs are directly 
accounted  for  in  the  production  models  considered  in  the  EFA.  The  aggregation  for 
production models is based  on the number  of  HHs directly engaged in the activity. This 
approach  could  not  be  used  in  the  accounting  of  processing  units  -  given  the  different 
nature of the investment. In this case, the aggregation is based primarily on the number 
of  plan/facilities  established.  The  total  number  of  HHs  benefitting  of  the  newly  formed 
agro-processing units are finally calculate and based on an estimated outreach of 243 HHs 
per unit. 
Overall  the  programme  will  benefits  women,  youth  and  men  directly  involved  in 
8. 
farm and off-farm activities proposed by the programme as well as indirect beneficiaries 
employed  in  the  value  adding  activities  and  benefitting  from  the  rehabilitated 
infrastructure.  The  inclusion  pattern  of  the  EFA  modes  and  beneficiary  is  described  the 
table below.  
Table 3: Beneficiaries and investment phasing 
Key assumptions. The following source of information gathered during the design 
9. 
mission  have  been  used  to  set  up  the  analysis:  a)  interviews  with  farmers  and 
entrepreneurs; b) official statistics and surveys from the Egyptian Bureau of statistics, c) 
academic papers, d) technical reports and; e) mission estimates. In particular, information 
on labour and input requirements for various operations, capital costs, prevailing wages, 
yields, farm gate and market prices of commodities, input and farm-to-market transport 
costs were collected during the field visit. Conservative assumptions were made both for 
inputs and outputs, and take account of possible risks.  
Exchange rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 EUR = 21.9445 
10. 
EGP computed as an average of the exchange rate prevailing during the design mission. 
Numeraire  and  Prices.  The  adopted  numeraire  for  the  EFA  is  the  domestic  price 
11. 
level  expressed  in  local  currency  unit.  The  financial  prices  for  programme  inputs  and 
outputs represent average market prices and were collected in the field during the design 
mission (June 2019). Prices used represent estimates of the average seasonal prices and 
the analysis is carried out using nominal constant prices.  
Labour. Family labour has been valued both in financial and economic analysis. It 
12. 
has been assumed that farm labour is provided by the households and is valued at EGP 75 
day-1 (EUR 4.1). Hired labour (skilled) is priced at EGP 100 day-1 (EUR 5.5), which is the 
prevailing market rate for on-farm activities.    
unitY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7TotalMODELS SML-DI-FCHHs313         1,336     5,569     6,580     4,057     1,738     610         20,203SML-FI-FCHHs313         1,336     5,569     6,580     4,057     1,738     610         20,203AVG-DI-FCHHs313         1,336     5,569     6,580     4,057     1,738     610         20,203AVG-FI-FCHHs144         612         2,552     3,016     1,859     797         280         9,260AVG-DI-HVHHs144         612         2,552     3,016     1,859     797         280         9,260CAP-FI-FCHHs52           223         928         1,097     676         290         102         3,367CAP-FI-HVHHs26           111         464         548         338         145         51           1,684ProcessingTomato processing unitunit2              4              6              6              6              3              27Production 
Opportunity cost of capital. A discount rate of 12% has been used in this analysis 
13. 
to  assess  the  viability  and  robustness  of  the  investments.  In  order  to  consider  the 
profitability  of  the  foreseen  investments  with  market  alternatives,  the  selected  value  is 
calculated as an average of the lending, deposit and money market interest rates. 
C. Food crops and high-value crops production cost 
Crop budgets for main food crops and high-value crops were prepared in order to 
14. 
support the elaboration of household models that were representative of the programme 
target group. Main field crops cultivated in Upper Egypt are maize, wheat and clover whose 
production would span over the winter and summer season. High value crop considered in 
the analysis are onions, tomatoes and fava beans. Each model - based on standard field 
units  (1  ha  or  1  feddan)  -  is  later  rescaled  based  on  land  size  and  cropping  patterns 
described in Table 4 below.    
Among  the  crops  considered,  tomato  production  is  comparably  more  expensive 
15. 
than  other  crops  due  to  higher  costs  related  to  pest  management.  Similarly,  labour 
intensity and cost vary according to commodities and access to mechanization. The most 
labour-intensive activity is fava beans farming due to the higher amount of labour required 
during harvest season. 
Figure 2: Crop production cost per feddan (EGP) 
D. Households and processing models 
Several  households  and  processing  models  were  elaborated  to  determine  the 
16. 
economic aptness of programme interventions. The underlying assumption is that, thanks 
to  increased  access  water  and  to  finance,  promotion  of  water  saving  technologies  and 
technical assistance, farmers will be able and keen to expand production, consolidate farm 
land and engage in  new farming practices. The table below shows the key assumptions 
concerning  cropping  patters  and  income  distribution  based  on  landholding.  In  order  to 
provide a comprehensive analysis of programme impact on the target group, household 
models are diversified accounting for land size (small - SML; average - AVG; large - CAP), 
main source of income (diversified - DI; farm income - FI) and production systems (food 
crops - FC; high-value crops - HV).  
Table 4: Assumptions related to HHs models 
SHARE OF CROPS IN TOTAL AREA 
HHs type 
SML-DI-FC 
SML-FI-FC 
AVG-DI-FC 
AVG-FI-FC 
AVG-DI-HV 
CAP-FI-FC 
CAP-FI-HV 
Feddan 
0.3 
0.4 
0.6 
1.1 
1.2 
2.4 
3.1 
Wheat  
46.6% 
48.7% 
38.1% 
39.1% 
32.2% 
37.9% 
33.1% 
Clover 
40.4% 
31.3% 
32.3% 
31.3% 
21.8% 
23.8% 
28.3% 
Maize 
13.0% 
19.9% 
20.2% 
22.1% 
16.4% 
34.5% 
16.3% 
Onion, tomato, 
fava beans 
- 
- 
- 
- 
27.8% 
- 
14.2% 
HHs type 
SML-DI-FC 
SML-FI-FC 
AVG-DI-FC 
AVG-FI-FC 
AVG-DI-HV 
CAP-FI-FC 
CAP-FI-HV 
Feddan 
0.3 
0.4 
0.6 
1.1 
1.2 
2.4 
3.1 
Wheat  
55.3% 
46.1% 
45.7% 
45.6% 
21.7% 
40.0% 
25.6% 
SHARE OF CROPS IN CROP REVENUES 
Onion, tomato, 
fava beans 
- 
- 
- 
- 
40.5% 
- 
41.8% 
Maize 
28.5% 
32.0% 
28.6% 
21.7% 
10.7% 
26.2% 
7.3% 
Clover 
16.2% 
21.8% 
15.7% 
15.0% 
8.0% 
23.0% 
11.9% 
Total 
100% 
99.9% 
90.6% 
92.5% 
98.2% 
96.2% 
91.9% 
Total 
100% 
99.9% 
90.0% 
82.3% 
80.9% 
89.2% 
86.6% 
  Small  household  farming  model.  Two  HHs  models  are  prepared  to  determine 
17. 
programme  economic  effects  on  smallholder  farmers  (i.e.  SML-DI-FC  and  SML-FI-FC). 
These models describe the production capacity of households with small landholdings and 
limited  capital  relative  to  their  total  available  labour.  Cultivated  areas  are  of  0.3-0.4 
Feddan4  and  they  are  mainly  dedicated  to  food  crop  production  (maize,  wheat,  clover). 
Both type of HHs are assumed to intensify production through the adoption of hybrid, heat-
tolerant  seed  varieties  able  to  withstand  prolonged  drought  and  heat.  Simultaneously, 
farmers will engage in livestock activities, purchasing an initial flock of four goats and four 
ducks. 
Initial  investment  cost  concerns  the  purchase  of  new  seed  varieties,  four  goats, 
18. 
four  ducks  and  the  construction  of  a  small  shed  for  keeping  the  animals.  The  average 
investment  cost  in  year  one  ranges  from  EGP  9,524  to  EGP  9,784  (EUR  509  -  542). 
Operating  costs  concern  mainly  the  buying  of  inputs,  fertilizers,  pesticides,  vaccination, 
labour cost (family only), water expenses and allowances for O&M for the shed. The annual 
operating cost range from EGP 12,772 to EGP 14,000 (EUR 707 - 774).  
Technical  reports  show  potential  increase  in  yields  in  the  range  of  10-40%, 
19. 
assuming water is available in the required amount and inputs as well as farming technics 
are properly employed5-6-7. The adoption of new practices and climate-resilient seeds are 
assumed to bring a conservative increase in yields of 14%. Maize, wheat and clover are 
assumed to reach yields of 2.2 tons, 2 tons and 22.8 tons feddan-1 respectively. Annual 
4 One feddan is equivalent to 1.037 acres or 0.42 hectares 
5 Ouda et al. (2009), Determination of water productivity on maize yield under deficit irrigation in middle Egypt, The Africa 
journal of plant science and biotechnology 3 (1) 80-85,   
6 Dhehibi et al., (2016), Impacts of Irrigation on Agricultural Productivity in Egypt, Annals of arid zones 55 (3&4): 67-78 
7 Osama, (2017), Optimization of the cropping pattern in Egypt,  Alexandria Engineering journal 56, 557-566  
gross revenues from crops and animal sales for smallholder farmers involved in this new 
practices would range from EGP 21,783 to EGP 22,908 (EUR 1,205-1,268). In the “Without 
programme scenario” (WoP), the actual performances of crop production is considered as 
the counterfactual. 
The cash flows of the two models are compared to their respective counterfactuals’ 
20. 
cash flows in the WoP scenarios to avoid overestimating programme impacts. Later, the 
net incremental cash flow (the difference in cash flows of the “with” and WoP models) is 
calculated.  Profitability  indicators  (i.e.  NPV,  FIRR,  BCR  and  payback  periods)  are  then 
calculated upon the net incremental cash flow.  
The cash-flow over the period of ten years, discounted at 12%, yields positive NPVs 
21. 
of EGP 4,060 and EGP 3,576 (EUR 225 and EUR 197) with FIRRs of 25% and 23%. BCRs 
are equal to 1.06 and 1.05. Return to family labour are of EGP 252 day-1 and EGP 224 day-
1. The sensitivity analysis in the model shows that activity results would turn negative in 
case of benefits declines or costs increase of ± 5-6%. The payback period for both activities 
is  equal  to  one  year.  The  table  below  summarises  the  pre-financing  and  post-financing 
results of the models. 
Table 5: Summary of small household farming results 
Pre-financing results 
Post-financing results 
NPV (EGP) 
FIRR (%) 
BCR 
NPV (EGP) 
FIRR (%) 
BCR 
SML-DI-FC 
SML-FI-FC 
4,060 
3,576 
25 
23 
1.06 
1.05 
17,696 
17,529 
n/a 
n/a 
1.28 
1.27 
Average  household  farming  model.  The  average  producers  in  Upper  Egypt  are 
22. 
characterized by landholdings of 0.6-1.2 Feddan, mainly devoted to food crop production 
and in some cases to high value crop production (i.e. tomato, onion, fava beans). Three 
HHs  models  (i.e.  AVG-DI-FC,  AVG-FI-FC  and  AVG-DI-HV)  are  prepared  to  demonstrate 
programme  economic  effects  on  the  target  group  featuring  such  characteristics.  As 
summarized in Table 1 above, two types of households will be engaged in crop production 
and livestock activities (goats and ducks) whereas one type of household will opt to invest 
in high value crop production rather than livestock. In all three scenarios, households are 
assumed to intensify production of food crops.     
Initial  investment  costs  concern  the  purchase  of  new  seed  varieties,  and  either 
23. 
small flock of goats / ducks and the related shed or the rehabilitation/construction works 
of irrigation canals (mesqa) for high-value crop producers. Outlays would range from EGP 
10,039  to  EGP  21,544  (EUR  555  -  1,192),  where  the  latter  estimate  includes  expenses 
related  to  the  irrigation  infrastructure.  On  average,  yearly  operating  costs  for  inputs, 
labour, O&M for infrastructures in the three models range from EGP 7,682 to EGP 22,254 
(EUR 425 - 1,231).  
Annual gross revenues  from  sales  would vary  depending on the  crops produced. 
24. 
Traditional farmers producing food crops would earn from EGP 27,903 to EGP 40,325 (EUR 
1,545-2,232) while high-value crop producers  would earn  an average  EGP 42,374 (EUR 
2,345) annually. All models are compared to WoP scenarios to account for the incremental 
effect of the programme only. 
Profitability indicators are positive in all three models. The NPVs are equal to EGP 
25. 
5,408, EGP 9,089 and EGP 18,439 (EUR 299, EUR 502 and EUR 1,1020) for AVG-DI-FC, 
AVG-FI-FC,  and  AVG-DI-HV  respectively.  Following  the  same  order,  FIRRs  are  equal  to 
29%, 40% and 39% and BCRs are equal to 1.07, 1.11 and 1.51. Return to family labour 
are of EGP 261 day-1, EGP 296 day-1 and EGP 569 day-1. Sensitivity analyses on models’ 
results  show  thresholds  for  a  decline  in  benefits  from  -7%  to  -34%  and  limits  in  cost 
increase from 7% to 51%. The maximum payback period is equal to one year. The table 
below summarises the pre-financing and post-financing results of the models. 
Table 6: Summary of average households farming results 
Pre-financing results 
Post-financing results 
NPV (EGP) 
FIRR (%) 
BCR 
NPV (EGP) 
FIRR (%) 
BCR 
AVG-DI-FC 
AVG-FI-FC 
5,408 
9,089 
AVG-DI-HV 
18,439 
29 
40 
39 
1.07 
1.11 
1.51 
19,579 
23,828 
34,989 
n/a 
n/a 
203 
1.29 
1.33 
2.13 
Large  household  farming  model.  Large  household  models  are  not  subdivided  by 
26. 
income  diversification  as  this  group  of  households  receives  most  of  its  income  from 
agriculture. Capitalized producers use a higher levels of capital and land per worker when 
compared  to  average  producers  and  have  landholdings  of  2.4-3.1  feddan.  Fields  are 
cultivated both with food crops and high-value crops. Two models (i.e. CAP-FI-FC and CAP-
FI-HV)  are  prepared  to  showcase  the  economic  return  for  this  group  of  farmers.  Both 
models foresee an intensified production thanks to increased access to water and adoption 
of climate resilient varieties and practices meanwhile none of the farmers from this group 
will  engage  in  livestock  activity.  In  the  case  of  the  high-value  crop  producer,  tomato 
production is foreseen to be carried out in a greenhouse structure covering one feddan. In 
order  to  sustain  the  initial  investment  cost,  a  shifting  in  the  current  cropping  pattern 
towards a more intense production of tomato is foreseen.      
Investment cost amounting to EGP 45,481 and EGP 274,237 (EUR 2,517 and EUR 
27. 
15,177) - for the CAP-FI-FC and CAP-FI-HV respectively - would cover the expenses for 
the  irrigation  canal  rehabilitation/construction,  the  construction  of  the  greenhouse 
structure  (for  CAP-FI-HV  producer  only)  and  the  acquisition  of  new  seed  varieties. 
Operating costs related to agro-inputs, fertilizers, pesticides, labour and O&M would range 
from EGP 14,454 to EGP 31,212 (EUR 800 - 1,727). Annual sales would range from EGP 
59,338 to EGP 167,241 (EUR 3,284 - 9,255). Also in this case, WoP scenarios describing 
actual performances on crop production are considered as counterfactuals. 
The NPVs are positive and equal to EGP 5,758 and EGP 105,740 (EUR 318 and EUR 
28. 
5,852) with FIRRs of 16% and 25%. BCRs are equal to 1.08 and 1.27. Return to family 
labour are of EGP 421 day-1 and EGP 582 day-1. The sensitivity analyses identified threshold 
in benefits decrease of -7 % and -21% or limits in cost increase of +8% and +27%. The 
payback period for CAP-FI-FC producer is slightly less than one year while the investment 
cost for the CAP-FI-HV producer will be repaid in 2.38 years. The table below summarises 
the pre-financing and post-financing results of the models. 
Table 7: Summary of smallholder farming results 
Pre-financing results 
Post-financing results 
NPV (EGP) 
FIRR (%) 
BCR 
NPV (EGP) 
FIRR (%) 
BCR 
CAP-FI-FC 
5,758 
CAP-FI-HV 
105,740 
16 
25 
1.08 
1.27 
35,504 
282,059 
69 
109 
1.54 
1.81 
Tomato processing unit model. The programme will support young entrepreneurs, 
29. 
producers  groups  and  cooperatives  to  invest  in  small  processing  facilities.  Increase  in 
value-addition  will  be  pursued  through  the  use  of  efficient  technology  and  technical 
knowledge  aimed  at  transforming  raw  materials  into  high-value  products,  preserving 
produce  for  longer  periods  and  marketing  final  products  to  higher  segments  of  the 
domestic  market.  Profitability  and  sustainability  for  this  type  of  initiative  will  be  also 
pursued  through  business  mentoring,  management  support  by  qualified  managers  and 
trained staff. In order to account for such benefits in the EFA, one tomato processing unit 
model is presented. 
The processing facility will consist of the technology required for cleaning, sorting 
30. 
and processing operations. The main production line consist of a: a) washer, b) crusher; 
c) pre-heating machine; d) pulping/ refining machine; e) holding tank; f) juice extractor; 
g)  vacuum  concentrator;  h)  tube-in-tube  sterilizer;  i)  bulk  aseptic  filter.  The  maximum 
processing  capacity  of  the  machinery  is  equal  to  20  tons  of  tomato/day  and  requires  a 
power supply of about 58 kW cycle-1 or 155 kW ton-1. The area required for hosting the 
production line is 6,000 m2.  
The  processing  capacity  at  full  regime  is  assumed  to  reach  2,600  tons  of  fresh 
31. 
product  per  year  -  half  of  its  maximum  running  capacity.  The  lower  capacity  assumed 
accounts for uncertainty regarding the stable supply of fresh product to the factory and 
the shorter growing season of tomato. The investment cost for the production line, land, 
office space and building structure is estimated at EGP 977,880 (EUR 54,119). Operating 
costs at full development stage would reach about EGP 9.5 M (EUR 528,000). Labour costs 
for six specialized workers would sum up to EGP 99,312 (EUR 5,495). Administrative staff, 
a managers would instead cost EGP 58,800 (EUR 3,254).  
32.  With  an  assumed  input-to-output  extraction  rate  of  15%-20%,  the  facility  is 
expected  to  produce  tomato  concentrate  that  could  sell  on  the  market  at  EGP  30  kg-1. 
Gross revenues from sales are expected to reach EGP 11 M (EUR 820,000 M). Considering 
the lack of a proper counterfactual and given this is assumed to be a newly established 
facility for people not currently engaged in similar economic activities, then the foregone 
income opportunity for all the people employed in the facility has been considered in the 
WoP scenario to avoid an overestimation of the activity benefits. 
The cash-flow over the period of ten years, discounted at 12%, yields a NPV of EGP 
33. 
4 M (EUR 228,000) with an FIRR of 33%. In addition, for every euro invested, this activity 
generates an eight cents of extra worth (BCR ratio equal to 1.08) and investments could 
be  repaid  within  the  four  years.  Finally,  the  activity  profitability  could  be  at  risk  in  the 
events of a benefits decline or cost increase of ± 7-8%. The first years in the cash flow 
are  characterized  by  a  deficit  which  would  need  to  be  off-set  by  accessing  a  loan. 
Nonetheless, after the loan repayment is considered, profitability indicators will increase 
and the NPV will amount to EGP 6.4 M (EUR 355,000), a FIRR of 44% and a BCR of 1.12. 
The switching values would also increase to -11% (decline in benefits) and +12% (increase 
in costs). 
E. Impact on household income 
The HHs’ models described so far present positive returns in both the pre- and the 
34. 
post-financing scenarios. Therefore,  we can  conclude that the activities proposed  in the 
STAR programme are technical viable (pre-financing results are positive) and are likely to 
be taken up by farmers in light of the financial support provided by the programme (post-
financing results are positive and higher than pre-financing results). Table 8 and Figure 3 
below provide a comparison of the results.  
Table 8: Annual household income before and after the project (EGP) 
MODELS 
Feddan 
Net income8, EGP 
(WoP) 
Net income9, EGP 
(WP) 
SML-DI-FC 
SML-FI-FC 
AVG-DI-FC 
AVG-FI-FC 
AVG-DI-HV 
CAP-FI-FC 
CAP-FI-HV 
0.3 
0.4 
0.6 
1.1 
1.2 
2.4 
3.1 
4,211 
3,884 
5,820 
10,223 
23,258 
28,613 
56,327 
7,120 
6,707 
9,063 
14,348 
30,769 
37,786 
119,768 
D (%) 
69% 
73% 
56% 
40% 
32% 
32% 
113% 
Figure 3: Comparison of pre-financing (blue) and post-financing (red) results 
8 Income values considered for both scenarios are the after-tax net incomes. These values do not include extra incomes 
derived from remittances and social security programmes. 
9 Net income values after tax at full development stage 
D. Economic analysis 
The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to examine the overall Programme 
35. 
viability; (ii) to assess the Project’s impact and the overall economic rate of return; and 
(iii) to perform sensitivity analyses upon risks and variables affecting project’s results. 
Key  Assumptions.  Production  and  activity  models  considered  in  the  financial 
36. 
analysis are used as building blocks for determining the viability of the whole project, once 
addressing  for  market  distortion  and  opportunity  costs  for  inputs  and  outputs.  The 
economic analysis of the programme hinges on the following assumptions: (i) Programme 
life has been assumed at 20 years in light of investments lifecycle; (ii) programme inputs 
and outputs are valued at their economic parity prices estimated upon international prices as 
reported by the World Bank commodity outlook, and on the basis of custom duties and taxes 
rates as provided by the national bureau of international trade; (iii) an economic discount 
rate of 10% has been calculate as the weighted average of saving interest rates, long term 
bonds yields and the real interest rate; (iv) family labour is valued at its opportunity cost; 
(v) the shadow exchange rate factor (SERF) of 1.02 is calculated upon international trade 
statistics  and  applied  for  the  conversion  of  tradable  commodity  prices;  vi)  conversion 
factors for main inputs and outputs are calculated starting from international prices and 
on the basis of import and export taxes and duties in Egypt; and (vii) the shadow exchange 
rate (SER), estimated upon international trade data, is equal to EGP 17. 
Programme  Economic  Costs.  The  economic  analysis  includes  the  investment  and 
37. 
incremental recurrent costs of programme components. Programme financial costs have 
been converted to economic values by removal of taxes, duties and subsidies. In order to 
avoid  double  counting,  the  final  aggregation  considered  only  those  costs  that  were  not 
included in financial models. Specifically, the estimation of economic costs considered: (a) 
all investments costs deducted from taxes; (b) the recurrent costs of the program; and 
(c) the use of a conversion factor of 1.02 (SERF) to correct market costs to economic costs 
into Costab.  
Benefits Estimation. The incremental benefits stream comprises the economic net 
38. 
values  of  all  the  models  developed  in  the  financial  analysis.  These  benefits  are  then 
aggregated  following  the  inclusion  phasing  foreseen  for  targeted  households  and 
cooperatives (Error! Reference source not found.). 
Economic  Profitability.  The  programme  is  a  technical  and  economically  viable 
39. 
investment to the economy as a whole. The programme economic NPV of the net benefit 
stream, discounted at 10%, is EGP 941 million (EUR 52 million) producing an EIRR of 18% 
for the base case scenario and resulting in a payback period of ten years. The summary 
of economic analysis is presented in Table 9. 
Table 9: Programme economic cash flow (EGP '000) 
Total incremental 
benefits  
 Total costs  
 Total net incremental 
benefits  
                (17,245) 
              77,975  
(95,220) 
 Investment  
 Operating  
                (68,945) 
             (275,123) 
             (259,631) 
                   (5,959) 
               223,002  
               357,418  
               436,093  
               483,876  
               522,023  
               544,863  
               553,603  
               553,092  
               549,939  
               548,405  
               547,525  
               547,525  
               547,525  
               547,525  
               547,525  
           117,460  
           277,179  
           301,414  
           179,805  
              78,644  
              35,140  
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
                           -    
(186,405) 
(552,302) 
(561,045) 
(185,764) 
               144,358  
               322,278  
               436,093  
               483,876  
               522,023  
               544,863  
               553,603  
               553,092  
               549,939  
               548,405  
               547,525  
               547,525  
               547,525  
               547,525  
               547,525  
   941  
    52  
 18,1% 
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
                 17,037  
 NPV (EGP '000) @ 10%  
 NPV (EUR '000) @ 10%  
 IRR  
Sensitivity  Analysis.  The  section  presents  the  effect  of  variations  in  Programme 
40. 
benefits and costs. Programme results were tested to sensitivity analysis so as to measure 
variations  due  to  unforeseen  factors,  hence  identifying  those  variables  affecting  final 
results  the  most.  Figure  4Error!  Reference  source  not  found.  depicts  the  extent  to 
which a change in key variables (the change is marked on the horizontal axis) would induce 
a change to the programme NPV (reported on vertical axis). The stepper the curve of a 
specific variable, the higher  the impact and the change this variable would bring to the 
NPV.  As  a  result,  the  programme  is  more  sensitive  to  changes  in  output  prices  and 
recurrent costs, rather than investment costs. 
Figure 4: Sensitivity of NPV to changes in key variables 
However, only the variability and uncertainty around specific variables could put at 
41. 
risk the overall viability of the project, and therefore need to be monitored more closely 
than others. Threshold values in variables changes are identified in Figure 5.  For instance, 
an increase in investment cost of 40% (from 100% to 140%) would bring the NPV down 
to EGP -50 million. Similarly, the  programme  would no longer be viable if  output prices 
drop by 20% (from 100% to 80%).  
Figure 5: Sensitivity of NPV to changes in key variables - detailed (EGP ‘000) 
941,107          941,107          941,107          20%11,191,059    20%6,848,802      20%(7,149,964)    40%5,011,684      40%5,371,878      40%(5,127,197)    60%2,851,072      60%3,894,954      60%(3,104,429)    80%1,695,152      80%2,418,031      80%(1,081,661)    100%941,107          100%941,107          100%941,107          120%388,001          120%(535,817)        120%2,963,875      140%(50,284)          140%(2,012,740)    140%4,986,643      160%(416,805)        160%(3,489,664)    160%7,009,411      180%(735,483)        180%(4,966,588)    180%9,032,179      200%(1,020,672)    200%(6,443,511)    200%11,054,946    Recurrent costBenefitsInvestment costInput prices941,107          Output prices941,107          20%34,256,436    20%(7,149,964)    40%13,961,209    40%(5,127,197)    60%6,961,976      60%(3,104,429)    80%3,286,742      80%(1,081,661)    100%941,107          100%941,107          120%(739,728)        120%2,963,875      140%(2,040,677)    140%4,986,643      160%(3,104,198)    160%7,009,411      180%(4,009,434)    180%9,032,179      200%(4,803,869)    200%11,054,946     
More in detail, switching values and critical threshold have been identified for key 
42. 
variables. In particular, the programme would no longer be viable in case: a) investment 
cost increases by 38%; b) operating cost increases of 13%; b) benefits decline by 10%; 
c) input cost increases by 11%; d) output prices fall by 10% e) programme beneficiaries 
involved in productive activities are less than 38,772 HHs. 
Finally,  the  sensitivity  analysis  allows  to  examine  the  effects  of  a  simultaneous 
43. 
variation in some of the pre-identified key variables on the overall programme profitability, 
hence determining all possible combinations of variables’ changes that would result in a 
negative (or positive) NPV.  
Figure 6: Simultaneous sensitivity analysis (EGP ‘000) 
E. Fiscal analysis 
51. 
Presenting a fiscal analysis helps describing the fiscal impact of the project on the 
government  budget  and  it  provides  an  insight  into  the  incentives  that  each  of  the 
stakeholders might have in seeing the project through.  
Project costs for the GoE are of EGP 435 M (EUR 24 M)10 and incremental project 
52. 
taxes - direct and indirect - levied through the project are of EGP 286 M (EUR 16 M), hence 
resulting in a cost recovery index of the resources used in the project of 66 per cent. This 
means that about two-thirds of government resources dedicated to the project are directly 
paid  back  through  incremental  taxation.  Further,  this  result  is  obtained  based  on  a 
conservative assumption that fiscal enforcement in rural area of Egypt would ensure the 
payment  of  taxes  by  at  least  20  per  cent  of  the  target  population.  Table  10  shows  the 
estimated present value of the income, costs, and taxes of  STAR and the distribution of 
wealth across the various stakeholders. 
10 This includes interest charges for loans repayments 
941107.0420%40%60%80%100%120%140%160%180%200%20%(22,428,321)            (12,652,503)      (9,494,717)         (7,991,439) (7,149,964) (6,639,391) (6,317,905) (6,114,597) (5,990,076) (5,920,705) 40%(14,023,476)            (8,236,456)        (6,408,270)         (5,569,792) (5,127,197) (4,882,543) (4,750,999) (4,690,149) (4,676,428) (4,695,697) 60%(5,618,631)              (3,820,410)        (3,321,822)         (3,148,144) (3,104,429) (3,125,695) (3,184,094) (3,265,701) (3,362,780) (3,470,688) 80%2,786,214                595,637             (235,375)             (726,496)     (1,081,661) (1,368,847) (1,617,189) (1,841,253) (2,049,131) (2,245,680) 100%11,191,059             5,011,684          2,851,072           1,695,152   941,107       388,001       (50,284)       (416,805)     (735,483)     (1,020,672) 120%19,595,904             9,427,731          5,937,520           4,116,799   2,963,875   2,144,849   1,516,621   1,007,643   578,165       204,336       140%28,000,750             13,843,778       9,023,967           6,538,447   4,986,643   3,901,697   3,083,527   2,432,092   1,891,813   1,429,344   160%36,405,595             18,259,825       12,110,415         8,960,095   7,009,411   5,658,545   4,650,432   3,856,540   3,205,461   2,654,353   180%44,810,440             22,675,872       15,196,862         11,381,742 9,032,179   7,415,393   6,217,337   5,280,988   4,519,109   3,879,361   200%53,215,285             27,091,918       18,283,310         13,803,390 11,054,946 9,172,241   7,784,242   6,705,436   5,832,758   5,104,369   941107.0420%40%60%80%100%120%140%160%180%200%20%34,911,037             17,598,985       11,727,481         8,716,114   6,848,802   5,553,517   4,585,105   3,820,988   3,193,069   2,660,487   40%28,981,043             14,452,160       9,508,379           6,960,873   5,371,878   4,262,138   3,426,258   2,761,540   2,210,931   1,740,198   60%23,051,048             11,305,335       7,289,277           5,205,633   3,894,954   2,970,759   2,267,411   1,702,092   1,228,793   819,908       80%17,121,054             8,158,509          5,070,175           3,450,392   2,418,031   1,679,380   1,108,563   642,644       246,655       (100,382)     100%11,191,059             5,011,684          2,851,072           1,695,152   941,107       388,001       (50,284)       (416,805)     (735,483)     (1,020,672) 120%5,261,065                1,864,859          631,970               (60,089)       (535,817)     (903,378)     (1,209,131) (1,476,253) (1,717,621) (1,940,962) 140%(668,930)                  (1,281,966)        (1,587,132)         (1,815,330) (2,012,740) (2,194,757) (2,367,978) (2,535,701) (2,699,759) (2,861,252) 160%(6,598,924)              (4,428,792)        (3,806,234)         (3,570,570) (3,489,664) (3,486,137) (3,526,825) (3,595,150) (3,681,897) (3,781,541) 180%(12,528,919)            (7,575,617)        (6,025,336)         (5,325,811) (4,966,588) (4,777,516) (4,685,673) (4,654,598) (4,664,035) (4,701,831) 200%(18,458,913)            (10,722,442)      (8,244,438)         (7,081,052) (6,443,511) (6,068,895) (5,844,520) (5,714,046) (5,646,173) (5,622,121) Recurrent costBenefitsInvestment costInvestment cost 
Category 
Income 
Costs 
Table 10: Fiscal analysis (EGP '000) 
Society 
              1,938,206  
Government 
Farmers 
              1,938,206  
Family labour 
Taxes on income 
VAT 
Project costs 
Net benefit 
Cost recovery index 
               (713,219) 
                             -    
                             -    
               (435,630) 
                  789,357  
                  110,177  
                  175,839  
               (435,630) 
               (149,614) 
66% 
               (713,219) 
               (110,177) 
               (175,839) 
                             -    
                  938,971  
Annex A 
PRICES AND MODELS 
Figure A 1: Conversion factors and prices (EGP) 
Unit Financial Prices (EGP) Conversion factors Economic Prices (EGP) OUTPUTSCommodities soldMaizekg3.80.893Maize by product (stalks)kg10.890Wheatkg4.60.894Wheat strawkg0.80.891Cloverkg30.893Fava beanskg141.0715Fava beans strawkg11.071Onionkg41.074Tomatokg31.073Tomato concentratekg301.0732Duckkg801.0785Goathead1,2001.021,229Skin kg2501.02256Saleshead231.0224Goat milkhead71.027INPUTSSeedsMaize seedskg310.8928Maize new seed varietykg450.8940Wheat seedskg60.895Wheat new seed varietykg200.8918Clover seedkg210.8919Clover new seed varietykg360.8932Faba beans seedkg191.0720Onion seedkg181.0719Tomato Seedkg451.0748Other agricultural inputs Manureton241.0225Bags (50 kg)no.71.027Fertilizers:TSPkg8.591.028.79Ammonium sulphatekg2.431.032.49Calcium carbidekg2.671.022.74Potassium chloridekg5.001.025.12KCLkg4.211.024.31Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg1.601.031.64Ureakg2.501.022.56Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg16.201.0216.59Chemical products:Insecticideskg81.000.9778.63Herbicideslt145.800.92133.41Toolslumpsum150.001.02153.59ElectricitykWh0.361.000.36Diesellt6.850.986.71Waterm31.000.00Mechanical Plowingha6501.02666Transportper kg0.051.020.05Land rentper ha 18,5711.0018,571Soil preparation (tractor)per hr2501.00250Mechanical harvesting per hr1001.00100Land levellinglumpsum2501.00250Canal liningper feddan16,5001.0016,500Greenhouse building (4,200 m2)Sit preparation and groundper feddan17,4901.0017,490Wood and kitsper feddan31,4821.0031,482Assembly and installationper feddan26,2351.0026,235Unit Financial Prices (EGP) Conversion factors Economic Prices (EGP) EquipmentFans, Fertilization system, harvesting equipmentsper feddan57,7171.0057,717Drip Irrigation System per feddan61,2151.0061,215Polyethylene sheets & insect-proof netsper feddan26,2351.0026,235Infrastructure O&Mlumpsum11,0191.0011,019Goat for breedinghead8001.02819Shed/housing lumpsum6,6001.006,600Shed/housing maintenancelump sum3301.00330Green leguminous fodderkg31.003Grasses/tender leave treeskg11.001Water/electricitylump sum9001.00900Vaccinationheads501.0050Veterinary serviceslump sum2001.00200Equipmentlump sum1,2001.001,200Duck chickno.251.0226Fodder for duckskg71.027Vaccination for duckshead31.003Tomato processing unitInvestmentWorkshopno.157,2001.00157,200Production lineno.524,0001.01529,372Furnitureno.20,0001.0220,479Office vehicleno.100,0001.02102,394Office equipment no.10,4801.0210,731Landno.140,0001.00140,000Equipment spare part invertoryno.26,2001.0126,469Operating costsTomatokg31.073Electricity (150 KWh / ton)Kwh1.401.001.40Gas (230 kWh / ton)Kwh0.311.000.31Water (200 m3 / ton)m33.101.003.10Wastewater (90 m3 / ton)m33.101.003.10Maintenance hygieneEGP/ton25,0001.0025,000O&M building (5% of investment cost)lumpsum7,8601.007,860O&M machinery and equipmentlumpsum32,7241.0032,724O&M of new machinery and equipmentlumpsum1,3101.001,310Packaging in aseptic bags (200 kg)no.50.001.0251.20Tools/equipmentlumpsum18,0001.0218,431LabourManagerpers.month3,1001.003,100Plant operatorspers.month1,6001.001,600Helperspers.month1,0001.001,000Technicianpers.month2,0761.002,076Driverpers.month1,0001.001,000Guardpers.month8001.00800LabourSkilled labourpers.day1001.00100Family labourpers.day751.0075Administrative staff, managerspers.day1201.00120Taxes on income%from 0 to 8,000 EGP%0%00from 8,000 to 30,000 EGP%10%00from 30,000 to 45,000 EGP%15%00from 45,000 to 200,000 EGP%20%00more than 200,000 EGP%22.5%00VAT%14.0%00Social security contribution%24%00Discount rate%12%0.8310%  
Figure A 1: Crop budgets (physical budgets) 
PRODUCTION AND INPUTSITEMSUnitPrice (EGP)QuantitiesUnitPrice (EGP)QuantitiesUnitPrice (EGP)QuantitiesUnitPrice (EGP)QuantitiesUnitPrice (EGP)QuantitiesUnitPrice (EGP)QuantitiesPRODUCTION AND INPUTSProductkg3.84,762kg4.574,286kg3.0047,619kg4.0029,524kg3.0030,476kg14.005,714Total salekg4,762kg4,286kg47,619kg29,524kg30,476kg5,714Selfconsumptionkg0kg0kg0kg0kg0kg0By productkg0.54,286kg12,143kgkgkgkg12,857Post-harvest losses%5%%5%%5%%5%%5%%5%InvestmentProductive inputsSeedskg31                50kg6148kg2120kg18.007kg45.00200kg19.00160Manureton24                2ton242.0ton2435ton240ton240.8ton243Bags (50 kg)no.7                   95no.7.086no.7952no.7590no.7610no.7114Fertilizers:0TSPkg8.6               40kg8.5960kg8.59kg8.5925kg8.6300kg8.59Ammonium sulphatekg2.4               kg2.4350kg2.43kg2.43kg2.4kg2.43100Calcium carbidekg2.7               kg2.67kg2.67kg2.67200kg2.7kg2.67Potassium chloridekg5.0               kg5.00kg5.0020kg5.00kg5.0kg5.00KCLkg4.2               kg4.21kg4.21kg4.21kg4.2kg4.21Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg1.6               70kg1.60100kg1.60kg1.6075kg1.610kg1.6050Ureakg2.5               100kg2.50150kg2.50kg2.50300kg2.550kg2.50Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg16.2             150kg16.20kg16115kg16.20400kg16.2150kg16.20Chemical products:Insecticideskg81                1kg810.5kg81kg812kg81.02kg814Herbicideslt146              1lt1460.5lt146lt146lt145.83lt1465Toolslumpsum150              1lumpsum1501lumpsum1501lumpsum1501lumpsum150.01lumpsum1501ElectricitykWh0.36             0kWh0.360kWh0.360kWh0.360kWh0.40kWh0.360Diesellt6.85             50lt6.8550lt6.8550lt6.8550lt6.90lt6.8550Waterm3-               3,780m30.003,780m30.003,780m30.003,780m30.00m30.003,780Mechanical Plowingha650              1ha6501ha6501ha6501ha650.01ha6501Transportper kg0.05             4,762per kg0.054,286per kg0.0547,619per kg0.0529,524per kg0.10per kg0.050Land rentper ha 18,571        0per ha 18,5710per ha 18,571.430per ha 18,571.430per ha 18,571.40per ha 18,571.430Labour forceLand Preparation and sowingpers.day10pers.day10pers.day10pers.day10pers.day10pers.day10Transplantingpers.day5pers.day5pers.day5pers.day10pers.day10pers.day10Various operationspers.day50pers.day60pers.day70pers.day72pers.day70pers.day80Harvestingpers.day10pers.day10pers.day15pers.day25pers.day25pers.day25Sub-total labour force75.0085100117115125Specialized labourpers.day1000pers.day1000pers.day1000pers.day10010pers.day1000pers.day1000Family labourpers.day7575.0pers.day7585pers.day75100pers.day75107pers.day75115pers.day75125Tomato (1 ha)Fava beans (1 ha)Maize (1 ha)Wheat (1 ha)Clover (1 Ha)Onion (1 ha) 
Figure A 2: Crop budgets (financial budgets) 
FINANCIAL BUDGETITEMSRevenues/costsRevenues/costsRevenues/costsRevenues/costsRevenues/costsRevenues/costsProduction RevenuesProduct18,09519,571142,857118,09591,42980,000Sales18,09519,571142,857118,09591,42980,000Selfconsumption000000By product2,1431,7140004,000Post-harvest losses9058149,0485,6105,7901,086Total revenues19,33320,471133,810112,48685,63882,914Investment costInfrastructure000000Instruments/ tools/ machinery000000Post harvest intervention000000Hybrid seeds000000Subtotal costos inversiones 000000Operating costsSeeds1,5508904201269,0003,040Manure484884001872Fertilizers:TSP34351502152,5760Ammonium sulphate0122000243Calcium carbide00053500Potassium chloride00100000KCL000000Superphosphate 18% P2O511216001201680Urea25037507501250Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)2,43001,8636,4802,4300Chemical Products:Insecticides41410162162324Herbicides1177300437729Tools150150150150150150Electricity000000Diesel3433433433430343Water000000Mechanical Plowing650650650650650650Transport2382142,3811,47600Land rent000000Sub-total operating costs 6,2713,5796,74611,00615,5645,631Labour costsCost of specialized labour0001,00000Cost of family labour5,6256,3757,5008,0258,6259,375Sub-total of labour cost5,6256,3757,5009,0258,6259,375Total production cost11,8969,95414,24620,03124,18915,006Income (after labour cost)7,43710,517119,56392,45561,44967,909Income (before labour cost)13,06216,892127,063100,48070,07477,284Tomato (1 ha)Fava beans (1 ha)Maize (1 ha)Wheat (1 ha)Clover (1 Ha)Onion (1 ha) 
Figure A 3: Goat keeping (physical budget and parameters) 
PRODUCTION PARAMETERS WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNIT112345678910Production parameters Age at first kidding/maturitymonths1010101010101010101010Kidding intervalmonths88888888888Kidding percentage (fertility rate)%75%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%Twinning percentage%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%Number of kiddings per yeartimes1.51.51.51.51.51.51.51.51.51.51.5Mortality of adults%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%Mortality of male kids%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%Mortality of female kids%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%15%Off-take rate does%0%40%40%40%40%40%40%40%40%40%40%Off-take rate buck0%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%Body weight of male kg5070808080858590909698Body weight of female kg4050606060656667686970Sex ratio (% of does)ratio0.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50Culling of does from second year onwards% 0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%Fiber production per goatkg23333333333Skin production per goatkg45555566676Milk per does per daylt33333333333Lactating daysdays100100100100100100100100100100100Stock growth modelF7-8yrs00000000000F6-7yrs00000000000F5-6yrs00000000000F4-5yrs00000000000F 3-4yrs00010000000F 2-3yrs00201011111F 1-2yrs03011111111Kid 0-1yr00635444444M1-2yrs00010111111M2-3yrs00000000000M3-4yrs00000000000M4-5yrs00000000000M5-6yrs00000000000M6-7yrs00000000000M7-8yrs00000000000Number of does03222222222Number of bucks00011111111Total stock03867777777YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE112345678910Main production output (yields)Animal saleshead1,20001333333333Skin kg25006161315141817181918Fiberkg2309598999999Milklt70900495685604647633645632644638Investment inputsInitial animal stockhead80003Shed/housinglumpsum6,6001Operating inputsShed/housing maintenancelump sum330111111111Green leguminous fodderkg309962,5812,1312,4462,3542,4282,4202,4322,4182,435Grasses/tender leave treeskg1329851702806776801798802797803Water/electricitylump sum9001111111111Vaccinationheads503867777777Veterinary serviceslump sum2001111111111Equipmentlump sum1,20011LabourSkilled (paid) labour (S)pers. dayFamily labour (F)pers. day7515182020202020202020WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Figure A 4: Goat keeping (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGETWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueAnimal sales01,4403,7303,0793,5343,4023,5093,4973,5143,4943,519Skin 01,5003,8853,2083,6813,5444,3864,3714,3934,7314,399Fiber0207114210186206201206202206204Milk06,4083,5244,8804,3024,6064,5074,5934,4984,5824,540Total revenue09,55511,25311,37711,70311,75712,60412,66712,60713,01212,661Investment inputsInitial animal stock02,400000000000Sub-total investment costs02,400000000000Operating costsShed/housing00330330330330330330330330330Green leguminous fodder cultivation02,9897,7426,3937,3377,0637,2857,2607,2957,2537,305Grasses/tender leave trees0164425351403388400399401398401Water/electricity0900900900900900900900900900900Vaccination0150389321368354366364366364367Veterinary aid0200200200200200200200200200200Equipment01,20000001,2000000Sub-total operating inputs costs05,6049,9868,4959,5389,23510,6809,4539,4929,4459,503LabourSkilled (paid) labour costs00000000000Family labour costs01,1251,3501,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,500Sub-total labour costs01,1251,3501,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,500Total production costs06,72911,3369,99511,03810,73512,18010,95310,99210,94511,003Income (after labour costs)02,826-831,3836661,0224231,7141,6152,0671,658Incremental net income2,826-831,3836661,0224231,7141,6152,0671,658Income (before labour costs)03,9511,2672,8832,1662,5221,9233,2143,1153,5673,158Return to family labour*96.17           *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate12%NPV @ 0.127,366IRR#NUM!NPVb65,685NPVc58,320B/C ratio1.13             Switching values Benefits-11%Switching values Costs13%WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 5: Household model SML-DI-FC (physical budget) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (EGP)112345678910Croppin pattern and distributionTotal land available to HHs Feddan0.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.3CloverFeddan0.120.120.120.120.120.120.120.120.120.120.12WheatFeddan0.140.140.140.140.140.140.140.140.140.140.14MaizeFeddan0.040.040.040.040.040.040.040.040.040.040.04High value cropFeddan0.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.00Check line0.300.300.300.300.300.300.300.300.300.300.30Ha : Feddan ratioha to feddan0.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.42LivestockHead03333333333Livestock model ratioratio01111111111Main productionCloverkg3.02,4242,487                 2,625                2,763                 2,763                 2,763                 2,763                 2,763           2,763           2,763           2,763           Wheatkg4.57252259                     273                    287                     287                     287                     287                     287              287              287              287              Maizekg3.87880                       84                      89                       89                       89                       89                       89                 89                 89                 89                 Animal saleshead1,20001                         3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   Skin kg25006                         16                      13                       15                       14                       18                       17                 18                 19                 18                 Fiberkg2309                         5                        9                         8                         9                         9                         9                   9                   9                   9                   Milklt70900                     495                    685                     604                     647                     633                     645              632              644              638              Duckskg806                        8                         10                       10                       10                       10                 10                 10                 10                 By-productsWheat strawkg0.8126129                     137                    144                     144                     144                     144                     144              144              144              144              Maize (stalk)kg0.57072                       76                      80                       80                       80                       80                       80                 80                 80                 80                 Post harvest losses%10%8%8%8%7%7%6%6%6%6%6%Total Productionkg2,6552,785                2,940               3,094                3,128                3,128                3,162                3,162          3,162          3,162          3,162          Investment inputsClover new seed varietykg3601.16                   -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat new seed varietykg20011                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize new seed varietykg4504                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Initial animal stockhead80003                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Shed/housinglumpsum6,60001                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Ducks chicksno.254                         Operating inputsClover seeds kg211.02                             -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat seedskg69.41                             -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize seedskg313.28                             -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Clover new seed varietykg36-                               -                     1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Wheat new seed varietykg20-                               -                     11                      11                       11                       11                       11                       11                 11                 11                 11                 Maize new seed varietykg45-                               -                     4                        4                         4                         4                         4                         4                   4                   4                   4                   Manureton245                                   5                         5                        5                         5                         5                         5                         5                   5                   5                   5                   Bagsno.7143                               150                     158                    166                     168                     168                     170                     170              170              170              170              Inorganic Fertilizer:TSPkg913                                 12                       14                      14                       14                       14                       14                       14                 14                 14                 14                 Ammonium sulphatekg26                                   6                         7                        7                         7                         7                         7                         7                   7                   7                   7                   Calcium carbidekg3-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Potassium chloridekg53                                   2                         3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   KCLkg4-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg221                                 21                       23                      24                       24                       24                       24                       24                 24                 24                 24                 Ureakg332                                 31                       34                      36                       36                       36                       36                       36                 36                 36                 36                 Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg1633                                 33                       36                      38                       38                       38                       38                       38                 38                 38                 38                 Chemicals:0-                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Insecticideskg810.13                             0.12                   0.14                  0.14                   0.14                   0.14                   0.14                   0.14             0.14             0.14             0.14             Herbicideslt1460.16                             0.16                   0.18                  0.19                   0.19                   0.19                   0.19                   0.19             0.19             0.19             0.19             Toolslumpsum1500.38                             0.37                   0.41                  0.43                   0.43                   0.43                   0.43                   0.43             0.43             0.43             0.43             ElectricitykWh0-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Diesellt719                                 18                       20                      22                       22                       22                       22                       22                 22                 22                 22                 Waterm301,429                           1,393                 1,547                1,629                 1,629                 1,629                 1,629                 1,629           1,629           1,629           1,629           Mechanical Plowingha6500.4                                0.4                      0.4                     0.4                      0.4                      0.4                      0.4                      0.4               0.4               0.4               0.4               Transportper kg0.17,140                           6,959                 7,733                8,140                 8,140                 8,140                 8,140                 8,140           8,140           8,140           8,140           Land rentper ha 18,571-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Shed/housing maintenancelump sum330-                               -                     1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Green leguminous fodderkg3.0-                               996                     2,581                2,131                 2,446                 2,354                 2,428                 2,420           2,432           2,418           2,435           Grasses/tender leave treeskg0.5-                               329                     851                    702                     806                     776                     801                     798              802              797              803              Water/electricitylump sum900-                               1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Vaccinationheads50-                               3                         8                        6                         7                         7                         7                         7                   7                   7                   7                   Veterinary serviceslump sum200-                               1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Equipmentlump sum1,200-                               1                         -                    -                     -                     -                     1                         -               -               -               -               Fodder for duckskg7-                               12                       12                      16                       20                       20                       20                       20                 20                 20                 20                 Vaccination for duckshead34                         10                      12                       14                       14                       14                       14                 14                 14                 14                 LabourLand Preparation and sowingpers. day1                                   1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Transplantingpers. day1                                   1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Various operationspers. day8                                   26                       28                      30                       30                       30                       30                       30                 30                 30                 30                 Harvestingpers. day2                                   1                         1                        2                         2                         2                         2                         2                   2                   2                   2                   Sub-total labour days11                                 28                       32                      33                       33                       33                       33                       33                 33                 33                 33                 Skilled labour (S)pers. day100-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Family labour (F)pers. day7511                                 28                       32                      33                       33                       33                       33                       33                 33                 33                 33                 WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 6: Household model SML-DI-FC (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGET (EGP)WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueClover7,2727,4617,8768,2908,2908,2908,2908,2908,2908,2908,290Wheat1,1521,1821,2471,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,313Maize296304321338338338338338338338338Animal sales01,4403,7303,0793,5343,4023,5093,4973,5143,4943,519Skin 01,5003,8853,2083,6813,5444,3864,3714,3934,7314,399Fiber0207114210186206201206202206204Milk06,3003,4654,7974,2294,5284,4324,5164,4224,5054,463Ducks00480640800800800800800800800By-productsWheat straw101103109115115115115115115115115Maize (stalk)3536384040404040404040Post harvest losses886727767808707707606606606606606Total revenue7,97017,80620,49721,22321,82021,86922,81822,88022,82123,22522,875incben9,83612,52713,25313,85013,89814,84814,91014,85115,25514,904Investment input costsClover new seed variety041000000000Wheat new seed variety0215000000000Maize new seed variety0168000000000Initial animal stock02,400000000000Shed/housing06,600000000000Ducks chicks0100000000000Sub-total investment costs09,524000000000Operating inputsClover seeds 210000000000Wheat seeds560000000000Maize seeds1020000000000Clover new seed variety00414141414141414141Wheat new seed variety00215215215215215215215215215Maize new seed variety00168168168168168168168168168Manure118118118118118118118118118118118Bags1,0001,0481,1071,1651,1781,1781,1901,1901,1901,1901,190Inorganic Fertilizer:TSP108105117123123123123123123123123Ammonium sulphate1515171717171717171717Calcium carbide00000000000Potassium chloride1312141414141414141414KCL00000000000Superphosphate 18% P2O53433373939393939393939Urea7977859090909090909090Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)541527586617617617617617617617617Chemicals:00000000000Insecticides1010111212121212121212Herbicides2423262727272727272727Tools5755616565656565656565Electricity00000000000Diesel129126140148148148148148148148148Water00000000000Mechanical Plowing246239266280280280280280280280280Transport357348387407407407407407407407407Land rent00000000000Shed/housing maintenance00330330330330330330330330330Green leguminous fodder02,9897,7426,3937,3377,0637,2857,2607,2957,2537,305Grasses/tender leave trees0164425351403388400399401398401Water/electricity0900900900900900900900900900900Vaccination0150389321368354366364366364367Veterinary services0200200200200200200200200200200Equipment01,20000001,2000000Fodder for ducks08484112140140140140140140140Vaccination for ducks012303642424242424242Sub-total operating costs2,9108,43813,49612,18913,27812,97614,43413,20613,24513,19813,256Labour costsSkilled labour costs00000000000Family labour costs8492,1372,3742,4992,4992,4992,4992,4992,4992,4992,499Sub-total labour costs8492,1372,3742,4992,4992,4992,4992,4992,4992,4992,499Total production costs3,75920,09915,87014,68815,77715,47516,93315,70515,74415,69715,755Gross Income (before labour costs)5,060-1567,0019,0358,5428,8938,3849,6749,57610,0279,619Taxes on income 0009038548898389679581,003962After-tax cash flow (before labour costs)5,060-1567,0018,1317,6888,0047,5468,7078,6189,0248,657After-tax cash flow (after labour costs)4,211-2,2934,6276,5366,0436,3945,8857,1757,0777,5287,120Net Incremental Benefits (NIB)-6,5044162,3241,8312,1831,6742,9632,8663,3172,908Cumulative cash flow-2,2932,3358,87014,91321,30727,19334,36841,44548,97356,092Fraction row-1.00                  0.50                   1.36                   2.47                   3.33                   4.62             4.79             5.86             6.51             inccos16,34012,11110,92912,01811,71613,17411,94611,98511,93811,996Return to family labour* (EGP/day)252                   *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate12%NPV (EGP) @ 0.124,060IRR25%NPVb75,454NPVc71,394B/C ratio1.06                  Switching values Benefits-5%Switching values Costs6%Payback period (years)1.00                  MAIN PROFITABILITY RESULTS (before financing)WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 7: Household model SML-FI-FC (physical budget) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (EGP)112345678910Croppin pattern and distributionTotal land available to HHs Feddan0.40.40.40.40.40.40.40.40.40.40.4CloverFeddan0.130.130.130.130.130.130.130.130.130.130.13WheatFeddan0.190.190.190.190.190.190.190.190.190.190.19MaizeFeddan0.080.080.080.080.080.080.080.080.080.080.08High value cropFeddan0.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.00Check line0.400.400.400.400.400.400.400.400.400.400.40Ha : Feddan ratioha to feddan0.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.42LivestockHead03333333333Livestock model ratioratio01111111111Main productionCloverkg3.02,5042,569                 2,712                2,855                 2,855                 2,855                 2,855                 2,855           2,855           2,855           2,855           Wheatkg4.57351360                     380                    400                     400                     400                     400                     400              400              400              400              Maizekg3.8159163                     172                    181                     181                     181                     181                     181              181              181              181              Animal saleshead1,20001                         3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   Skin kg25006                         16                      13                       15                       14                       18                       17                 18                 19                 18                 Fiberkg2309                         5                        9                         8                         9                         9                         9                   9                   9                   9                   Milklt70900                     495                    685                     604                     647                     633                     645              632              644              638              Duckskg806                        8                         10                       10                       10                       10                 10                 10                 10                 By-productsWheat strawkg0.8175180                     190                    200                     200                     200                     200                     200              200              200              200              Maize (stalk)kg0.5143147                     155                    163                     163                     163                     163                     163              163              163              163              Post harvest losses%10%8%8%8%7%7%6%6%6%6%6%Total Productionkg2,9993,146                3,320               3,495                3,533                3,533                3,571                3,571          3,571          3,571          3,571          Investment inputsClover new seed varietykg3601.20                   -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat new seed varietykg20015                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize new seed varietykg4508                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Initial animal stockhead80003                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Shed/housinglumpsum6,60001                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Ducks chicksno.254                         Operating inputsClover seeds kg211.05                             -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat seedskg613.09                           -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize seedskg316.69                             -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Clover new seed varietykg36-                               -                     1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Wheat new seed varietykg20-                               -                     15                      15                       15                       15                       15                       15                 15                 15                 15                 Maize new seed varietykg45-                               -                     8                        8                         8                         8                         8                         8                   8                   8                   8                   Manureton247                                   7                         7                        7                         7                         7                         7                         7                   7                   7                   7                   Bagsno.7190                               200                     211                    222                     224                     224                     227                     227              227              227              227              Inorganic Fertilizer:TSPkg917                                 16                       18                      19                       19                       19                       19                       19                 19                 19                 19                 Ammonium sulphatekg28                                   8                         9                        10                       10                       10                       10                       10                 10                 10                 10                 Calcium carbidekg3-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Potassium chloridekg53                                   3                         4                        4                         4                         4                         4                         4                   4                   4                   4                   KCLkg4-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg229                                 28                       31                      33                       33                       33                       33                       33                 33                 33                 33                 Ureakg342                                 41                       45                      48                       48                       48                       48                       48                 48                 48                 48                 Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg1645                                 43                       48                      51                       51                       51                       51                       51                 51                 51                 51                 Chemicals:0-                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Insecticideskg810.17                             0.16                   0.18                  0.19                   0.19                   0.19                   0.19                   0.19             0.19             0.19             0.19             Herbicideslt1460.22                             0.21                   0.24                  0.25                   0.25                   0.25                   0.25                   0.25             0.25             0.25             0.25             Toolslumpsum1500.50                             0.49                   0.55                  0.57                   0.57                   0.57                   0.57                   0.57             0.57             0.57             0.57             ElectricitykWh0-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Diesellt725                                 25                       27                      29                       29                       29                       29                       29                 29                 29                 29                 Waterm301,905                           1,857                 2,063                2,172                 2,172                 2,172                 2,172                 2,172           2,172           2,172           2,172           Mechanical Plowingha6500.5                                0.5                      0.5                     0.6                      0.6                      0.6                      0.6                      0.6               0.6               0.6               0.6               Transportper kg0.19,520                           9,279                 10,310              10,853               10,853               10,853               10,853               10,853        10,853        10,853        10,853        Land rentper ha 18,571-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Shed/housing maintenancelump sum330-                               -                     1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Green leguminous fodderkg3.0-                               996                     2,581                2,131                 2,446                 2,354                 2,428                 2,420           2,432           2,418           2,435           Grasses/tender leave treeskg0.5-                               329                     851                    702                     806                     776                     801                     798              802              797              803              Water/electricitylump sum900-                               1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Vaccinationheads50-                               3                         8                        6                         7                         7                         7                         7                   7                   7                   7                   Veterinary serviceslump sum200-                               1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Equipmentlump sum1,200-                               1                         -                    -                     -                     -                     1                         -               -               -               -               Fodder for duckskg7-                               12                       12                      16                       20                       20                       20                       20                 20                 20                 20                 Vaccination for duckshead34                         10                      12                       14                       14                       14                       14                 14                 14                 14                 LabourLand Preparation and sowingpers. day2                                   1                         2                        2                         2                         2                         2                         2                   2                   2                   2                   Transplantingpers. day1                                   1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Various operationspers. day10                                 28                       31                      32                       32                       32                       32                       32                 32                 32                 32                 Harvestingpers. day2                                   2                         2                        2                         2                         2                         2                         2                   2                   2                   2                   Sub-total labour days15                                 31                       35                      37                       37                       37                       37                       37                 37                 37                 37                 Skilled labour (S)pers. day100-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Family labour (F)pers. day7515                                 31                       35                      37                       37                       37                       37                       37                 37                 37                 37                 WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 8: Household model SML-FI-FC (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGET (EGP)WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueClover7,5127,7078,1358,5648,5648,5648,5648,5648,5648,5648,564Wheat1,6011,6431,7341,8251,8251,8251,8251,8251,8251,8251,825Maize605621655690690690690690690690690Animal sales01,4403,7303,0793,5343,4023,5093,4973,5143,4943,519Skin 01,5003,8853,2083,6813,5444,3864,3714,3934,7314,399Fiber0207114210186206201206202206204Milk06,3003,4654,7974,2294,5284,4324,5164,4224,5054,463Ducks00480640800800800800800800800By-productsWheat straw140144152160160160160160160160160Maize (stalk)7274788282828282828282Post harvest losses993815860906792792679679679679679Total revenue8,93718,82021,56722,35022,95923,00823,96924,03123,97224,37624,026incben9,88312,63013,41314,02214,07115,03215,09415,03515,43915,088Investment input costsClover new seed variety043000000000Wheat new seed variety0298000000000Maize new seed variety0343000000000Initial animal stock02,400000000000Shed/housing06,600000000000Ducks chicks0100000000000Sub-total investment costs09,784000000000Operating inputsClover seeds 220000000000Wheat seeds790000000000Maize seeds2070000000000Clover new seed variety00434343434343434343Wheat new seed variety00298298298298298298298298298Maize new seed variety00343343343343343343343343343Manure157157157157157157157157157157157Bags1,3331,3981,4751,5531,5701,5701,5871,5871,5871,5871,587Inorganic Fertilizer:TSP144141156164164164164164164164164Ammonium sulphate2020222323232323232323Calcium carbide00000000000Potassium chloride1716181919191919191919KCL00000000000Superphosphate 18% P2O54645495252525252525252Urea105102114120120120120120120120120Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)721703781822822822822822822822822Chemicals:00000000000Insecticides1413151616161616161616Herbicides3231343636363636363636Tools7674828686868686868686Electricity00000000000Diesel173168187197197197197197197197197Water00000000000Mechanical Plowing328319355373373373373373373373373Transport476464516543543543543543543543543Land rent00000000000Shed/housing maintenance00330330330330330330330330330Green leguminous fodder02,9897,7426,3937,3377,0637,2857,2607,2957,2537,305Grasses/tender leave trees0164425351403388400399401398401Water/electricity0900900900900900900900900900900Vaccination0150389321368354366364366364367Veterinary services0200200200200200200200200200200Equipment01,20000001,2000000Fodder for ducks08484112140140140140140140140Vaccination for ducks012303642424242424242Sub-total operating costs3,9499,35114,74713,48914,58314,28115,74314,51514,55414,50714,565Labour costsSkilled labour costs00000000000Family labour costs1,1042,3552,6162,7542,7542,7542,7542,7542,7542,7542,754Sub-total labour costs1,1042,3552,6162,7542,7542,7542,7542,7542,7542,7542,754Total production costs5,05321,49017,36316,24317,33717,03518,49717,26917,30817,26117,319Gross Income (before labour costs)4,988-3156,8218,8618,3768,7278,2269,5169,4189,8699,461Taxes on income 000886838873823952942987946After-tax cash flow (before labour costs)4,988-3156,8217,9757,5387,8547,4048,5648,4768,8828,514After-tax cash flow (after labour costs)3,884-2,6704,2056,1075,6225,9735,4726,7626,6647,1156,707Net Incremental Benefits (NIB)-6,5543202,2221,7372,0891,5882,8772,7793,2312,822Cumulative cash flow-2,6701,5357,64213,26319,23624,70931,47138,13545,25051,956Fraction row-1.00                  0.37                   1.25                   2.36                   3.22                   4.52             4.65             5.72             6.36             inccos16,43712,31011,19112,28511,98213,44412,21712,25612,20912,266Return to family labour* (EGP/day)224                   *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate12%NPV (EGP) @ 0.123,576IRR23%NPVb76,276NPVc72,700B/C ratio1.05                  Switching values Benefits-5%Switching values Costs5%Payback period (years)1.00                  MAIN PROFITABILITY RESULTS (before financing)WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 9: Household model AVG-DI-FC (physical budget) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (EGP)112345678910Croppin pattern and distributionTotal land available to HHs Feddan0.60.60.60.60.60.60.60.60.60.60.6CloverFeddan0.190.190.190.190.190.190.190.190.190.190.19WheatFeddan0.230.230.230.230.230.230.230.230.230.230.23MaizeFeddan0.120.120.120.120.120.120.120.120.120.120.12High value cropFeddan0.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.00Check line0.540.540.540.540.540.540.540.540.540.540.54Ha : Feddan ratioha to feddan0.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.42LivestockHead03333333333Livestock model ratioratio01111111111Main productionCloverkg3.03,8763,977                 4,198                4,419                 4,419                 4,419                 4,419                 4,419           4,419           4,419           4,419           Wheatkg4.57411422                     446                    469                     469                     469                     469                     469              469              469              469              Maizekg3.8242249                     263                    276                     276                     276                     276                     276              276              276              276              Animal saleshead1,20001                         3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   Skin kg25006                         16                      13                       15                       14                       18                       17                 18                 19                 18                 Fiberkg2309                         5                        9                         8                         9                         9                         9                   9                   9                   9                   Milklt70900                     495                    685                     604                     647                     633                     645              632              644              638              Duckskg806                        8                         10                       10                       10                       10                 10                 10                 10                 By-productsWheat strawkg0.8206211                     223                    235                     235                     235                     235                     235              235              235              235              Maize (stalk)kg0.5218224                     236                    249                     249                     249                     249                     249              249              249              249              Post harvest losses%10%8%8%8%7%7%6%6%6%6%6%Total Productionkg4,4584,676                4,936               5,196                5,252                5,252                5,308                5,308          5,308          5,308          5,308          Investment inputsClover new seed varietykg3601.86                   -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat new seed varietykg20018                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize new seed varietykg45012                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Initial animal stockhead80003                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Shed/housinglumpsum6,60001                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Ducks chicksno.254                         Operating inputsClover seeds kg211.63                             -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat seedskg615.36                           -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize seedskg3110.18                           -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Clover new seed varietykg36-                               -                     2                        2                         2                         2                         2                         2                   2                   2                   2                   Wheat new seed varietykg20-                               -                     18                      18                       18                       18                       18                       18                 18                 18                 18                 Maize new seed varietykg45-                               -                     12                      12                       12                       12                       12                       12                 12                 12                 12                 Manureton2410                                 10                       10                      10                       10                       10                       10                       10                 10                 10                 10                 Bagsno.7286                               300                     316                    333                     336                     336                     340                     340              340              340              340              Inorganic Fertilizer:TSPkg925                                 25                       27                      29                       29                       29                       29                       29                 29                 29                 29                 Ammonium sulphatekg213                                 12                       14                      14                       14                       14                       14                       14                 14                 14                 14                 Calcium carbidekg3-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Potassium chloridekg55                                   5                         5                        6                         6                         6                         6                         6                   6                   6                   6                   KCLkg4-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg243                                 42                       46                      49                       49                       49                       49                       49                 49                 49                 49                 Ureakg363                                 61                       68                      72                       72                       72                       72                       72                 72                 72                 72                 Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg1667                                 65                       72                      76                       76                       76                       76                       76                 76                 76                 76                 Chemicals:0-                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Insecticideskg810.25                             0.25                   0.27                  0.29                   0.29                   0.29                   0.29                   0.29             0.29             0.29             0.29             Herbicideslt1460.33                             0.32                   0.35                  0.37                   0.37                   0.37                   0.37                   0.37             0.37             0.37             0.37             Toolslumpsum1500.76                             0.74                   0.82                  0.86                   0.86                   0.86                   0.86                   0.86             0.86             0.86             0.86             ElectricitykWh0-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Diesellt738                                 37                       41                      43                       43                       43                       43                       43                 43                 43                 43                 Waterm302,858                           2,785                 3,095                3,258                 3,258                 3,258                 3,258                 3,258           3,258           3,258           3,258           Mechanical Plowingha6500.8                                0.7                      0.8                     0.9                      0.9                      0.9                      0.9                      0.9               0.9               0.9               0.9               Transportper kg0.114,280                         13,919               15,465              16,279               16,279               16,279               16,279               16,279        16,279        16,279        16,279        Land rentper ha 18,571-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Shed/housing maintenancelump sum330-                               -                     1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Green leguminous fodderkg3.0-                               996                     2,581                2,131                 2,446                 2,354                 2,428                 2,420           2,432           2,418           2,435           Grasses/tender leave treeskg0.5-                               329                     851                    702                     806                     776                     801                     798              802              797              803              Water/electricitylump sum900-                               1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Vaccinationheads50-                               3                         8                        6                         7                         7                         7                         7                   7                   7                   7                   Veterinary serviceslump sum200-                               1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Equipmentlump sum1,200-                               1                         -                    -                     -                     -                     1                         -               -               -               -               Fodder for duckskg7-                               12                       12                      16                       20                       20                       20                       20                 20                 20                 20                 Vaccination for duckshead34                         10                      12                       14                       14                       14                       14                 14                 14                 14                 LabourLand Preparation and sowingpers. day2                                   2                         2                        2                         2                         2                         2                         2                   2                   2                   2                   Transplantingpers. day1                                   1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Various operationspers. day14                                 31                       34                      36                       36                       36                       36                       36                 36                 36                 36                 Harvestingpers. day3                                   2                         3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   Sub-total labour days20                                 36                       40                      42                       42                       42                       42                       42                 42                 42                 42                 Skilled labour (S)pers. day100-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Family labour (F)pers. day7520                                 36                       40                      42                       42                       42                       42                       42                 42                 42                 42                 WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 10: Household model AVG-DI-FC (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGET (EGP)WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueClover11,62811,93012,59313,25613,25613,25613,25613,25613,25613,25613,256Wheat1,8791,9282,0352,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,1422,142Maize9219459981,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,050Animal sales01,4403,7303,0793,5343,4023,5093,4973,5143,4943,519Skin 01,5003,8853,2083,6813,5444,3864,3714,3934,7314,399Fiber0207114210186206201206202206204Milk06,3003,4654,7974,2294,5284,4324,5164,4224,5054,463Ducks00480640800800800800800800800By-productsWheat straw165169178188188188188188188188188Maize (stalk)109112118124124124124124124124124Post harvest losses1,4701,2071,2741,3411,1731,1731,0061,0061,0061,0061,006Total revenue13,23223,32426,32227,35428,01828,06729,08229,14429,08629,49029,139incben10,09313,09014,12314,78614,83515,85115,91315,85416,25815,907Investment input costsClover new seed variety066000000000Wheat new seed variety0350000000000Maize new seed variety0522000000000Initial animal stock02,400000000000Shed/housing06,600000000000Ducks chicks0100000000000Sub-total investment costs010,039000000000Operating inputsClover seeds 340000000000Wheat seeds920000000000Maize seeds3160000000000Clover new seed variety00666666666666666666Wheat new seed variety00350350350350350350350350350Maize new seed variety00522522522522522522522522522Manure236236236236236236236236236236236Bags1,9992,0972,2132,3302,3552,3552,3802,3802,3802,3802,380Inorganic Fertilizer:TSP216211234247247247247247247247247Ammonium sulphate3130333535353535353535Calcium carbide00000000000Potassium chloride2525272929292929292929KCL00000000000Superphosphate 18% P2O56967747878787878787878Urea158154171180180180180180180180180Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)1,0821,0541,1721,2331,2331,2331,2331,2331,2331,2331,233Chemicals:00000000000Insecticides2020222323232323232323Herbicides4847525454545454545454Tools113111123129129129129129129129129Electricity00000000000Diesel259252280295295295295295295295295Water00000000000Mechanical Plowing491479532560560560560560560560560Transport714696773814814814814814814814814Land rent00000000000Shed/housing maintenance00330330330330330330330330330Green leguminous fodder02,9897,7426,3937,3377,0637,2857,2607,2957,2537,305Grasses/tender leave trees0164425351403388400399401398401Water/electricity0900900900900900900900900900900Vaccination0150389321368354366364366364367Veterinary services0200200200200200200200200200200Equipment01,20000001,2000000Fodder for ducks08484112140140140140140140140Vaccination for ducks012303642424242424242Sub-total operating costs5,90311,17716,98215,82516,92716,62518,09516,86816,90716,86016,917Labour costsSkilled labour costs00000000000Family labour costs1,5092,7013,0013,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,159Sub-total labour costs1,5092,7013,0013,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,159Total production costs7,41223,91619,98318,98420,08619,78321,25420,02720,06520,01920,076Gross Income (before labour costs)7,3292,1099,34011,53011,09111,44210,98712,27712,17912,63012,222Taxes on income 009341,1531,1091,1441,0991,2281,2181,2631,222After-tax cash flow (before labour costs)7,3292,1098,40610,3779,98210,2989,88911,04910,96111,36710,999After-tax cash flow (after labour costs)5,820-5926,3398,3717,9328,2837,8289,1189,0209,4719,063Net Incremental Benefits (NIB)-6,4125192,5512,1122,4632,0093,2983,2003,6513,243Cumulative cash flow-5925,74714,11822,05030,33338,16247,27956,30065,77174,833Fraction row-1.00                  0.91                   1.69                   2.78                   3.66                   4.87             5.19             6.24             6.94             inccos16,50412,57111,57212,67412,37213,84212,61512,65412,60712,664Return to family labour* (EGP/day)261                   *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate12%NPV (EGP) @ 0.125,408IRR29%NPVb79,930NPVc74,522B/C ratio1.07                  Switching values Benefits-7%Switching values Costs7%Payback period (years)1.00                  MAIN PROFITABILITY RESULTS (before financing)WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 11: Household model AVG-FI-FC (physical budget) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (EGP)112345678910Croppin pattern and distributionTotal land available to HHs Feddan1.11.11.11.11.11.11.11.11.11.11.1CloverFeddan0.340.340.340.340.340.340.340.340.340.340.34WheatFeddan0.430.430.430.430.430.430.430.430.430.430.43MaizeFeddan0.240.240.240.240.240.240.240.240.240.240.24High value cropFeddan0.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.00Check line1.021.021.021.021.021.021.021.021.021.021.02Ha : Feddan ratioha to feddan0.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.42LivestockHead03333333333Livestock model ratioratio01111111111Main productionCloverkg3.06,8867,065                 7,458                7,850                 7,850                 7,850                 7,850                 7,850           7,850           7,850           7,850           Wheatkg4.57774794                     838                    883                     883                     883                     883                     883              883              883              883              Maizekg3.8486499                     527                    554                     554                     554                     554                     554              554              554              554              Animal saleshead1,20001                         3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   Skin kg25006                         16                      13                       15                       14                       18                       17                 18                 19                 18                 Fiberkg2309                         5                        9                         8                         9                         9                         9                   9                   9                   9                   Milklt70900                     495                    685                     604                     647                     633                     645              632              644              638              Duckskg806                        8                         10                       10                       10                       10                 10                 10                 10                 By-productsWheat strawkg0.8387397                     419                    441                     441                     441                     441                     441              441              441              441              Maize (stalk)kg0.5438449                     474                    499                     499                     499                     499                     499              499              499              499              Post harvest losses%10%8%8%8%7%7%6%6%6%6%6%Total Productionkg8,0748,468                8,938               9,409                9,511                9,511                9,613                9,613          9,613          9,613          9,613          Investment inputsClover new seed varietykg3603.30                   -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat new seed varietykg20033                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize new seed varietykg45023                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Initial animal stockhead80003                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Shed/housinglumpsum6,60001                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Ducks chicksno.254                         Operating inputsClover seeds kg212.89                             -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat seedskg628.90                           -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize seedskg3120.42                           -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Clover new seed varietykg36-                               -                     3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   Wheat new seed varietykg20-                               -                     33                      33                       33                       33                       33                       33                 33                 33                 33                 Maize new seed varietykg45-                               -                     23                      23                       23                       23                       23                       23                 23                 23                 23                 Manureton2418                                 18                       18                      18                       18                       18                       18                       18                 18                 18                 18                 Bagsno.7524                               549                     580                    610                     617                     617                     623                     623              623              623              623              Inorganic Fertilizer:TSPkg946                                 45                       50                      53                       53                       53                       53                       53                 53                 53                 53                 Ammonium sulphatekg223                                 23                       25                      26                       26                       26                       26                       26                 26                 26                 26                 Calcium carbidekg3-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Potassium chloridekg59                                   9                         10                      11                       11                       11                       11                       11                 11                 11                 11                 KCLkg4-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg279                                 77                       85                      90                       90                       90                       90                       90                 90                 90                 90                 Ureakg3116                               113                     125                    132                     132                     132                     132                     132              132              132              132              Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg16122                               119                     133                    140                     140                     140                     140                     140              140              140              140              Chemicals:0-                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Insecticideskg810.46                             0.45                   0.50                  0.53                   0.53                   0.53                   0.53                   0.53             0.53             0.53             0.53             Herbicideslt1460.60                             0.59                   0.65                  0.68                   0.68                   0.68                   0.68                   0.68             0.68             0.68             0.68             Toolslumpsum1501.39                             1.35                   1.50                  1.58                   1.58                   1.58                   1.58                   1.58             1.58             1.58             1.58             ElectricitykWh0-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Diesellt769                                 68                       75                      79                       79                       79                       79                       79                 79                 79                 79                 Waterm305,239                           5,107                 5,674                5,973                 5,973                 5,973                 5,973                 5,973           5,973           5,973           5,973           Mechanical Plowingha6501.4                                1.4                      1.5                     1.6                      1.6                      1.6                      1.6                      1.6               1.6               1.6               1.6               Transportper kg0.126,180                         25,518               28,353              29,845               29,845               29,845               29,845               29,845        29,845        29,845        29,845        Land rentper ha 18,571-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Shed/housing maintenancelump sum330-                               -                     1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Green leguminous fodderkg3.0-                               996                     2,581                2,131                 2,446                 2,354                 2,428                 2,420           2,432           2,418           2,435           Grasses/tender leave treeskg0.5-                               329                     851                    702                     806                     776                     801                     798              802              797              803              Water/electricitylump sum900-                               1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Vaccinationheads50-                               3                         8                        6                         7                         7                         7                         7                   7                   7                   7                   Veterinary serviceslump sum200-                               1                         1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   Equipmentlump sum1,200-                               1                         -                    -                     -                     -                     1                         -               -               -               -               Fodder for duckskg7-                               12                       12                      16                       20                       20                       20                       20                 20                 20                 20                 Vaccination for duckshead34                         10                      12                       14                       14                       14                       14                 14                 14                 14                 LabourLand Preparation and sowingpers. day4                                   4                         4                        4                         4                         4                         4                         4                   4                   4                   4                   Transplantingpers. day2                                   2                         2                        2                         2                         2                         2                         2                   2                   2                   2                   Various operationspers. day26                                 41                       46                      48                       48                       48                       48                       48                 48                 48                 48                 Harvestingpers. day5                                   4                         5                        5                         5                         5                         5                         5                   5                   5                   5                   Sub-total labour days37                                 51                       56                      59                       59                       59                       59                       59                 59                 59                 59                 Skilled labour (S)pers. day100-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Family labour (F)pers. day7537                                 51                       56                      59                       59                       59                       59                       59                 59                 59                 59                 WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 12: Household model AVG-FI-FC (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGET (EGP)WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueClover20,65821,19522,37323,55023,55023,55023,55023,55023,55023,55023,550Wheat3,5353,6273,8294,0304,0304,0304,0304,0304,0304,0304,030Maize1,8481,8962,0012,1062,1062,1062,1062,1062,1062,1062,106Animal sales01,4403,7303,0793,5343,4023,5093,4973,5143,4943,519Skin 01,5003,8853,2083,6813,5444,3864,3714,3934,7314,399Fiber0207114210186206201206202206204Milk06,3003,4654,7974,2294,5284,4324,5164,4224,5054,463Ducks00480640800800800800800800800By-productsWheat straw310318335353353353353353353353353Maize (stalk)219224237249249249249249249249249Post harvest losses2,6572,1812,3022,4232,1202,1201,8171,8171,8171,8171,817Total revenue23,91234,52638,14639,80140,60040,64941,80041,86241,80342,20741,856incben10,61414,23415,88916,68716,73617,88717,94917,89018,29517,944Investment input costsClover new seed variety0118000000000Wheat new seed variety0659000000000Maize new seed variety01,048000000000Initial animal stock02,400000000000Shed/housing06,600000000000Ducks chicks0100000000000Sub-total investment costs010,924000000000Operating inputsClover seeds 610000000000Wheat seeds1730000000000Maize seeds6330000000000Clover new seed variety00118118118118118118118118118Wheat new seed variety00659659659659659659659659659Maize new seed variety001,0481,0481,0481,0481,0481,0481,0481,0481,048Manure432432432432432432432432432432432Bags3,6653,8444,0584,2714,3184,3184,3644,3644,3644,3644,364Inorganic Fertilizer:TSP397387430452452452452452452452452Ammonium sulphate5655616464646464646464Calcium carbide00000000000Potassium chloride4645505353535353535353KCL00000000000Superphosphate 18% P2O5126122136143143143143143143143143Urea289281313329329329329329329329329Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)1,9831,9332,1482,2612,2612,2612,2612,2612,2612,2612,261Chemicals:00000000000Insecticides3736414343434343434343Herbicides888595100100100100100100100100Tools208203225237237237237237237237237Electricity00000000000Diesel475463514541541541541541541541541Water00000000000Mechanical Plowing9018789761,0271,0271,0271,0271,0271,0271,0271,027Transport1,3091,2761,4181,4921,4921,4921,4921,4921,4921,4921,492Land rent00000000000Shed/housing maintenance00330330330330330330330330330Green leguminous fodder02,9897,7426,3937,3377,0637,2857,2607,2957,2537,305Grasses/tender leave trees0164425351403388400399401398401Water/electricity0900900900900900900900900900900Vaccination0150389321368354366364366364367Veterinary services0200200200200200200200200200200Equipment01,20000001,2000000Fodder for ducks08484112140140140140140140140Vaccination for ducks012303642424242424242Sub-total operating costs10,87915,74122,82021,91323,03622,73424,22522,99823,03722,99023,048Labour costsSkilled labour costs00000000000Family labour costs2,8103,8144,2374,4604,4604,4604,4604,4604,4604,4604,460Sub-total labour costs2,8103,8144,2374,4604,4604,4604,4604,4604,4604,4604,460Total production costs13,69030,47927,05726,37327,49727,19428,68627,45827,49727,45127,508Gross Income (before labour costs)13,0337,86115,32617,88817,56317,91517,57418,86418,76619,21718,808Taxes on income 1,30301,5331,7891,7561,7911,7571,8861,8771,9221,881After-tax cash flow (before labour costs)11,7307,86113,79416,09915,80716,12315,81716,97716,88917,29516,928After-tax cash flow (after labour costs)10,2234,04811,08913,42813,10313,45413,11414,40314,30514,75614,348Net Incremental Benefits (NIB)-6,1758663,2052,8803,2312,8914,1804,0824,5344,125Cumulative cash flow4,04815,13728,56441,66755,12268,23682,63996,944111,701126,049Fraction row01.00                  1.37                   2.13                   3.18                   4.10                   5.20             5.74             6.78             7.57             inccos16,78913,36812,68413,80713,50514,99613,76913,80813,76113,819Return to family labour* (EGP/day)296                   *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate12%NPV (EGP) @ 0.129,089IRR40%NPVb89,016NPVc79,927B/C ratio1.11                  Switching values Benefits-10%Switching values Costs11%Payback period (years)-                    MAIN PROFITABILITY RESULTS (before financing)WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 13: Household model AVG-DI-HV (physical budget) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (EGP)112345678910Croppin pattern and distributionTotal land available to HHs Feddan1.21.21.21.21.21.21.21.21.21.21.2CloverFeddan0.260.260.260.260.260.260.260.260.260.260.26WheatFeddan0.390.390.390.390.390.390.390.390.390.390.39MaizeFeddan0.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.20High value cropFeddan0.330.330.330.330.330.330.330.330.330.330.33Check line1.181.181.181.181.181.181.181.181.181.181.18Ha : Feddan ratioha to feddan0.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.42LivestockHead03333333333Livestock model ratioratio01111111111Main productionCloverkg3.05,2326,121                 6,462                6,802                 6,802                 6,802                 6,802                 6,802           6,802           6,802           6,802           Wheatkg4.57696814                     859                    904                     904                     904                     904                     904              904              904              904              Maizekg3.8394461                     486                    512                     512                     512                     512                     512              512              512              512              Onionkg4.01,3651,602                 1,686                1,775                 1,775                 1,775                 1,775                 1,775           1,775           1,775           1,775           Tomatokg3.01,4091,653                 1,740                1,832                 1,832                 1,832                 1,832                 1,832           1,832           1,832           1,832           Fava beanskg14264310                     326                    343                     343                     343                     343                     343              343              343              343              kgBy-productsWheat strawkg0.8348407                     429                    452                     452                     452                     452                     452              452              452              452              Maize (stalk)kg0.5354414                     437                    461                     461                     461                     461                     461              461              461              461              Fava beans strawkg1.4132155                     163                    172                     172                     172                     172                     172              172              172              172              Post harvest losses%10%8%8%7%7%6%6%6%5%5%5%Total Productionkg9,17410,982              11,582             12,324              12,324              12,457              12,457              12,457        12,589        12,589        12,589        Investment inputsClover new seed varietykg3603                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat new seed varietykg20034                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize new seed varietykg45021                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Canal rehabilitationper feddan16,50001.2                      -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Operating inputsClover seeds kg212                                   -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat seedskg626                                 -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize seedskg3117                                 -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Onion seedskg180.32                             0.4                      0.4                     0.4                      0.4                      0.4                      0.4                      0.4               0.4               0.4               0.4               Tomato seedskg459.2                                12.0                   11                      11                       11                       11                       11                       11                 11                 11                 11                 Fava beans seedskg197                                   9.6                      9                        9                         9                         9                         9                         9                   9                   9                   9                   Clover new seed varietykg36-                               -                     3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   Wheat new seed varietykg20-                               -                     34                      34                       34                       34                       34                       34                 34                 34                 34                 Maize new seed varietykg45-                               -                     21                      21                       21                       21                       21                       21                 21                 21                 21                 Manureton2422                                 28                       28                      28                       28                       28                       28                       28                 28                 28                 28                 Bagsno.7183                               220                     232                    246                     246                     249                     249                     249              252              252              252              Inorganic Fertilizer:TSPkg928                                 31                       35                      36                       36                       36                       36                       36                 36                 36                 36                 Ammonium sulphatekg213                                 14                       16                      17                       17                       17                       17                       17                 17                 17                 17                 Calcium carbidekg39                                   -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Potassium chloridekg52                                   2                         3                        3                         3                         3                         3                         3                   3                   3                   3                   KCLkg4-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg228                                 31                       35                      37                       37                       37                       37                       37                 37                 37                 37                 Ureakg349                                 54                       60                      63                       63                       63                       63                       63                 63                 63                 63                 Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg1650                                 56                       62                      66                       66                       66                       66                       66                 66                 66                 66                 Chemicals:Insecticideskg810                                   0.55                   0.61                  0.64                   0.64                   0.64                   0.64                   0.64             0.64             0.64             0.64             Herbicideslt1461                                   0.57                   0.64                  0.67                   0.67                   0.67                   0.67                   0.67             0.67             0.67             0.67             Toolslumpsum1500                                   0.55                   0.61                  0.64                   0.64                   0.64                   0.64                   0.64             0.64             0.64             0.64             ElectricitykWh0-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Diesellt722                                 25                       28                      29                       29                       29                       29                       29                 29                 29                 29                 Waterm301,691                           1,879                 2,088                2,198                 2,198                 2,198                 2,198                 2,198           2,198           2,198           2,198           Mechanical Plowingha6500                                   0.5                      0.6                     0.6                      0.6                      0.6                      0.6                      0.6               0.6               0.6               0.6               Transportper kg0.19,174                           10,197               11,330              11,927               11,927               11,927               11,927               11,927        11,927        11,927        11,927        LabourLand Preparation and sowingpers. day5                                   5                         6                        6                         6                         6                         6                         6                   6                   6                   6                   Transplantingpers. day3                                   4                         4                        4                         4                         4                         4                         4                   4                   4                   4                   Various operationspers. day32                                 35                       39                      41                       41                       41                       41                       41                 41                 41                 41                 Harvestingpers. day8                                   8                         9                        10                       10                       10                       10                       10                 10                 10                 10                 Sub-total labour days47                                 53                       59                      62                       62                       62                       62                       62                 62                 62                 62                 Skilled labour (S)pers. day100-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Family labour (F)pers. day7547                                 53                       59                      62                       62                       62                       62                       62                 62                 62                 62                 WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 14: Household model AVG-DI-HV (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGET (EGP)WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueClover15,69618,36419,38520,40520,40520,40520,40520,40520,40520,40520,405Wheat3,1763,7163,9234,1294,1294,1294,1294,1294,1294,1294,129Maize1,4961,7501,8471,9441,9441,9441,9441,9441,9441,9441,944Onion5,4606,4066,7447,0987,0987,0987,0987,0987,0987,0987,098Tomato4,2274,9605,2215,4965,4965,4965,4965,4965,4965,4965,496Fava beans3,6994,3404,5684,8094,8094,8094,8094,8094,8094,8094,809By-productsWheat straw278326344362362362362362362362362Maize (stalk)177207219230230230230230230230230Fava beans straw185216228240240240240240240240240Post harvest losses2,0821,9492,0571,8951,8951,6241,6241,6241,3541,3541,354Total revenue32,31338,33640,42042,81842,81843,08943,08943,08943,36043,36043,360incben6,0248,10810,50610,50610,77710,77710,77711,04711,04711,047Investment input costsClover new seed variety0102000000000Wheat new seed variety0675000000000Maize new seed variety0967000000000Canal rehabilitation019,800000000000Sub-total investment costs021,544000000000Operating inputsClover seeds 460000000000Wheat seeds1560000000000Maize seeds5120000000000Onion seeds68888888888Tomato seeds416541499499499499499499499499499Fava beans seeds141183169169169169169169169169169Clover new seed variety00102102102102102102102102102Wheat new seed variety00675675675675675675675675675Maize new seed variety00967967967967967967967967967Manure517672672672672672672672672672672Bags1,2841,5371,6211,7251,7251,7441,7441,7441,7621,7621,762Inorganic Fertilizer:TSP241268298313313313313313313313313Ammonium sulphate3134384040404040404040Calcium carbide250000000000Potassium chloride1112141414141414141414KCL00000000000Superphosphate 18% P2O54550565959595959595959Urea122136151159159159159159159159159Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)8189091,0101,0631,0631,0631,0631,0631,0631,0631,063Chemicals:00000000000Insecticides4044495252525252525252Herbicides7584939898989898989898Tools7482919696969696969696Electricity00000000000Diesel153170189199199199199199199199199Water00000000000Mechanical Plowing321357396417417417417417417417417Transport459510567596596596596596596596596Sub-total operating costs5,4935,5977,6657,9247,9247,9437,9437,9437,9617,9617,961Labour costsSkilled labour costs00000000000Family labour costs3,5623,9594,3994,6304,6304,6304,6304,6304,6304,6304,630Sub-total labour costs3,5623,9594,3994,6304,6304,6304,6304,6304,6304,6304,630Total production costs9,05431,10012,06312,55412,55412,57312,57312,57312,59112,59112,591Gross Income (before labour costs)26,82011,19532,75634,89434,89435,14735,14735,14735,39935,39935,399Taxes on income 2,6821,1204,9135,2345,2345,2725,2725,2725,3105,3105,310After-tax cash flow (before labour costs)24,13810,07627,84229,66029,66029,87529,87529,87530,08930,08930,089After-tax cash flow (after labour costs)23,2587,23728,35730,26430,26430,51730,51730,51730,76930,76930,769Net Incremental Benefits (NIB)-16,0225,0997,0067,0067,2587,2587,2587,5117,5117,511Cumulative cash flow7,23735,59465,85896,122126,639157,156187,672218,441249,209279,978Fraction row01.00                  1.26                   2.18                   3.18                   4.15                   5.15             6.15             7.10             8.10             inccos22,0463,0093,5003,5003,5183,5183,5183,5373,5373,537Return to family labour* (EGP/day)569                   BCRIRR*consider full development year family labour requirementsFEDDAN1.51                  FEDDAN39%Discount rate12%0.30                   1.52                  0.30                   36%NPV (EGP) @ 0.1218,4390.60                   1.52                  0.60                   36%IRR39%0.90                   1.52                  0.90                   36%NPVb54,4481.20                   1.52                  1.20                   36%NPVc36,0101.50                   1.52                  1.50                   36%B/C ratio1.51                  1.80                   1.52                  1.80                   36%Switching values Benefits-34%2.10                   1.52                  2.10                   36%Switching values Costs51%2.40                   1.52                  2.40                   36%Payback period (years)-                    WITH PROJECTMAIN PROFITABILITY RESULTS (before financing) 
Figure A 15: Household model CAP-FI-FC (physical budget) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (EGP)112345678910Croppin pattern and distributionTotal land available to HHs Feddan2.42.42.42.42.42.42.42.42.42.42.4CloverFeddan0.570.570.570.570.570.570.570.570.570.570.57WheatFeddan0.910.910.910.910.910.910.910.910.910.910.91MaizeFeddan0.830.830.830.830.830.830.830.830.830.830.83High value cropFeddan0.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.00Check line2.312.312.312.312.312.312.312.312.312.312.31Ha : Feddan ratioha to feddan0.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.42LivestockHead03333333333Livestock model ratioratio01111111111Main productionCloverkg3.011,42413,366               14,109              14,851               14,851               14,851               14,851               14,851        14,851        14,851        14,851        Wheatkg4.571,6371,916                 2,022                2,128                 2,128                 2,128                 2,128                 2,128           2,128           2,128           2,128           Maizekg3.81,6561,938                 2,045                2,153                 2,153                 2,153                 2,153                 2,153           2,153           2,153           2,153           Onionkg4.00-                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Tomatokg3.00-                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Fava beanskg140-                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               kgBy-productsWheat strawkg0.8819958                     1,011                1,064                 1,064                 1,064                 1,064                 1,064           1,064           1,064           1,064           Maize (stalk)kg0.51,4901,744                 1,841                1,938                 1,938                 1,938                 1,938                 1,938           1,938           1,938           1,938           Fava beans strawkg1.40-                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Post harvest losses%10%8%8%7%7%6%6%6%5%5%5%Total Productionkg15,32418,327              19,345             20,585              20,585              20,806              20,806              20,806        21,028        21,028        21,028        Investment inputsClover new seed varietykg3606                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat new seed varietykg20079                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize new seed varietykg45090                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Canal rehabilitationper feddan16,50002.4                      -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Operating inputsClover seeds kg215                                   -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat seedskg661                                 -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize seedskg3170                                 -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Onion seedskg18-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Tomato seedskg45-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Fava beans seedskg19-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Clover new seed varietykg36-                               -                     6                        6                         6                         6                         6                         6                   6                   6                   6                   Wheat new seed varietykg20-                               -                     79                      79                       79                       79                       79                       79                 79                 79                 79                 Maize new seed varietykg45-                               -                     90                      90                       90                       90                       90                       90                 90                 90                 90                 Manureton2439                                 51                       51                      51                       51                       51                       51                       51                 51                 51                 51                 Bagsno.7306                               367                     387                    412                     412                     416                     416                     416              421              421              421              Inorganic Fertilizer:TSPkg937                                 41                       45                      48                       48                       48                       48                       48                 48                 48                 48                 Ammonium sulphatekg219                                 21                       24                      25                       25                       25                       25                       25                 25                 25                 25                 Calcium carbidekg3-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Potassium chloridekg55                                   5                         6                        6                         6                         6                         6                         6                   6                   6                   6                   KCLkg4-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg263                                 70                       77                      81                       81                       81                       81                       81                 81                 81                 81                 Ureakg392                                 102                     114                    120                     120                     120                     120                     120              120              120              120              Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg1680                                 89                       98                      104                     104                     104                     104                     104              104              104              104              Chemicals:Insecticideskg810                                   0.41                   0.45                  0.47                   0.47                   0.47                   0.47                   0.47             0.47             0.47             0.47             Herbicideslt1460                                   0.52                   0.58                  0.61                   0.61                   0.61                   0.61                   0.61             0.61             0.61             0.61             Toolslumpsum1501                                   1.08                   1.20                  1.26                   1.26                   1.26                   1.26                   1.26             1.26             1.26             1.26             ElectricitykWh0-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Diesellt748                                 54                       60                      63                       63                       63                       63                       63                 63                 63                 63                 Waterm303,665                           4,074                 4,527                4,765                 4,765                 4,765                 4,765                 4,765           4,765           4,765           4,765           Mechanical Plowingha6500.97                             1.1                      1.2                     1.3                      1.3                      1.3                      1.3                      1.3               1.3               1.3               1.3               Transportper kg0.0515,324                         17,032               18,925              19,921               19,921               19,921               19,921               19,921        19,921        19,921        19,921        Land rentper ha 18,571-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               LabourLand Preparation and sowingpers. day10                                 11                       12                      13                       13                       13                       13                       13                 13                 13                 13                 Transplantingpers. day5                                   5                         6                        6                         6                         6                         6                         6                   6                   6                   6                   Various operationspers. day57                                 63                       71                      74                       74                       74                       74                       74                 74                 74                 74                 Harvestingpers. day11                                 12                       13                      14                       14                       14                       14                       14                 14                 14                 14                 Sub-total labour days83                                 92                       102                    107                     107                     107                     107                     107              107              107              107              Skilled labour (S)pers. day100-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Family labour (F)pers. day7583                                 92                       102                    107                     107                     107                     107                     107              107              107              107              WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 16: Household model CAP-FI-FC (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGET (EGP)WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueClover34,27240,09842,32644,55444,55444,55444,55444,55444,55444,55444,554Wheat7,4778,7489,2349,7209,7209,7209,7209,7209,7209,7209,720Maize6,2937,3637,7728,1818,1818,1818,1818,1818,1818,1818,181Onion00000000000Tomato00000000000Fava beans00000000000By-productsWheat straw655766809851851851851851851851851Maize (stalk)745872920969969969969969969969969Fava beans straw00000000000Post harvest losses4,9444,6284,8854,4994,4993,8563,8563,8563,2143,2143,214Total revenue44,49853,21956,17659,77559,77560,41860,41860,41861,06161,06161,061incben8,72211,67815,27815,27815,92015,92015,92016,56316,56316,563Investment input costsClover new seed variety0223000000000Wheat new seed variety01,589000000000Maize new seed variety04,069000000000Canal rehabilitation039,600000000000Sub-total investment costs045,481000000000Operating inputsClover seeds 1010000000000Wheat seeds3670000000000Maize seeds2,1560000000000Onion seeds00000000000Tomato seeds00000000000Fava beans seeds00000000000Clover new seed variety00223223223223223223223223223Wheat new seed variety001,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,589Maize new seed variety004,0694,0694,0694,0694,0694,0694,0694,0694,069Manure9431,2271,2271,2271,2271,2271,2271,2271,2271,2271,227Bags2,1452,5662,7082,8822,8822,9132,9132,9132,9442,9442,944Inorganic Fertilizer:TSP316352391411411411411411411411411Ammonium sulphate4652576060606060606060Calcium carbide00000000000Potassium chloride2427303131313131313131KCL00000000000Superphosphate 18% P2O5100111124130130130130130130130130Urea230256284299299299299299299299299Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)1,2921,4361,5961,6801,6801,6801,6801,6801,6801,6801,680Chemicals:00000000000Insecticides3033373838383838383838Herbicides6876848989898989898989Tools145162180189189189189189189189189Electricity00000000000Diesel332369410432432432432432432432432Water00000000000Mechanical Plowing630701778819819819819819819819819Transport766852946996996996996996996996996Sub-total operating costs9,6938,21714,73215,16415,16415,19515,19515,19515,22615,22615,226Labour costsSkilled labour costs00000000000Family labour costs6,1916,8817,6468,0488,0488,0488,0488,0488,0488,0488,048Sub-total labour costs6,1916,8817,6468,0488,0488,0488,0488,0488,0488,0488,048Total production costs15,88460,57922,37823,21323,21323,24423,24423,24423,27523,27523,275Gross Income (before labour costs)34,804-47941,44444,61144,61145,22345,22345,22345,83445,83445,834Taxes on income 5,22106,2176,6926,6929,0459,0459,0459,1679,1679,167After-tax cash flow (before labour costs)29,584-47935,22737,91937,91936,17836,17836,17836,66736,66736,667After-tax cash flow (after labour costs)28,613-7,36033,79836,56336,56337,17437,17437,17437,78637,78637,786Net Incremental Benefits (NIB)-35,9735,1857,9497,9498,5618,5618,5619,1739,1739,173Cumulative cash flow-7,36026,43863,00199,563136,738173,912211,087248,873286,659324,445Fraction row-1.00                  0.78                   1.72                   2.72                   3.68                   4.68             5.68             6.59             7.59             inccos44,6956,4947,3287,3287,3597,3597,3597,3907,3907,390Return to family labour* (EGP/day)421                   BCRIRR*consider full development year family labour requirementsFEDDAN1.08                  FEDDAN16%Discount rate12%0.30                   1.02                  0.30                   11%NPV (EGP) @ 0.125,7580.60                   1.02                  0.60                   11%IRR16%0.90                   1.02                  0.90                   11%NPVb79,9761.20                   1.02                  1.20                   11%NPVc74,2181.50                   1.02                  1.50                   11%B/C ratio1.08                  1.80                   1.02                  1.80                   11%Switching values Benefits-7%2.10                   1.02                  2.10                   11%Switching values Costs8%2.40                   1.02                  2.40                   11%Payback period (years)1.00                  WITH PROJECTMAIN PROFITABILITY RESULTS (before financing) 
Figure A 17: Household model CAP-FI-HV (physical budget) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE (EGP)112345678910Croppin pattern and distributionTotal land available to HHs Feddan3.13.13.13.13.13.13.13.13.13.13.1CloverFeddan0.880.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50WheatFeddan1.030.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50MaizeFeddan0.510.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50High value cropFeddan0.441.501.501.501.501.501.501.501.501.501.50Check line2.853.003.003.003.003.003.003.003.003.003.00Ha : Feddan ratioha to feddan0.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.420.42LivestockHead03333333333Livestock model ratioratio01111111111Main productionCloverkg3.017,54611,70012,350              13,00013,000               13,000               13,000               13,000        13,000        13,000        13,000        Wheatkg4.571,8471,053                 1,112                1,1701,170                 1,170                 1,170                 1,170           1,170           1,170           1,170           Maizekg3.81,0111,170                 1,235                1,3001,300                 1,300                 1,300                 1,300           1,300           1,300           1,300           Onionkg4.01,8013,604                 3,794                3,9943,994                 3,994                 3,994                 3,994           3,994           3,994           3,994           Tomatokg3.01,85928,591               30,096              31,68031,680               31,680               31,680               31,680        31,680        31,680        31,680        Fava beanskg14349676                     711                    749749                     749                     749                     749              749              749              749              kgBy-productsWheat strawkg0.8923527                     556                    585585                     585                     585                     585              585              585              585              Maize (stalk)kg0.59101,053                 1,112                1,1701,170                 1,170                 1,170                 1,170           1,170           1,170           1,170           Fava beans strawkg1.4174695                     734                    772772                     772                     772                     772              772              772              772              Post harvest losses%10%8%8%7%7%6%6%6%5%5%5%Total Productionkg23,77845,143              47,563             50,610              50,610              51,154              51,154              51,154        51,699        51,699        51,699        Investment inputsClover new seed varietykg3604                         -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat new seed varietykg20034                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize new seed varietykg45042                       -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Canal rehabilitationper feddan16,50003.1                      -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Greenhouse building (4,200 m2)Sit preparation and groundper feddan17,49001                         Wood and kitsper feddan31,48201                         Assembly and installationper feddan26,23501                         EquipmentFans, Fertilization system, harvesting equipmentsper feddan57,71701                         Drip Irrigation System per feddan61,21501                         Polyethylene sheets & insect-proof netsper feddan26,23501                         Operating inputsClover seeds kg217                                   -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Wheat seedskg669                                 -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Maize seedskg3142                                 -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Onion seedskg180.43                             0.71                   0.7                     0.7                      0.7                      0.7                      0.7                      0.7               0.7               0.7               0.7               Tomato seedskg4512.2                             20.2                   20                      20                       20                       20                       20                       20                 20                 20                 20                 Fava beans seedskg1910                                 67                       67                      67                       67                       67                       67                       67                 67                 67                 67                 Clover new seed varietykg36-                               -                     4                        4                         4                         4                         4                         4                   4                   4                   4                   Wheat new seed varietykg20-                               -                     34                      34                       34                       34                       34                       34                 34                 34                 34                 Maize new seed varietykg45-                               -                     42                      42                       42                       42                       42                       42                 42                 42                 42                 Manureton2456                                 72                       72                      72                       72                       72                       72                       72                 72                 72                 72                 Bagsno.7476                               903                     951                    1,012                 1,012                 1,023                 1,023                 1,023           1,034           1,034           1,034           Inorganic Fertilizer:TSPkg954                                 60                       67                      70                       70                       70                       70                       70                 70                 70                 70                 Ammonium sulphatekg228                                 31                       34                      36                       36                       36                       36                       36                 36                 36                 36                 Calcium carbidekg312                                 -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Potassium chloridekg57                                   8                         9                        10                       10                       10                       10                       10                 10                 10                 10                 KCLkg4-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Superphosphate 18% P2O5kg266                                 74                       82                      86                       86                       86                       86                       86                 86                 86                 86                 Ureakg3107                               119                     132                    139                     139                     139                     139                     139              139              139              139              Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)kg16108                               120                     133                    140                     140                     140                     140                     140              140              140              140              Chemicals:Insecticideskg811                                   0.90                   1.00                  1.05                   1.05                   1.05                   1.05                   1.05             1.05             1.05             1.05             Herbicideslt1461                                   0.97                   1.08                  1.14                   1.14                   1.14                   1.14                   1.14             1.14             1.14             1.14             Toolslumpsum1501                                   1.33                   1.48                  1.55                   1.55                   1.55                   1.55                   1.55             1.55             1.55             1.55             ElectricitykWh0-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Diesellt757                                 63                       70                      74                       74                       74                       74                       74                 74                 74                 74                 Waterm304,285                           4,763                 5,292                5,571                 5,571                 5,571                 5,571                 5,571           5,571           5,571           5,571           Mechanical Plowingha6501.19                             1.3                      1.5                     1.6                      1.6                      1.6                      1.6                      1.6               1.6               1.6               1.6               Transportper kg0.123,778                         45,143               47,563              50,610               50,610               51,154               51,154               51,154        51,699        51,699        51,699        Land rentper ha 18,571-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Infrastructure  O&Mlump sum11,019-                               1                        1                         1                         1                         1                         1                   1                   1                   1                   LabourLand Preparation and sowingpers. day12                                 13                       15                      16                       16                       16                       16                       16                 16                 16                 16                 Transplantingpers. day7                                   8                         9                        9                         9                         9                         9                         9                   9                   9                   9                   Various operationspers. day76                                 162                     180                    190                     190                     190                     190                     190              190              190              190              Harvestingpers. day17                                 18                       20                      21                       21                       21                       21                       21                 21                 21                 21                 Sub-total labour days111                               201                     224                    235                     235                     235                     235                     235              235              235              235              Skilled labour (S)pers. day100-                               -                     -                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -               -               -               -               Family labour (F)pers. day75111                               201                     224                    235                     235                     235                     235                     235              235              235              235              WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 18: Household model CAP-FI-HV (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGET (EGP)WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS 112345678910Main production revenueClover52,63835,10037,05039,00039,00039,00039,00039,00039,00039,00039,000Wheat8,4354,8095,0765,3435,3435,3435,3435,3435,3435,3435,343Maize3,8404,4464,6934,9404,9404,9404,9404,9404,9404,9404,940Onion7,20514,41715,17615,97415,97415,97415,97415,97415,97415,97415,974Tomato5,57885,77490,28895,04095,04095,04095,04095,04095,04095,04095,040Fava beans4,8819,4619,95910,48310,48310,48310,48310,48310,48310,48310,483By-productsWheat straw739421445468468468468468468468468Maize (stalk)455527556585585585585585585585585Fava beans straw2449731,0271,0811,0811,0811,0811,0811,0811,0811,081Post harvest losses6,6113,6243,8263,5243,5243,0203,0203,0202,5172,5172,517Total revenue77,404152,303160,443169,391169,391169,895169,895169,895170,398170,398170,398incben74,89983,03991,98791,98792,49092,49092,49092,99492,99492,994Investment input costsClover new seed variety0150000000000Wheat new seed variety0672000000000Maize new seed variety01,890000000000Canal rehabilitation051,150000000000Greenhouse building (4,200 m2)00000000000Sit preparation and ground017,490000000000Wood and kits031,482000000000Assembly and installation026,235000000000Equipment00000000000Fans, Fertilization system, harvesting equipments057,717000000000Drip Irrigation System 061,215000000000Polyethylene sheets & insect-proof nets026,235000000000Sub-total investment costs0274,237000000000Operating inputsClover seeds 1550000000000Wheat seeds4140000000000Maize seeds1,3160000000000Onion seeds813131313131313131313Tomato seeds549907907907907907907907907907907Fava beans seeds1851,2641,2641,2641,2641,2641,2641,2641,2641,2641,264Clover new seed variety00150150150150150150150150150Wheat new seed variety00672672672672672672672672672Maize new seed variety001,8901,8901,8901,8901,8901,8901,8901,8901,890Manure1,3361,7371,7371,7371,7371,7371,7371,7371,7371,7371,737Bags3,3296,3206,6597,0857,0857,1627,1627,1627,2387,2387,238Inorganic Fertilizer:TSP465517574605605605605605605605605Ammonium sulphate6775838787878787878787Calcium carbide330000000000Potassium chloride3741464848484848484848KCL00000000000Superphosphate 18% P2O5106118131138138138138138138138138Urea268298331348348348348348348348348Basal Fertilizers (NPK, DAP, CAN)1,7461,9402,1562,2702,2702,2702,2702,2702,2702,2702,270Chemicals:00000000000Insecticides6673818585858585858585Herbicides127142157166166166166166166166166Tools179199221233233233233233233233233Electricity00000000000Diesel388432480505505505505505505505505Water00000000000Mechanical Plowing7778639591,0101,0101,0101,0101,0101,0101,0101,010Transport1,1892,2572,3782,5312,5312,5582,5582,5582,5852,5852,585Land rent00000000000Infrastructure  O&M0011,01911,01911,01911,01911,01911,01911,01911,01911,019Sub-total operating costs12,73917,19531,90732,76132,76132,86432,86432,86432,96832,96832,968Labour costsSkilled labour costs00000000000Family labour costs8,33815,10116,77917,66217,66217,66217,66217,66217,66217,66217,662Sub-total labour costs8,33815,10116,77917,66217,66217,66217,66217,66217,66217,66217,662Total production costs21,077306,53348,68650,42350,42350,52650,52650,52650,63050,63050,630Gross Income (before labour costs)64,665-139,129128,536136,630136,630137,030137,030137,030137,430137,430137,430Taxes on income 12,933025,70727,32627,32627,40627,40627,40627,48627,48627,486After-tax cash flow (before labour costs)51,732-139,129102,829109,304109,304109,624109,624109,624109,944109,944109,944After-tax cash flow (after labour costs)56,327-154,230111,757118,968118,968119,368119,368119,368119,768119,768119,768Net Incremental Benefits (NIB)-210,55755,43062,64162,64163,04163,04163,04163,44163,44163,441Cumulative cash flow-154,230-42,47376,495195,463314,831434,199553,568673,336793,104912,872Fraction row--0.38                   0.64                   1.64                   2.64                   3.64             4.64             5.62             6.62             inccos285,45627,60929,34629,34629,44929,44929,44929,55329,55329,553Return to family labour* (EGP/day)582                   *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate12%NPV (EGP) @ 0.12105,740IRR25%NPVb499,219NPVc393,479B/C ratio1.27                  Switching values Benefits-21%Switching values Costs27%Payback period (years)2.38                  MAIN PROFITABILITY RESULTS (before financing)WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 19: Tomato processing unit model (physical budget) 
YIELDS AND INPUTSITEMS UNITPRICE (EGP)012345678910Main productionTomato concentratekg300197,600237,120276,640316,160520,000520,000520,000520,000520,000520,000kg8000000000000kg700000000000Processing losses%0%10%9%8%7%6%5%5%5%5%5%Investment inputsWorkshopno.157,2001Production lineno.524,0001Furnitureno.20,0001Office vehicleno.100,0001Office equipment no.10,4801Landno.140,0001Equipment spare part invertoryno.26,2001Operating inputsTomatokg31,300,0001,560,0001,820,0002,080,0002,600,0002,600,0002,600,0002,600,0002,600,0002,600,000Electricity (150 KWh / ton)Kwh1195,000234,000273,000312,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000Gas (230 kWh / ton)Kwh0299,000358,800418,600478,400598,000598,000598,000598,000598,000598,000Water (200 m3 / ton)m33260,000312,000364,000416,000520,000520,000520,000520,000520,000520,000Wastewater (90 m3 / ton)m33117,000140,400163,800187,200234,000234,000234,000234,000234,000234,000Maintenance hygieneEGP/ton25,0001111111111O&M building (5% of investment cost)lumpsum7,8601111111111O&M machinery and equipmentlumpsum32,7241111111111O&M of new machinery and equipmentlumpsum1,3101111111111Packaging in aseptic bags (200 kg)no.50.009881,1861,3831,5812,6002,6002,6002,6002,6002,600Tools/equipmentlumpsum18,0001111111111LabourManagerpers.month3,10012121212121212121212Plant operatorspers.month1,60024242424242424242424Helperspers.month1,00036363636363636363636Technicianpers.month2,07612121212121212121212Driverpers.month1,00012121212121212121212Guardpers.month80012121212121212121212Sub-total labour096969696969696969696Skilled (paid) labour (S)pers.month096969696969696969696WITH PROJECT 
Figure A 20: Tomato processing unit model (financial budget) 
FINANCIAL BUDGETITEMS 012345678910Main production revenueTomato concentrate05,928,0007,113,6008,299,2009,484,80015,600,00015,600,00015,600,00015,600,00015,600,00015,600,000Sales05,928,0007,113,6008,299,2009,484,80015,600,00015,600,00015,600,00015,600,00015,600,00015,600,000Selfconsumption00000000000Post harvest losses0592,800640,224663,936663,936936,000780,000780,000780,000780,000780,000Total revenue05,335,2006,473,3767,635,2648,820,86414,664,00014,820,00014,820,00014,820,00014,820,00014,820,000Investment input costsWorkshop157,2000000000000Production line524,0000000000000Furniture20,0000000000000Office vehicle100,0000000000000Office equipment 10,4800000000000Land140,0000000000000Equipment spare part invertory26,2000000000000Sub-total investment costs977,880000000000059,265Operating input costsTomato03,900,0004,680,0005,460,0006,240,0007,800,0007,800,0007,800,0007,800,0007,800,0007,800,000Electricity (150 KWh / ton)0273,000327,600382,200436,800546,000546,000546,000546,000546,000546,000Gas (230 kWh / ton)092,690111,228129,766148,304185,380185,380185,380185,380185,380185,380Water (200 m3 / ton)0806,000967,2001,128,4001,289,6001,612,0001,612,0001,612,0001,612,0001,612,0001,612,000Wastewater (90 m3 / ton)0362,700435,240507,780580,320725,400725,400725,400725,400725,400725,400Maintenance hygiene025,00025,00025,00025,00025,00025,00025,00025,00025,00025,000O&M building (5% of investment cost)07,8607,8607,8607,8607,8607,8607,8607,8607,8607,860O&M machinery and equipment032,72432,72432,72432,72432,72432,72432,72432,72432,72432,724O&M of new machinery and equipment01,3101,3101,3101,3101,3101,3101,3101,3101,3101,310Packaging in aseptic bags (200 kg)049,40059,28069,16079,040130,000130,000130,000130,000130,000130,000Tools/equipment018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000Sub-total operating costs05,568,6846,665,4427,762,2008,858,95811,083,67411,083,67411,083,67411,083,67411,083,67411,083,674Labour costsManager037,20037,20037,20037,20037,20037,20037,20037,20037,20037,200Plant operators038,40038,40038,40038,40038,40038,40038,40038,40038,40038,400Helpers036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,000Technician024,91224,91224,91224,91224,91224,91224,91224,91224,91224,912Driver012,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,000Guard09,6009,6009,6009,6009,6009,6009,6009,6009,6009,600Sub-total labour costs0158,112158,112158,112158,112158,112158,112158,112158,112158,112158,112Total production costs977,8805,726,7966,823,5547,920,3129,017,07011,241,78611,241,78611,241,78611,241,78611,241,78611,241,786Gross Income (after labour costs)-977,880-391,596-350,178-285,048-196,2063,422,2143,578,2143,578,2143,578,2143,578,2143,578,214Taxes00000769,998805,098805,098805,098805,098805,098Social security contribution (24%)037,94737,94737,94737,94737,94737,94737,94737,94737,94737,947Net Income (after labour costs)-977,880-429,543-388,125-322,995-234,1532,614,2692,735,1692,735,1692,735,1692,735,1692,735,169Net incremental income-977,880-587,655-546,237-481,107-392,2652,456,1572,577,0572,577,0572,577,0572,577,0572,577,057Foregone income (WOP)158,112Income (before labour costs)-977,880-271,431-230,013-164,883-76,0412,772,3812,893,2812,893,2812,893,2812,893,2812,893,281Return to family labour*#DIV/0!*consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate12%NPV (EGP) @ 0.124,135,160       IRR33%NPVb58,705,457NPVc54,465,524B/C ratio1.08Switching values Benefits-7%Switching values Costs8%Payback period (years)4.10WITHOUT PROJECT 
Figure A 21: Project economic costs (EGP '000) 
EgyptSustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR]Project Components by Year -- Base CostsEconomic Costs (EGP '000)Base Cost2020202120222023202420252026Total A. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets1. Strengthening marketing institutions36,28455,46882,22369,14828,4902,202-273,8142. Micro enterprises development22,216144,242152,479136,271125,52063,11455,449699,290Subtotal58,499199,710234,702205,419154,01065,31655,449973,104B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management14,72488,592928,924977,104457,877101,612-2,568,8332. Production related investments under business plans33,51766,253139,227332,823314,269223,65982,6271,192,376Subtotal48,241154,8451,068,1511,309,927772,146325,27182,6273,761,209C. Project Management, M&E and KM1. Project Management Unit29,17314,43212,90212,30212,30212,3026,05199,4642. M&E and Knowledge Management3,1092,0572,3632,0572,0572,3634,08018,084Subtotal32,28216,48915,26514,35914,35914,66510,131117,548139,022371,0431,318,1171,529,705940,514405,252148,2074,851,861Investment costs for final aggregation77,975117,460277,179301,414179,80578,64435,140Funds directly used in the models58,064                  247,617  1,031,988 1,219,340 751,758 322,132  113,067  Funds directly used in the models2,983                     5,967      8,950         8,950         8,950      4,475      -           EgyptSustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR]Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Base CostsEconomic Costs (EGP '000)Base Cost2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment CostsA. Technical assistance and consultancies /a47,91540,869143,588129,73256,8228,6589,753437,337B. Goods, Services and Inputs31,66489,438163,873329,327298,278213,61876,9551,203,153C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b23,21424,96429,01423,80419,4726,644-127,113D. Civil Works9,00071,600810,100881,000420,300100,000-2,292,000E. Grants and subsidies10,191128,250155,620150,520130,32062,61055,449692,960Total Investment Costs121,985355,1211,302,1951,514,383925,192391,530142,1564,752,563II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and Allowances11,67610,75210,75210,15210,15210,1525,07668,712B. Operating costs /c5,3615,1705,1705,1705,1703,57097530,586Total Recurrent Costs17,03715,92215,92215,32215,32213,7226,05199,298Total BASELINE COSTS139,022371,0431,318,1171,529,705940,514405,252148,2074,851,861Recurrent costs for final aggregation17,03715,92215,92215,32215,32213,7226,051 
Figure A 22: Calculation of conversion factors (1/2) 
IEUreaFinancialEconomicIEPotassium chlorideFinancialEconomicItem Item 1. Price FOB at port (USD per ton)2492491. Price FOB at port (USD per ton)2152152. Exchange rate17172. Exchange rate16.5016.903. Price FOB at port (EGP per ton)410942073. Price FOB at port (EGP per ton)354836324. Export duty (0% of CIF)004. Export duty (0% of CIF)005. Value-Added Tax (0%)005. Value-Added Tax (0%)006. Handling (50 EGP per ton)50506. Handling (50 EGP per ton)50507. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)41427. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)35368. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)46468. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)43439. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)6165109. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)53244010. Price at wholesale market3356355910. Price at wholesale market2887306211. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)61651011. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)53244012. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)3972406912. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)3419350313. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)3.974.0713. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)3.423.50conversion factor 1.02conversion factor 1.02IERock phosphateFinancialEconomicIEDAPFinancialEconomicItem Item 1. Price FOB at port (USD per ton)88881. Price FOB at port (USD per ton)3933932. Exchange rate16.5016.902. Exchange rate16.5016.903. Price FOB at port (EGP per ton)145214873. Price FOB at port (EGP per ton)648566404. Export duty (0% of CIF)004. Export duty (0% of CIF)005. Value-Added Tax (0%)005. Value-Added Tax (0%)006. Handling (50 EGP per ton)50506. Handling (50 EGP per ton)50507. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)15157. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)65668. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)32328. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)57589. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)2181809. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)97380510. Price at wholesale market1137120910. Price at wholesale market5340566011. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)21818011. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)97380512. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)1355138912. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)6312646513. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)1.361.3913. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)6.316.47conversion factor 1.03conversion factor 1.02IETriple super phospateFinancialEconomicIIMilling machineFinancialEconomicItem Item 1. Price FOB at port (USD per ton)3463461. CIF price al port (Cif: $ per Unit)20000200002. Exchange rate17172. Exchange rate17173. Price FOB at port (EGP per ton)570958463. CIF price at port (CIF: EGP per unit)3300003379004. Export duty (0% of CIF)004. Import duty (5% of CIF)1650005. Value-Added Tax (0%)005. Value-Added Tax (5%)1650006. Handling (50 EGP per ton)50506. Handling (50 EGP per ton)500050007. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)57587. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)363033798. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)54548. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)431541909. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)8567099. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)495004097310. Price at wholesale market4692497410. Price at wholesale market23455528435911. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)85670911. Transportation cost from port to farm (EGP per ton)495004097312. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)5548568312. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)70950071677313. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)6613. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)710717conversion factor 1.02conversion factor 1.01IEGasolineFinancialEconomicIEDieselFinancialEconomicItem Item 1. Price FOB at port (USD per ton)7007001. Price FOB at port (USD per ton)6156152. Exchange rate17172. Exchange rate17173. Price FOB at port (EGP per ton)11550118273. Price FOB at port (EGP per ton)10148103904. Import duty (5% of CIF)57804. Import duty (0% of CIF)005. Value-Added Tax (10%)121305. Value-Added Tax (10%)101506. Withholding tax (Pajak Penghasilan) 0.3%366. Withholding tax (Pajak Penghasilan) 0.3%308. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50000500008. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50000500009. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)1331189. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)11210410. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)250672505910. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)250562505211. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)57847811. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)50742012. Price at wholesale market-66054-6382912. Price at wholesale market-66573-6518513. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)584813. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)514214. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)-65996-6378114. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)-66522-6514315. price at the farm gate (BRL per lt)-66.0-63.815. price at the farm gate (BRL per lt)-66.5-65.1conversion factor 0.97conversion factor 0.98ValueValueValueValueValueValueValueValue 
Figure A 23: calculation of conversion factors (2/2) 
IIHerbicidesFinancialEconomicIIFungicidesFinancialEconomicItem Item 1. Price CIF al port (USD per ton)500050001. Price CIF al port (USD per ton)9009002. Exchange rate16.5016.902. Exchange rate16.5016.903. Price CIFal port (EGP per ton)82500844753. Price CIFal port (EGP per ton)14850152064. Import duty (5% of CIF)412504. Import duty (5% of CIF)74305. Value-Added Tax (14%)1212805. Value-Added Tax (14%)218308. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50000500008. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50000500009. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)9888459. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)17815210. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)254942542210. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)250892507611. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)4125341411. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)74361512. Price at wholesale market17935916415712. Price at wholesale market937859104813. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)41334113. Transportation/handling/margins cost from port to whosale market (EGP per ton)746114. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)17977116449814. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)938599111015. price at the farm gate (EGP per lt)18016415. price at the farm gate (EGP per lt)9491conversion factor 0.92conversion factor 0.97OISMaizeFinancialEconomicOISWheatFinancialEconomicItem Item 1. CIF Price at port (USD per ton)1581581. CIF Price at port (USD per ton)2102102. Exchange rate17172. Exchange rate17171. CIF Price at port (EGP per ton)260226641. CIF Price at port (EGP per ton)346535484. Import duty (0% of CIF)004. Import duty (0% of CIF)005. Value-Added Tax (14%)36405. Value-Added Tax (0%)48506. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50516. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50517. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)30277. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)40358. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)40398. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)45439. Transportation cost from port to wholesale market (EGP per ton)3903239. Transportation cost from port to wholesale market (EGP per ton)52043010. Price at wholesale market (EGP)3476310310. Price at wholesale market (EGP)4604410711. Transportation cost from port to farm (EGP per ton)594811. Transportation cost from port to farm (EGP per ton)786512. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)3418305512. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)4526404313. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)3313. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)54conversion factor 0.89conversion factor 0.89OEXWheat flourFinancialEconomicOISGoat meatFinancialEconomicItem Item 1. FOB Price at port (USD per ton)2062061. CIF Price at port (USD per ton)593959392. Exchange rate17172. Exchange rate17171. FOB Price at port (EGP per ton)339934801. CIF Price at port (EGP per ton)980001003464. Export duty (0% of CIF)004. Import duty (0% of CIF)005. Value-Added Tax (0%)005. Value-Added Tax (0%)1372006. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50516. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50517. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)34357. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)111710038. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)42438. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)5845279. Transportation cost from port to wholesale market (EGP per ton)5104229. Transportation cost from port to wholesale market (EGP per ton)147001216810. Price at wholesale market (EGP)2763293010. Price at wholesale market (EGP)12817111409511. Transportation cost from port to farm (EGP per ton)766311. Transportation cost from port to farm (EGP per ton)2205182512. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)2687286712. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)12596611227013. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)3313. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)126112conversion factor 1.07conversion factor 0.89OEXOnionFinancialEconomicOEXTomatoFinancialEconomicItem Item 1. FOB Price at port (USD per ton)2852851. FOB Price at port (USD per ton)90902. Exchange rate17172. Exchange rate17171. FOB Price at port (EGP per ton)470348151. FOB Price at port (EGP per ton)148515214. Export duty (0% of CIF)004. Export duty (0% of CIF)005. Value-Added Tax (0%)005. Value-Added Tax (0%)006. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50516. Handling (50 EGP per kg)50517. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)47487. Storage fee (1% of CIF and duties)15158. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)49498. Port fee (50 % of the storage fee and handling fee)32339. Transportation cost from port to wholesale market (EGP per ton)7055849. Transportation cost from port to wholesale market (EGP per ton)22318410. Price at wholesale market (EGP)3852408310. Price at wholesale market (EGP)1165123811. Transportation cost from port to farm (EGP per ton)1068811. Transportation cost from port to farm (EGP per ton)332812. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)3746399612. price at the farm gate (EGP per ton)1132121013. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)4413. price at the farm gate (EGP per kg)11conversion factor 1.07conversion factor 1.07ValueValueValueValueValueValueValueValue 
Figure A 24: derivation of Shadow Exchange Rate (EGP Million) 
Source: World Bank data retrieved on June 8th, 2019 
10000002006200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018AverageTotal imports of G&SM195,000259,400346,000329,300320,800338,500407,200434,500483,000529,400539,2001,017,0001,303,100596,967      Total exports of G&SX185,000225,300295,900260,100257,600282,000274,600316,600303,400322,200280,300548,900839,200380,533      Average duties on importst4.90%3.94%3.86%4.10%4.28%3.97%4.00%4.00%4.00%3.96%4.00%4.00%4.00%Import dutiesTm9,55410,23313,36113,49613,73313,45516,288        17,380        19,320        20,95521,568        40,680        52,124        23,945        Average taxes on exportss0.001%0.010%0.175%0.177%0.318%0.103%0.13%0.13%0.13%0.13%0.13%0.13%0.13%Export dutiesTx222519461819289360              415              397              422              367              719              1,099           453              Total international commercM+X380,000      484,700      641,900      589,400      578,400      620,500      681,800      751,100      786,400      851,600      819,500      1,565,900  2,142,300  977,500      M+Tm204,554      269,633      359,361      342,796      334,533      351,955      423,488      451,880      502,320      550,355      560,768      1,057,680  1,355,224  620,911      X-Tx184,999      225,278      295,381      259,639      256,781      281,711      274,240      316,185      303,003      321,778      279,933      548,181      838,101      379,990      0.975           0.979           0.980           0.978           0.978           0.979           0.977           0.978           0.977           0.976           0.975           0.975           0.977           0.977           5.73             5.64             5.43             5.54             5.62             5.93             6.06             6.87             7.00             7.50             9.00             17.90           17.70           5.88             5.75             5.54             5.67             5.75             6.06             6.20             7.03             7.17             7.68             9.23             18.36           18.12           SCFOER (EGP/USD)SER 
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Sustainable Transformation for 
Agricultural Resilience in Upper 
Egypt (STAR) 
Annex 5 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment 
(SECAP) Review Note 
Contents 
1. 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 3 
2. 
Situational Analysis and Potential Project Impacts......................................................................... 3 
A. 
Socio-economic and Poverty Assessment .................................................................................. 3 
B.  Environment and Climate Context, Trends and Implications ..................................................... 7 
C.  Poverty and Targeting Profiles .................................................................................................. 15 
3. 
4. 
Institutional Analysis ..................................................................................................................... 19 
Environmental and Social Category .............................................................................................. 23 
5.  Climate Risk Category ................................................................................................................... 23 
6.  Recommendations for Project Design and Implementation ........................................................ 23 
7. 
Further Studies Needed ................................................................................................................ 27 
8.  Monitoring and Evaluation ........................................................................................................... 27 
9.  References .................................................................................................................................... 28 
Annex 5.1: Climate Vulnerability Assessment Framework ................................................................... 30 
Annex 5.2: Climate Risk Analysis ........................................................................................................... 31 
Annex 5.3: Alignment with National Strategies .................................................................................... 42 
Annex 5.4: Environmental and Social Management Plan ..................................................................... 44 
Annex 5.5: Guiding Questions for Environmental, Social and Climate Risk Screening ......................... 50 
1. Introduction 
IFAD undertook a concept note mission in March 2019 and a project design mission in 
June 2019 for the Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt 
(STAR) project. In Cairo, the mission met with the core stakeholders in the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR), Ministry of Investments and International 
Cooperation (MIIC), Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI), Egyptian 
Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA), Ministry of Supply and Internal Trade, and other 
key government agencies as well as development partners. Extensive field visits were 
undertaken to the three governorates of Minya, Asyut and Sohag where the mission met 
farmers involved with IFAD financed projects (OFIDO and PRIME) as well as those 
supported by other donors. 
The objective of the Review Note of the Social Environment and Climate Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP) is for the project to take into account social, environmental and 
climate change issues. The Review Note summarizes the development context, looks 
how the project might impact it with regards to IFAD’s mainstreaming themes (gender, 
youth, nutrition, indigenous peoples, climate and environment) and makes specific 
recommendations how the project can mitigate risks and better include social and 
environmental concerns. 
2. Situational Analysis and Potential Project Impacts 
A. Socio-economic and Poverty Assessment 
i.  Overall poverty situation 
Poverty: Poverty in Egypt, as measured in monetary terms through the National 
Poverty Line, has been increasing over the past 15 years, from around 16.7 percent (or 
9.9 million people) in 1996 to 21.6 percent in 2009 and 25.2 percent (21 million) in 
2011. This suggests that economic growth, which was steady over the same period, has 
not resulted in an improvement in the lives of Egyptians. Poverty and food insecurity 
have risen by 20% between 2009 and 2015, with 27. 8 percent of Egyptians (26 Million) 
living below the poverty line (CAPMAS).1 Disparities in poverty follow geographic and 
gender lines: Rural Upper Egypt and Frontier Governorates experience higher levels of 
poverty than other areas, with women and children facing multi-dimensional poverty. 
When compared to urban areas in Egypt, the poverty rate in rural areas is 37 percent 
higher. The poverty rate is highest in Upper Egypt and specifically rural Upper Egypt 
(51.5 percent of population against the national average of 27.8 percent). Poverty in 
Upper Egypt is mainly structural, driven by lack of adequate public infrastructure, private 
capital accumulation, and low investment in human capital. Women are subject more 
1 The official poverty measure is based on a household-specific poverty line that takes into account two key 
things: (1) the household composition and thus the household- specific caloric requirements; and (2) the 
regional variation in cost/calorie and non-food allowance. This methodology leads to several thousand poverty 
lines. In 2015, the average poverty line in Egypt was equivalent to 5,787 EGP per capita per year (roughly $4 
per person per day 2011 PPP). According to World Bank data, population below the international Poverty line 
(2015) set at 1,3 Million (US$1.90 PPP) while the population below the lower middle-Income poverty line 
(US$3.20 PPP) at 16% of the total population (16 Million people) and 61.9% (58 Million) upper Middle-Income 
Poverty (US$5.50 PPP). 
than men to experience multi-dimensional poverty, with women head of households 
resulting as the most vulnerable (11 percent of rural households are women-headed).2 
The incidence of poverty is also widely variable across governorates, the prevalence of 
income poverty is critically high in Asyut (66 percent), Sohag (65.8 percent) and Minya 
(56.7 percent) in Upper Egypt 3. 
ii.  Gender 
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: Egypt scored 0.449 on the UNDP’s 
2017 Gender Inequality Index and ranking it 101 out of 160 countries in the 2017 index. 
In Egypt, 14.9 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women, and 58.2 percent of 
adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 70.7 
percent of their male counterparts. For every 100,000 live births, 33 women die from 
pregnancy related causes; and the adolescent birth rate is 50.0 births per 1,000 women 
of ages 15-19. Female participation in the labour market is 22.2 percent compared to 
73.7 for men4. According to the Global Gender Gap Report 2018, Egypt ranked 135 out 
of 149 countries (score 0.614).5 
Women access to labour market: Gender differentials in the level of labour 
participation and unemployment are clearly noticed. Labor force in Egypt was estimated 
at 28.9 million in 2016, with women representing 24.2 percent of the total labor force.  
Labor force residing in rural areas is higher than that in urban areas (16.6 million and 
12.3 million, respectively).   According to the Egypt Demographic and Health Survey 
(EHDS 2014), the sector where women were employed in Rural Upper Egypt is: 
Professional and technical 37.3%; clerical 5.4%, service 20.5%, skilled manual 7.2%, 
unskilled manual 0.6 %and Agriculture 26%. Overall unemployment stands at 12 
percent, but is particularly higher among women at 23.1 percent. Male unemployment 
was only 8.2 percent while female unemployment was about three times that level 
(23.1%).6 
Regional disparities in women’s illiteracy, age at marriage, unemployment, fertility and 
health still persist, with Upper Egypt lagging behind.  Thee most recent CAPMAS labor 
survey (2016) and Survey of Young People in Egypt (SYPE)7 point to the persistently low 
female labor participation rates due to multiple factors including social norms and values, 
burdens of marital responsibilities, lack of childcare facilities, poor transportation, sexual 
harassment and a mismatch between labor market demand and the outputs of the 
education system. Unemployment rate for women by Governorates targeted by STAR 
show the following percentage: Minya 24%, Asyut 41% and Sohag 37%. 
Rural women access to education: According to the 2017 census (CAPMAS), 30.8 
percent of Egyptian females over ten years of age (10.6 million females) are illiterate 
compared to 18.5 of men. This percentage is higher in rural areas (38.8 percent) and 
even higher in Upper Egypt where 82 percent of men have ever attended school, 
compared with 66 percent of women. Educational attainment is associated with wealth 
2 CAPMAS, Income expenditure and Consumption Survey, 2015 
3 UNFPA, Localizing the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals on Governorate Level (2018) based on 
EHDS 2014. 
4 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2017 
5 WEF, The global gender Gap report, 2018 
6 CAPMAS, Egypt Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS), 2014 
7 Population Council, Panel survey of young people in Egypt (SYPE) Generating Evidence for Policy, Programs, 
and Research, 2014 
index, with the largest differentials between males and females observed in the lowest 
two wealth quintiles. The details percentage in the target area show that in women 
literacy rate is less than 50 percent having Minya with 45 percent, followed by Assuyt 41 
percent and Sohag 41 percent. 
Women in the agriculture sector: Women have always played a critical role in 
Egyptian agriculture, but their contribution has remained invisible. At household level 
men and women have different roles and responsibilities on farm: While men carry out 
the land preparation, planting, weeding, irrigation, and pest control, women are mostly 
engaged in animal husbandry (95% in Upper Egypt), fattening small ruminants, and 
generate additional income from milk, cheese, butter, eggs and poultry. The products 
are usually used for consumption with a minimal amount sold in the village market. In 
upper Egypt the differences are marked by limited mobility of women, performing their 
activities in the homestead. When women performed agriculture and farming-related 
activities on the land (very rare in rural Upper Egypt but more common in Lower rural 
Egypt) it is mostly on family owned land as unpaid labour. Women are mostly engaged 
in post production, forming the majority (75 per cent) of the work force involved in 
harvesting, handling, sorting and packing processes within the post-harvest activities.   
According to EDHS 2014, overall women engaged in agriculture sector account for a total 
of 16 percent of which 10 percent are women head of households. in Rural Upper Egypt 
they account for 26 percent and majority of them have no education (48 percent) or 
some primary (38 percent). Furthermore, 63 percent belong to the lowest wealth quintile 
and 28 percent to the second lowest. Data reveal that 55 percent women farmers did not 
received any payment for the agriculture labour, against 34% percent paid in cash and 7 
percent paid in cash and in kind. Data report that 53.5 were employed by family 
members, 33.8 by non family members and only 12.7 were self-employed in agriculture. 
Women working all year in agriculture account for 56 percent, seasonal 38 percent and 
only 5.9 percent provide occasional labour. Only 3.9 percent of women own land.  
Digital Divide: Data from CAMPAS 2016, show that reducing the digital divide is 
occurring for both sexes in urban and in rural area.  Digital literacy is higher among 
males in urban and rural areas; however, bridging the gap is faster in urban areas. The 
gap in using computers in urban areas is 34 percent among females compared to 45 
percent male. The pace is slower in rural areas where the gap is 37% women and 45 % 
men. The gap in digital literacy is non-existent among among youth below 25 years of 
age but is larger with regard to married women (age 15-49) with only 14% surveyed 
having used computer, 8% having used internet and 9% social media.  
Women access to finance: Women’s access to finance is very limited in Egypt. Women 
account for only 10 to 25 percent of bank borrowers, and the majority of them are 
microfinance clients. In fact, only 20 percent of women entrepreneurs rely on 
commercial banks for credit.  On the financial inclusion front, the latest FINDEX (2017) 
revealed that inequality remains an obstacle and women are disproportionately excluded 
from the formal financial system, although there is considerable room for growth: formal 
account ownership among women has more than tripled between 2011 and 2017 (from 7 to 27 
percent). However, it is stil
environment holds huge potential for women’s financial inclusion in Egypt. Egypt’s 
National Women
Empowerment Strategy and its accompanying pillar on Women’s 
l below the rate among men
percent in 2017
 The current 
 )39 
 .(
s’
Economic 
financial services, as an important objective8.  
Empowerment list wo
’men
s access to economic resources, through increased access to 
iii.  Youth 
Youth: Egypt is the most populous Arab country, with an estimated population of 98.4 
million (2018, World Bank). The population is currently growing at 2.0% per year 
(2018), producing a youth bulge with attendant problems such as a rapidly intensifying 
need for education, jobs, housing, health care services and so on. The percentage of 
youth (18-29 years) out of total population is calculated at 21% (CAPMAS,2015) 
corresponding t0 21.7 million people. 
Youth Unemployment: The unemployment rate for the young is currently 15.7 per 
cent – 23.5 per cent for young men and 50.59 per cent for young women according to 
ILO Report Labour Market Transitions of Young Women and Men in Egypt (2014). This 
statistic refers to the proportion of unemployed youth aged 15-29 to those in the 
workforce (both employed and unemployed) from the same age group. First, 
unemployed youth are primarily from the educated.  Almost one-half of unemployed 
young people have completed university-level education or above (44.5 per cent of the 
unemployed). The second largest group of unemployed are technical vocational 
education and training (TVET) graduates (38.4 of the unemployed). The youth 
unemployment rate increases with each additional level of educational attainment; 
tertiary-level graduates have the highest rate at 34.0 per cent, compared to only 2.4 per 
cent among youth with less than primary-level education. 
Youth challenges for employment and self-employment opportunities: There are 
a number of commonly identified challenges facing men and women youth in entering 
the labor market and contributing to increasing the unemployment rate. First, (i) the 
limited skill base of unemployed youth can be related to problems in the education 
systems and its inability to prepare its graduates with the relevant skills needed in the 
labor market or early school drop-out.   Access to soft and portable skills, such as the 
ability to communicate effectively, have been identified as a key challenge to these new 
entrants to the labor market.  Second, (ii) the limited access to labor market information 
about employment opportunities, particularly for youth in poor and remote areas is also 
another key challenge.  Young educated youth in remote rural areas face this access to 
information problem and are hence unable to apply to available vacancies elsewhere.  
Third, (iii) the limited access to finance for entrepreneurial support is a key challenge 
and inhibits the entrepreneurship potentials for young people. Fourth, (iv) the lack of 
employment opportunities challenge is also more prevalent in remote and poor areas, 
particularly for educated rural youth.  This group is faced with contracting employment 
opportunities in agriculture and the mismatch of their education to their rural settings. 
iv.  Nutrition 
Nutrition: According to the 2018 Global Hunger Index, Egypt suffers from a moderate 
level of hunger, ranking 61 of 119 countries. Affordability, food quality and food safety 
remain the most pressing challenges as Egypt continues to rely on global markets for 
more than half of its staples.  
8 Integrating gender and Women financial inclusion into the central bank of Egypt (CBE) framework, 2018 
Malnutrition is a growing public health concern, with the double burden of undernutrition, 
including high rates of stunting and micronutrient deficiencies, and overweight and 
obesity. Because of poor hygiene education and lack of positive food consumption 
awareness, the burden of malnutrition among children aged between 6 months and 2 
years, adolescents and women of reproductive age continues to increase. 
According to the Nutrition Agenda for Action (2017)9 based on national statistics data 
(EDHS 2014) chronic undernutrition, “stunting”, for children under five remains at 21%. 
Trends in child wasting (weight-for-height) and underweight (weight-for-age), between 
2000 and 2014, have shown an increase from three to eight percent and from four to six 
percent, respectively. The level of severe acute undernutrition (severe wasting) stands 
at 3.8 percent. Looking at residential categories, the proportion underweight was higher 
in Upper Egypt with stunted children, at  39 percent, compared with a national average.  
Anaemia in women of child-bearing age (15-49 years) is high at 25 percent; overweight 
in children is 15 percent (2014); exclusive breast feeding(EBF) is rapidly declining 
instead of improving, where EBF rates at 4-5 months is only 13 percent; acute 
malnutrition is increasing and stands at 8 percent (2014) with half of those children 
classified as severe acute malnutrition. Anaemia in children 6-59 months is 27 percent 
with significant variations among regions: higher in rural relative to urban areas (29 and 
23 percent respectively), peaking among children in the three Frontier Governorates 
(Matrouh, Red Sea, New Valley) and in rural Upper Egypt (45 and 30 percent, 
respectively). 
There is a strong correlation between poverty and poor dietary diversity, with 56.2 
percent of the population in rural Upper Egypt, Egypt’s poorest region, having a poor 
dietary diversity. Rising poverty has resulted in increasing dependence on cheaper, 
calorie-dense foods, including subsidized commodities, all of which have a correlation 
with obesity. Compounded by high food prices, changing lifestyles, and poor nutritional 
awareness, obesity in Egypt is on the rise, with an estimated 48 percent of rural women 
older than 15 being obese (55 percent in the highest quintile and 44 percent women 
belonging to the lowest quintile).  
B.  Environment and Climate Context, Trends and Implications 
i.  Environmental assessment 
Water. The Nile River – which is the longest river in the world at 6,741 km – is the main 
source of water providing 72.7% of Egypt's total 64.4 billion m3 water resources. Egypt's 
share of the Nile is currently 55.5 billion m3 governed by several colonial and post-
colonial conventions and treaties (Ministry of Environment, 2017).  
The rest of Egypt's water resources for the year 2014-2015 are from recycling 
agricultural wastewater drainage (15.51%), groundwater (9.03%), wastewater 
treatment (1.7%) and rainfall (1.18%). With 64.4 billion m3, Egypt suffers from water 
scarcity and is 13.4 billion m3 short from meeting its current water demands that add up 
to 77.8 billion m3 (Ministry of Environment, 2017). This gap is- of course- being widened 
by the country's increase in population which is currently at a high rate. Agriculture is 
9 UNICEF, Nutrition Agenda for Action, 2017 
the top sector in terms of water demand with 63.25 billion m3 followed by household 
usage with 10.55 billion m3 and finally industrial usage with 1.5 billion m3. This in 
addition to 2.5 billion m3 that are lost in evaporation (Ministry of Environment, 2017).  
The Nile river faces pollution challenges mainly due to waste disposal coming from 
industrial, agricultural and sanitation drainage that amount to 18.992 billion m3/year . 
Agriculture drainage networks have the biggest share with 72 drains disposing water into 
the Nile containing large amounts of agrochemicals in addition to the direct waste 
coming from rural villages with no sanitation services. However, the levels of Dissolved 
Oxygen (DO), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) and Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 
for 2016 all came within safe limits for the project target governorates except for the 
COD in Minya where it was higher than the 10 ppm threshold (Ministry of Environment, 
2017).  
The issue of water salinity also remains a concern for Egypt. Drainage return flows to the 
Nile increase the salinity of the water from 250 ppm (mg/l) at Aswan to 2,700 ppm at 
the delta barrages (Ministry of Environment, 2016), mostly as a result of the use of 
chemical fertilizers that increase salinity. Although Total Dissolved Salts (TDS) for Nile 
water is within normal ranges for the three target governorates (CAPMAS, 2018a), 
meetings with farmers in some areas in Asyut and Sohag confirmed that groundwater 
has showed high level of salinity in recent years. This consequently increased soil salinity 
and required more use of surface water to clean the soil. 
Land. Egypt's total cultivated land was 9.1 million feddans in 2016 (CAPMAS, 2018b). 
Although since 2001 the area of old lands dropped from 6.40 to 6.15 million feddans, the 
new lands reclaimed almost doubled from 1.54 to 2.95 million feddans to increase the 
total agricultural land area (CAPMAS, 2018b). However, the per capita share of 
agricultural land has declined from 0.13 feddan/capita in 1995 to 0.1 feddan/capita in 
2015 due to the increase in population (Ministry of Environment, 2017). According to the 
population census of 2017, this figure should be around 0.9 for 2018. Cultivated lands in 
Upper Egypt are currently at 1.33 million feddans (Ministry of Environment, 2017) 
representing around 14.6% of the total agricultural land in Egypt. 
One of the main challenges facing agricultural land resources in Egypt is encroachment 
for urban development and infrastructure. In 2017, Egypt has already lost 0.4 million 
feddans of its agricultural land since 1983. Around 45% of this area has been lost due to 
illegal violations on land, while the rest was for public services and legal urban 
expansion. The rate of agricultural land loss due to violations has increased more than 4 
times after the 2011 revolution to reach 13,100 feddans/year (Ministry of Environment, 
2017). 
Another challenge for land resources is soil salinity and pollution. Studies show that 
around 25-30% of Egyptian soil suffer from high salinity (Ministry of Environment, 
2017). The increase in temperature that causes groundwater containing high levels of 
fertilizers and pesticides coupled with irrigation with agriculture drainage water increase 
the soil salinity (Ministry of Environment, 2017). These factors coincide with the reasons 
brought up by farmers and agriculture directorate experts in some parts of Asyut and 
Sohag suffering from soil salinity. However, soil salinity is much more evident in the Nile 
Delta where seawater intrusion is a third factor that contributes to this problem. Soil 
pollution is mainly attributed to excessive use of fertilizers, pesticides and the low quality 
of drainage water. 
In 2016, organic agriculture in Egypt represented 2.8% of total agricultural land 
compared to 0.1% in 2000. Minya and Sohag are among the top 10 ranked governorates 
with organic agriculture representing 3.8% and 3% of total agricultural land respectively. 
Only 1.3% of Asyut's agricultural land is organic (CIHEAM-IAMM, 2019). Although there 
is a big potential for promoting organic agriculture in upper Egypt, a number of 
challenges remain. Water scarcity, weak extension services, land fragmentation as well 
as the high cost of initial investment are among the main challenges facing farmers who 
are willing to move towards organic agriculture (CIHEAM-IAMM, 2019).   
Air Pollution. Air quality is a major concern in Egypt especially in urban areas and areas 
near industrial zones. While levels of Sulphur dioxide and Lead are within normal range 
across the country, the PM10 levels are much higher than the 70 microgram/m3 quality 
threshold adopted by the Ministry of Health, with 329, 304 and 299 microgram/m3  in 
Minya, Asyut and Sohag respectively. Same goes for the Total Suspended Particles (TSP) 
where levels are much higher than the 90 microgram/m3 quality threshold adopted by 
the Ministry of Health with 667, 397 and 556 microgram/m3 in Minya, Asyut and Sohag 
respectively (CAPMAS, 2018a). 
Waste. Egypt has to face a number of challenges in waste management. The increasing 
population, lack of society's awareness, changes in production and consumption patterns 
and lack of financial and institutional capacities are all obstacles crippling the Ministry of 
Environment's efforts towards sound waste management. Currently, only 12% of Egypt's 
solid waste is being recycled (Ministry of Environment, 2017). However, the percentage 
might be actually higher due to informal recycling that is not accounted for in official 
statistics.  
It is worth mentioning that agricultural waste has the biggest waste share with 31 million 
tonnes/year representing 34.2% in the total waste produced in Egypt. The second 
biggest share is the waste produced from cleaning canals and drainage systems with 25 
million tonnes/year representing 27.5%. Solid municipal waste is third with 21 million 
tonnes/year representing 23.1% (Ministry of Environment, 2017). 
At the governorate level, Cairo produces the highest amount of solid municipal waste 
with 5.48 million tonnes/year representing one quarter of the country's total solid 
municipal waste produced. Minya, Asyut and Sohag produce 0.53, 0.26 and 0.41 million 
tonnes/year representing 2.4%, 1.2% and 1.9% respectively (Ministry of Environment, 
2017).  
ii.  Climate trends and impacts 
Historical Data Analysis 
Generally, there has been an increase in annual temperature in Egypt of 2.1°C with most 
of the increase- 3.6°C- taking place in winter and increase of 1.8°C, 1.9°C and 1.1°C for 
spring, fall and summer respectively. Extreme temperature indices show an increase in 
both daily maximum and minimum temperature. Since 1990, all the years have been 
warmer than the average (Ministry of Environment, 2016). Precipitation has declined by 
an average of 7% between 1975 and 2005 (Ministry of Environment, 2016). 
Analysis of historical climate data shows that for the 1901-2017 period average 
maximum temperature has increased between May and October by 0.95%10, 1% and 
0.93% for Asyut, Minya and Sohag respectively. While for the same period of time, 
average maximum temperature between November and April has declined by 0.64%, 
0.61% and 0.72% for Asyut, Minya and Sohag respectively. The three governorates 
show a similar trend for the period 1901-2017 with regards to monthly mean 
temperature. There has been an increase in the monthly mean temperature between 
March and August. On the other hand, there has been a decrease in the monthly mean 
temperature between September and November; and January and February. However, 
there has been an increase in the trend of the monthly mean temperature during 
December. Detailed analysis is in Annex 5.2. 
Although there might be variance across the different data sources, however 
temperature increase in summer is common among all of them. This coincides with the 
farmer's own observations with regards to heat and the subsequent irrigation demand 
for their crops.  
In terms of heat waves, analysis of historical data shows that the frequency of heat 
waves has increased during over the past 50 years while it also suggests that the length 
of the heat waves have also increased over the past 20 years. Detailed analysis is in 
Annex 5.2. 
Climate Trends and Projections 
The impact on precipitation is not significant in the project areas since the volume of 
rainfall is already negligible (Minya receives 9.15 mm/year, Asyut receives 6 mm/year 
and Sohag receives 3.25 mm/year11). However, there will be a significant change in 
temperature.  
Annex 5.2 shows an analysis of climate projections for the periods 2020-2039 and 2080-
2099 compared to 1986-2005 under the IPCC's 4.5 RCP and 8.5 RCP scenarios. Data is 
derived from World Bank's Climate Change Portal using the "ensemble" model.  
Under the RCP 4.5 scenario, projections show that the monthly temperature will increase 
across the country and the median increase is almost doubled for every month as we go 
from the 2020-2039 period to the 2080-2099 period. The highest increase will be in 
August reaching around 3°C by 2080-2099. While for the RCP 8.5 scenario, the increase 
will be much higher with no less than 1°C for 2020-2039. On the longer term, the 
increase will surpass 4°C reaching a maximum median of 6°C in August. The projections' 
trend for the three target governorates shows almost no variance compared to the 
overall trend and to each other. 
This coincides with the historical data analysis that shows the increasing trend in the 
three governorates between May and October since 1901. However, it shows that- unlike 
the historical trend- temperature will also increase between November and April but at a 
lower rate. 
10 This percentage represents the trend slope. The percentage increase represents the average rate of increase 
per year in degrees Celsius. For example, 0.95% slope increase is equal to an 0.0095°C/year average rate of 
increase.  
11 Derived from historical data using CoMon tool  
The frequency of occurrence of heat waves is most likely to increase in the future. Under 
the RCP 4.5 scenario, the annual probability of heat waves for Egypt increases with time 
starting with a median value of 0.03 for the 2020-2039 period until it reaches 0.12 for 
the 2080-2099 period. The probability almost doubles with the RCP 8.5 scenario starting 
with a median value of 0.05 for the 2020-2039 period until it reaches around 0.27 for 
the 2080-2099 period. This index shows the daily probability of observing a heat wave, 
which is a 3 or more-day sequence where the daily temperature is above the long-term 
95th percentile of daily mean temperature. Although this model uses a different definition 
– adopted by the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal- for heat waves than the 
WMO's adopted for the historical analysis, it still shows the future trend in probability of 
number of hot days. However, it still does not show the exact frequency or intensity of 
such heat waves. 
Findings of the consultation meetings with farmers who already observed this trend 
confirm that heat waves have become more frequent and tend to occur for longer days.   
Impacts on Water Resources 
Water demand. The projected increase in temperature induced by climate change will 
increase water demands for agriculture and municipal use (Ministry of Water Resources 
and Irrigation, 2013). This is mainly due to the increase in the rate of evaporation 
(Ministry of Environment, 2016). Table 1 below shows the average impact of climate 
change on water demand until the year 210012 
Table 1 Projected averaged direct & indirect impacts of climate change on water demands (Ministry of Water Resources 
and Irrigation, 2013) 
Nile flow. Regarding future impacts of climate change on the Nile flows, there is a large 
variation between the general circulation models (GCMs) about whether the Blue Nile- 
that contributes more than 75% of the Nile flows- will get wetter or drier. Around two 
thirds of the GCMs project an increase in precipitation in East Africa, while the rest 
expect reduced precipitation (Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, 2013). Table 2 
below shows the variation between the different models used for the Blue Nile. 
12 ETo = Evapotranspiration 
Table 2 Model-simulated flow of the Blue Nile at Diem (Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, 2013) 
On the other hand, other sources show a change of between -19% to +29% for the Blue 
Nile, -8% to +10% for the White Nile and -13% to +36% for the Main Nile. 
These model variations add to the existing uncertainties to the expectations for Egypt's 
share in Nile water. However, such uncertainty should not stop policymakers from re-
evaluating the current water policies. Since the associated potential impacts would be 
severe and that any decrease in the total supply of water, coupled with an expected 
increase in consumption due to continuing high population growth rates and rising 
incomes and living standards, would have drastic impacts, therefore adaptation in the 
water sector becomes a top priority (Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, 2013). 
Table 3 below shows a summary of the water budget trends in the drying and wetting 
scenarios.  
Table 3 Summary of assumptions used in developing the water budget trends (Ministry of Water Resources and 
Irrigation, 2013) 
More importantly, inter-annual variability of total Nile flow could increase by 50% in the 
twenty-first century compared to the twentieth century (Siam et al., 2017). This will be 
mainly due to the increase in the intensity and duration of El Niño and La Niña cycle, 
which are strongly connected to annual rainfall variations in the Ethiopian highlands and 
adjacent eastern Nile basins. As a result, there will be fewer normal flow years with flows 
between 70 and 100 km3 per year, many more extreme years with flows greater than 
100 and more years of drought (Siam et al., 2017).  
Meetings with government stakeholders and researchers have confirmed the 
uncertainties regarding the Nile flow in the future. The future inter-annual variation has 
been also highlighted as a challenge given the current irrigation practices widely used.. 
Although Egypt is less vulnerable in terms of Nile flow variation than Ethiopia and Sudan, 
Egypt's high dependence on the Nile makes it vulnerable to future climate change 
impacts on the river's flow (Ministry of Environment, 2016). 
Water for agricultural use. While crop water stress is identified as the other main 
factor causing reduced productivity under climate change, agriculture in Egypt is 
considered less sensitive to climate variability- compared to other countries in the 
region- due to its reliance on irrigated agriculture systems rather than rain-fed 
agriculture for some 95 % of the total cultivated area (Ministry of Water Resources and 
Irrigation, 2013). However, inter-annual variability of Nile flow can have major impact on 
agriculture in Egypt as discussed in the above section. Without adaptation policies to 
protect farmers from such variability on the long term, the agriculture sector will suffer 
greatly from water scarcity. 
Impacts on the Agriculture Sector 
The projected rise in temperature and change of its seasonal pattern would lead to 
decreasing the productivity of some crops and livestock, a negative impact on marginal 
agricultural areas and a potential increase in desertification rates (Ministry of 
Environment, 2016). In addition, extreme weather events such as heat waves are 
projected to occur more frequently and/or last for longer periods of time (Ministry of 
Water Resources and Irrigation, 2013). During meetings with ministry of agriculture's 
technical officials and farmers in the three governorates, climate change and frequent 
heat waves have been underlined as one of the key challenges facing agriculture in their 
respective governorates.  
Agricultural Production. Such impact on the agriculture sector would then have a 
negative impact on the country's food security. Different estimates predict a decline 
between 11% and 51% in national food production due to climate change. Strategic 
crops such as wheat and maize would suffer a decline of 11-12% and 40-47% 
respectively under a 1.5°C increase scenario. The price of these crops will also most 
likely increase accordingly (Ministry of Environment, 2016). During consultations with 
farmers in the 3 governorates, it has been highlighted that the increasingly frequent 
heat waves were the biggest threat to their crops and have already caused crop losses in 
some areas. It is worth mentioning that upper Egypt were the most vulnerable areas to 
heat waves with major impact on wheat in winter (-35%) and maize (-15.1%) in 
summer during heat waves recorded in winter 2010 and summer 2015 (Saleh et al., 
2017). Table 4 below shows the expected impact of climate change on the productivity 
of the major crops in Egypt. 
Table 4 Change in major crop production due to climate change (Ministry of Environment, 2016) 
Annex 5.2 shows an analysis for change in crop yields using IFAD's Climate Adaptation in 
Rural Development (CARD) tool. It shows a lower change in yield for maize and soy 
beans of -13.56% and -12.72% by 2039 in the most pessimistic scenario compared to -
40% and -28% in the Third National Communication to the UNFCCC (TNC). However, 
CARD shows even higher change in wheat yield reaching -34.65% by 2039 compared to 
a maximum of -31% reported in the TNC. Although it is difficult to compare both models 
since CARD uses a time frame and the TNC uses temperature increase scenarios, both 
models agree that there will be a decline in Egypt's most strategic crops due to climate 
change.  
Plant Pests and Diseases. There is clear scientific evidence that climate change is 
already altering the distribution, incidence and intensity of plant pests and diseases. 
Climate change creates new ecological niches which potentially allow plant pests and 
diseases spread to new geographical areas. Severe epidemics of tomato late blight 
(Phytophthorainfestans) emerged in the last few years. In practice, an epidemic onset is 
expected to lead to 2-4 additional sprays to be applied at the coming decades of the 
2025-2100 period. Severities of current cultivars of wheat to leaf rust caused by 
Pucciniatriticina and stripe rust disease caused by Pucciniastriiformis increase with 
increasing temperature, which is projected under climate change conditions. 
Subsequently, this will result in higher costs related to inspection, treatment and 
compliance with the obligations of the importing trading partners in addition to more 
frequent trade disputes under World Trade Organisation (WTO) that are costly to resolve 
(Ministry of Environment, 2016). 
Livestock. Due to increase in temperature, the lack of ability of animals to dissipate the 
heat determines that animals suffer heat stress during, at least, part of the year. Heat 
stress has a variety of detrimental effects on livestock, with significant effects on milk 
production and reproduction in dairy cows. Extreme events, such as heat waves, may 
particularly affect beef and dairy cattle. However, higher minimum temperatures might 
reduce the frequency and severity of cold-stress events conditions that foster high lamb 
mortality. On the other hand, climate change can also indirectly affect animal 
performance due to alterations in the quantity and quality of their feed resources 
(Ministry of Environment, 2016). During consultations with women in field schools, they 
have pointed out that the increased temperature has caused increased the spread of 
diseases among animals in a noticeable manner.  
Aquaculture. Climate change is expected to increase sea temperature causing fish 
distribution to shift northwards and to move to deeper water. Aquaculture may suffer 
from water shortages due to the expected scarcity in freshwater supply, and increased 
temperatures might also affect the production of some fish species.  
iii.  Climate change mitigation 
The agriculture sector in Egypt is the third biggest sector in terms of Greenhouse Gas 
(GHG) emissions – after energy and industrial sectors- with a contribution of 39,446 Gg. 
According to 2005 GHG inventory data, agricultural soil is the main source of GHGs 
emissions from agriculture sector by a contribution of 50.75% followed by enteric 
fermentation with 22.8% and rice cultivation with 11.73%. Manure management and 
field burning of agricultural residue contribute the rest with 10.18% and 4.43% 
respectively (Ministry of Environment, 2016). However, it is worth mentioning though 
that the government has widely restricted the cultivation of rice since 2018.  
The project is mainly focused on adaptation measures. However, there are opportunities 
for mitigation co-benefits mainly through promoting sustainable agriculture, soil 
conservation and organic farming in addition to replacing diesel pumps with electrical 
(including solar) pumps in some target areas.  
The project does not include activities that would have significant impact on greenhouse 
gas emissions in the target areas. 
C.  Poverty and Targeting Profiles  
Smallholder farmers in Egypt: The traditional Egyptian farming system is based on a 
mixed and integrated crop-livestock system. According to a FAO study, using data from 
the 2009–10 agricultural census13, the population among farming families is nearly 28.4 
million, which is 38 percent of Egypt’s total population and two-thirds of the rural 
population. Families of holding areas less than one feddan are the largest group, 
comprising about 37.7 percent of the agricultural population. The population within the 
SSF category (<3 feddans) is about 69 percent of the total family farming population, 
13 FAO, Study on small scale family farming in Near East and North Africa Region, focus country on Egypt, 2017 
landless represent 16.5 percent of the total family farming population in 2010. The 
remaining landholders (with three feddans or more) represent only 14.5 percent of the 
total agricultural population in Egypt.  
In general, smallholders and their smallholdings are the primary producers of the main 
food and fodder crops for domestic consumption. With the prevailing agricultural system 
in Egypt, the income generated from farms of less than three feddans (from different 
farming activities and utilizing family labour) does not meet the poverty line of US$1.25 
per day per capita (the United Nations poverty line). Therefore, holders of less than 
three feddans are considered by many experts to be the most vulnerable category of 
farmers in Egypt. 
Key concerns for smallholder farmers: (i) marketing of produce (ii) lack of storage 
facilities (iii) lack of post-harvesting equipment (iv) lack of access to water (v) lack of 
access to affordable credit due to collateral requirements and high rates of interest (vi) 
lack of advice on market trends and crop diversification.  Key concern for women 
farmers are: (i) limited mobility due to many factors, including gender biases (ii) lack of 
access to skill development training related to entrepreneurial opportunities and improve 
production on the commodities the are engaged; (iii) access to finance and related 
education (iv) lack of market information for selling their products (v) low access to 
nutritious food and poor dietary diversity. Key concern for rural youth: (i) lack of 
entrepreneurial opportunities and access to finance as well as (ii) lack proper on the job 
training education in the agriculture sector to develop professional service provision.  
STAR target groups, can be described mainly on the basis of poverty level14,  land 
ownership and access to market: (i) Very poor households living below the poverty line, 
with limited agriculture productive assets, considered as landless and near landless (less 
than 0.5) and ranking among the poorest; (ii) poor smallholder subsistence households 
living below the poverty line, farming on very limited land holding (below 1 feddan) and 
experiencing very limited access to market and income generation due to low surplus; 
(iii) market-oriented smallholder households with small land holding size (1-3 feddans) 
with access to market but limited return due to low prices, high production and 
transaction costs, and low bargaining power. They are slightly above the poverty line but 
considered as vulnerable and transitory poor due to the risks to slide back into poverty; 
(v) youth (19-35) from the targeted communities (skilled, graduated as well as 
unskilled) with low opportunities of employment and self-employment in general and 
specifically in agriculture (either as farming as a business or skilled/unskilled labors) and 
allied sector (agro-entrepreneurship, service provision, extension). The programme will 
consider direct targeted interventions for specific categories (direct targeting). 
Another target group that the project will consider are transformation drivers, better off 
households, including: medium and large holder farmers (land average size above 3 
feddans) traders, processors, aggregators and other actors along the value chains; 
supplier, traders, entrepreneurs and other private sector actors that the project will 
engage with to catalyse the expected transformation.  
14 The poverty line used is EGP 482 per capita per month, which is defined by the 2015 national poverty line. According to this line, the 
poorest 40 percent of households are defined as poor. In the absence of an official updated poverty line, this is a working definition of 
poverty that seems reasonable and coincides conveniently with the targeting goal of the program. 
Landless, near landless and very poor households, including women headed 
households: Those households will comprise 20% of the total target beneficiaries (or 
32,000 HHs). They are worse-off households of landless and near landless with less than 
0.5 feddan and unable to make their living out of poverty. Typically, those households 
are composed of high number of members/dependants with limited productive capacity, 
unable to fulfil households’ basic needs.  Within this category households’ livelihood is 
mainly focused on animal husbandry (small ruminants, poultry) and low income off-farm 
activities. The project, in line with principles of leave no one behind and putting 
emphasis on a strong social inclusion strategy, will include 32,000 households from this 
category, focusing on women which are expected to be more than 70% beneficiaries 
from this category, while 30% will be youth.  
Poor subsistence smallholders’ households (less than 1 feddan): The project will 
target 80,000 poor subsistence smallholder households (corresponding to 50% total 
direct beneficiaries). Farmers in this category practice subsistence agriculture (0.5 -1 
feddan), with low surplus for selling and low income due to low prices. Project services 
will be equally provided to men and women (minimum 30% women) in line with the 
activities/responsibilities they are engaged in the farming sector: i.e crop production 
mostly dominated by adult men, versus animal husbandry (small ruminants, poultry and 
ducks) and dairy activities for women. They process cheese and other products for 
household use and occasional informal sales. Proceeds from agricultural activities make 
the major contribution to the viability of their livelihood. To strengthen household 
resilience, the project will consider specific activities for men (land consolidation and 
improved agriculture practices, among others) and also for women (on farm as well as 
off farm) along the value chains (post processing-added value).  
Market oriented smallholders’ households (1-3 feddan): The project will target 
40,000 market-oriented smallholder households (corresponding to 25% of the total 
direct beneficiaries).  Farmers in this category are considered borderline poor as they are 
above the poverty line but at risk to slide back into poverty due to stress and external 
shocks. They are men and women smallholders (and/or small-scale processors) who 
typically own 1 to 3 feddans, 1 to 2 cows and buffalos and 5 to 6 small ruminants. They 
have sufficient labour and skills as well as high production but lack affordable inputs, 
connectivity to profitable networks and markets, technical capacity, scale and bargaining 
power. They produce a range of products which are sold at a low price through formal 
and informal outlets such as neighbours, domestic markets, brokers, aggregators. 
Women in this category practice agriculture activities as described above: animal 
husbandry, small animals fattening (ruminants) and ducks rearing and dairy production 
for informal sale to complement household income.  
Better off households. These include actors at least one step higher in the agriculture 
value chain, including lead farmers (large farmers with 3 feddan and above), agro-
enterprises and processors who can serve as aggregators and models to demonstrate 
the viability of new approaches to increase rural resilience and provide potential 
development pathways for the poor, including generating employment opportunities. The 
project will engage with them as linkage for market services. Given the commercial 
nature of their involvement in the value chain, project takes into consideration of their 
influence and outreach potential to serve other producers with market linkages/services. 
They are 6% of the targeted beneficiaries, comprising a total of about 8,000 households 
including a smaller percentage of women and youth. Youth in this category correspond 
to young men and women graduated from universities (young professionals) and 
interested in agriculture from different angle: agronomy, business and market 
orientation, veterinary.  
Youth: Youth are found in the above categories (poor, transitory poor and better off). 
The higher percentage of them is from the very poor and poor categories (outlines 
above) and a smaller percentage from the better off as young professionals. Overall this 
target group includes (i) young men and women (18-35 years) who are engaged (on full 
time or part time basis) in rural activities at subsistence level ( family labour/ or 
subsistence) with an interest to further expand their activities to make it as a business, 
make use of technologies  and increase their income, and (ii) unemployed (or seasonal 
workers at minimum wage) young men and women who are not directly engaged in rural 
activities and represent beneficiaries who are interested to explore the sector, identify 
and engage in better employment and self-employment opportunities offered by the 
cluster development, especially in agri-business, service provision and allied sectors; (iii) 
young graduated interested to apply their skills in the agriculture sectors as 
professionals service providers. 
Project services and target groups: All target groups will equally benefit from 
activities under Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening marketing institutions. Institutional 
strengthening aims to empower the targeted communities through the strengthening 
and outreach of Marketing Associations (MA) in order to promote market access to both 
domestic and export markets, thereby increasing the marketing of smallholder (men and 
women) produce and profits. It is expected that farmers from all categories will be 
included in the marketing associations in existing CDAs. Activities developed under 
component 2: Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and resilience will be directed 
towards men and women producers, as they are traditionally engaged in crop production 
(men) and in animal husbandry activities (women). Majority of women, youth and 
landless will be benefiting directly from activities supported under Sub-component 1.2: 
Micro enterprises development for strengthening entrepreneurial skills, technical 
knowhow and mobilise finance to develop business ideas around agricultural services 
provision and agribusinesses, with the aim of generating income opportunities and 
employment.   
The objectives of this intervention targeting mostly landless, including women and youth 
is: (i) to ensure that trained youth and women interested in starting or expanding a 
small agri-business receive business development and financial support. This can include 
homestead production, agro-processing and agriculture allied production, such as 
handicrafts from agricultural waste; and (ii) to promote private agricultural services to 
complement public extension services, improve provision of inputs, and other 
agricultural services, such as compost making, nurseries and renting of machinery.  The 
sub-component will invest in: (i) tailored entrepreneurial training, for example Start and 
Improve Your Own Business; (ii) development of savings and credit culture, including  
financial literacy training and orientation of financial products and repayment schemes 
and assistance in preparation of feasibilities; (iii) Specific technical capacity building in 
production, processing and agricultural services and the marketing of these products; 
and (iv) applied skills and practical training through apprenticeship programs with 
established agribusiness.  Specifically targeting women, the programme will promote 
poultry and small ruminants (e.g. ducks, goats, sheep) and homestead processing and 
services. Furthermore, roof and homestead gardens will be promoted, complemented 
with nutritional awareness campaigns and food conservation.        
For youth, the programme will facilitate technical training in processing and value 
addition, in areas such as basil, tomato paste, sun dried tomatoes and pomegranate 
processing (validated through the market studies); as well as the provision of 
agricultural services (e.g. nurseries, equipment repairs, agro dealership). Training 
packages, ensuring readiness for trainees with practical technical knowledge, will be 
provided coupled with access to finance through a dedicated seed capital mechanism 
with favorable conditions. 
3. Institutional Analysis 
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation 
The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Land  Reclamation  (MALR)  is  responsible  for  formulating 
and  implementing  agricultural  sector  policies  for  promoting  and  upgrading  Egyptian 
agriculture.  It  is  in  charge  of  land  reclamation  and  agricultural,  fisheries  and  livestock 
development.  MALR  has  jurisdiction  for  providing  a  variety  of  agricultural  services  and 
regulate the activities of public and private entities involved in production and processing 
of agricultural products. The responsibilities of MALR for services and regulation are carried 
out at the Governorate level through the Governorates Directorate of Agriculture (GDA) 
and  Governorate  Directorate  of  Veterinary  Services  (GDVS),  which  are  administratively 
responsible  to  the  Governor  but  technically  responsible  to  MALR.  MALR  also  has  the 
responsibilities of overseeing irrigation and water management at farm level and on farm 
improvements.  MALR  is  the  main  implementing  entity  for  the  STAR  project.  There  are 
several institutions that are affiliated to MALR, such as the Agricultural Bank of Egypt (ABE) 
and the Agriculture Research Centre (ARC). 
Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation 
The Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) is the principal government body 
that is responsible for managing the water resources of Egypt so as to guarantee 
adequate supplies for municipal, agricultural, industrial, navigational and power 
generation use. MWRI has sole responsibility for planning and execution of regulations 
and policies as well as for the development, distribution and management of water 
resources in all the Egyptian districts. It is responsible for regulation, distribution and 
quality management of water resources of which the agricultural sector is the greatest 
recipient. MWRI authorizes water use and manages water supply, irrigation and drainage 
systems and associated pumping stations. These responsibilities are carried out through 
several departments and agencies. The development and operation and maintenance of 
water infrastructure is largely funded by the Government and carried out by MWRI. 
MWRI is also responsible for irrigation improvements from mesqa level (tertiary canals) 
and above, covering branch, main and principal canals as well as the River Nile, while 
MALR on the other hand is responsible for on-farm irrigation improvements including 
marwas (quaternary canals) and other on-farm improvements. These responsibilities are 
carried out through several departments and agencies at central and governorate level. 
Ministry of Social Solidarity 
The Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS) aims to provide social protection, integrated care 
and economic empowerment to the citizens who are in need. It alsoz seeks to develop its 
services throughout the country and calls for coordination of efforts with the private 
sector and civil society to invest in joint work for the development of citizens and 
society. Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)/ Community Development 
Associations (CDAs) are registered with the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS) and are 
governed by Law no. 84 of 2002/2004. 
Ministry of Investments and International Cooperation 
The  Ministry  of  Investment  and  International  Cooperation  (MIIC)  is  responsible  for 
integrating and harmonizing available funds to contribute to national development and for 
fostering private investments and private sector engagement through promoting a more 
conducive  environment  for  investment  and  entrepreneurship.  It  is  also  responsible  for 
mobilizing  Official  Development  Assistance  (ODA)  in  order  to  complement  the  national 
efforts  and  support  the  national  priorities  and  needs.  It  works  on  managing  and 
strengthening  Egypt’s  cooperation  with  other  countries  as  well  as  regional  and 
international  financial  institutions  to  receive  loans  and  grants  that  would  support  the 
country in its socio-economic plan objectives. The Ministry is also responsible for advising 
on  the  State's  external  borrowing  by  negotiating  terms  to  reduce  impact  on  foreign 
reserves and diversifying funding to effectively manage financial resources and follows-up 
matters of usage and repayment with the relevant counterparts benefiting from loans and 
grants. MIIC is the government representative in respect of IFAD financing. It leads the 
financing negotiations and the ratification process and it is the focal point with IFAD in all 
matters concerned with amendments to the financing agreement. 
Ministry of Youth and Sports 
The Ministry of Youth and Sports is the government entity responsible for enhancing the 
quality of life of Egyptian youth and supporting the development of their skills and abilities. 
The Ministry's mission includes: launching a national policy for youth and sport in which 
all segments of the society take part; providing decent work opportunities for the young 
people  through  small  and  medium  enterprises;  and  adopting  youth  initiatives  and 
expanding community partnership with civil society organizations. 
Ministry of Environment 
The Ministry of Environment with its executive agency, EEAA, is the government entity 
responsible for the definition of environmental and climate policies and the setting of 
environmental priorities, as well as designing, actively supporting and implementing 
initiatives within the context of sustainable development. It has the role of monitoring 
the pollution levels and setting the environmental standards that would contribute to 
improving the quality of the environment. This is carried out with a focus on the 
reduction of pollution, the conservation of the country’s natural resources and combating 
climate change. 
Supreme Committee for Climate Change 
The Supreme Committee for Climate Change has been recently established and operates 
under the Egyptian Cabinet headed by the Prime Minister. The committee is constituted 
of concerned line ministries and the Ministry of Environment has a leading role within the 
committee. The committee aims to coordinate climate action across line ministries and 
work on mainstreaming adaptation and mitigation measures in sectorial work. 
Agricultural Bank of Egypt (ABE) 
The Agricultural Bank of Egypt (ABE) is the former Principal Bank for Development and 
Agriculture Credit (PBDAC).  ABE aims to provide the necessary funding for various types 
of agricultural and rural development activities. The Bank underwent a comprehensive 
institutional reform, which is regarded as the cornerstone of achieving major institutional 
changes to the organizational structure, internal policies and operations, in efforts to 
improve the Bank's accountability, efficiency and sustainability. It is worth noting that 
PBDAC institutional challenges affected its performance throughout previous IFAD's 
projects. The poor performance was as a result of the high default rates and the absence 
of a reliable system for credit monitoring and follow-ups of overdue loans. 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency (MSMEDA) 
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency (MSMEDA) is a national 
entity that is concerned with the development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) and entrepreneurship and responsible for MSMEs projects in Egypt. The Agency 
replaced the Social Fund for Development (SFD), which was established in 1991. It aims 
at supporting the government efforts in implementing community development 
programs and labor-intensive projects, creating employment opportunities, providing a 
more enabling environment for micro and small enterprises, and promoting 
entrepreneurship, which would in turn contribute to improving the living standards of 
citizens and reducing poverty rates . In 2018, MSMEDA provided loans amounting to a 
total of 5.4 billion EGP to around 251 thousand micro and small projects. It is estimated 
that these projects provided 407 thousand job opportunities. The Agency has been 
following a geographic poverty targeting approach and has a strong network of 
implementing agencies at local levels: namely the governorates, NGOs, CDAs, and 
banks. MSMEDA is supported by both national and international development partners. 
National Council for Women (NCW)  
The National Council for Women (NCW) is a government body that focuses on enhancing 
the socioeconomic conditions of Egyptian women and supporting women's participation 
in the development of their local communities and the society. The council addresses 
women's economic empowerment; raising the standard of living of poor and 
marginalized women; and promoting the principle of gender equality and the integration 
of a gender perspective into all policies. Its mission is to have an effective partnership 
and role in formulating policies and programs related to women's advancement and the 
sustainability of their development, as well as defining their active roles and participation 
in their society at all levels. 
Agriculture Research Centre 
The Agricultural Research Centre (ARC) is one of the largest research organizations in 
the Middle East dedicated to research and development of agricultural sciences. Under 
MALR, ARC is the principal organization responsible for technology generation and 
transfer for agriculture growth and development. It focuses its research on the 
development of new varieties, improved agronomic practices, livestock development and 
better food processing techniques.   
Community Development Associations (CDAs) 
Community Development Associations (CDAs) are considered NGOs under the relevant 
legislation for non-profit organizations. They are governed by Law 84 of 2002/2004?? 
and are registered with and supervised by the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS). They 
currently operate under the supervision of  the Egyptian Financial Supervisory Authority 
(EFSA), according to the microfinance law no. 141 of 2014. CDAs exist in many villages 
and their mandate can vary from charity and social services to development, but their 
coverage is usually limited to a village or a neighborhood. CDAs can also provide 
economic services as they can play a vital role in offer microloans to end beneficiaries in 
the rural community. 
Agriculture Cooperatives 
The Agricultural Cooperatives are recognized organizations that mostly pertain to the local 
community.  They  were  established  by  the  Egyptian  government  mainly  to  supply  the 
farmers with the necessary agricultural inputs and purchase their crops as well as generally 
be  of  support  to  them.  As  per  their  current  mandate,  the  Agricultural  Cooperatives  are 
defined as social and economic units with the objective of improving agriculture, providing 
recommendations  for  the  crop  choices  and  rotations  and  contributing  to  the  rural 
development of the area in which they work. Agricultural Cooperatives are formed under 
the  Cooperative  Law  and  supervised  by  the  Central  Administration  for  Agricultural 
Cooperatives, a specific unit in MALR. 
Adaptation Fund 
The Adaptation Fund finances projects and programmes that help vulnerable 
communities in developing countries adapt to climate change. Initiatives are based on 
country needs, views and priorities. The Adaptation Fund was established under the 
Kyoto Protocol of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, and since 2010 has 
committed US$ 564 million to climate adaptation and resilience activities, including 
supporting 84 concrete adaptation projects. STAR will explore co-financing opportunities 
from the Adaptation Fund. 
World Food Programme (WFP) 
The World Food Programme (WFP) is the leading humanitarian organization in delivering 
food assistance in emergencies and working with communities to improve nutrition and 
build resilience. WFP is currently implementing an Adaptation Fund project in upper 
Egypt including Minya, Asyut and Sohag that aims to build resilience of food systems. 
The project will build on the best practices and lessons learned from WFP's interventions 
in the target areas. 
African Development Bank 
The overarching objective of the African Development Bank (AfDB) Group is to spur 
sustainable economic development and social progress in its regional member countries 
(RMCs), thus contributing to poverty reduction. STAR is currently in negotiations with 
the African Development Bank for co-financing infrastructure interventions. 
Annex 5.5 shows the national plans and strategies to which the project is 
aligned. 
4. Environmental and Social Category 
The project targets smallholder farmers and will include investing in large-scale water 
conservation measures; rehabilitation of damaged irrigation systems; and enhancing 
marketing capacities mainly for smallholder farmers, youth and women. The project is 
deliberately intended to prevent irreversible or unprecedented social or environmental 
adverse impacts. Hence, the STAR project is classified as a moderate risk project: 
category B according to IFAD's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Procedures Guidelines. An Environmental and Social Management Plan is required for 
each of the project components.  
5. Climate Risk Category 
The proposed project’s interventions will not increase the vulnerability of target 
populations and resources to climate hazards. On the contrary, the project components 
will contribute to increasing the adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and their 
families through improved water-efficient irrigation systems; economic diversification 
mainly through investing in women and youth; use of digital agriculture technologies in 
early warning systems; and poverty alleviation through enhanced access to markets. 
Hence, the STAR project’s Climate Risk Classification is Moderate according to 
IFAD's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures Guidelines.  
6. Recommendations for Project Design and 
Implementation 
Component 1: Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 
Poverty and unemployment are major socio-economic challenges facing upper Egypt. 
Women and youth shall be regarded as change agents when it comes to the 
development of micro-enterprises and training and business plan support shall focus on 
them. On one hand, this would contribute to addressing rural unemployment in a way 
that lives up to youth ambitions. On the other hand, it would contribute to women 
economic empowerment especially among female headed households. In addition, this 
economic diversification at the household level is an adaptation measure to climate and 
market shocks and so would mitigate the risk of falling into further poverty.   
The institutional capacity building activities of the project shall also focus on increasing 
awareness of environmental and climate change issues from a value chain analysis 
perspective.  
Component 2 Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 
Even if water scarcity is not felt by all the farmers – except those who are downstream 
with respect to branch canals-, it is still the major environmental issue facing the three 
governorates and Egypt as a whole. In that sense, the project shall invest in water-
efficient irrigation systems as an adaptation measure starting from the branch canal 
level in compliance with the target strategy that focuses on the poorest villages around 
branch canals that need to be rehabilitated. The project shall also consider drip irrigation 
and hydroponic agriculture to be introduced in demonstration fields. Mitigation co-
benefits in terms of solar pumping shall be utilised according to the project's cost 
recovery mechanism. 
In order to ensure the sustainability of such investments, water resources management 
strategies at the governorate level should be formulated for the three governorates. This 
shall help planning in terms of management and maintenance.  
In response to climate change, the use of digital agriculture can be utilised in this project 
to enhance early warning systems in the target areas especially with regards to heat 
waves. The digital tool shall not only provide warning signals to farmers but also should 
give meaningful information that the farmer can follow to avoid crop loss or damage due 
to climate shocks. 
The project shall also propose a more structural approach to increasing the resilience of 
food systems through building on the government's current thinking to widely grow 
crops like beans and lentils which have relatively less water requirements and have high 
market demand. This could also contribute to better nutrition at household level. In 
general, the project can push to prioritise crops with high nutritional values for humans 
over crops for feeding animals. 
In the interest of ensuring sustainable farming practices and in the light of weak 
extension services, youth shall be empowered through a "Young Professional 
Programme" that gives young graduates- from the faculty of agriculture- practical 
experience in dealing with farmers and providing extension services. This will build their 
capacities towards providing such service in the future and at the same time would give 
the chance to communicate new climate-resilient and sustainable farming practices. This 
would be especially useful in areas suffering from soil salinity due to intense use of 
fertilisers or pesticides (also see "Further Studies Needed" section). There is a big 
opportunity to push towards organic and nutrition-oriented farming especially if links can 
be made with the first component in terms of marketing.  
Climate Finance Opportunities 
The project shall seek co-financing from the Adaptation Fund (AF) for activities related to 
building climate resilience. The amount available for Egypt is $2.8 million and already a 
concept note has been prepared to seek endorsement from the Egyptian Environmental 
Affairs Agency to submit a proposal to the AF board. The grant can be mainly used to 
establish demonstration plots for climate-resilient production techniques; water-efficient 
irrigation for poor smallholder farmers; enhancing early warning systems; capacity 
development of rural institutions with regards to climate change; improved water 
management planning at the governorate level; support to innovative climate change 
adaptation micro-enterprises. 
Further funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) shall be explored. 
IFAD will use the following entry points to address mainstreaming themes: (i) 
improve women’s access to viable economic opportunity (on farm and off-farm) and 
finance; (ii) generate economic and professional opportunities for youth (iii) improve 
nutrition for all, especially for food insecure households and vulnerable categories. 
Improve women’s access to viable economic opportunities and access to 
finance: The project will address gender disparities and the key constraints that limit 
women’s participation in viable economic opportunities and access to financial services 
by: (a) ensuring that women have equal access to capacity building, training and 
opportunity by creating an enabling environment which ensure their mobility and 
participation in the economic activities. Community facilitators hired by the project will 
engage with community leaders and also male household members, to sensitize on 
gender equality and women’s economic empowerment (b) promoting productive 
opportunities  that are suitable for women’s by ensuring that analisis are done capturing  
women’s needs and priorities and allowing women full participation during the design of 
sub-project activities; (c) increase women’s access to skills and knowledge by providing 
women's skills in financial literacy, digital literacy, managing and saving money,  
business development and leadership. This type of activities is tailored to serve women 
from different socio-economic categories: vulnerable women interested in small IGA to 
complement their livelihood (subsistence level), as well as women from better off 
farming households engaged in productive activities (agriculture related) and interested 
to expand their businesses along the value chains.   
Specific measures will include: (i) Ensuring strong awareness/sensitisation campaign 
at the beginning of the project; (ii) developing the capacities of Cluster Support Team 
(CST) to undertake proper mobilisation of women and young women, involving also 
traditional leaders and male household members (iii) increase number of women 
accessing viable economic opportunity; (iv) ensuring that both male and female have 
access to demo plots and other technical training depending on the activities they are 
engaged (men on crop farming and women on animal husbandry and processing) and 
women’s leadership training.  The programme will pay careful attention to ensure 
trainings respond to women’s needs and to ensure their inclusion consider appropriate 
time, location, especially considering the strict mobility limit for women in Upper Egypt. 
One of the best training model for women producers is the Women’s Farmers Field 
Schools, which will be replicated and will include topics of relevance for women: (i) 
animal health; (ii) milk handling and hygiene; (iv) small-ruminants and beef-dairy 
fattening activities; (v) animal husbandry; and (vi) marketing. In addition to the above, 
nutrition education/sensitisation will also be conducted as part of the training. 
Generating economic opportunities for young people: Youth will be consulted, 
selected by the Cluster Support Teams (CSTs) and CDAs then organized in groups on the 
basis of their interests and different degrees of participation in the programme; i.e. as 
existing farmers’ producers or new entrants; skilled or unskilled, with low education level 
or with secondary education and above, thus being organized accordingly and receiving 
targeted interventions and trainings on the basis of their aspirations and interest in 
engaging in agricultural activities (from adopting technology in the production system to 
provide service along the different nodes of value chains).  
Selection of youth will consider a screening process using questionnaire forms to 
determine: preparedness, having clear ideas, willingness to invest time and energy. 
Youth mobilisation, formation of groups as well as provision of services and 
implementation of specific activities will be undertaken in accordance and alignment with 
business plan developed at cluster level. This is expected to benefit youth already 
engaged in agriculture and interested to continue, but lacking capacity, skills and capital 
to do agriculture as a business and using advanced technologies (most of them being 
unpaid family labour or unskilled labourer at larger farms). Others will be engaged in 
entrepreneurial opportunities related to the agriculture value chains: from private 
agricultural services to complement public extension services, improve provision of 
inputs, and other agricultural services, such as compost making, nurseries and renting of 
machinery.  
They will receive additional intensive trainings on: i) how to develop a concrete business 
idea first; and then, (ii) enable the potential entrepreneurs to develop a bankable 
business plan. In this case the programme could consider using the successful 
methodology applied by ILO: Star and Improve Your Business (SIYB). This is one of the 
largest global business management training programmes. It has four training packages 
that respond to stages of business development. Young graduated (50% young boys and 
50% young girls) will benefit from the Young professional program. To support the STAR 
targeted farmer groups in adopting new crops, practices and technologies a young 
professional program for newly agricultural and irrigation graduates from the programme 
governorates will be established. The program will give the young professionals an 
opportunity to rapidly gain substantial field experience, and build their CV and capacities 
in working with farmers, bringing in new ideas including digital solutions and adapt these 
to the conditions and needs of smallholder farmers. It is expected that after the program 
a part of these graduates will be able to establish private extension services or join 
companies or NGOs providing these services in the three governorates. Each participant 
will be supported with subsistence allowances and complete a one to two years program 
with the STAR programme.  
Improving nutrition for all, especially among food insecure households: IFAD is 
committed to addressing malnutrition in all its forms in its investments. This includes in 
addition to underweight and micronutrient deficiency also overweight and obesity. The 
project recognizes that access to better economic opportunity is a key element that 
within the household dynamics can play an important role in combatting malnutrition as 
long as it is accompanied by awareness creation. Limited nutrition knowledge among 
beneficiaries may prevent STAR target groups to translate increased production and 
income into improved diets. The project will contribute to improved nutrition by 
promoting awareness at community level, with special focus/priority in areas where 
higher food vulnerability is registered. To support beneficiaries in addressing gaps in 
nutrition knowledge, the project will carry out nutrition education at village level 
establishing Demostration site with roof-top gardens. This will be particularly relevant for 
low income level households. 
The nutrition intervention will also address awareness creation about obesity. Tailored 
nutrition education sessions will be organised to advocate for healthy diets and food 
systems. Key topics will be: (i) Nutrient values (ii) dietary diversity for healthy diets iii) 
consumer information on healthy food choices to allow purchase of food on the basis of 
informed decisions.  
7. Further Studies Needed 
During consultation meetings with stakeholders and farmers in the three different 
governorates, the issue of soil salinity has been raised. A study to explore the main 
reasons behind soil salinity- and declining soil quality in general- is needed. The study 
should help the project team understand the key factors behind this phenomenon and 
should assess the soil conservation options within the context of the need for increased 
agricultural production. 
A feasibility study on the introduction of some crops that use less water and less 
fertilizers as strategic crops (e.g. beans) would act as a guiding document for the project 
and the government policy. The study should include the impact of introducing such 
crops on water efficiency and soil conservation; economic and marketing assessment for 
each crop; technical and cultural barriers for farmers to plant these crops; and the risk 
analysis. 
8. Monitoring and Evaluation 
Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) will be under the oversight of the PMU, and led 
by the M&E officer who will work closely with the implementing entities. The M&E system 
should  produce,  organize  and  disseminate  the  information  needed  for  the  strategic 
management  of the  Project;  document the  results and lessons learned;  and respond to 
the information needs of IFAD and the Government (and other co-financing institutions) 
on the activities, immediate outcomes and impact of the Project.  
Day to day monitoring of implementation progress will be the responsibility of the project 
team, based on the project's Annual Work Plan and its indicators. During the first months 
of  the  project,  the  project  team  will  complete  and  fine-tune  baseline  data  for  each 
indicator, and will define and fine-tune performance. Specific targets for the first year of 
implementation, progress indicators, and their means of verification will be developed at 
the Start up Workshop.  
M&E officer- supported by IFAD supervision- shall monitor compliance to the Social and 
Environmental Category and the Climate Risk Category and report any issues regarding 
compliance to IFAD's procedures. In addition, a review of this SECAP note shall be done 
to identify any emerging social, environmental or climate issues in the project target areas. 
The  M&E  system  will  give  strong  emphasis  to  monitoring  of  targeting  performance.  All 
implementers  will  be  required  to  provide  disaggregated  data  on  women  and  youth 
participation, in relation to overall project targets. The M&E system will collect and analyze 
information  about  project  outreach,  effectiveness  of  the  targeting  strategy  and  specific 
benefits for women and youth. This requires strong coordination and collaboration between 
the M&E unit and the Gender and Social Development experts at all levels. Impact will be 
assessed  on  the  basis  of  methodologically  gender  sensitive  baseline,  mid-term  and 
completion surveys which will use key indicators to measure women’s empowerment 
Environment and Climate Related Indicators15 
3.1.1. Number of groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources and 
climate-related risks 
3.1.2. Number of persons provided with climate information services 
3.1.4. Number of hectares of land brought under climate-resilient management 
Gender, Youth and Nutrition Related Indicators 
Gender: proposed Indicators will consider: number of women members of Income 
Generating Groups and Marketing Associations, including number of women in leadership 
position.  
Youth: Proposed indicators will consider:  number of youth self-employed in agriculture 
and allied sector ; number of students receiving support through the young professional 
programme; #number of youth accessing finance for business plans related to on 
farm/off farm IGA and service provision (baseline to be conducted).  
Nutrition: Proposed indicators will consider:  number of demo-plots established; 
number of people increased dietary diversity; number of households increased 
consumption of nutritious foods; number of households starting roof-top garden as a 
results of the trainings received; (Baseline to be condu cted).  
9. References 
Alliance for Financial Inclusion (2019). Integrating gender and Women Financial Inclusion into the 
Central Bank of Egypt (CBE) Framework. 
CAPMAS (2014). Demographic and Health Survey. 
CAPMAS (2015). Health Issues Survey. 
CAPMAS (2015). Income expenditure and Consumption Survey. 
CAPMAS (2018a). Environmental Statistics. 
CAPMAS (2018b). Agricultural and Land Reclamation Statistics. 
CIHEAM-IAMM (2019). The Organic Agriculture in Egypt. ENPARD South Support Project II. EU 
Funded Project. 
Egyptian Centre for Economic Studies (2008). Agricultural productivity growth, employment and 
poverty in Egypt. 
FAO (2017). Study on Small Scale Family Farming in Near East and North Africa Region, Focusing 
on Egypt. 
IFPRI (2016). Overview: The Role of Agriculture and the Agro-processing Industry for 
Development in Egypt. 
15 Adopted from IFAD's Results and Impact Management System Document 
IFPRI (2018). Farm household in Egypt, 2018 
IFPRI (2019). Characteristics of Smallholder Farm Households in Upper Egypt: Implications for 
Nutrition-Sensitive Agricultural Interventions.  
ILO (2014). Labour Market Transitions of Young Women and Men in Egypt. 
Ministry of Environment (2016). Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. 
Ministry of Environment (2017). State of the Environment Report 2016. 
Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (2013). Proposed Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 
for the Ministry of Water Resources & Irrigation in Egypt. Climate Change Risk Management in 
Egypt.  
Population Council (2014). Panel Survey of Young People in Egypt (SYPE) Generating Evidence for 
Policy, Programs and Research. 
Saleh, S. M., Heggi, M. A. M., Abdrabbo, M. A. A. and Farag, A. A. (2016). Heat Waves 
Investigation During Last Decades in Some Climatic Regions in Egypt. Egypt Journal for Agriculture 
Research, 95 (2). 
Siam, M and Eltahir, E. (2017). Climate change enhances interannual variability of the Nile river 
flow. Nature Climate Change volume 7, pages 350–354. 
UN Women (2018). Profile of Women in Rural Egypt. 
UNFPA (2016). Population Situation Analysis. 
UNFPA (2018). Localizing the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals on Governorate Level 
- Based on EHDS 2014. 
UNICEF (2017). Nutrition Agenda for Action. 
WFP (2013). The Status of Poverty and Food Security in Egypt: Analysis and Policy 
Recommendations. 
World Bank (2018). Poverty Brief: Egypt. 
World Bank (2018). Women Economic Empowerment Study.  
World Bank (2019). World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal 
[https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/egypt]. Last Accessed: 14/07/2019. 
World Economic Forum (2018). The Global Gender Gap Report. 
Annex 5.1: Climate Vulnerability Assessment Framework 
Vulnerability = Exposure + Sensitivity – Adaptive Capacity 
Exposure
•Increasing temperature
•Extreme events (heat waves)
•Inter-annual variability in Nile water flow 
with a potential decline.
Sensitivity
•Increasing population
•Environmental degradation (water and soil 
quality)
•Geopolitical risk (e.g. Nile Basin Dams) 
•Urbanisation and building on agricultural 
land
Adaptive 
Capacity
•Water efficient irrigation technology
•Dependence on agriculture and economic 
diversification
•Awareness regarding water conservation
•Marketing challenges
•Women inclusion
•Skills for youth
Figure 1 Climate Vulnerability Assessment Framework 
Annex 5.2: Climate Risk Analysis  
Historical Temperature Data Analysis 
Since the STAR project will be implemented in Minya, Asyut and Sohag, an analysis of 
the historical temperature data for the period 1901-2017 has been carried out using 
CoMon model data. 
As shown in Figure 2 below, the trend slope for the period 1901-2017 shows an increase 
of 0.95% in average maximum temperature between May and October in Asyut. On the 
other hand, there has been a decrease of 0.64% in the average maximum temperature 
between November and April. 
Figure 2 Average Maximum Temperature in Asyut (1901-2017) 
As shown in Figure 3 below, the trend slope for the period 1901-2017 shows an increase 
of 1% in average maximum temperature between May and October in Minya. On the 
other hand, there has been a decrease of 0.61% in the average maximum temperature 
between November and April. 
Figure 3 Average Maximum Temperature in Minya (1901-2017) 
As shown in Figure 4 below, the trend slope for the period 1901-2017 shows an increase 
of 0.93% in average maximum temperature between May and October in Sohag. On the 
other hand, there has been a decrease of 0.72% in the average maximum temperature 
between November and April. 
Figure 4 Average Maximum Temperature in Sohag (1901-2017) 
Asyut, Minya and Sohag show a similar trend for the period 1901-2017 with regards to 
monthly mean temperature. As shown in Figures 5, 6 and 7 below, the biggest increase 
in the monthly mean temperature is between March and August in the 3 governorates. 
Figure 5 Monthly Mean Temperature and Trend's Slope for 1901-2017 in Asyut 
Figure 6 Monthly Mean Temperature and Trend's Slope for 1901-2017 in Minya 
Figure 7 Monthly Mean Temperature and Trend's Slope for 1901-2017 in Sohag 
Historical Heat Waves Data Analysis 
The World Meteorological Organization defines heat waves as five or more consecutive 
days during which the daily maximum temperature surpasses the average maximum 
temperature by 5 °C (9 °F) or more. 
This analysis has been done by using the historical NASA dataset GLDAS-2.0 covering 
the period 1948-2010 and GLDAS-2.1 covering the period 2000-current. Daily average 
maximum temperature has been calculated for the 1971-2000 time period. 
Figures 8, 10 and 12 show the number of heat waves per year in Asyut, Minya and 
Sohag for the period 1970-2010 using NASA's GLDAS-2.0. The 5 year average indicated 
by the red line shows that the trend has been increasing for the three governorates 
between 1970 and 2010. In 2008, each of the three governorates suffered from 3 heat 
waves which is more than any other year for that period.  
Figures 9, 11 and 13 show the number of heat waves per year in Asyut, Minya and 
Sohag for the period 2000-2018 using NASA's GLDAS-2.1. The 5 year average indicated 
by the red line shows that the trend has been increasing for the three governorates 
between 2000 and 2018. It is worth mentioning that 2018 has been the highest for the 
three governorates in terms of numbers with 15 heat waves for Asyut and Sohag and 9 
heat waves for Minya. 
Although the two datasets show slightly different numbers for the overlapping years 
(2000-2010), the trend remains the same for the three governorates with an increase in 
the frequency of heat waves.  
Figure 8 Number of Heat Waves in Asyut (1970-2010) 
     Figure 9 Number of Heat Waves in Asyut (2000-2018) 
Figure 10 Number of Heat Waves in Minya (1970-2010)  
     Figure 11 Number of Heat Waves in Minya (2000-2018)  
Figure 12 Number of Heat Waves in Sohag (1970-2010) 
 Figure 13 Number of Heat Waves in Sohag (2000-2018) 
On the other hand, the intensity of heat waves- measured by the number of days of the 
heat wave- has not shown a certain pattern for any of the governorates using NASA's 
GLDAS-2.0 as suggested by the Figures 14, 16 and 18 below. However, NASA's GLDAS-
2.1 illustrated by Figures 15, 17 and 19 shows a pattern where the length of the annual 
longest heat wave event is generally increasing for the three governorates. It is worth 
mentioning that the year 2018 has seen the longest heat wave for Asyut and Sohag with 
16 and 15 days respectively, while the longest for Minya was for 13 days in 2017.  
Figure 14 Longest Heat Waves Event in Asyut (1970-2010)  
Figure 15 Longest Heat Waves Event in Asyut (2000-2018)  
Figure 16 Longest Heat Waves Event in Minya (1970-2010)  
Figure 17 Longest Heat Waves Event in Minya (2000-2018)  
Figure 18 Longest Heat Waves Event in Sohag (1970-2010) 
 Figure 19 Longest Heat Waves Event in Sohag (2000-2018)  
Climate Projection and Trend Analysis 
The section below shows an analysis of climate projections for the periods 2020-2039 
and 2080-2099 compared to 1986-2005 under the IPCC's 4.5 RCP and 8.5 RCP 
scenarios. Data is derived from World Bank's Climate Change Portal using the 
"ensemble" model.  
While there will be no significant change in average precipitation all over the country 
under all scenarios, there will be a significant change in temperature. In general, 
monthly temperature will increase all over the year under all scenarios in Egypt. The 
figures below show the monthly increase in temperature for 2020-2039 and 2080-2099 
under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5. 
Figure 20 Projected Change in Monthly Temperature for Egypt under RCP 4.5 (World Bank, 2019) 
Figure 21 Projected Change in Monthly Temperature for Egypt under RCP 8.5 (World Bank, 2019) 
Under the RCP 4.5 scenario, projections show that the monthly temperature will increase 
across the country and the median increase is almost doubled for every month as we go 
from the 2020-2039 period to the 2080-2099 period. The highest increase will be in 
August reaching around 3°C by 2080-2099. While for the RCP 8.5 scenario, the increase 
will be much higher with no less than 1°C for 2020-2039. On the longer term, the 
increase will surpass 4°C reaching a maximum median of 6°C in August.  
Figure 22 Projected Change in Monthly Temperature for Asyut under RCP 4.5 (World Bank, 2019) 
Figure 23 Projected Change in Monthly Temperature for Asyut under RCP 8.5 (World Bank, 2019) 
Projections show a similar trend for Asyut. Under the RCP 4.5 scenario, the monthly 
temperature will increase and the median increase is almost doubled for every month as 
we go from the 2020-2039 period to the 2080-2099 period. The highest increase will 
also be in August reaching more than 3°C by 2080-2099. While for the RCP 8.5 scenario, 
the increase will be much higher with no less than 1°C for 2020-2039 and reaching 
around 1.8°C in August. On the longer term, the increase will surpass 4°C reaching a 
maximum median of 6°C in August.  
Figure 24 Projected Change in Monthly Temperature for Minya under RCP 4.5 (World Bank, 2019) 
Figure 25 Projected Change in Monthly Temperature for Minya under RCP 8.5 (World Bank, 2019) 
Projections show a similar trend for Minya. Under the RCP 4.5 scenario, the monthly 
temperature will increase and the median increase is almost doubled for every month as 
we go from the 2020-2039 period to the 2080-2099 period. The highest increase will 
also be in August reaching more than 3°C by 2080-2099. While for the RCP 8.5 scenario, 
the increase will be much higher with no less than 1°C for 2020-2039 and reaching 
almost 2°C in August. On the longer term, the increase will surpass 4°C reaching a 
maximum median of 6°C in August.  
Figure 26 Projected Change in Monthly Temperature for Sohag under RCP 4.5 (World Bank, 2019) 
Figure 27 Projected Change in Monthly Temperature for Sohag under RCP 8.5 (World Bank, 2019) 
Projections show a similar trend for Sohag. Under the RCP 4.5 scenario, the monthly 
temperature will increase and the median increase is almost doubled for every month as 
we go from the 2020-2039 period to the 2080-2099 period. The highest increase will 
also be in August reaching more than 3°C by 2080-2099. While for the RCP 8.5 scenario, 
the increase will be much higher with no less than 1°C for 2020-2039 and reaching 
around 1.8°C in August. On the longer term, the increase will surpass 4°C reaching a 
maximum median of 6°C in August.  
Figure 28 Projected Change in Annual Probability of Heat Wave for Egypt under RCP 4.5 (left) and RCP 8.5 (right) 
The frequency of occurrence of heat waves is most likely to increase in the future. Under 
the RCP 4.5 scenario, the annual probability of heat waves for Egypt increases with time 
starting with a median value of 0.03 for the 2020-2039 period until it reaches 0.12 for 
the 2080-2099 period. The probability almost doubles with the RCP 8.5 scenario starting 
with a median value of 0.05 for the 2020-2039 period until it reaches around 0.27 for 
the 2080-2099 period. This index shows the daily probability of observing a heat wave  
which is- according to the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal- a 3 or more-
day sequence where the daily temperature is above the long-term 95th percentile of daily 
mean temperature. 
Impact of Climate Change on Crops (CARD Analysis) 
Climate change is expected to have a major impact on crops in Egypt. The figure below 
shows the impact of climate change on major crops in Egypt at a median risk for the 
period 2020-2039 relative to the projected 2020 baseline. The analysis uses IFAD's 
Climate Adaptation in Rural Development Assessment Tool (CARD).  
Figure 29 Predicted Impact of Climate Change on Crops in Egypt under Median Risk Scenario (2020-2039) 
Under the median risk scenario, almost all major crops- except sugarcane- will 
eventually suffer a decline as we move towards 2039. Maize, rice and soy beans 
production will slightly increase in the first few years but will then decline drastically to 
reach -5.98%, -2.91% and -5.63% respectively by 2039. Wheat will also decline by 
around -4.47% by 2039. 
Figure 30 Predicted Impact of Climate Change on Crops in Egypt under Pessimistic Risk Scenario (2020-2039) 
Under the pessimistic risk scenario, almost all major crops will eventually suffer a decline 
as we move towards 2039. Maize and soy beans production will slightly increase in the 
first few years but will then decline drastically to reach -13.56% and -12.72% 
respectively by 2039. In this scenario, wheat production will suffer the biggest decline 
with -34.65% in 2039.    
Annex 5.3: Alignment with National Strategies 
The project objectives and components are well aligned with Egypt's main plans and 
strategies.  
Sustainable Development Strategy: Egypt Vision 2030. Through this long-term 
strategy, Egypt looks to achieve sustainable development by 2030 taking into 
consideration the economic, social and environmental dimensions. The project will 
contribute- through both of its agricultural marketing and production components- 
towards achieving the 2030 target for percentage of female headed households living 
under the poverty line (0%); geographical gap in the percentage of population under 
poverty line (5%); percentage of population below the extreme poverty line (0%); 
unemployment rate (5%); female labour force participation (35%); Ratio of private 
sector contribution to GDP (75%); ratio of total water consumption (80%); percentage 
of loss in water transfer networks (<5%); and reduction of the expected increasing rates 
of greenhouse gas emissions. 
Sustainable Agriculture Development Strategy Towards 2030 (2009). Through 
this strategy, Egypt aims to use natural agricultural resources in a sustainable way; 
increasing productivity of land and water units; improving food security with regards to 
strategic commodities; increase competitiveness of agricultural products in local and 
international markets; enhancing the climate for agricultural investment; and alleviating 
rural poverty. The project is well aligned with the strategy through both if its 
components that focus on water-efficient agricultural production; promoting soil 
conservation through better farming practices; demonstrating climate-resilient farming; 
enhancing marketing capabilities of smallholder farmers and reducing post-harvest 
losses; building capacities for micro-enterprises development; in addition to the project's 
poverty oriented targeting methodology. 
National Water Resources Plan 2037. Through this strategy, Egypt aims to address 
water scarcity in the context of increasing demand due to rapid population growth taking 
into consideration water quantity and quality from economic, social and environmental 
perspectives. The project is well aligned with three of the four pillars of the strategy 
namely improving water quality, rationalising water use and enhancing the enabling 
environment for sound integrated water resources management. The project will 
contribute through more efficient irrigation systems; improved water quality through 
sustainable farming practices; and water asset management strategies at the 
governorate level.  
National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction 
(2011). Through this strategy, Egypt aims increase the flexibility of its community when 
dealing with the risks and disasters that might be caused by climate change and its 
impact on different sectors and activities. It also aims at strengthening the capacity to 
absorb and reduce the risks and disasters to be caused by such changes. The project is 
well aligned with the strategy in terms of climate change adaptation measures for the 
water and agriculture sectors through more efficient irrigation networks; better 
management of land resources; improved agro-industry and marketing systems; 
capacity building for institutions and rural communities; and enhanced early warning 
systems. 
Egypt's Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs). Egypt's INDC not 
only focuses on climate change mitigation but has a strong adaptation component as 
well to promote resilience across the different sectors. The project is well aligned with 
the INDC's adaptation policies in for the water and agriculture sectors through investing 
in more water-efficient irrigation systems, building institutional capacities to manage 
climate risks, developing agro-economic systems to manage crops in a climate-resilient 
manner. The project will also contribute to mitigation across the agriculture sector 
through the installation of solar pumps in irrigation systems and introducing better 
farming practices. 
National Strategy for Mainstreaming Gender in Climate Change in Egypt. 
Through this strategy, Egypt aims to mainstream gender considerations into national 
climate change initiatives and policies so that both men and women have equal 
opportunity to understand, participate and decide effective measures to implement 
mitigation and adaptation activities. The project is well aligned with this strategy as it 
will enhance rural women's access to technology and micro-credit for agricultural 
production; raise women's awareness on the importance of efficient water use; provide 
specific information to women on climate change and nutrition; and build women's 
capacities on the different adaptation techniques.  
National Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy 2030. Through this strategy, Egypt aims 
at improving the national system of crisis/disaster management and Disaster Risk 
Reduction (DRR) by coordinating efforts on all levels, institutions and national sectors. 
The project is well aligned with this strategy by contributing to its fifth goal regarding 
increasing enhancing early warning systems; building capacities for addressing climate 
change; and improving disaster risk reduction. The project will work closely with the DRR 
committees/focal points at the governorate level with regards to all the climate change 
relevant activities.  
Egyptian Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (2015-2030). Through this 
strategy, Egypt aims to conserve and manage terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity; use 
natural resources in a sustainable manner; enhance access to genetic resources and 
benefit sharing; improve understanding of how ecosystems work; prepare for climate 
change and combat desertification; and integrate biodiversity in all national frameworks. 
The project is well aligned with the strategy in promoting sustainable agricultural 
practices that conserve soil resources; installing more efficient irrigation systems; and 
promoting organic agriculture with minimal use of fertilizers and pesticides.  
Annex 5.4: Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
The programme will follow IFAD's Complaints Procedure which ensures that appropriate 
mechanisms are in place to allow individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly and file a 
complaint if they believe they are or might be adversely affected by an IFAD-funded 
project/programme not complying with IFAD's Social and Environmental Policies and mandatory 
aspects of SECAP. 
IFAD's Grievance and Redress Mechanism shall be fully explained to stakeholders during the 
programme's start-up workshop and to beneficiaries during the programme's activities. The 
complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the PMU or to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Land Reclamation. If the PMU does not adequately respond, then the matter may be 
brought to the attention of IFAD. The issue may be brought straight to IFAD if the complainants feel 
they might be subject to retaliation if they went to the PMU directly. 
Grievances shall be addressed at the field level by the project team which will be the first layer of 
redressal mechanism. If the grievance is not resolved at the field level, it will be escalated to the 
PMU and then to IFAD who will be responsible for addressing grievances related to violations of the 
Programme's SECAP or the Environmental and Social Policy of the Adaptation Fund (if co-financing 
from AF is made available). AfDB's, OFID's and WFP's complaints management mechanisms shall 
apply to any complaints regarding activities financed through their own funds. 
All grievances received and action taken on them- including the ones received by AfDB, OFID and 
WFP- will be reported to the PMU and Steering committee. In this regard, the PMU shall coordinate 
with the AfDB, OFID and WFP to ensure that the all complaints received and actions taken to address 
them are included in the progress reports. 
Interventions  Social,  
Mitigating Measure 
Monitoring 
Responsible 
Institution 
Cost 
Environmental & 
Climate Risk 
Factors limate 
Risk Factors 
All interventions  All possible risks 
  Apply the  Grievance 
 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
strictly.   
Ensure dissemination of 
the GRM to local 
communities prior to 
starting project activities. 
  Maintain solid 
documentation for the 
received complaints during 
the operation of the 
project and track the level 
of responsiveness 
(provision of feedback).   
Beneficiary 
Dissatisfaction and 
Discrimination 
All interventions  Social: 
 
Gender Issues and 
all forms of Gender 
Based Violence, 
including sexual 
project performance and 
beneficiary satisfaction 
from women and men of 
various age groups, 
especially the most 
vulnerable (landless, 
women head of 
households, youth, 
especially young girls), 
through focus group 
discussions. 
Increasing local CDAs 
engagement to work with 
local leaders and male 
household’s members to 
campaign for gender 
  Quarterly review of 
the number of 
complaints received. 
  Quarterly review of 
the number of 
complaints 
addressed, the 
mechanisms used 
and the time it took 
to address them. 
 
PMU. If not 
solved then 
IFAD, AfDB, 
OFID or WFP 
depending on 
which activity 
the complaint 
is referring 
to.  
  $2,000 
(PMU 
admin 
budget) 
Annually collecting 
gender-  
disaggregated 
monitoring and 
evaluation data to track 
 
PMU 
  $15,000 
(Capacity 
building 
budget) 
All interventions  Social: 
  Collect feedback on 
  Annual surveys.An.   
 
PMU 
  $5,000 
(M&E 
budget) 
harassment (due to 
the increasing 
mobilisation of 
women to 
participate in project 
activities; attend 
trainings, exchange 
visit, learning). 
equality and against 
gender biases at 
community and household 
level. 
the extent to which 
women have been able 
to participate and benefit 
from project activities.  
  Conducting gender-
sensitive and participatory 
consultations while 
finalizing and designing 
the various sub-project 
activities (enterprise 
development Component 
1.2) such as the selection 
of commodities and 
products, training 
activities, and capacity 
building initiatives related 
to IGA/entrepreneurial 
development for women. 
These have to include safe 
spaces/ women-only focus 
groups to encourage 
women’s meaningful 
participation in 
consultations.   
  Create female only spaces 
for women to receive 
trainings and services.   
  Gender mainstreaming 
actions should be 
developed as part of a 
Gender Development Plan 
(GDP) prepared by the 
CDAs engaged in the 
implementation. 
1.1. 
Strengthening 
marketing 
institutions  
Strengthening rural institutions, enterprises and markets 
Social:  
  Women, Youth 
and other 
vulnerable 
categories are 
  Conducting strong public 
information dissemination 
at different levels on the 
programme objectives, 
eligibility criteria, the 
  Annually monitoring 
the indicators for the 
percentage of women 
and youth 
participating in 
 
PMU 
  $5,000 
(M&E 
budget) 
  Conducting surveys 
 
PMU 
  $5,000 
 
excluded from 
capacity building 
Farmers are 
unable to fully 
utilize digital 
technologies in 
marketing 
selection process for 
capacity building activities 
Marketing 
Associations. 
  Annually monitoring 
the use of digital 
platforms (e.g. 
number of hits or 
downloads of 
applications) 
1.2. Micro 
enterprises 
development 
Social: 
 
Lack of ability of 
entrepreneurs 
with insufficient 
education or 
exposure to 
develop a good 
business plan 
Elite capture 
 
 
 
Investing in capacity 
building for business plans 
development and 
enhancing entrepreneurial 
skills. 
Implementing the 
programme's targeting 
strategy to make sure the 
component reaches the 
poorest and landless 
beneficiaries  
to assess 
entrepreneurial skills 
during baseline 
assessments. 
  Monitoring the 
percentage of 
poorest and landless 
who develop micro-
enterprises during 
MTR and completion. 
2. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 
2.1. 
Investments in 
irrigation 
infrastructure 
and 
management 
Environmental: 
 
 
Environmental 
Impact due to 
irrigation 
infrastructure 
work 
The project will ensure 
complying with the 
national law regarding 
Environmental Impact 
Assessments. The project 
will follow the 
Environmental and Social 
Management Plan for each 
sub-component to ensure 
that the interventions are 
in line with IFAD's policies. 
  Canal selection shall be 
 
based on canals that need 
rehabilitation and feeding 
the highest number of 
poorest villages (as 
defined by the 
governorates).  
  Applying the 
 
Grievance Redress 
Mechanism will 
ensure that 
communities have a 
channel to voice any 
complaints regarding 
any negative 
environmental or 
social impact of the 
project's 
interventions. 
The monitoring and 
evaluation officer in 
the Project 
Management Unit will 
report any negative 
impacts or 
complaints on 
monthly basis.  
 
Social: 
 
 
 
Poor smallholder 
farmers not 
benefitting from 
the programme 
Tension within 
Water Users 
Associations 
(WUAs)  
Farmers are 
unwilling to 
(Capacity 
building 
budget) 
  $10,000 
(M&E 
budget 
and 
Capacity 
building 
budget) 
PMU. If not 
solved then 
IFAD, AfDB, 
OFID or WFP 
depending on 
which activity 
the complaint 
is referring 
to. 
PMU (for the 
indicators 
and surveys).  
 
Targeting indicators 
will be reviewed to 
ensure reaching out 
the poorest on 
annual basis. 
  Surveys shall be 
conducted to assess 
farmers' and WUAs' 
satisfaction during 
MTR and completion. 
 
 
participate in 
the programme 
Farmers are not 
aware of the 
cost recovery 
policy 
Farmers are 
unwilling to use 
their land as 
demonstration 
plots. 
 
 
The programme will set up 
WUAs using a 
participatory design the 
builds credibility among 
farmers and allows them 
to participate in the design 
of improvement plans. 
Participatory approach 
shall be taken through 
making WUAs fully 
responsible for the water 
management. WUAs shall 
operate, maintain, 
rehabilitate and 
improve the water 
management 
infrastructure. 
  WUAs should be fully 
aware of the cost of 
improvement and the 
terms of the cost recovery 
prior to the improvement 
taking place. Farmers 
could be linked to credits 
making them responsible 
for the financing from the 
beginning.  
Incentives shall be given 
to farmers who are willing 
to participate through 
receiving demonstration 
credit which could be set 
to cover 50% of cost and 
only to be repaid based on 
actual pumping cost 
savings 
 
2.2. Improved 
crop farming 
practices 
Social:  
  Women, Youth 
and other 
vulnerable 
  Conducting strong public 
information dissemination 
at different levels on the 
programme objectives, 
  Annually monitoring 
the indicators for the 
percentage of women 
and youth 
 
PMU 
  $2,000 
(Capacity 
building 
budget) 
participating in 
Marketing 
Associations. 
  Annually monitoring 
the use of digital 
platforms (e.g. 
number of hits or 
downloads of 
applications) 
  Surveys shall be 
conducted to assess 
farmers' satisfaction 
annually. 
  Annual evaluation 
through surveys for 
the Young 
Professionals 
Programme 
 
 
 
 
categories are 
excluded from 
capacity building 
Farmers are 
unable to fully 
utilize digital 
technologies in 
extension 
Farmers are 
unwilling to use 
their land as 
demonstration 
plots. 
Farmers are 
unwilling to 
share 
agricultural 
machinery 
Young people 
are not willing 
to take part in 
the Young 
Professional 
Programme for 
on farm 
extension 
 
 
 
 
eligibility criteria, the 
selection process for 
capacity building activities 
Investing in capacity 
building for communities 
on digital agriculture 
Incentives shall be given 
to farmers who are willing 
to participate through 
receiving demonstration 
credit which could be set 
to cover 50% of cost and 
only to be repaid based on 
actual increase in profit. 
Investing in training for 
farmers on sharing 
agricultural awareness and 
increasing awareness on 
the cost efficiency of 
machinery sharing  
The programme shall 
provide subsistence 
allowances to the young 
professionals and build 
their capacities in order to 
encourage future private 
extensions services 
Annex 5.5: Guiding Questions for Environmental, Social 
and Climate Risk Screening 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Guiding questions for environment and 
social screening 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or 
not readily remedied adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1.  Would the project develop any 
wetlands? (Guidance statement 1) 
2.  Would the project cause significant 
adverse impacts to habitats and/or 
ecosystems and their services (e.g. 
conversion of more than 50 hectares of 
natural forest, loss of habitat, 
erosion/other form of land degradation, 
fragmentation and hydrological 
changes)? (Guidance statements 1, 2 
and 5) 
3.  Does the proposed project target area 
include ecologically sensitive areas,16 
areas of global/national significance for 
biodiversity conservation, and/or 
biodiversity-rich areas and habitats 
depended on by endangered species? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
4.  Is the project location subjected to 
major destruction as a result of 
geophysical hazards (tsunamis, 
landslides, earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions)? 
Natural resources 
No 
No 
No 
No 
5.  Would the project lead to 
No 
unsustainable natural resource 
management practices (fisheries, 
forestry, livestock) and/or result in 
16 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere 
reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral 
reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and 
variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation, areas 
that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural 
significance), and areas with high social vulnerability. 
exceeding carrying capacity. For 
example, is the development 
happening in areas where little up-to-
date information exists on sustainable 
yield/carrying capacity? (Guidance 
statements 4, 5 and 6) 
6.  Would the project develop large-
No 
scale17 aquaculture or mariculture 
projects, or where their development 
involves significant alteration of 
ecologically sensitive areas? 
7.  Would the project result in significant 
use of agrochemicals which may lead 
to life-threatening illness and long-
term public health and safety 
concerns? (Guidance statement 14) 
8.  Does the project rely on water-based 
No 
Yes 
(groundwater and/or surface water) 
development where there is reason to 
believe that significant depletion 
and/or reduced flow has occurred from 
the effects of climate change or from 
overutilization? (Guidance statement 
7) 
9.  Does the project pose a risk of 
introducing potentially invasive 
species or genetically modified 
organisms which might alter genetic 
traits of indigenous species or have 
an adverse effect on local 
biodiversity? (Guidance statement 1) 
No 
10.  Does the project make use of 
Yes 
wastewater (e.g. industrial, mining, 
sewage effluent)? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
The project will involve 
improving water-use 
efficiency precisely to 
reduce pressure on 
limited water 
resources. This may 
involve rehabilitation 
of irrigation schemes. 
This will only be done 
following exhaustive 
and rigorous 
assessment of 
renewable potential of 
pumping water. 
The project MAY 
involve reuse of 
treated wastewater for 
agricultural pusposes, 
with the objective of 
increasing water-use 
efficiency and reducing 
17 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on 
minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be adopted where 
they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as an 
aquaculture unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
pressure on limited 
water resources. 
Infrastructure development 
11.  Does the project include the 
No 
construction/ rehabilitation/upgrade 
of dam(s) and/or reservoir(s) 
meeting at least one of the following 
criteria?  
-  more than 15 metre high wall;  
-  more than 500 metre long crest;  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir 
capacity; or  
-  incoming flood of more than 
2,000 m3/s  
(Guidance statement 8) 
12.  Does the project involve large-scale 
irrigation schemes rehabilitation 
and/or development (more than 
100 hectares per scheme)?18  
(Guidance statement 7) 
No 
13.  Does the project include construction/ 
No 
rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that 
entail a total area being cleared 
above 10 km long, or any farmer with 
more than 10 per cent of his or her 
private land taken? (Guidance 
statement 10). Will the works entail 
temporary and/or permanent resident 
workers?  
14.  Does the project include drainage or 
correction of natural waterbodies  
(e.g. river training)? (Guidance 
statement 7) 
15.  Does the project involve significant 
extraction/diversion/containment of 
surface water, leaving the river flow 
below 20 per cent environmental flow 
plus downstream user requirements?  
(Guidance statement 7) 
No 
No 
Social 
16.  Would the project result in economic 
No 
displacement19 or physical 
resettlement of more than 20 people, 
or impacting more than 10 per cent of 
18 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations 
determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted where they 
exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation 
development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
19 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or 
means of livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
an individual household’s assets?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
17.  Would the project result in conversion 
No 
No 
and/or loss of physical cultural 
resources? (Guidance statement 9) 
18. Would the project generate significant 
social adverse risk/impacts to local 
communities (including disadvantaged 
and vulnerable groups,indigenous 
people, persons vulnerable to GBV and 
sexual exploitation and abuse and 
people with disabilities) or other 
project-affected parties?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
Other 
19. Does the project include the 
No 
manufacture and transportation of 
hazardous and toxic materials which 
may affect the environment? 
(Guidance statement 2) 
20. Does the project include the 
construction of a large or medium-
scale industrial plant? 
21. 
 Does the project include the 
development of large-scale production 
forestry?  
(Guidance statement 5) 
Rural finance 
22. Does the project support any of the 
above (Question 1 to Question 21) 
through the provision of a line of 
credit to financial service providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
No 
No 
No 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or 
social implications which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
23.  Does the project involve agricultural 
No 
intensification and/or expansion of 
cropping area in non-sensitive areas 
that may have adverse impacts on 
habitats, ecosystems and/or 
livelihoods?  
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
24.  Do the project activities include 
No 
rangeland and livestock development?  
(Guidance statement 6) 
25.  Does the project involve fisheries 
No 
where there is information on stocks, 
fishing effort and sustainable yield? Is 
there any risk of overfishing, habitat 
damage and knowledge of fishing 
zones and seasons?  
(Guidance statement 4) 
26.  Would the project activities include 
No 
aquaculture and/or agriculture in 
newly introduced or intensively 
practiced areas? Do project activities 
include conversion of wetlands and 
clearing of coastal vegetation, change 
in hydrology or introduction of exotic 
species? (Guidance statement 4) 
27.  Do the project activities include 
No 
natural resource-based value chain 
development? (Guidance statements 
1, 6 and 12) 
28.  Do the project activities include 
watershed management or 
rehabilitation? 
No 
29.  Does the project include large-scale 
No 
soil and water conservation 
measures? (Guidance statements 1 
and 5)  
Infrastructure 
30.  Does the project include small-scale 
No 
irrigation and drainage, and small and 
medium dam subprojects (capacity < 
3 million m3)? (Guidance statements 
7 and 8) 
31.  Does the project include small and 
microenterprise development 
subprojects? (Guidance statements 
12 and 13) 
No 
32.  Does the project include the 
Yes 
development of agroprocessing 
facilities?  
(Guidance statements 2, 6 and 12) 
33.  Would the construction or operation 
of the project cause an increase in 
traffic on rural roads? (Guidance 
statement 10) 
The project will work 
on strengthening of 
marketing 
infrastructure which 
can include 
construction of small 
agro processing 
facilities such as small 
cooling and packing 
facilities 
Social 
34.  Would any of the project activities 
have minor adverse impacts on 
physical cultural resources? (Guidance 
statement 9) 
No 
35.  Would the project result in physical 
No 
resettlement of 20 people or less, or 
impacting less than 10 per cent of an 
individual household’s assets  
(Guidance statement 13)? 
36.  Would the project result in short-term 
public health and safety concerns?  
(Guidance statement 14) 
No 
37.  Would the project require a migrant 
No 
workforce or seasonal workers (for 
construction, planting and/or 
harvesting)? (Guidance statement 13) 
Rural finance 
38.  Does the project support any of the 
above (Question 23 to Question 37) 
through the provision of a line of 
credit to financial service providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
Yes 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Financing of 
Agribusinesses and 
marketing 
infrastructure 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of “yes” response* 
Extreme weather events such as storms 
and flooding are more frequent and may 
increase in future. Heavy rains and 
flooding affected the Assuit, Red Sea, 
Sohag, South Sinai and Qena 
governorates in December 2016  
A strong increase in the duration of heat 
waves is projected. 
1.  Is the project area subject 
to extreme climatic events, 
such as flooding, drought, 
tropical storms or heat 
waves? 
Yes 
Yes 
2.  Do climate scenarios for 
the project area foresee 
changes in temperature, 
rainfall or extreme weather 
that will adversely affect 
the project impact, 
sustainability or cost over 
its lifetime? 
3.  Would the project make 
investments in low-lying 
coastal areas/zones 
exposed to tropical 
storms? 
No 
4.  Would the project make 
investments in glacial 
areas and mountains 
zones? 
5.  Would the project promote 
agricultural activity in 
marginal and/or highly 
degraded areas that have 
increased sensitivity to 
climatic events (such as on 
hillsides, deforested slopes 
or floodplains)? 
6.  Is the project located in 
areas where rural 
development projects have 
experienced significant 
weather-related losses and 
damages in the past? 
7.  Would the project 
develop/install 
infrastructure in areas with 
a track record of extreme 
weather events? 
Yes 
8.  Is the project target group 
entirely dependent on 
natural resources (such as 
seasonal crops, rainfed 
agricultural plots, migratory 
fish stocks) that have been 
affected by in the last 
decade by climate trends 
or specific climatic events? 
9.  Would climate variability 
likely affect agricultural 
productivity 
(crops/livestock/fisheries), 
access to markets and/or 
the associated incidence of 
pests and diseases for the 
project target groups? 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
The project will invest in 
construction/upscaling of marketing 
infrastructure such as warehouses, post-
harvest processing facilities. Additionally, 
access roads will be constructed to 
enhance market linkages. Heavy rains 
and flooding has effects on the proposed 
area of intervention, though its occasional. 
10. Would weather-related 
risks or climatic extremes 
likely adversely impact 
Yes 
Heat waves and rise in tempratures will 
reduce yields for crops which are sensitive 
to climate change. As part of the 
upon key stages of 
identified value chains in 
the project (from 
production to markets)? 
mitigation measures for STAR, the project 
will assess the possibility of introducing 
climate resistant varieties   
11. Is the project investing in 
No 
climate-sensitive 
livelihoods that are 
diversified? 
12. Is the project investing in 
infrastructure that is 
exposed to infrequent 
extreme weather events? 
Yes 
Heat waves, flooding and heavy rains 
occur occasionally in the proposed project 
area 
The introduction of solar pumps for 
irrigation will have a positive impact  
Yes 
Yes 
13. Is the project investing in 
institutional development 
and capacity-building for 
rural institutions (such as 
farmer groups, 
cooperatives) in 
climatically heterogeneous 
areas? 
14. Does the project have the 
potential to become more 
resilient through the 
adoption of green 
technologies at a 
reasonable cost? 
15. Does the project 
intervention have 
opportunities 
to strengthen indigenous 
climate risk management 
capabilities? 
16. Does the project have 
opportunities to integrate 
climate resilience aspects 
through policy dialogue to 
improve agricultural sector 
strategies and policies? 
17. Does the project have 
potential to integrate 
climate resilience 
measures without 
extensive additional costs 
(e.g. improved building 
codes, capacity-building, 
or including climate risk 
No 
No 
No 
issues in policy 
processes)? 
18. Based on the information 
available would the project 
benefit from a more 
thorough accounting of 
GHG  emission ? 
No 
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 6:  First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Annual Work Plan & Budget of the project "Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR]"  
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
The expected results of the 
project for 2019 
Unit 
Quantity 
#/ha/fdeddan 
HH/ppl 
Financier Rule ( 2020 and half 2021) usd 000 
Plan ( 18 
month) 
Actual  % 
Plan Actual  %  Plan Actual  % 
IFAD  
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Govt  OFID 
Beneficiary 
WFP 
AF 
AFDB 
PFI 
Narrative 
on status, 
rationale, 
challenges, 
solutions 
1.  Strengthening rural institutions, enterprises and markets 
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Subcomponent 1.1. "Strengthening marketing 
institutions" 
A. Studies and traninig material 
developed by service providers 
Service provider for preparation of 
training material /a 
Community mobilization, 
awareness package, training 
material preparation and 
guidelines /b 
TA_AND_CONS 
TWM 
lumpsum 
           -    
           -    
lumpsum 
TA_AND_CONS Istitutional need assessment /c 
no. of studies 
            3  
TA_AND_CONS Market studies /d 
no. of studies 
            3  
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
Agribusiness landscape and 
opportunities /e 
Quantitative assessment on 
access to finance, demand and 
supply 
no. of studies 
            3  
no. of studies 
            1  
TA_AND_CONS Analysis of climate risks 
local VC 
           40  
B. Sensitisation and 
mobilisation for CDAs, 
cooperatives, women groups 
and MAs 
TWM 
TWM 
Training of trainers /f 
Communication and mobilisation 
campaign /g 
training sessions 
            5  
lumpsum 
           -    
30  
76  
15  
15  
15  
8  
81  
25  
23  
              -    
30.00  
-    
-    
            -    
              -    
76.00  
-    
-    
            -    
              -    
15.00  
              -    
15.00  
              -    
15.00  
-    
-    
-    
            -    
            -    
            -    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
            -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
            -    
80.68  
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
25.38  
-    
22.82  
-    
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
GSI 
TWM 
TWM 
Community mobilisation meetings 
and training roll-out /h 
Community mobilisation meetings 
for women 
Sensitisation events and exposure 
meetings /i 
Targeting and gender Training of 
Gender and Social Inclusion 
experts / Social Focal Points at 
CDAs 
Development of training material 
for TOT trainings on targeting and 
gender /j 
Exchange for Women's groups /k 
Women's leader participate to 
exibition ( agri-food product ) 
Gender / targeting / Nutrition 
mainstreaming training for Gender 
and Social Developemnt expert at 
Governorate level 
Leadership training for Women in 
VSC&L Groups 
Finance Literacy Training /l 
Women enterprise development 
trainings ( 10 per villages) /m 
Institutional support to partner 
CDAs and Ag coops (office 
refurbishment, and equipment) 
Support registration costs for new 
businesses 
Other specialized training 
C. Market related investments 
under the business plans 
no of 
meetings/trainings            30  
no of 
meetings/trainings            25  
no. of visits 
            4  
people 
         100  
lumpsum 
           -    
no. of people 
           30  
no. of people 
           13  
no. of people 
            3  
no. of people 
         500  
no. of people 
      2,000  
no. of people 
      1,500  
no. 
           30  
lumpsum 
            0  
15  
25  
11  
3  
3  
2  
1  
0  
20  
81  
61  
76  
8  
lumpsum 
           -    
25  
TA_AND_CONS Certification costs /n 
lumpsum 
            1  
TWM 
TA_AND_CONS 
Participation to Expos, trade fairs 
and other fora 
Post-harvest specialized technical 
assistance 
Financing of post-harvest 
equipment /o 
lumpsum 
           -    
lumpsum 
no. of business 
plan 
           -    
14  
35  
43  
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
15.23  
-    
25.21  
-    
10.67  
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
        3.03  
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
76.15  
-    
              -    
7.61  
-    
              -    
25.43  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
        3.03  
-    
        1.85  
-    
        0.77  
-    
        0.12  
-    
20.17  
-    
80.68  
-    
60.85  
-    
            -    
-    
            -    
-    
            -    
-    
              -    
-    
1.72  
12.31               -    
-    
              -    
-    
4.31  
30.77               -    
-    
              -    
-    
5.32  
38.03               -    
-    
GR&SUB 
CW 
CW 
Market structures and outlets 
no. of structures 
            1  
26  
              -    
-    
4.09  
21.54               -    
-    
Collection centres /p 
no. of centres 
            1  
              -                               
            -               
         225  
228  
              -    
-    
-    
228.20              -    
-    
CW 
(Cold) storage facilities /q 
no. of facilities 
            1  
128  
              -    
-    
20.46  
107.69              -    
-    
26  
-    
4.09  
21.54  
-    
D. Demonstration plots 
Nutrition Demo Plot ( Roof-
Garden) established at cluster 
level 
Home ( roof top) garden 
demonstrations 
E. Capacity development of 
rural institution 
Capacity building on climate 
change issues 
F. Digital agriculture setup 
Development of Digital market 
Platform and Customization of 
Bashaier of KEF 
Digital Finance STAR Wallet and 
Mobile Money - Platform 
Integration 
Visual agriculture marketing 
Module, Uber Model and 
Aggregation 
Mobile Interface of Digital Market 
Platform 
Content development and 
inventory on digital agriculture /r 
Business Meetings, Hackathon for 
Digital market Solutions, 
Handholding /s 
Implementation of Digital Solutions 
at village level 
GSI 
TWM 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
TWM 
TWM 
TWM 
no. of demos 
           20  
no. of demos 
           20  
17  
9  
-    
-    
2.13  
-    
15.21  
-    
-    
-    
1.06  
-    
7.61  
-    
lumpsum 
           -    
230  
-    
-    
28.24  
-    
-    
201.70  
lumpsum 
           -    
690  
605.10  
-    
84.71  
-    
            -    
-    
lumpsum 
           -    
690  
605.10  
-    
84.71  
-    
            -    
-    
lumpsum 
           -    
460  
403.40  
-    
56.48  
-    
            -    
-    
lumpsum 
no. of trainings/ 
meetings 
           -    
52  
           45  
520  
              -    
52.18  
-    
-    
            -    
-    
456.40  
-    
63.90  
-    
            -    
-    
meetings 
            1  
6  
              -    
5.13  
0.72  
-    
            -    
-    
no. 
           30  
279  
244.78  
-    
34.27  
-    
            -    
-    
TA_AND_CONS MOOCs platform 
lumpsum 
           -    
115  
              -    
-    
124.97  
-    
            -    
-    
Certified courses for 
operationalising capacity building 
on digital technology 
TWM 
Total of subcomponent 1.1 
Subcomponent 1.2. Micro enterprises 
development 
A. Studies 
no 
           45  
260  
164.30  
63.89  
31.95  
-    
            -    
-    
4,447  
2,479.08  
381.40  
553.14  
460.08  
292.62  
282.38  
TA_AND_CONS 
Gender / nutrition sensitive Value 
Chain analysis as part of VC / 
Market analysis 
no. of studies 
            1  
TA_AND_CONS Gender Impact Assessment /a 
no. of studies 
            1  
TA_AND_CONS Poverty Impact Assessment /b 
no. of studies 
            1  
6  
6  
6  
              -      
0.71  
        5.04  
-    
              -    
-    
              -      
0.71  
        5.04  
-    
              -    
-    
              -      
0.71  
        5.04  
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
no. 
           98  
68  
              -      
8.34  
59.54  
-    
              -    
-    
-    
no. 
           13  
377  
              -      
46.31  
330.76  
-    
              -    
-    
-    
no. 
           33  
47  
              -      
5.79  
41.35  
-    
              -    
-    
-    
no. 
            7  
377  
              -      
46.31  
330.76  
-    
              -    
-    
-    
GSI 
GSI 
GSI 
GSI 
GSI 
GR&SUB 
GR&SUB 
GR&SUB 
GR&SUB 
TA_AND_CONS 
TWM 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
B. Demonstrations 
Small income generation activity 
by women (innovative businesses) 
/c 
Collective youth enterprises 
(processing and agro-residue 
based enterprises) /d 
Individual youth loans through 
youth groups (innovative  
technology adoption) /e 
Collective VC enterprises through 
MAs, CDAs Etc (energy saving 
technolgy etc) /f 
Support to individual farmers in the 
MAs (innovative production 
technologies, climate resistant 
varieties etc) /g 
C. Financial support for MSME 
Credit line for small income 
generation by women 
Credit line for collective youth 
enterprises 
Credit line for individual youth 
loans through youth groups 
Credit line for collective VC 
enterprises through MAs, CDAs 
Etc 
Entrepreunership and financing 
specialist 
Training in business management 
to beneficiaries 
Study on opportunities for 
microinsurance 
Assessment and mapping of the 
demand for credit 
International technical assistance 
on rural finance issues /h 
D. Support to innovations for 
climate adaptation 
no. 
         173  
120  
              -    
lumpsum 
           -    
15,552  
lumpsum 
           -    
2,607  
lumpsum 
           -    
11,333  
lumpsum 
           -    
1,313  
pers.year 
            5  
lumpsum 
           -    
lumpsum 
           -    
lumpsum 
           -    
26  
29  
80  
80  
              -      
14.75  
105.33  
-    
              -    
-    
-    
9,642.24     
782.10  
5,439.84     
393.90  
22.82  
25.21  
70.60  
70.60  
-    
-    
-    
-    
3.19  
3.53  
9.88  
9.88  
5,909.76  
-    
              -    
-    
-    
            -    
-    
       104.28  
1,720.62  
-    
            -    
-    
       453.32  
-    
5,439.84  
            -    
-    
       131.30  
787.80  
-    
            -    
-    
              -    
-    
            -    
-    
              -    
-    
            -    
-    
              -    
-    
            -    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
lumpsum 
           -    
172  
151.28  
21.18  
            -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
GR&SUB 
Development of innovative 
climate-resilient micro-enterprises 
no. of grants 
           20  
102  
-    
-    
-    
                  -    
101.71  
-    
-    
Total of subcomponent 1.2. 
Sub-Total of Component 1 
32,301.34    
36,748.38    
16,598.58    
-      
171.27    
-      
6,792.63    
101.71    
2,508.42    
5,439.84    
        688.90    
19,077.66    
381.40    
724.41    
460.08    
7,085.25    
384.09    
2,508.42    
5,439.84    
        688.90    
Subcomponent 2.1. Investments in irrigation 
infrastructure and management 
2. Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and resilience 
A. Technology demonstration 
Irrigation rehabilitation (use of 
modern technology) /a 
B. Irrigation related investments 
under the business plans 
CW 
CW 
TA_AND_CONS 
Irrigation rehabilitation 
Development of Water User 
Associations /b 
no 
           65  
174  
           -    
-    
no of HH 
         775  
2,080  
no. 
           75  
380  
CW 
Rehabilitation of branch canals 
no. of branches 
           -    
TA_AND_CONS Branch canal design 
no of branches 
           -    
-    
-    
-    
no of branches 
           -    
           -    
-    
lumpsum 
           -    
34  
no. of units 
         100  
409  
no. of units 
           -    
-    
no. of meetings 
            9  
lumpsum 
           20  
           -    
1  
94  
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
Branch canal construction and 
supervision 
C. Digital solutions to water 
management 
Digital water DashBoard, server 
and software 
GSI 
GSI 
TWM 
OM 
Digital water meters /c 
Irrigation automation with Smart 
Phone based automated Pump 
Starters /d 
Workshops, meetings, group 
discussions /e 
Implementing digital strategies for 
water management 
Total of subcomponent 2.1. 
Subcomponent.2.2 . Production related 
investments under business plans 
A. Demonstrations 
              -    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
174  
-    
177  
380  
-    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
0  
-    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
30  
4  
205  
-    
205  
              -    
-    
-    
               1  
-    
0  
              -    
-    
94  
333  
            208  
759  
603  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
3,172  
763  
30  
303  
333  
            -    
-    
            208  
933  
603  
GSI 
GSI 
GSI 
GSI 
GSI 
TWM 
GSI 
GR&SUB 
GSI 
GSI 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
TWM 
TWM 
TA_AND_CONS 
Establishment of demonstration 
plot for climate resilience 
businesses 
B. Production related 
investments 
Credit line for collective youth 
enterprises ( direct agricultural 
production and marketing related)  
Credit line for individual youth 
loans through youth groups ( direct 
agricultural production and 
marketing related) 
Credit line for collective VC 
enterprises through MAs, CDAs 
Etc( direct agricultural production 
and marketing related) 
Credit line for support to individual 
farmers in the MAs 
Production related training and 
capacity building 
Establishment of water efficient 
irrigation at plot level 
Contribution to credit guarantee 
funds 
C. Digital solutions to support 
production 
Digital Platform development 
(STAR Platform), Dashboard, 
Databases, Design, Development, 
Hosting 
Data logging systems for Project 
Staff and the Collaborators (Tabs) 
Video extension strategy, digital 
green model 
STAR integrated app development 
design development and content 
development 
SMS Gateway - Customising the 
Existing gateway of WFP or 
development afresh 
Overall implementation of digital 
strategies in production 
component 
MOOCs platform development and 
course development execution. 
Input dealer certified training 
Social media and whatsapp 
components - Content 
no. of demo plots             38  
520  
              -      
64  
456  
              -    
-    
-    
           -    
no. 
           18  
1,013  
no. 
      1,250  
1,815  
no. 
no. 
            4  
348  
      5,000  
2,323  
lumpsum 
           -    
22  
no. of feddan 
         225  
260  
lumpsum 
           -    
-    
           -    
lumpsum 
           -    
1,380  
lumpsum 
           -    
0  
lumpsum 
           -    
1,150  
lumpsum 
           -    
345  
lumpsum 
           -    
34  
no. of meetings 
           24  
277  
lumpsum 
           -    
lumpsum 
           -    
87  
78  
427  
124  
764  
223  
137  
693  
             19  
              -    
              -    
43  
285  
3  
32  
-    
1,210  
169  
               0  
1,009  
303  
             30  
243  
             76  
             68  
0  
141  
42  
4  
34  
11  
10  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
              36  
427  
-    
              64  
-    
764  
              31  
137  
-    
            183  
              -    
              -    
              -    
228  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
1,161  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
              -    
              -    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
              -    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
development and network graph 
theory implementation 
AIDA tool customization and 
implementation 
Digital hackathon for pitching 3 
ideas - POC to pilot and 
handholding 
Input dealer certified courses - 
private extension model - linking it 
to input supply - extension 
performance /a 
Development of digital tools for 
early warning outreach 
TA_AND_CONS 
TA_AND_CONS 
TWM 
TA_AND_CONS 
II. Recurrent Costs 
Total of subcomponent 2.2. 
Total of Component 2 
Component 3.1" Project Management 
A. Investment Costs 
1. Investment Costs 
lumpsum 
           -    
57  
lumpsum 
           -    
6  
lumpsum 
           -    
-    
lumpsum 
           -    
115  
           -    
           -    
9,830.42    
13,002.50    
             50  
               5  
              -    
              -    
7  
1  
-    
14  
-    
-    
-    
              -    
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
              -    
-    
-    
              -    
101  
-    
-    
#REF! 
  5,035.14    
-      
1,207.24    
         -                -      
     313.12    
785.45    
563.96    
1,925.51    
  5,797.78    
30.26    
1,509.76    
332.77    
          -      
     521.10    
785.45    
1,496.74    
2,528.65    
3. Programme management and policy engagement 
GSI 
GSI 
MIS System & Istallation 
STAR specific accounting software 
/a 
no. 
no. 
            1  
            1  
46  
11  
GSI 
Vehicles 
GSI 
Laptops 
GSI 
Printers 
GSI 
Photocopier 
GSI 
Fax / telephone 
GSI 
GSI 
Tabs with open data kits 
Handicam and video production 
equipments 
GSI 
Pico projectors / neat projectors 
vehicle 
           10  
230  
no. 
no. 
No 
No 
no. 
no. 
no. 
           30  
14  
            5  
            2  
           10  
3  
2  
1  
         400  
138  
         160  
           80  
74  
28  
              -      
              -      
46  
11  
              -      
230  
              -      
14  
              -      
              -      
              -      
3  
2  
1  
              -      
138  
              -      
              -      
74  
28  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
GSI 
Other office equipment 
sets 
           30  
5  
              -      
5  
-    
B. Meetings and workshops 
TWM 
TWM 
Project startup 
Financial management training 
workshops /b 
C. Advisory services 
lumpsum 
            1  
lumpsum 
            2  
                -      
           -    
17  
16  
TA_AND_CONS Digital technology advisor /c 
Lumpsum 
            2  
130  
D. Policy dialogue 
TWM 
Policy dialogue platforms 
lumpsum 
            1  
17  
II. Recurrent Costs 
A. National Programme 
Coordination Unit - NPCU 
National programme manager 
STAR programme technical 
specialist 
Adaptation Fund Programme 
management 
person.month 
           18  
person.month 
           18  
18  
45  
lumpsum 
           -    
300  
M&E and KM manager 
person.month 
           18  
M&E and KM specialist 
person.month 
           36  
M&E and ICT specialist 
Gender and social development 
manager 
person.month 
           18  
person.month 
           18  
Digital agriculture specialist 
person.month 
           18  
Financial manager 
person.month 
           18  
Financial coordinator 
person.month 
           18  
Procurement manager 
person.month 
           18  
Procurement coordinator 
person.month 
           18  
Accountant 
person.month 
           18  
Accountant assistant 
person.month 
           18  
32  
50  
25  
29  
45  
40  
29  
36  
27  
36  
22  
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
              -    
              -    
114  
             15  
              -    
             45  
              -    
             32  
             50  
             25  
             29  
             45  
             40  
             29  
             36  
             27  
             36  
             22  
17  
16  
16  
2  
18  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
300  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
SA 
OM 
OM 
OM 
OM 
OM 
OM 
Human resources and 
administrative manager 
Human resources and 
administrative assistant 
person.month 
           18  
person.month 
           18  
Office assistant 
person.month 
           18  
Office clerk 
person.month 
           18  
Driver 
B. Governorate Programme 
Coordination Unit - GPCU 
Governorate Programme 
Coordinator 
person.month 
           18  
              1.5    
           -    
person.month 
           54  
Deputy manager 
person.month 
           54  
Agronomist 
Gender and social development 
experts 
Business development, marketing 
and M&E 
Digital agriculture specialist 
Digital agriculture facilitators / 
volounteers 
person.month 
           54  
person.month 
           54  
person.month 
           54  
person.month 
           54  
person.month 
         108  
Infrastructure Engineer specialist 
person.month 
           54  
Accountant 
Social and community mobilization 
specialist 
person.month 
           54  
person.month 
           54  
Young professionals 
person.month 
         270  
C. Operating costs 
              1.5    
           -    
Car fuel and maintenance 
lumpsum 
           15  
Office supplies 
lumpsum 
            2  
Office operating costs 
lumpsum 
            2  
Travel allowances 
lumpsum 
            2  
Annual maintenance of softwares 
lumpsum 
            1  
32  
18  
14  
4  
7  
27  
54  
19  
19  
19  
19  
11  
24  
19  
19  
68  
86  
4  
72  
5  
1  
Adaptation Fund agency fees 
lumpsum 
           -    
250  
             32  
             18  
             14  
               4  
               7  
              -    
             54  
              -    
              -    
              -    
              -    
             11  
              -    
              -    
              -    
             68  
              -    
              -    
              -    
              -    
               1  
              -    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
27  
-    
19  
19  
19  
19  
-    
24  
19  
19  
-    
86  
4  
72  
5  
0  
31  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
219  
A. M&E studies and activities 
           -    
TA_AND_CONS Baseline survey 
lumpsum 
            1  
115  
TA_AND_CONS Completion survey 
lumpsum 
           -    
-    
TA_AND_CONS Annual Outcome surveys 
Annual M&E and planning 
workshop 
TWM 
lumpsum 
            1  
lumpsum 
            1  
TA_AND_CONS Knowledge management activities 
lumpsum 
            1  
TA_AND_CONS M&E data collection activities 
lumpsum 
            2  
TA_AND_CONS Technical assistance 
lumpsum 
            1  
TA_AND_CONS Website and social media 
lumpsum 
            2  
15  
6  
12  
9  
17  
5  
TA_AND_CONS Impact assessment 
study 
           -    
-    
TWM 
Communication and KM products 
on success stories 
TA_AND_CONS Audit 
lumpsum 
            5  
audit 
            1  
52  
5  
14  
-    
2  
1  
1  
1  
2  
5  
-    
6  
1  
101  
              -    
             13  
               5  
             10  
               8  
             15  
              -    
              -    
             46  
               4  
              -    
              -    
Total of Component 3. 
Grand Total of the Project 
     -        -        
2,490  
52,241  
955  
-    
1,016  
-    
            -    
519  
              -    
-    
-    
25,831  
412  
3,250  
793  
7,085  
1,689  
         1,210  
4,005  
7,968  
Footnotes for Component 1.1:  
\a Responsible also for the training of trainier 
\b Done by the service provider; related to community mobilisation, development of rural institutions, business plan development; including farming as a business and crop budget module, marketing modules, business modules, financial 
management modules; 
     revisi 
\c One per governorate 
\d One per governorate 
\e One per governorate 
\f Training workshop 30 members per w/s, SP trains Yps, and CDTs. 
\g Per cluster; carried out by the mobilisers in CDTs, CDT and Yps based on awareness package developed by the service provider 
\h Per village; roll out carried out by the CDAs and Yps and CDTs 
\i 20 women per village; this will also include buyers orientation workshops 
\j this includes guidance on Wealth ranking Exercise 
\k Learning village to village on diferent topics: agriculture/off-farm enterprise 
\l 20 women per village 
\m 10 people per village 
\n per cluster 
\o Machinery and equipment 
\p Estimated one collection centre per cluster 
\q One per cluster 
\r Including campaigns, publicity, group discussions 
\s Mentoring 3 pilot projects 
Footnotes for Component 1.2:  
\a At start, mid-term and completion 
\b At start, mid-term and completion 
\c 15 demos per cluster identified 
\d 2 demos per cluster identified 
\e 5 demos per cluster identified 
\f 1 demo per cluster identified 
\g 15 demos per cluster identified 
\h expertise on insurance, credit guarantee, secured 
transactions 
Footnotes for Component 2.1:  
\a 10 demos per cluster identified 
\b This involves, mobilisation, training, capacity building and institutional development support to WUAs 
\c Electromagnetic flow meter model ex: FM600 / 6"), IoT master control RTU, communication booster, servo Stabilizer and an online UPS 
\d Electromagnetic flow meter model ex: FM600 / 6"), IoT master control RTU, communication booster, servo Stabilizer and an online UPS 
\e Two for each governorate 
Footnotes for Component 2.2:  
\a Piloted in 5 locations in each governorate every year 
Footnotes for Component 3  
\a Access to 5 users 
\b Attended by 6 project staff and 1 IFAD employee 
/consultant - in Cairo 
\c International 
consultant 
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7:  Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
GOODSDrafter of this PP: Project/Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper EgyptProcurement MethodLoan #:ICB and LIB (Goods): USD 100,000NCB and LNB (Goods): USD 25,000-USD 100,000IFAD prior review is required for Goods procurement value with more than USD 50,000Plan vs.DescriptionAWPB Ref.Lot NumberActual1Plan01-Oct-2011-Oct-2016-Oct-2027-Nov-2027-Dec-2011-Jan-2131-Jan-2120-Feb-21Actual1Plan01-Aug-2006-Aug-2009-Aug-2019-Aug-2024-Aug-2029-Aug-2018-Sep-2020-Sep-20Actual4              265,000 Plan01-Sep-2011-Sep-2016-Sep-2028-Oct-2027-Nov-2007-Dec-2027-Dec-2016-Jan-21Actual1                34,000 NCBPlan01-Dec-2011-Dec-2016-Dec-2015-Jan-2104-Feb-2114-Feb-2106-Mar-2116-Mar-21Actual1                40,000 NCBPlan15-Nov-2025-Nov-2030-Nov-2030-Dec-2019-Jan-2129-Jan-2118-Feb-2128-Feb-21Actual2Plan01-Jan-2111-Jan-2116-Jan-2115-Feb-2107-Mar-2117-Mar-2106-Apr-2116-Apr-21Actual2Plan01-Feb-2106-Feb-2109-Feb-2119-Feb-2124-Feb-2101-Mar-2121-Mar-2123-Mar-21ActualContract finalization Bid invitation datePost                15,000 NSPriorNCBPriorBid closing/openingIssue # of invitation for bidsFor other Financier, the procurement methods will be revisedBid evaluation reportDate Contract AwardBid evaluation reportDate Contract SignatureNo-ObjectionContract amount in US$PriorBid DocumentsBidding PeriodDate ProposedDate No- ObjectionProcurement MethodPre- or post- reviewBASIC DATA              230,000 Procurement of accounting softwareProcurement of 10 Pickups Vehicles Estimated Amount in US$Country/Organization: EgyptICB                11,000 NSICBProcurement of MIS System & IstallationProcurement of inputs for Nutrition and Home ( roof top) gardenDemo PlotsProcurement of Digital water DashBoard, server and softwareProcurement of post-harvest equipmentPriorProcurement of Office equipment including laptops, tablets, Photocopiers, Printers, Fax / telephone sets, Handicam and video production equipments, Pico projectors / neat projectors and Other office equipmentPriorPrior              150,000  
Drafter of this PP: Project/Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper EgyptProcurement MethodLoan #:ICB (Works): USD 200,000NCB (Works): USD 50,000-USD 200,000IFAD prior review is required for Works procurement value with more than USD 100,000Plan vsDescriptionAWPB Ref.Lot NumberActualPlan01-Dec-2011-Dec-2016-Dec-2015-Jan-2104-Feb-2114-Feb-2106-Mar-2116-Mar-21ActualPlan01-Feb-2111-Feb-2116-Feb-2130-Mar-2129-Apr-2109-May-2129-May-2118-Jun-21ActualPlan01-Jul-2111-Jul-2116-Jul-2127-Aug-2126-Sep-2106-Oct-2126-Oct-2115-Nov-21ActualPlan01-Aug-2111-Aug-2116-Aug-2115-Sep-2105-Oct-2115-Oct-2104-Nov-2114-Nov-21ActualPlan01-Aug-2111-Aug-2116-Aug-2115-Sep-2105-Oct-2115-Oct-2104-Nov-2114-Nov-21ActualPlan01-Sep-2111-Sep-2116-Sep-2116-Oct-2105-Nov-2115-Nov-2105-Dec-2115-Dec-21ActualPlan01-Sep-2111-Sep-2116-Sep-2116-Oct-2105-Nov-2115-Nov-2105-Dec-2115-Dec-21ActualWORKSCountry/Organization: EgyptFor other Financier, the procurement methods will be revisedBASIC DATABid DocumentsBidding PeriodBid evaluation reportContract finalization no-objectionContract amount in US$Issue # of invitation for bidsProcurement methodEstimated Amount in US$Prior- or post- reviewDate ProposedLumpsum or bill of quantitiesPre- or post- qualificationsbill of quantitiesPost-qualificationsBid closing-openingBid evaluation reportDate contract awardDate contract signatureIrrigation rehabilitation (Demo Plots)-phase 1PriorNCB79,000                  PriorDate no- ObjectionBid invitation datePriorIrrigation rehabilitation-phase 1bill of quantitiesPre-qualificationsbill of quantitiesPre-qualificationsICB395,000                Post-qualificationsMarket structures and outletsNCB50,000                  Irrigation rehabilitation-phase 2ICB3,365,000             NCB250,000                PriorConstruction of Collection centresNCBPrior50,000                  Priorbill of quantitiesIrrigation rehabilitation (Demo Plots)-phase 2NCB188,000                PriorConstruction of (Cold) storage facilities bill of quantitiesPost-qualificationsbill of quantitiesPost-qualifications1                 bill of quantitiesPost-qualifications1                 1                 4                 1                 1                 1                  
CONSULTANTSDrafter of this PP: Country/Organization: EgyptProject/Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper EgyptProcurement MethodLoan #:QCBSQBSFBSLCSCQSSSSSICIFAD prior review is required for Consultancy Services procurement value with more than USD 50,000IFAD prior review is required for for individual Consultants procurement value with more than USD 5,000DescriptionAWPB Ref.Selection methodLump-sum or time-basedEstimated amount in US$Pre/Post- reviewPlan vs. ActualDate publishedClosing dateDate proposedDate no-objection Date proposed Date no-objection Plan vs. ActualDate preparedDate no-objectionInvitation dateSubmission/opening dateSubmission evaluation report (T)no-objection evaluation report (T)Opening Financial ProposalSubmission eval. Report (T) and (F)no-objection eval. Report (T) and (F) Plan vs. ActualContract amount in US$Contract awardContract signatureSICPriorPlan01-Sep-2011-Sep-2001-Aug-2006-Aug-2016-Sep-2021-Sep-20PlanNANANANANANANA26-Sep-2001-Oct-20Plan21-Oct-2021-Oct-20ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Oct-2016-Oct-2001-Oct-2008-Oct-2026-Oct-2002-Nov-20Plan12-Nov-2019-Nov-2020-Nov-2020-Dec-2009-Jan-2119-Jan-2126-Jan-2130-Dec-2006-Jan-21Plan26-Jan-2105-Feb-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Oct-2030-Oct-2015-Oct-2022-Oct-2009-Nov-2016-Nov-20Plan26-Nov-2003-Dec-2004-Dec-2003-Jan-2123-Jan-2102-Feb-2109-Feb-2113-Jan-2120-Jan-21Plan09-Feb-2119-Feb-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Nov-2016-Nov-2001-Nov-2008-Nov-2026-Nov-2003-Dec-20Plan13-Dec-2020-Dec-2021-Dec-2020-Jan-2109-Feb-2119-Feb-2126-Feb-2130-Jan-2106-Feb-21Plan26-Feb-2108-Mar-21ActualActualActualSICPriorPlan01-Sep-2011-Sep-2001-Aug-2006-Aug-2016-Sep-2021-Sep-20PlanNANANANANANANA26-Sep-2001-Oct-20Plan21-Oct-2021-Oct-20ActualActualActualQCBSPostPlan15-Oct-2030-Oct-2015-Oct-2022-Oct-2009-Nov-2016-Nov-20Plan26-Nov-2003-Dec-2004-Dec-2003-Jan-2123-Jan-2102-Feb-2109-Feb-2113-Jan-2120-Jan-21Plan09-Feb-2119-Feb-21ActualActualActualSICPostPlan01-Nov-2011-Nov-2001-Aug-2006-Aug-2016-Nov-2021-Nov-20PlanNANANANANANANA26-Nov-2001-Dec-20Plan21-Dec-2021-Dec-20ActualActualActualQCBSPostPlan15-Oct-2030-Oct-2015-Oct-2022-Oct-2009-Nov-2016-Nov-20Plan26-Nov-2003-Dec-2004-Dec-2003-Jan-2123-Jan-2102-Feb-2109-Feb-2113-Jan-2120-Jan-21Plan09-Feb-2119-Feb-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Nov-2021-Nov-2001-Nov-2011-Nov-2011-Dec-2021-Dec-20Plan05-Jan-2115-Jan-2118-Jan-2101-Mar-2131-Mar-2110-Apr-2120-Apr-2125-Apr-2105-May-21Plan25-May-2114-Jun-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Dec-2004-Jan-2115-Dec-2025-Dec-2024-Jan-2103-Feb-21Plan18-Feb-2128-Feb-2103-Mar-2114-Apr-2114-May-2124-May-2103-Jun-2108-Jun-2118-Jun-21Plan08-Jul-2128-Jul-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Jan-2104-Feb-2115-Jan-2125-Jan-2124-Feb-2106-Mar-21Plan21-Mar-2131-Mar-2103-Apr-2115-May-2114-Jun-2124-Jun-2104-Jul-2109-Jul-2119-Jul-21Plan08-Aug-2128-Aug-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Feb-2107-Mar-2115-Feb-2125-Feb-2127-Mar-2106-Apr-21Plan21-Apr-2101-May-2104-May-2115-Jun-2115-Jul-2125-Jul-2104-Aug-2109-Aug-2119-Aug-21Plan08-Sep-2128-Sep-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Mar-2004-Apr-2015-Mar-2025-Mar-2024-Apr-2004-May-20Plan19-May-2029-May-2001-Jun-2013-Jul-2012-Aug-2022-Aug-2001-Sep-2006-Sep-2016-Sep-20Plan06-Oct-2026-Oct-20ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Apr-2105-May-2115-Apr-2125-Apr-2125-May-2104-Jun-21Plan19-Jun-2129-Jun-2102-Jul-2113-Aug-2112-Sep-2122-Sep-2102-Oct-2107-Oct-2117-Oct-21Plan06-Nov-2126-Nov-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-May-2121-May-2101-May-2111-May-2110-Jun-2120-Jun-21Plan05-Jul-2115-Jul-2118-Jul-2129-Aug-2128-Sep-2108-Oct-2118-Oct-2123-Oct-2102-Nov-21Plan22-Nov-2112-Dec-21ActualActualActualSICPriorPlan01-Oct-2011-Oct-2001-Aug-2006-Aug-2016-Oct-2021-Oct-20PlanNANANANANANANA26-Oct-2031-Oct-20Plan20-Nov-2020-Nov-20ActualActualActualSICPriorPlan15-Oct-2025-Oct-2001-Aug-2006-Aug-2030-Oct-2004-Nov-20PlanNANANANANANANA09-Nov-2014-Nov-20Plan04-Dec-2004-Dec-20ActualActualActualSICPriorPlan01-Sep-2011-Sep-2001-Aug-2006-Aug-2016-Sep-2021-Sep-20PlanNANANANANANANA26-Sep-2001-Oct-20Plan21-Oct-2021-Oct-20ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Oct-2016-Oct-2001-Oct-2008-Oct-2026-Oct-2002-Nov-20Plan12-Nov-2019-Nov-2020-Nov-2020-Dec-2009-Jan-2119-Jan-2126-Jan-2130-Dec-2006-Jan-21Plan26-Jan-2105-Feb-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Oct-2021-Oct-2001-Oct-2011-Oct-2010-Nov-2020-Nov-20Plan05-Dec-2015-Dec-2018-Dec-2029-Jan-2128-Feb-2110-Mar-2120-Mar-2125-Mar-2104-Apr-21Plan24-Apr-2114-May-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Nov-2021-Nov-2001-Nov-2011-Nov-2011-Dec-2021-Dec-20Plan05-Jan-2115-Jan-2118-Jan-2101-Mar-2131-Mar-2110-Apr-2120-Apr-2125-Apr-2105-May-21Plan25-May-2114-Jun-21ActualActualActualQCBSPostPlan01-Dec-2016-Dec-2001-Dec-2008-Dec-2026-Dec-2002-Jan-21Plan12-Jan-2119-Jan-2120-Jan-2119-Feb-2111-Mar-2121-Mar-2128-Mar-2101-Mar-2108-Mar-21Plan28-Mar-2107-Apr-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Nov-2021-Nov-2001-Nov-2011-Nov-2011-Dec-2021-Dec-20Plan05-Jan-2115-Jan-2118-Jan-2101-Mar-2131-Mar-2110-Apr-2120-Apr-2125-Apr-2105-May-21Plan25-May-2114-Jun-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Dec-2021-Dec-2001-Dec-2011-Dec-2010-Jan-2120-Jan-21Plan04-Feb-2114-Feb-2117-Feb-2131-Mar-2130-Apr-2110-May-2120-May-2125-May-2104-Jun-21Plan24-Jun-2114-Jul-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Dec-2004-Jan-2115-Dec-2025-Dec-2024-Jan-2103-Feb-21Plan18-Feb-2128-Feb-2103-Mar-2114-Apr-2114-May-2124-May-2103-Jun-2108-Jun-2118-Jun-21Plan08-Jul-2128-Jul-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Oct-2016-Oct-2001-Oct-2008-Oct-2026-Oct-2002-Nov-20Plan12-Nov-2019-Nov-2020-Nov-2020-Dec-2009-Jan-2119-Jan-2126-Jan-2130-Dec-2006-Jan-21Plan26-Jan-2105-Feb-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Oct-2030-Oct-2015-Oct-2022-Oct-2009-Nov-2016-Nov-20Plan26-Nov-2003-Dec-2004-Dec-2003-Jan-2123-Jan-2102-Feb-2109-Feb-2113-Jan-2120-Jan-21Plan09-Feb-2119-Feb-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Nov-2016-Nov-2001-Nov-2008-Nov-2026-Nov-2003-Dec-20Plan13-Dec-2020-Dec-2021-Dec-2020-Jan-2109-Feb-2119-Feb-2126-Feb-2130-Jan-2106-Feb-21Plan26-Feb-2108-Mar-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan15-Nov-2005-Dec-2015-Nov-2025-Nov-2025-Dec-2004-Jan-21Plan19-Jan-2129-Jan-2101-Feb-2115-Mar-2114-Apr-2124-Apr-2104-May-2109-May-2119-May-21Plan08-Jun-2128-Jun-21ActualActualActualQCBSPriorPlan01-Sep-2021-Sep-2001-Sep-2011-Sep-2011-Oct-2021-Oct-20Plan05-Nov-2015-Nov-2018-Nov-2030-Dec-2029-Jan-2108-Feb-2118-Feb-2123-Feb-2105-Mar-21Plan25-Mar-2114-Apr-21ActualActualActualSICPriorPlan01-Sep-2011-Sep-2001-Sep-2006-Sep-2016-Sep-2021-Sep-20PlanNANANANANANANA26-Sep-2001-Oct-20Plan21-Oct-2021-Oct-20ActualActualActualSICPriorPlan01-Oct-2021-Oct-2001-Oct-2008-Oct-2031-Oct-2007-Nov-20PlanNANANANANANANA17-Nov-2024-Nov-20Plan14-Dec-2014-Dec-20ActualActualActualBid ProposalBid evaluations technical (T) and financial (F) 75,000                   30,000                   For other Financier, the procurement methods will be revisedContract Finalisation Request for expression of interestTerms of Reference ShortlistRequest for ProposalRecruitment of Indivadual Consultant for providing training of trainier for mobilisation of CDAs, cooperatives, women groups and MAsRecruitment of Consulting Firm for carrying out Communication and mobilisation campaign Lump-sumRecruitment of Indivadual Consultant for preparation of training material and providing training of trainierLump-sumRecruitment of Consulting Firm for Community mobilization, awareness package, training material preparation and guidelinesLump-sum15,000                   Recruitment of Indivadual Consultant for development of training material for TOT trainings on targeting and genderLump-sum3,000                     55,000                   Lump-sum15,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm for carrying out Istitutional need assessment, Market studies, Agribusiness landscape and Quantitative assessment on access to financeLump-sumRecruitment of Consulting Firm for providing post-harvest specialized technical assistanceLump-sum29,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm to provide capacity building on climate change issuesLump-sum230,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for the development of Digital market Platform and Customization of Bashaier of KEFLump-sum690,000                Recruitment of Indivadual Consultant for carrying out Gender Impact AssessmentLump-sum5,000                     Lump-sum115,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for the development of Digital Finance STAR Wallet and Mobile Money - Platform IntegrationLump-sum690,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for the development of Visual agriculture marketing ModuleLump-sum460,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for providing Certified courses for operationalising capacity building on digital technologyLump-sum170,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for carrying out Analysis of climate risksLump-sum80,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm for the development of Content development and inventory on digital agricultureLump-sum345,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for the development of MOOCs platformRecruitment of Indivadual Consultant for carrying out Poverty Impact AssessmentLump-sum5,000                     Recruitment of Entrepreunership and financing specialistLump-sum17,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm for providing Training in business management to beneficiariesLump-sum29,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm for carrying out Study on opportunities for microinsurance and Assessment and mapping of the demand for creditLump-sum160,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for providing technical assistance on rural finance issues Lump-sum170,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for development of Digital Platform development (STAR Platform), Dashboard, Databases, Design, Development, HostingLump-sum1,380,000             Recruitment of Consulting Firm for development of Video extension strategy, digital green modelLump-sum1,150,000             Recruitment of Consulting Firm for STAR integrated app development design development and content developmentLump-sum345,000                Recruitment of Consulting Firm for development of MOOCs platform development and course development execution. Input dealer certified trainingLump-sum57,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm for development of Social media and whatsapp components - Content development and network graph theory implementationLump-sum52,000                   Lump-sum30,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm for AIDA tool customization and implementationLump-sum57,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm for development of digital tools for early warning outreachLump-sum115,000                Recruitment of Digital technology advisorLump-sum85,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm for carrying out Production related training and capacity buildingLump-sum14,000                   Recruitment of Consulting Firm to carry out Programme Baseline surveyLump-sum115,000                Recruitment of Indivadual Consultant for M&E Technical assistance 
Non-Consultancy ServicesDrafter of this PP: Project/Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper EgyptProcurement MethodLoan #:ICB (Non-Consultancy Services): USD 100,000NCB (Non-Consultancy Services): USD 10,000-USD 100,000IFAD prior review is required for Non-Consultancy Services procurement value with more than USD 10,000Plan vs.DescriptionAWPB Ref.Lot NumberActual1              345,000 Plan01-Dec-2011-Dec-2016-Dec-2027-Jan-2126-Feb-2113-Mar-2102-Apr-2122-Apr-21Actual1Plan01-Dec-2011-Dec-2016-Dec-2027-Jan-2126-Feb-2113-Mar-2102-Apr-2122-Apr-21Actual1              350,000 Plan01-Sep-2111-Sep-2116-Sep-2128-Oct-2127-Nov-2112-Dec-2101-Jan-2221-Jan-22Actual1Plan01-Oct-2111-Oct-2116-Oct-2127-Nov-2127-Dec-2111-Jan-2231-Jan-2220-Feb-22ActualBid DocumentsBidding PeriodBid evaluation reportContract finalization Issue # of invitation for bidsEstimated Amount in US$Procurement MethodPre- or post- reviewDate ProposedCountry/Organization: EgyptFor other Financier, the procurement methods will be revisedBASIC DATADate Contract AwardDate Contract SignatureDate No- ObjectionBid invitation dateBid closing/openingBid evaluation reportNo-ObjectionContract amount in US$PriorEstablishment of water efficient irrigation at plot level              170,000 ICBPriorEstablishment of demonstration plot for climate resilience businessesICBEstablishment of demonstration plot for climate resilience businessesEstablishment of water efficient irrigation at plot levelICBPrior              175,000 ICBPrior 
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Arab Republic OF Egypt  
and 
The International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD) 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural 
Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
1 
Contents 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ..................................................................................... 3 
MAP OF THE PROGRAMME AREA ........................................................................................ 5 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND ................................................................. 6 
CHAPTER 2: THE PROGRAMME ......................................................................................... 10 
PROGRAMME GOAL AND OBJECTIVES ............................................................................... 10 
A. 
B. 
PROJECT AREA AND GEOGRAPHICAL TARGETING .................................................................. 11 
C.  TARGET GROUPS AND TARGETING STRATEGY: .................................................................... 13 
CHAPTER 3: PROGRAMME COMPONENTS ........................................................................... 22 
CHAPTER 4: PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION STRUCTURE AND RESPONSIBILITIES ................... 54 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT, IMPLEMENTATION STRUCTURE AND STAFFING .......................................... 54 
A. 
B. 
PLANNING AND BUDGETING ......................................................................................... 57 
C.  M AND E ............................................................................................................. 63 
D.  KM AND COMMUNICATIONS ......................................................................................... 77 
CHAPTER 5: GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF RURAL FINANCE ACTIVITIES ............. 81 
CHAPTER 6: GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF DIGITAL SOLUTIONS ........................ 90 
CHAPTER 7: PROGRAMME COST AND FINANCING ............................................................. 105 
CHAPTER 8: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ............................................................................ 129 
CHAPTER 9: PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING .............................................................. 239 
CHAPTER 10: ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN ........................................... 285 
ANNEXES 
ANNEX 1: TERMS OF REFERENCE OF KEY STAFF ............................................................... 290 
ANNEX 2: LOGFRAME ................................................................................................... 308 
ANNEX 3: BACKGROUND NOTE ON MARKETS AND VALUE CHAINS ....................................... 312 
ANNEX 4: COMMUNITY BASED ORGANISATION IN THE STAR AREA ...................................... 320 
ANNEX 5: PROFILE OF POTENTIAL SERVICE PROVIDERS .................................................... 326 
ANNEX 6: BACKGROUND NOTE ON RURAL FINANCE SECTOR .............................................. 331 
ANNEX 7: STAR INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK .................................................................. 349 
2 
Abbreviations and Acronyms  
AB 
ABE 
AC 
ADP 
AF 
AFD 
AfDB 
AFI 
AOS 
BMGF 
BMS 
CB 
CBE 
CC 
CDA 
CFI 
CGC 
CIB 
CPMI 
CW 
ECM 
EDHS 
EGP 
EIB 
EMFF 
ESC 
FC 
FIGI 
FM 
FRA 
FSS 
GA 
GDM 
GFA 
GoE 
GPC 
GPCU 
GSC 
GSM 
HRA 
HRM 
IAMP 
IAS 
ICB 
IDB 
IE 
IGE 
IIS 
ITU 
KM 
KYC 
LSP 
M&E 
MA  
MALR 
MF 
MFI 
MFP 
Agent Bank 
Agricultural Bank of Egypt 
Agricultural Cooperative 
Agricultural Development Plan 
Adaptation Fund 
Agence Française de Développement 
African Development Bank 
Alliance for Financial Inclusion 
Annual Outcome Survey 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
Business Development and Marketing Specialist 
Commercial Banks 
Central Bank of Egypt 
Credit Cooperatives 
Community Development Association 
Cooperating Financial Institution 
Credit Guarantee Company 
Commercial International Bank 
Community Production and Marketing Institution 
Credit Wholesalers 
Environment and Climate Manager 
Egypt Demographic and Health Survey 
Egyptian Pound (1EUR=21.9445 EGP) 
European Investment Bank 
Egyptian Micro Finance Federation 
Executive steering committee 
Finance Coordinator 
Financial Inclusion Initiative 
Finance Manager 
Financial Regulatory Authority 
Financial Services Specialist 
GPCU Agronomist 
Governorate Deputy Manager 
GPCU Accountant 
Government of Egypt 
Governorate Programme Coordinator 
Governorate Programme Coordination Unit 
Governorate Steering Committee 
Gender and Social Inclusion Manager 
HR and Administration Assistant 
HR and Administration Manager  
Irrigation Asset Management Plan 
Irrigation Advisory Services 
Institutional Capacity Building 
Industrial Bank of Egypt 
Infrastructure Engineer 
Income generation and enterprise  
Irrigation improvement Sector 
International Telecommunications Union 
Knowledge Management 
Know your Customer 
Lead Service Provider 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Marketing Association 
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reforms 
Microfinance 
Micro Finance Institution 
M&E Focal Point 
3 
MIC 
MKIS 
MKM 
MKS 
MoF 
MoSS 
MSME 
MSMEDA 
MWRI 
NBFI 
NC 
NGO 
NGO-MFI 
NPCU 
NPL 
NPM 
OFIDO 
ORMS 
PAR 
PB 
PCR 
PM 
PMA 
PRIDE 
PRIME 
PS 
PSC 
SAIL 
SC 
SCS 
STS 
SYP 
ToT 
VC 
VIP 
WRMP 
WUA 
YCF 
Ministry of investment and International Cooperation 
M&E, KM and ICT Specialist 
M&E and KM Manager 
M&E and KM Specialists 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Social Solidarity 
Micro/Small Medium Enterprise 
Micro and Small Medium Enterprises Development Agency 
Ministry of water resources and irrigation 
Non-Bank Financial Institution 
National Coordinator 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
NGO Microfinance Institutions 
National Programme Coordination Unit 
Non-Performing Loan 
National Programme Manager 
On-farm Irrigation Development Project in Old-lands 
The Operational and Results Management System 
Portfolio at Risk 
Participating Bank 
Project Completion Review 
Procurement Manager  
Production and Marketing Association 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments 
Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement Project 
Procurement Specialist 
Programme steering committee 
Sustainable Agricultural Investments and Livelihoods 
Subcomponent 
Social and Community Mobilization Specialist 
STAR Technical Specialist 
Star Young Professional 
Training of Trainers 
Value chain 
Village Implementation Plan 
Water Resources Management Plan 
Water Users Association 
Young Community Facilitators 
4 
Map of the Programme Area 
5 
Chapter 1: Introduction and background 
1.  Governance and administration: The Arab Republic of Egypt is spread in an 
area of 1 million km2 and is divided into four regions of which the Nile valley and delta 
region is considered most important. It is the only cultivable part of the country and 
though it covers just 5% of the total land area, about 95% of the country’s total 
population of around 98.5 million lives in this part. The southern part of this region 
covering the Nile Valley area is referred to as Upper Egypt while the northern part, which 
is the Nile delta area, is referred to as Lower Egypt. The country is divided into 27 
Governorates which are further subdivided into many districts and numerous villages for 
administrative purposes.  
Political and economic context: Following the revolution in 2011, Egypt was 
2. 
thrown into period of political and economic turmoil during which the elected 
government was unseated, the annual GDP growth rate slowed down to 2.5%, inflation 
increased to 33% and the current account deficit reached alarming levels. The current 
government, sworn-in in 2014, initiated a series of reforms to spur the economy which 
included the passage of the VAT law, reducing energy subsidies, currency liberalisation 
and containing wage bills. These reforms have gradually restored economic confidence, 
increased stability, promoted investments and enhanced exports. In 2018 Egypt 
reported an increase in the GDP growth rate to 5.4%, reduction of inflation to 14% and 
unemployment rate at 9%, leading to the re-election of the government in the 
presidential elections held during the same year.  
3.  Much of Egypt’s economic reform has come, unfortunately, at the cost of taking on 
more debt. In December 2018, Egypt’s foreign debt totalled to an all-time high of US$ 
96.6 billion which was compounded by domestic debt of around US$ 240 billion. In 
response, the government has introduced austerity measures including liberalising the 
price of bread flour and slashing fuel and transportation subsidies. The Government has 
also initiated deeper review of all new external debt proposals to prevent non-essential 
borrowings from adding to the debt burden. Only those external debt proposals are 
accepted that are structured in a way that allows the government (as much as possible) 
to use financial institutions to deliver and recover the external debt financed investments 
after they have stimulated growth in various sectors.  
State of fragility: About 95% of Egypt is covered by desert land without human 
4. 
habitation. The remaining 5% area of the country, which is mainly the Nile valley and 
delta region, supports almost the entire population of the country. The total cultivated 
land is restricted to only 30,000 km2 (3%) of the total land area and comprises both ‘old 
lands’ (two-thirds) in the Nile valley and the delta region and reclaimed ‘new lands’ (one-
third) to ease the pressure on the old lands.  
In the old lands, the pressure on farm land and water resources has increased 
5. 
rapidly over the last two decades as a result of the fast-paced increase in Egypt’s 
population from 65 million (1998) to 98.5 million people (2018). The population pressure 
has caused high levels of land fragmentation with 43% (upper Egypt) and 30% (lower 
Egypt) of all farms falling below 1 feddan land-holding size. Almost 50-60% of these 
farms are less than 0.5 feddans in size that are currently used only for subsistence 
farming which is a major reason for the presence of widespread poverty in these areas. 
The population pressure has also increased the demand for irrigation water from the 
Nile. However, the irrigation systems, challenged by inadequate investment in their 
development and maintenance, are unable to respond to the increased demand for 
6 
water, resulting in shortages at the end of the irrigation networks where the farmlands 
are usually dominated by smallholder farmers. It is well known that the availability of 
Nile water can suffer fluctuations in the future due to climate change and upstream dam 
construction in Ethiopia. To develop resilience against potential water shortage in the 
future the Government has identified the command areas that are suitable for shifting to 
drip irrigation practices. However, at the farm level there is little impact of these threats 
(water shortage) and policies (for water conservation) and farmers continue to use 
surface irrigation to cultivate their crops leading to low water application efficiency of 
50%. The main factors which challenge the adoption of water saving technologies are 
the lack of awareness and demonstration of these technologies, lack of finance, gap in 
advisory services and absence of high value marketing linkages to maximise household 
income by adopting these technologies.  
In the new lands, the adoption of sprinkler and drip irrigation has improved water 
6. 
efficiency. However, there are questions surrounding the depletion of aquifers while 
using groundwater for irrigating the new lands. Other common challenges across both 
land types are drainage problems, salinity, low productivity, soil depletion and continued 
degradation of soil fertility. Over the next 20 years, the population is projected to grow 
to around 150 million and there is growing concern that water scarcity, land scarcity and 
low productivity of the lands can trigger widespread food shortages. 
Poverty: Poverty in Egypt, is measured in monetary terms through the National 
7. 
Poverty Line defined at LE 736 per person per month. Poverty has increased steadily 
since the beginning of the millennium from around 17% (1999-00) to 27.8% (2015-16) 
and according to some reports currently it could be as high as 35%. An additional 25% 
of the population lives just above the poverty line and are highly vulnerable and 
susceptible to sliding back into poverty with minor shocks. Disparities in poverty follow 
geographic and gender lines. In general, about 57% of the population lives in rural areas 
and 33% of the rural population is poor. However, in the governorates in upper Egypt 
about 75% of the population live in rural areas and experiences much higher poverty 
(52% compared to the national average of 27.8%), with women and children facing 
multi-dimensional poverty. Poverty in upper Egypt is mainly structural, driven by high 
population growth rate, high level of land fragmentation, illiteracy, lack of employment 
opportunities and low levels of investment in infrastructure and human capital. Women 
are subject more than men to experience multi-dimensional poverty specially women 
head of households being most vulnerable (11% of rural households are women 
headed). The incidence of poverty is widely variable across governorates, with the 
prevalence of income poverty most critical in Assuit (66%), Sohag (65.8%) and Menya 
(56.7%) governorates in Upper Egypt. 
Poverty reduction programs at National level: In March 2015, the GoE, with the 
8. 
support of the World Bank launched “Takafol and Karama” (solidarity and dignity) as a 
targeted cash transfer scheme for reducing poverty. Takaful and karama is a conditional 
cash transfer program that seeks to provide income support to the poor and most 
vulnerable; namely poor families with children (under 18 years of age), poor elderly 
(aged 65 years and above) and persons with severe disability. The project provides 
conditional cash transfer to families to ensure that such subsidy is directed toward 
investment in children education, mothers and children health care, enhance mother's 
awareness about healthy nutrition practices and family planning, in addition to 
preserving the rights of disabled, aging and orphans' persons. The programme is 
implemented by the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS) and has so far reached about 
9.4 million individuals or 10% of the country’s population. According to IFPRI (2018), 
who conducted an impact evaluation on the scheme, 90 % of beneficiaries are poor and 
ultra-poor rural women. 
7 
9.  Agriculture development: The agriculture sector accounts for about 13% of GDP 
and 20% of total exports and foreign exchange earnings and employs more than 55% of 
rural household. Crucially, agriculture-related industries such as processing and 
marketing and input supplies account for a further 20% of GDP. About 25% of the labour 
force is engaged in agriculture and in upper Egypt, this figure is more than 55%. 
However, the agricultural sector is affected by low productivity and low efficiency, gaps 
in market information and weak linkages to high-value markets, lack of access to 
affordable agricultural finance including agricultural insurance, and ineffective rural 
institutions.  
10.  Main agricultural produce: There are five national strategic crops, cotton, maize, 
wheat, potatoes and rice. Their yields improvements have slowed down markedly in 
recent years. Fruits and vegetables grown by smallholders include tomatoes, potatoes, 
beets, oranges, onions, grapes, and dates among others. Potatoes and tomatoes 
together make up around 24% while beets, oranges, onions, grapes, and dates all 
contribute about 44% of the gross fruits and vegetable production in Egypt. The yield of 
these crops is much below potential and there are high margins for improvement. Yield 
is affected by outdated technologies and tools for land preparation, irrigation, and 
harvesting leading to high production costs, reduced yields, decreased soil fertility. 
11.  Export and domestic demand for agricultural produce: There is a growing demand 
for Egyptian agricultural produce both in the export and the domestic markets. The main 
agricultural exports are cotton, potatoes, onions, tomatoes, legumes, other vegetables 
(frozen, dried, preserved), citrus, grapes, melons, frozen fruits and nuts. The exports of 
fruits and vegetables have increased from around 2.0 to 2.8 million tons over the last 
decade supported by friendly export policies, improved compliance with export quality 
standards and success in opening new markets for Egyptian produce in the EU and 
countries such as Canada, China, Taiwan, Nigeria, Tanzania and South Africa in addition 
to the Arab countries. The export demand of medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPS) such 
as basil, chamomile, fennel, cumin and caraway has also increased with 10-12% annual 
growth in their export over the last 4-5 years. There is also a growing domestic market 
for agricultural produce. The domestic fruits and vegetable market is expected to grow 
from US$ 5.5 billion in 2017 to US$ 6.2 billion in 2023. Egypt produces around 6,000 
tons of milk annually with 300 dairy production factories across the country. These 
figures indicate considerable economic opportunities related to the production, 
processing and supply of agricultural produce. 
12.  Smallholder farmers: The agricultural sector is dominated by smallholder farmers 
mainly using traditional farming practices. Farms are predominantly small with a total of 
81% of farmers owning less than three feddan. Families of holding areas less than one 
feddan are the largest group, comprising about 37.7 percent of the agricultural 
population. Landless represent around 16.5% of the total rural population. The 
traditional smallholder farming system is based on a mixed and integrated crop-livestock 
system. In general, smallholders are the primary producers of the main food and fodder 
crops for domestic consumption. The income generated from farms of less than three 
feddans (from different farming activities and utilizing family labour) does not meet the 
poverty line of US$1.25 per day per capita. Therefore, holders of less than three feddans 
are considered by many experts to be the most vulnerable category of farmers in Egypt. 
The key constraints facing smallholder farmers are described below:  
13.  Gaps in access to remunerative markets: Smallholders usually sell perishable 
commodities (vegetables, fruits, poultry) directly to the consumers in very small retail 
shops in weekly or bi-weekly markets resulting in limited but regular cash flows. Surplus 
grain and other non-perishable crops are usually sold to local traders with the help of 
village-based middlemen who broker the deals between the smallholders and the traders 
8 
for a commission which reduces the net income of the smallholder. The traders resell to 
consumers or to larger traders and wholesalers who in turn supply to food processors 
and larger distributors. 
9 
Chapter 2: The Programme 
A. Programme Goal and Objectives 
14.  The programme goal is to contribute to improved living standards of smallholder 
farmers and poor and vulnerable women and youth in the rural areas in upper Egypt. 
15.  STAR’s development objective is to improve the income and resilience of 
smallholder and landless families through better marketing linkages, sustainable and 
climate change adapted agricultural intensification, small rural businesses and inclusive 
policies, building on women and youth potentials as untapped resources for family 
resilience. The development objective is in line with the IFAD Egypt COSOP framework 
SO1, focus on enhancing productivity and profitability of agriculture-related activities) 
and SO2 addressing the development of enhanced policies to support rural 
transformation. The development objective is also aligned to the IFAD strategic 
framework SO1 as it focuses on increasing poor people’s productive capacities and 
income levels; SO2, as it supports poor people’s market participation and SO3 as it 
addresses environmental sustainability and climate change. STAR is also aligned to the 
IFAD mainstreaming priorities of climate and environment, gender and youth inclusion.  
16.  Programme duration: The STAR programme duration is seven years.  
17.  Programme outreach: STAR will provide services to 240,000 poor rural 
households (1.2 million individuals with an average of 5 members per household), across 
160 villages in 24 command area-based clusters in the three Governorates of Menya, 
Asyut and Suhag. The target households are divided into ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ categories. 
The direct target group consists of 160,000 smallholder households (800,000 
individuals) who will receive the full set of STAR services. These producers will be drawn 
mainly from the categories of extra small and small landholders (less than 3 feddans) 
with special emphasis on the inclusion of women, women-headed households and youth 
(aged 18-35). The indirect target group comprises 80,000 households (400,000 
individuals) residing within the command areas who will also benefit from the 
rehabilitated water infrastructures and their inclusion as transformation drivers in STAR 
supported WUAs and Production and Marketing Associations (PMA). However, many of 
these households will comprise possibly the relatively better-off (above three feddans), 
who can forge linkages to markets, financing institutions, input suppliers and agricultural 
service providers on their own.  
18.  Key outcomes and impact indicators: Key impacts/outcomes of the STAR 
programme include: i) 10% reduction in percentage of rural households living below the 
national poverty line in the targeted areas, ii) 50% increase average HH income, iii) 
12,555 new jobs created, iv) 50% of rural producers’ organizations reporting increase in 
sales, v) 60% of households reporting increase in production, vi) 60% of households 
reporting reduced water shortage vis-à-vis production needs, and vii) 2 policies or 
strategies proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment 
19.  STAR supported commodities: STAR investments will support activities related 
to fresh and processed fruits and vegetables, medicinal and aromatic plants, field crops 
relevant to smallholders and other livelihood diversification options such as poultry, 
small ruminants and beekeeping. To a limited extent, STAR will support dairy, fisheries 
and other farm-based opportunities relevant to the profitability of the target groups.  
10 
20.  Programmatic approach: STAR will aim at rural transformation in the selected 
governorates following a programmatic approach. The current IFAD funding cycle of 
seven years will support Phase 1 of the programme which will enable STAR to reach 160 
villages, or 20% of the 850 villages in the three governorates. The subsequent phases 
will be implemented with the objective of building on the Phase 1 success stories and 
expanding the STAR benefits to the other villages and other governorates in a systematic 
manner. The key aspects embedded in the implementation arrangements of Phase 1 to 
enable STAR to make a smooth transition to the next phase are, i) strengthen MALR 
capacity and develop its readiness for the next phase; ii) develop standardized 
implementation arrangements for the successful interventions identified for the next 
phase; iii) convene government and donor resources to support the next phase; iv) 
capacitate and orient the CFIs to expand their STAR oriented portfolios to potential 
clusters for the next phase; v) widely disseminate success stories and their 
implementation mechanisms using digital technologies; vi) facilitate the strong partner 
CDAs and ACs to mentor other CDAs/ACs in potential clusters for the next phase; and 
vii) develop a network of service providers to continue strengthening STAR’s 
achievements in the next phase. 
21.  Implementation stages: STAR Phase 1 will have two implementation stages, the 
‘calibration stage’ and the ‘scaling up’ stage. In the calibration stage (Years 1 to 3) STAR 
will focus on consolidating and showcasing the achievements in 20-30 villages (across 
the 24 clusters in the three governorates) where previous IFAD and other donor 
supported projects have already produced success stories. These villages will have 
strong CDAs already experienced in partnering with previous projects. STAR will partner 
with such CDAs and develop model villages by introducing a range of STAR 
demonstrations and expanding the outreach of the STAR benefits to the target 
households. Year 1 will be devoted to programme start-up, focusing on preparatory 
activities, embedding the STAR innovations in the programme delivery structures and 
strengthening the partnerships with the development partners, with limited thrust on 
achieving village level outreach. Scaling-up stage (Years 4 to 7): During the calibration 
stage STAR will prepare itself for the scaling-up stage by i) developing and strengthening 
the CDAs in the other STAR villages ( 130-140 villages in the 24 clusters); ii) exposing 
the target households in the other villages to demonstrations both using physical study 
trips and digital extension methodologies and iii) preparing the CFIs to lend to target 
households in the other villages. STAR will build on these preparations and expand its 
outreach to an additional 130-140 villages which fulfil a set of preconditions and 
demonstrate their preparedness for STAR implementation.  
B. Project Area and Geographical targeting 
22.  Geographic area and poverty: STAR will be implemented in three Governorates 
of Upper Egypt: Menya, Assuyt and Sohag. The geographic area has been identified on 
the basis of the high poverty and food insecurity level. Around 12 million people live in 
the rural areas in these Governorates and 6.7 million (56%) are poor and cannot meet 
their basic needs. Upper Egypt continues to be the most food insecure and deprived 
region in all aspects of access to food. In terms of population numbers, the largest 
population with poor access to food in Upper Egypt is registered in Asyut with 2.4 Million 
and 2.1 million in Sohag (WFP, 2013) and poverty level for the three governorates are: 
Assuit (66 percent), Sohag (65.8 percent) and Menya (56.7 percent) according to EDHS 
2014.  
23.  Irrigation command area based village cluster selection (Geographic 
Targeting): The geographic entry point to select target villages will consider a 
11 
command area (following a cluster approach) targeting villages served by the same 
branch canals in need of rehabilitation and work with them based on various programme 
services. These include among others: (i) improved water infrastructures and water 
management practices; (ii) improvement of farming practices to introduce productive, 
sustainable and resource-efficient techniques; (iii) better market linkages, value addition 
and outlets for their produce; and (iv) establishment of small service and processing 
enterprises linked to agricultural value chains targeting the poor and more vulnerable 
households, women and youth.  
As a lesson learned from PRIME and OFIDO, STAR will provide the full package of project 
interventions  (production  improvement,  access  to  market  and  finance,  and  support  for 
micro enterprises) to villages with high incidence of poverty in concentrated geographical 
areas (water units/clusters), in order to avoid that synergies between the various project 
interventions get diluted and the achievements of impacts in terms of empowerment and 
poverty alleviation are limited. This will also allow for the demonstration of a  water unit 
based intervention model that can be scaled up. During the field visit the mission observed 
a  correlation  between  poverty,  insufficient  access  to  water  and  the  need  for  water 
infrastructure  rehabilitation.  Irrigation  branch  canals  and  at  mesqa  level  effectively 
providing water are vital for the livelihood of poor farmers, who cannot afford to drill their 
own boreholes/ wells (most vulnerable households with 0.5 to 1 feddan). 
24.  The targeted water units/command areas are expected to present a composition of 
landholding in line with the findings from the Agriculture Farm Income Survey (AFIS) for 
Upper Egypt (42.3% below 1 feddan; 35.8% between 1 to 3 feddan; 10.9% between 3 
to 5 and 10.8 % above 5 feddans). Therefore, the targeting strategy at water 
unit/command area level will be inclusive of all typology of households classified on the 
basis of landownership: land-less and extra-small, small, medium and large landholders. 
25.  The Selection criteria  of irrigation command areas would be: (i) higher 
concentration of poverty; (ii) the main and second order branch canals and the drainage 
system are in good working condition and there is no need for major investments for 
their upstream improvements; (iii) adequate quantity of good quality water is available 
for irrigation from the second order canal; (iv) there are no major social and 
environmental problems that require mitigation by the programme; and (v) there is 
willingness by farmers served by the command area to participate in the programme.  
26.  Once the clusters are identified according to the above, the list of the selected 
villages forming a cluster (command area) is expected to have 160 villages and 32 
Cluster, with an average number of 5 villages per cluster (appraisal stage). The list will 
be accompanied by a brief explanation on the selection and especially the coherence 
supporting the integrated set of interventions within the identified clusters and poverty 
level. A map, as a result of the mapping exercise jointly undertaken by OFIDO, the 
Directorates of Irrigation, Agriculture and Social Solidarity in each governorate will help 
to identify the branch canals (third and fourth order which need rehabilitation and at the 
same time serves villages with high or medium presence/incidence of poorest 
population. IFAD design Mission has provided a proposed methodology with ranking 
criteria to ease the exercise and sped up the process of village selection in line with 
poverty targeting criteria.  
27.  Community institutions in the programme area: The different community 
institutions (CI) present in the programme area are i) Agricultural Cooperatives (AC), 
present in each village and used by MALR to supply subsidized agricultural inputs to 
farmers. Their marketing function is very weak, and their management is dominated by 
larger farmers; ii) Community Development Associations (CDA) are considered as NGOs, 
registered and supervised by the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS). They have a 
12 
general assembly with 50-400 community members and partner with larger NGOs and 
donors projects to implement development programmes at the village level; iii) 
Marketing Associations (MA) are special interest groups supporting members’ produce 
marketing. They lack legal status and are function under the umbrella of the village 
CDAs. STAR will refer to these groups as Production and Marketing Associations (PMA) to 
reflect both production and marketing related functions carried out by them; iv) Income 
generation and enterprise groups (IGE) are informal groups focused on savings, internal 
loans, income generation and microenterprise activities. They too function under the 
CDA; v) Water Users Associations (WUA) are legal entities established under Ministerial 
decrees as specialized associations performing functions related to water management. 
They are not involved in marketing activities. 
C. Target Groups and Targeting Strategy:  
28.  STAR will provide services to a total of 240,000 poor rural household engaged in 
agriculture production (or about 1.2 Million individuals based on average of 5 household 
members). While 160,000 households (direct beneficiaries) will receive the full set of 
programme services, an additional number of 80,000 Household (indirect beneficiaries) 
will be covered by services related mainly to improved water infrastructure, given their 
proximity in the command area. 
29.  The programme primary target groups are 160,000 households of smallholder 
farmers (800.000 individuals, direct beneficiaries), with the majority of producers within 
the categories of extra small and small landholders (less than three feddans of land) with 
special emphasis on the inclusion of women, women-headed households and youth 
(aged 18-35) often ranking among the poorest and asset less, hence landless or near 
landless.  
30.  All will be benefiting from programmme services that cut across the needs of all 
types of households and which are delivered working with organisations inclusive of all 
groups: (i) water infrastructure rehabilitation and management through Water Users 
Associations (WUA); (ii) market linkages through Market Associations; and (iii) outreach 
and agricultural extension work through Cooperatives and/or Community Development 
Associations (CDAs). There will be specific services and activities directly targeted to 
poorer and most vulnerable households depending on their income levels, overall 
production capacity, market linkages, financing capacity, division of role and 
responsibilities (gender and youth) and vulnerability. 
31.  An additional number of 80,000 households (400,000 indirect beneficiaries) 
residing within the command areas are expected to benefit, by virtue of their proximity, 
of rehabilitated water infrastructures and better market linkages created by STAR. They 
are expected to benefit from creation of Water User Associations (WUAs) as well as other 
grassroots institutions such as Producers and Marketing Associations (MA) and become 
members. However, it is possible that those households will be from better-off quintile 
(above 3 feddan) and able to mobilize their own financial resources to finance the 
production-related activities and forge their own linkages with financing institutions.  
32.  Direct beneficiaries can be classified into five target groups, described 
mainly on the basis of poverty level1,  land ownership and access to market. Given their 
1 The poverty line was revised in 2019: The poverty line for Egypt is: 8827 Egyptian Pounds per person per year (735.6 
Egyptian Pounds per person per month). The extreme poverty line for Egypt is: 5889.6 Egyptian Pounds per person per year 
(490.8 Egyptian Pounds per person per month). The poverty line for Rural Upper Egypt: 8865.6 Egyptian Pounds per person 
per year (738.8 Egyptian Pounds per person per month). The extreme poverty line for Rural Upper Egypt is: 5896.5 Egyptian 
Pounds per person per year (491.375 Egyptian Pounds per person per month). 
13 
internal differentiations in terms of socio-economic levels, the project will provide 
services and targeted activities, considering the following classification as an additional 
targeting instrument to better identify and serve the intended beneficiaries: (i) Very poor 
households living below the poverty line, with limited agriculture productive assets, 
considered as landless and near landless (less than 0.5) and ranking among the poorest; 
(ii) poor smallholder subsistence households living below the poverty line, farming on 
very limited land holding (below 1 feddan) and experiencing very limited access to 
market and income generation due to low surplus; (iii) market-oriented smallholder 
households with small land holding size (1-3 feddans) with access to market but limited 
return due to low prices, high production and transaction costs, and low bargaining 
power. They are slightly above the poverty line but considered as vulnerable and 
transitory poor due to the risks to slide back into poverty; (v) youth (18-35) from the 
targeted communities (skilled, graduated as well as unskilled) with low opportunities of 
employment and self-employment in general and specifically in agriculture (either as 
farming as a business or skilled/unskilled labors) and allied sector (agro-
entrepreneurship, service provision, extension). The programme will consider direct 
targeted interventions for specific categories (direct targeting). 
33.  Another target group that the project will consider are transformation drivers, 
better off households, including: medium and large holder farmers (land average size 
above 3 feddans) traders, processors, aggregators and other actors along the value 
chains; supplier, traders, entrepreneurs and other private sector actors that the project 
will engage with to catalyse the expected transformation.  
34.  Based on the above data on presence distribution on type of farming households 
and landholding (FAO publication based on Agriculture Census 2010 on farming 
population)2, STAR will target: 20 percent of very poor households living below the 
poverty line, 50 percent (majority) of poor smallholder subsistence households (below 1 
feddan); 25 percent of market-oriented smallholder households with small land holding 
size (1-3 feddans) and a limited percentage of better off (5 percent).  
35.  The calculation on proportion and number of direct beneficiaries is based on 
160,000 households, as they are those receiving full package of STAR support. Men will 
be 40 per cent, Women will be overall 35 percent and youth (young men and young 
women) will represent 25 percent of direct beneficiaries.  
36.  Detailed description of target groups 
37.  Landless, near landless and very poor households, including women headed 
households: Those households will comprise 20% of the total target beneficiaries (or 
32,000 HHs). They are worse-off households of landless and near landless with less than 
0.5 feddan and unable to make their living out of poverty. Typically, those households 
are composed of high number of members/dependants with limited productive capacity, 
unable to fulfil households’ basic needs.  Within this category households’ livelihood is 
mainly focused on animal husbandry (small ruminants, poultry). The project, in line with 
principles of leave no one behind and putting emphasis on a strong social inclusion 
see source - only in Arabic 
https://www.capmas.gov.eg/Pages/StaticPages.aspx?page_id=7183 
2 According to a FAO study, using data from the 2009–10 agricultural census, the population among farming 
families is nearly 28.4 million, which is 38 percent of Egypt’s total population and two-thirds of the rural 
population. Families of holding areas less than one feddan are the largest group, comprising about 37.7 
percent of the agricultural population. The population within the SSF category (<3 feddans) is about 69 percent 
of the total family farming population, landless represent 16.5 percent of the total family farming population in 
2010. The remaining landholders (with three feddans or more) represent only 14.5 percent of the total 
agricultural population in Egypt. 
14 
strategy, will include 32,000 households from this category, focusing on women which 
are expected to be more than 70% beneficiaries from this category, while 30% will be 
youth. It is expected that households ranking among the poorest and poorer in the 
selected communities will be interested in moving out of poverty by participating in pro-
poor services promoted by the STAR project (i.e. saving and credit/finance literacy for 
women, alternative income generating activities on farm and off farm/ alternative 
enterprises for groups of very poor households and especially women and youth).  
38.  Based on their socio-economic characteristics, it is expected that households from 
these categories will mainly join groups and associations formed under STAR, for Income 
Generating Activities (about 24,000 HHs) developed under component 1.2 (creation of 
enterprise development) and another 8,000HHs will join Production and Marketing 
Associations in existing CDAs (Component 1.1 strengthening Market Institutions). Due to 
the low income and assets ownership level, it is not expected that households from this 
category will be joining Cooperatives (as most of them are landless) and Independent 
marketing institutions at this stage (more suitable for household already economically 
active as described below). Women joining this groups are also expected, in addition to 
technical trainings provided by the technical components, to receive leadership trainings, 
as part of strengthening market institutions and women in leadership positions. At Lest 
20% of women joining the producers and marketing associations in existing CDAs will 
attend the leadership trainings and become leaders (expected 1,600 women leaders 
from this category).   
39.  Poor subsistence smallholders’ households (less than 1 feddan): The 
project will target 80,000 poor subsistence smallholder households (corresponding to 
50% total direct beneficiaries). Farmers in this category practice subsistence agriculture 
(0.5 -1 feddan), with low surplus for selling and low income due to low prices. Project 
services will be equally provided to men and women (minimum 30% women) in line with 
the activities/responsibilities they are engaged in the farming sector: i.e crop production 
mostly dominated by adult men, versus animal husbandry (small ruminants, poultry and 
ducks) and dairy activities for women. They process cheese and other products for 
household use and occasional informal sales. Proceeds from agricultural activities make 
the major contribution to the viability of their livelihood. To strengthen household 
resilience, the project will consider specific activities for men (land consolidation and 
improved agriculture practices, among others) and also for women (on farm as well as 
off farm) along the value chains (post processing-added value). Youth can be found in 
those household typology as: (i) unpaid family labour (mostly in subsistence farming) or 
(ii) unskilled labourers for minimum-wage at larger farms/processing units or (iii) youth 
interested to practice agriculture using technologies, green houses for example, or 
engage as service providers in extension and allied sectors.  
40.  Based on their socio-economic characteristics, it is expected that households from 
this category will be joining in large majority the Producers and Marketing Associations, 
in line with the following proportion: 16,000 HHs Income Generating Groups (component 
1.2 creation of enterprise development, with large majority of women); 42,700 HHs 
(men and women producers) joining the Producers and Marketing associations in 
existing CDAs (Component 1.1 strengthening Market Institutions) while 10,600 HHs 
Independent marketing institutions, and 10,600 Agricultural Cooperatives and WUAs 
(Component 2 Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and resilience). Women 
producers from this group will also be selected to attend the women’s leadership 
trainings and be representatives within P&MA associated to CDAs. They are expected to 
have leadership roles (at least 20%, corresponding to 8,500 Women’s Leaders) and 
ensure that women’s producers needs and view are constantly provided and taken into 
account.  
15 
41.  Market oriented smallholders’ households (1-3 feddan): The project will 
target 40,000 market-oriented smallholder households (corresponding to 25% of the 
total direct beneficiaries).  Farmers in this category are considered borderline poor as 
they are above the poverty line but at risk to slide back into poverty due to stress and 
external shocks. They are men and women smallholders (and/or small-scale processors) 
who typically own 1 to 3 feddans, 1 to 2 cows and buffalos and 5 to 6 small ruminants. 
They have sufficient labour and skills as well as high production but lack affordable 
inputs, connectivity to profitable networks and markets, technical capacity, scale and 
bargaining power. They produce a range of products which are sold at a low price 
through formal and informal outlets such as neighbours, domestic markets, brokers, 
aggregators. Women in this category practice agriculture activities as described above: 
animal husbandry, small animals fattening (ruminants) and ducks rearing and dairy 
production for informal sale to complement household income. As above, with similar 
characteristics, youth can also be found in this category.   
42.  Based on their market capacity and income level, it is expected that households 
from this category will not be interested to join the Income Generating Groups (more 
suitable for the most vulnerable and subsistence-level households, especially for woman 
and youth)  but will be present in larger number forming Producers and Marketing 
Associations in existing CDAs (Component 1.1 strengthening Market Institutions) 
accounting for 26,700 Households, while another 6,600 HHs  are expected to be part of 
independent producers and marketing institutions, and 6,600 of Agricultural 
Cooperatives and WUAs (Component 2 Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and 
resilience). As Above a 20% of women are expected to hold leadership positions in 
producers and marketing associations.  
43.  Better off households. This target group include actors at least one step higher in 
the agriculture value chain, including lead farmers (large farmers with 3 feddan and 
above), agro-enterprises and processors who can serve as aggregators and models to 
demonstrate the viability of new approaches to increase rural resilience and provide 
potential development pathways for the poor, including generating employment 
opportunities. The project will engage with them as linkage for market services. Given 
the commercial nature of their involvement in the value chain, project takes into 
consideration of their influence and outreach potential to serve other producers with 
market linkages/services.  
44.  They are 5% of the targeted beneficiaries, comprising a total of about 8,000 
households including a smaller percentage of women and youth. Youth in this category 
correspond to young men and women graduated from universities (young professionals) 
and interested in agriculture from different angle: agronomy, business and market 
orientation, veterinary.   
45. 
It is expected that households from this category will be joining the following 
groups: 4,000 HHs Producers and Marketing associations in existing CDAs (Component 
1.1 strengthening Market Institutions) 1,900 HHs Independent producers and marketing 
institutions, and 1,900 Agricultural Cooperatives and WUAs (Component 2 Improvement 
of smallholders’ productivity and resilience). 
46.  Youth (18-35): Youth are found in the above categories (poor, transitory poor 
and better off). The higher percentage of them is from the very poor and poor categories 
(outlines above) and a smaller percentage from the better off as young professionals. 
Overall this target group includes (i) young men and women who are engaged (on full 
time or part time basis) in rural activities at subsistence level (family labour/ or 
subsistence) with an interest to further expand their activities to make it as a business, 
make use of technologies  and increase their income, and (ii) unemployed (or seasonal 
16 
workers at minimum wage) young men and women who are not directly engaged in rural 
activities and represent beneficiaries who are interested to explore the sector, identify 
and engage in better employment and self-employment opportunities offered by the 
cluster development, especially in agri-business, service provision and allied sectors; (iii) 
young graduated in agriculture, interested to apply their skills in the agriculture sectors 
as professionals service providers.  
47.  Self targeting: STAR programme applies a self-targeting approach as the 
activities promoted are expected to be of interest for all target groups, ranging from: 
pro-poor intervention for the most vulnerable to strengthen resilience to adaptation of 
new technologies with higher capital investment to transform the sector for better off 
farmer (transformation drivers). In line, the type of groups, grassroots institutions and 
association formed/strengthen under STAR are expected to provide services according to 
the different socio-economic characteristics and needs of the beneficiaries. The 
programme will be implemented applying a combination of self-targeting and direct 
targeting approach: while some interventions will be of interest for all target groups, 
STAR will promote activities which will exclusively be directed to a specific target group: 
women and youth. In doing so, the implementing partners will be encouraged to adopot 
a pro-poor focus and ensure inclusion of the most vulnerable groups: very poor landless 
and and poor subsistence households, especially women and unemployed youth and 
engage with them accordingly.  
48.  Direct targeting and financial support to specific categories: Specific 
activities for entrepreneurial opportunities and skilled development will be mainly 
dedicate to landless and most vulnerable households, with focus on women and youth. 
Small-scale farmers’ households, depending on their production capacity and 
landholding, will also receive dedicated interventions and aligned type of financial 
support.  While low-income families of subsistence farmers will be more interested 
(among others) in activities that generate income (IGA) and strengthen the household 
resilience, other better-off farmers, will be more oriented towards (among others) 
adoption of new technologies which will require a higher capital for investments and risk 
taking behaviour. 
49.  On the basis of the above typologies of beneficiaries, including their different 
economic productive, economic and financial capacities, the type of financing will be 
aligned. Activities directed to low-income subsistence households, including unemployed 
youth and women, will be partially covered by grant financing.  Investments activities 
(i.e. processing and packaging facilities and new more efficient and sustainable 
agricultural practice and technologies) targeting groups, market oriented smallholders 
and better off households (transformation drivers) will be financed under the loan 
through credits securing a high reflow rate to the government.  
50.  Direct targeting for nutrition intervention: Direct targeted interventions for 
selected target groups will be associated with nutrition directed to women: Curriculum 
on nutrition will be developed and integrated in the training plans and will include, 
among others, sensitization on nutrition-sensitive agriculture, basic nutrition knowledge, 
ability to promote nutritious food and adequate consumption pattern in varied agro 
ecological situations. Furthermore, promotion of roof-top gardening, to enable poor and 
food insecure women and their families to increase adoption and implementation of 
nutrition-sensitive interventions, will be promoted.  
51.  Identification and selection of participants.  Participant selection will be based 
on self-targeting (farmer’s motivation/commitment/interest) as well as purposive 
targeting mechanisms as per categories defined in the targeting section and percentage 
of their participation on the basis of the reality in the ground: 20 percent of very poor 
17 
households living below the poverty line landless and near landless, 50 percent 
(majority) of poor smallholder subsistence households (below 1 feddan); 25 percent of 
market-oriented smallholder households with small land holding size (1-3 feddans) and a 
limited percentage of better off (5 percent). In addition to the above, especially for 
inclusion of poorer and more vulnerable households, identification of groups will be 
based on clear selection criteria, which will consider among other: (i) assets, (ii) level of 
income dependent on the farm production activities, (iii) willingness and preparedness to 
participate in the programme, (iv) age (v) gender including consideration of affirmative 
quotas (not less than 45% women and 41% youth). 
52.  To ensure that the intervention will reach the intended target groups and avoid 
elite capture, implementing partners supporting the process of selection (Cluster Support 
Team and CDAs gender and social development focal points) will receive induction 
training at the start up phase of the Programme. The gender and social development 
expert at national level (CPMU) will be responsible for the trainings and any follow up.  
53.  Youth mainstreaming strategy: Young beneficiaries will have the potential to be 
economically active in self-employment and potentially create economically viable 
projects by: (a) receiving training on agribusiness, trade and services provision; (b) 
improving entrepreneurial capacities through non-financial services to allow beneficiaries 
to be later linked with existing microfinance institutions and related financing scheme 
(programmes) dedicated to youth.  
54. 
It is expected that young men and women will join the groups as following: 10,000 
men and 10,000 young women in income generating groups (component 1.2 creation of 
enterprise development); 12,000 young women and 24,000 young men in producers and 
marketing associations in existing CDAs (Component 1.1 strengthening market 
institutions) while a minor number of 2,800 women and 5,700 young men will form 
Independent producers and marketing institutions. 
55.  Youth will also benefit from the young professional program. The program will give 
the young professionals an opportunity to rapidly gain substantial field experience, and 
build their CV and capacities in working with farmers, bringing in new ideas including 
digital solutions and adapt these to the conditions and needs of smallholder farmers. 
56.  Gender mainstreaming strategy: The project will address gender disparities and 
the key constraints that limit women’s participation in economic opportunities and 
accessing financial services by: (a) ensuring that women have equal access to capacity 
building, training and opportunity by creating an enabling environment which ensure 
their mobility and participation in the economic activities (b) promoting productive 
opportunities that are suitable for women’s by ensuring that analisis are done capturing 
women’s needs and priorities; (c) increase women’s access to skills and knowledge by 
providing women's skills in financial literacy, digital literacy, managing and saving money 
as well as business development; (d) promote women’s leadership and women 
representatives in the grassroots institutions and organisation (producers and marketing 
associations); Furthermore, the programme will provide women with nutrition education.  
57.  Women are expected to largely participate in income generating groups (formed 
under component 1.2 creation of enterprise development) and marketing associations in 
existing CDAs (Component 1.1 strengthening Market Institutions) accounting for 20,000 
and 20,300 respectively. A minor number is expected to be seen in independent 
marketing institutions and Cooperatives (2,800 and 3,800 respectively) at this stage of 
the programme. The low level of women membership in agriculture cooperatives is due 
to the low (almost absent) women land owners (about 3%). The membership in groups 
18 
reflect the distribution of women based on their interests and the activities they are 
mostly engaged. 
58.  Women’s leaders: The programme will provide women leaders trainings and 
ensure that 20 percent women are in leadership positions within the producers and 
marketing associations created/strengthened under STAR. 
59.  Social Inclusion:  The targeting and social inclusion strategy will rely on a strong 
mobilisation strategy to be undertaken at the beginning of the programme. It is 
expected that the Cluster Support Teams (CST) and community facilitators will play a 
crucial role in mobilising communities and have specific focus group discussions with 
women and youth groups.  
60.  Implementation Modalities:. Programme Support Units (PSU) will be established 
in the 3 selected Governorates, staffed by specialists who would supervise the technical 
interventions. Each PSU will also have dedicated gender and social development 
specialists in additional to the technical staff. At village level, local CDAs will appoint 
gender and social development focal points and the Programme staff will make sure the 
gender focal points fulfil requirements to undertake related responsibilities. A gender and 
social development expert will be recruited in the CPMU at national level with 
responsibility for the overall supervision of related activities and action plan.  
61.  Project Coordination and Monitoring: The M&E system will give strong 
emphasis to monitoring of targeting performance. All implementers will be required to 
provide disaggregated data on women and youth participation, in relation to overall 
project targets. 
62.  The M&E system will collect and analyze information about project outreach, 
effectiveness of the targeting strategy and specific benefits for women and youth. This 
requires strong coordination and collaboration between the M&E unit and the Gender and 
Social Development experts at all levels. Impact will be assessed on the basis of 
methodologically gender sensitive baseline, mid-term and completion surveys which will 
use key indicators to measure women’s empowerment.  
63.  Service providers supporting the implementation of activities (particularly those 
directly dealing with producers and groups) should have a demonstrable commitment to 
gender inclusive approaches, youth engagement etc. In order to ensure adequate 
knowledge of relevant gender and youth issues and how to tackle them during 
implementation of activities. 
64.  Community mobilisation.  The Cluster Support Team (CST) will be responsible 
for community mobilisation. They will work in synergy at community level, including the 
involvement of CDAs and community-based organisations and local/traditional 
institutions to mobilise and sensitize communities to get buy in to the Programme and 
enhance the demand driven nature of the intervention.  This activity will be undertaken 
at the village level and will consist of public consultations with the community as a whole 
and separate interaction with special groups, such as women and youth. The gender and 
social expert at Governorate and village levels (CDAs gender and social development 
focal points) will be directly responsible for separate consultation with those groups and 
their consequent mobilisation within the proposed activities. 
65.  Orientation and Outreach: During community mobilisation at the beginning of 
the project intervention, orientation sessions to disseminate information about the 
economic inclusion activities among the target groups around potential livelihood 
opportunities and different pathways will be explained to beneficiaries. The project will 
19 
closely work with Ministry of Social Solidarity (MOSS) and local CDAs, to: (i) create 
community space to identify the needs of each local community and also social segments 
(based on the target groups identified); (ii) identify the poorer and most vulnerable 
households to be eligible for STAR support dedicated activities (mainly for 
entrepreneurial opportunities); (iii) engage with male household members and 
community traditional leaders to create the necessary awareness enabling women 
(especially young women) to fully participate. Gender awareness campaigns will 
accompany the orientation process. 
66.  Social Assessment: Existing social and poverty assessments, as well as available 
vulnerability studies have been conduced as part of the work on targeting the poorest by 
several agencies, including the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS)  for the development 
of safety net programmes. Takaful and Karama is a conditional cash transfer program 
that seeks to provide income support to the poor and most vulnerable  people; namely 
poor families with children (under 18 years of age), poor elderly (aged 65 years and 
above) and persons with severe disability3.  
67.  Data collected for the social assessment undertaken prior to implementation of the 
above programme (as well as others4) are available at Governorate level and they are 
constantly updated. Collaboration with MOSS can be useful to identify vulnerable 
households at cluster and village level for specific targeting activities of STAR social 
inclusion.  On the basis of the existing social assessments and in addition to the wealth 
ranking exercise which will be done by community workers and supervised by the social 
and development focal points at CDAs level, the programme will determine the presence 
of intended beneficiaries, strategy for their mobilization and final integration into the 
respective productive sector based on socio-economic profile.  
68.  Profiling at village level: Social development focal points from CDAs and 
community workers will support wealth-ranking criteria exercise (under the supervision 
of the PSU Gender and Social development expert) to identify eligible households, 
especially for the landless and very poor, and collecting information related to their 
background, demographic characteristics, income level and household number of 
dependency (among others).  
69.  The information will also help to implement a profiling system to identify the target 
group and type of economic activities. This profiling activity will include a 
typology/assessment of heterogeneity across groups to determine which economic 
inclusion packages will be tailored for homogeneous groups according to their 
characteristics and labor market barriers.  
70.  Groups formation and trainings for women and youth: Once beneficiaries are 
identified, the programme, through the CST will establish groups on the basis of their 
interest (i.e. income generation/ enterprise creation) and related trainings/services will 
be delivered to respective beneficiaries. Women and youth organized in (separate) 
groups around interests, will receive (indicatively) the following trainings: financial 
literacy, small scale enterprise management, support development of market access, 
market information and business plans, including planned approach to ensure market 
demand for sustainability of income generating activities undertook and increase value-
3 Takaful exclusion criteria: owned a car, owned more than 1 feddan of land, had a government job or pension, 
received transfers from abroad, or had a formal private sector job with insurance. 
4 as part of pro-poor initiatives such as Takafol and Karma started in 2015 and Decent life initiatives launched 
by the President al-Sisi in 2019, Governorates, led by MoSS, have been engaged in exercises to identify 
the poorer and poorest villages and families. Data and information have been collected and are available (upon 
request ) at Ministry of Social Solidarity ( MoSS) with whom the program will closely collaborate during 
preparation and implementation.  
20 
added. Group formation will be the responsibility of the CST, community workers 
(mobilisers) and CDAs Gender and Social Development Focal points (including leadership 
training for women leaders). 
71.  Technical assistance for specific training modules for women and youth 
(ILO package trainings) For trainings of women and youth the programme might 
consider the following training packages developed by ILO: 1) The training package 
Gender and Entrepreneurship Together – GET Ahead for Women in Enterprise – aims to 
assist organizations in promoting enterprise development among women in poverty who 
want to start or are already engaged in small-scale business. 
For training of youth: Star and Improve Your Business (SIYB). This is one of the largest 
global  business  management  training  programmes.  It  has  four  training  package  that 
respond  to  stages  of  business  development.  Master  trainers  are  responsible  for  youth 
groups  of 10-20  individuals  and of selection, formation, training and mentoring for  one 
year.  
72.  Considering that ILO is actively engaged in promoting women and youth 
enterprises in Egypt through various programmes at national level, adoption of this 
training packages has resulted in creation of in country presence of master trainers, thus 
having GET and SIYB Master trainers are available in Egypt, it is proposed that master 
trainers will be engaged (as Technical Assistance) to train women and youth. 
73.  As model for Women’s groups formation the programme may consider the 
following: Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLAs) – functional as income 
generation and enterprise groups. In line with the joint efforts implemented, National 
Council for Women (NCW) and UN Women Egypt have been advocating for implementing 
and expanding a tested model on reaching the most vulnerable and marginalized women 
in society through sustaining and transforming the social capital of Village Savings and 
Loans Associations (VSLAs) into a broad base platform for financial inclusion of Egyptian 
women. 
74.  The VSLAs target poor and marginalized women in rural communities, empowering 
them through participation in savings and loan groups, supporting them to better 
manage household cash whilst investing in income generating activities. In one 
programme alone, in partnership with Care International and funded by the European 
Union, UN Women Egypt have supported the establishment of 1,036 VSLA groups in 
Assiut, Menia and Beni Suef, comprising of 18,844 members (92% of which are women) 
with a total savings of EGP 4,577,190, alongside financial literacy trainings and non-
financial services. 
75.  Applying the SDGs principle of “leaving no one behind”, capitalizing on the social 
capital of women is necessary for the progress of any public or private stakeholder. The 
VSLA offers a ready platform for accessing the furthest left behind first which is 
appealing to Micro Financial Institutions because of significant lower “acquisition” cost as 
they develop women clientele from the bottom of the pyramid. It is also appealing for 
banks as the approach builds on the savings concept and not on loans that carry the 
perceived risk of debt. 
21 
Chapter 3: Programme Components 
76.  STAR is designed with two inter-related technical components and a programme 
management and policy component: Component 1: Strengthening rural institutions, 
enterprises and markets; ii) Component 2: Improvement of smallholders’ productivity 
and resilience and iii) Component 3: Programme management and policy engagement. 
77.  Component 1: Strengthening rural institutions, enterprises and markets  
78.  This component will increase the marketing of produce and profitability by 
increasing the target households’ participation in the relevant Community Institutions 
(CI), i.e. CDAs, ACs, WUAs, PMAs and IGEs), strengthening the CIs, linking them to 
domestic and export markets and increasing their business opportunities in the rural 
areas. There are two subcomponents (SC): SC 1.1: Strengthening marketing institutions 
and partnerships; and SC 2.2: Microenterprise development. 
79.  Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening marketing institutions  
80.  This sub-component will strengthen the CIs and increase their outreach to the 
target households. It will support around 160 CDC and ACs; 150 WUAs and 1,000 PMAs. 
The strengthened CIs and ACs will serve as collective platforms to facilitate their 
member-producers to engage and benefit from agribusiness partnerships, domestic 
market opportunities and improved marketing infrastructure facilities. Agribusinesses 
(export-oriented and local) will develop 4-Ps marketing partnerships and incentivise the 
CI member-producers to increase their income by improving the quality and quantity of 
produce. The CIs will develop business plans (BPs), form marketing linkages with buyers 
(exporters, processors, wholesalers) and start affordable credit linkages with cooperating 
financial institutions (CFIs) to implement the BPs. 
81.  Preparatory studies and assessments: STAR will contract a service provider 
(SP) to carry out a set of studies/surveys to i) assess the landscape, capacities and 
needs of the CIs in the programme areas; ii) prioritise the commodities with more 
‘market potential’ and asses their value chains, market channels (domestic and export), 
competitiveness and marketing infrastructure needs; iii) assess the agribusiness 
landscape and pre-screen the agribusiness which have more potential to partner with the 
CIs in the STAR programme area. Also based on the assessment identify opportunities 
for supporting businesses related to value addition, agricultural service provision (e.g. 
nurseries, rental of farm equipment) and particularly income generation for youth and 
women (e.g. homestead processing); and iv) assess the financial institutions landscape 
and pre-screen potential financial institutions that have more potential to partner with 
the CIs and target households in the programme area based on their technical 
capacities, geographical/sector specific focus, availability of value chain financing 
products, and focus on savings culture development; v) identify potential digital 
agricultural services and capacity building needs to support their implementation; vi) 
utilise resources from the Adaptation Fund (AF) to assess potential climate risks and 
develop a preliminary list of measures to address these.  
82.  STAR will select the LSPs from available private, public, university, and NGO 
resources through competitive bidding with performance-based contracts. Description of 
some of the main SPs is presented in Annex 1.  STAR will prefer to select a single, 
reliable, and capable LSP to carry out all the studies. However, to save time, more than 
one LSP, focusing on different surveys/assessment topics, can be contracted.  
22 
83.  STAR will complete the selection of the command area/water-unit based village 
clusters before the above-mentioned surveys/studies carried out by the SP so that the 
studies/surveys can focus identifying the opportunities specific to the villages in the Star 
supported clusters. To the extent possible the SP will implement these surveys at the 
Governorate level in partnership with strong CDAs there are already present in the 
identified village clusters with a track record of strong implementation partnership with 
PRIME and other developmental partners 
84.  Develop a pool of master trainers through ToTs: Training modules 
development. The SP will develop a set of training modules based on the findings of the 
studies/surveys. These modules will focus on a range of topics broadly pertaining to i) 
institutional capacity building of the CIs and detailed implementation guidelines for these 
relevant CIs to implement STAR supported activities in the community level; ii) assisting 
CIs with identification of marketing opportunities (export and domestic) and guidelines 
for negotiating and developing marketing contracts; iii) orienting the CIs to the basics of 
microenterprise development and management along with guidelines for supporting the 
market linkages and production performance of these microenterprises; iv) guidelines for 
sensitising the CIs to the range of financial products available in the region, financing 
institutions and the terms of conditions for accessing these products; v) training the 
target households on farming as a business; vi) orienting and guiding target households 
to develop and operate savings and credit activities and inculcate savings culture within 
the various community institutions; vi) capacitating the CIs to develop high quality 
business plans (BPs) that can serve as the basis for developing marketing linkages, 
mobilise financing and starting business activities. 
85.  The STAR team at the NPMU in consultation with the GPMU teams will approved the 
training modules developed by the SP. Following the approval of these modules STAR 
will organise a series of Training of Trainer (ToT) workshops for preparing a group of 
“master trainers” who can further roll out these training and capacity building inputs to 
the target households in the future. The participants in the ToTs will include young 
community facilitators nominated by the CDAs operating in the STAR programme area. 
The CDAs will later on use these representatives as community mobilisers; relevant 
STAR staff members; some of the agricultural officers, particularly the extension officers, 
working in the agricultural directorates in the STAR supported governorates; young 
professionals (YPs) who are already recruited  by STAR; and a set of participants 
nominated by other NGOs, donor programs and private consultancy firms active in the 
programme area. The SPs will provide “master trainer” certificates to the successful 
participants at the end of the training workshops. Based on performance STAR will retain 
the SP to update the training modules and develop new ones if relevant and conduct 
refresher ToTs on an annual basis. 
86.  Select and strengthen partner CDAs and ACs:  
87.  STAR will initially target rural community institutions at the target command area 
level, identifying CDA's (and where relevant Cooperatives). Though CDA's have a 
multisectoral approach, they are well established community institutions, and present in 
most villages. However capacities, scope and outreach of these institutions vary. 
88.  CDAs will be dominantly selected as STAR partners with some instances of partner 
ACs selection, if ACs are found active in marketing activities in some villages. STAR will 
select the partner CDA and ACs from the shortlist prepared by the LSP. The partner 
CDAs and ACs will serve as the STAR entry point in a village and it is within these 
structures that both the PMAs and the microenterprises will be initially established. 
23 
89.  STAR will select the CDA in the villages identified for programme interventions 
from shortlisted CDA prepared by the SP at the beginning of implementation. The 
villages selected for the ‘calibration phase’ will already have active CDAs in the area of 
agricultural development. STAR will identify a set of partner CDAs from this list based on 
criteria such as i) the track record of the partnership with prime or other developmental 
programmes; ii) governance and management structure iii) focus on STAR target group 
based on the proportion of members from very poor and poor target households; iii) 
outreach orientation and growth in membership over the last 2 to 3 years; and iv) 
previous experiences in mentoring PMAs, brokering market linkages with buyers, 
supporting microenterprises, dealing with financial institutions and serving as financial 
intermediary and carrying out climate change related activities. The MoSS will also be 
consulted for assisting the final selection of the CDA. 
90.  STAR will encourage the formation of new CDA’s in those villages in the 
programme clusters which do not have CDAs or where the CDAs and very weak to serve 
as programme partners as indicated by the results of the survey carried out at the 
beginning. The STAR teams at the GPCUs in coordination with the SP will give special 
attention to mobilisation and strengthening of the CDAs in these villages so that they are 
ready as STAR partners during the scaling up phase. 
91.  Organizational Capacity Building of CDAs and Cooperatives: STAR will build the 
capacity of the CDAs as apex institutional platforms to facilitate the improved marketing 
and productivity of smallholder farmers. It is within these structures that both the PMAs 
and the microenterprises will be initially established. STAR will support the capacity 
development of the CDAs focusing on governance, managerial and organizational 
development aspects. The capacity building inputs will also enhance the CDAs’ project 
management, book keeping, monitoring and reporting capacities. Inputs will be directed 
to empower the CDAs leadership (board members, and Committee) to better represent 
its members and enhance the quality of their technical and economic services. Special 
emphasis will be placed on transparent financial management. Further the capacity 
building inputs will enhance the business inclination of the CDAs and at the same time 
generate a strong pro-poor orientation with focus on increasing CDA membership to 
include at least 60% members from very poor and poor categories, women and youth. 
Clear protocols for consultative decision-making and conflict resolutions will be 
established.  
92.  Strengthening CDAs and ACs: STAR will facilitate capacity development of the 
partner CDAs and ACs focusing on, stronger governance, leadership and management; 
transparent financial system to manage the income earned directly or indirectly from 
STAR supported businesses; developing members rules and regulations, book keeping, 
monitoring and reporting capacities; enhancing business inclination and pro-poor 
orientation, with the aim to reach at least 60% members from very poor and poor 
categories; establishing protocols for consultative decision-making and conflict 
resolution; and orientation to address climate change and environmental risks. STAR will 
support the registration of these institutions and the opening of their bank accounts and 
strengthening their offices through basic office furnishing and equipment; STAR will 
assist the partner CDAs and ACs to pay the allowances and engage a YCFs to implement 
STAR related activities in the villages. 
93.  Community sensitisation and mobilisation: The community sensitisation and 
mobilisation activities result in the development of PDAs (component 1.1), IGEs 
(Component 1.2) and WUA (Component 2.1). The expected membership and the 
outreach of these institutions is presented below; 
Table 2: Membership and outreach of community institutions 
24 
Type of community institution 
- Water user associations (refer C2.1) 
- Production and marketing associations  
- Income generation and enterprise groups (refer C 2.2) 
- Youth enterprise groups (refer C 2.2) 
- MSMEs (enterprise CDAs, companies)  
Members 
/beneficiaries 
150-500 
25-75 
20-30 
20-200 
50-300 
Total 
Approximate 
STAR outreach 
30,000 
55,000 
40,000 
22,500 
12,500 
160,000 
Women 
and youth 
Poor and 
very poor 
60% 
70% 
94.  The GPCUs will carry out intense community mobilisation and sensitisation 
activities in the programme villages through the engagement of the partner CDA which 
will select 2 to 3 community mobilisers in each village and also appoint some youth 
volunteers to facilitate the community mobilisation activities. The GPCUs will anchor the 
community mobilisation activities through young professionals and partner community 
development associations and the master trainers where relevant. Capacity building and 
sensitization activities will be directed in particular targeting the poor, women and youth 
with the aim of raising awareness on the potential market and livelihood opportunities 
and the benefits of collective action. The activities will include i) communication 
campaigns in the villages in the selected command areas, including social media and 
rural radio  programmes; ii) capacity building of youth volunteers to organise small 
group meetings and house visits to develop the awareness of target households about 
the benefits of STAR activities and how to participate in these; iii) meetings with local 
authorities in the three governorates, agribusinesses and private operators and selected 
institutions and service providers; (iii) special communication events on market days, 
harvest days, as well as sensitization events targeting producers and their organizations 
(iv) visits to more mature well established CDAs, Cooperatives, WUAs and marketing 
associations. This sensitisation will be linked with the awareness raising sessions on 
livelihood opportunities and specialised coaching on entrepreneurship. 
95.  Forming and strengthening production and marketing associations: The 
STAR programme area has significant advantages for producing fresh vegetables, fresh 
fruits, herbs and spices, dried vegetables and processed produce. For smallholder 
farmers to benefit from these opportunities farming should be seen as a business, one 
that is integrated into domestic and export markets and value chains and is able to 
respond to market incentives and signals. To facilitate the integration of smallholder 
producers with marketing opportunities the GPCUs, with the help of the partner CDAs, 
will initially establish 1-2 PMAs per village, in order to showcase success and promising 
implementation approaches, and to build up trust and buy-in from the community, and 
build replicable and scalable models. Each village is expected to have 8-10 PMAs by the 
end of the programme. 
96.  The PMAs will comprise around 50 members with at least 60% members drawn 
from the poor and very poor category households. In particular, the STAR programme 
will focus on the formation of women's PMAs as women play significant role in 
production/rearing and processing at the homestead level in the STAR governorates. 
Each PMA will identify 3-5 member steering committee, including women and youth. The 
PMAs will be informal groups housed in the CDAs referred to as the host CDAs. All 
members of a PMA must also be members of the general assembly of the host CDA. 
Each host CDA will form a 3-5 member PMA committee to focus on activities pertaining 
to the development of the PMAs. The PMA committees will appoint 1-2 focal points to 
directly engage with the PMA steering committee on a regular basis.  
97.  The host CDA will open a separate bank account for each of the PMAs hosted by it. 
The head of the PMA steering committee will be one of the signatories to this account. 
For transparency, the host CDA will manage all financial transactions pertaining to a PMA 
through the dedicated PMA account. The PMA steering committee will assign a 
25 
membership fee for the PMA members. In addition, all PMAs will adopt regular savings 
by the members as a key activity. The host CDAs will capacity the PMAs to carry out 
regular savings activities and also to retain a part of their profits from collective 
marketing activities as retained earnings before distributing revenue to the members. 
The savings and retained earnings will serve as internal capital of the PMAs. The PMAs 
will use their internal capital for carrying out internal credit activities designed mainly to 
support individual PMA members to meet the production costs of the commodities 
collected and marketed by the PMAs.  
98.  Services of the PMAs: The PMAs will provide its members with both marketing and 
production related services. The marketing services will include identification of 
remunerative markets, negotiating attractive marketing contracts and payment terms, 
developing marketing/delivery/selling arrangements for supplying the produce to the 
buyers, facilitating certification, packaging, grading, branding and labelling of the 
produce to improve their market appeal. PMAs will also facilitate production-oriented 
services e.g. access to inputs and machinery services (refer component 2.2). The PMAs 
will also benefit the buyers (e.g. agribusinesses) who can ensure economies of scale by 
buying in bulk from the PMAs which will aggregate the produce of their members, 
instead of sourcing one by one from individual small-holder fragmented farm.  
99.  Based on the requirements of the marketing contracts the PMAs will also facilitate 
production-oriented services for the members such as partnerships with quality input 
suppliers, linkages to machinery service providers and access to technical service 
providers. The production related services are elaborated further in component 2.2. The 
presence of the PMAs will also benefit the buyers (e.g. agribusinesses) who can ensure 
economies of scale by buying in bulk from the PMAs which will aggregate the produce of 
their members, instead of sourcing one by one from individual small-holder fragmented 
farm.  
100.  PMA institutional development: PMAs will be trained on, farming as a business and 
crop budgeting; market analysis, access to market information, marketing partnerships 
and contract negotiation, financial literacy, access to credit and repayment, public-
private producers’ partnerships (4Ps) provision of business advisory services; 
productivity and production efficiencies (under component 2.2); and technologies to 
address climate change and environment related challenges and issues of water 
availability. 
101.  PMA graduation model: Initially 1-2 PMAs per village will be established to 
showcase success and build replicable and scalable models. Each village is expected to 
have 8-10 PMAs by the end of the programme. A graduation model will be developed to 
facilitate the progression of mature PMAs from operating as sub-entities of the CDAs into 
independent income generating associations and private enterprises. The host CDAs will 
be responsible for capacitating the PMA steering committees to gradually accept more 
responsibility and eventually manage independently the PMA’s external marketing, 
financial and production related linkages. Other factors based on which PMAs will be 
graduated will include, increase in membership/beneficiaries  (e.g. from 25-75 
members/beneficiaries to 100-300 members/beneficiaries); increase in the volume of 
business; capability to diversify marketing contracts and increase demand for produce; 
and accumulated internal capital; STAR will incentivise the PMA graduation process by 
assisting the legal formalities and costs for registering and facilitating larger credit 
linkages. 
102.  Business plan development: The GPCUs will make an open call for business 
plans (BPs) from the CIs in the programme supported villages once the partner CDAs in 
26 
these villages are identified and have received initial rounds of institutional development 
training including training on BP development and implementation.  
103.  Two categories of BPs will be developed. The first category will mainly focus on 
PMAs offering marketing support and production linkages to its members with assistance 
from the host CDAs. The crop production activities can be carried out individually by the 
members or collectively through mechanisms such as land consolidation (Component 
2.2). An integral part of these BPs will be their focus on select high-impact value chains 
and the establishment of contractual and public-private-producer partnerships. The 
second category of BPs will be developed by IEGs focusing on a range of income 
generation and microenterprise activities along different agricultural value chains (refer 
SC 1.2). (consider deleting this) Although in the course of implementation some overlap 
between the two categories of BP will occur, in the PDR these are kept separate in order 
to give special emphasis on the development of microenterprises. Although the focus of 
the business areas will be different, the main elements and structure of both categories 
of BPs will be similar, as detailed below.  
VIPs 
CDAs and ACs (Total) 
BPs 
PMAs and WUAs  
IGEs, 
enterprises 
youth 
enterprises, 
Year 
2* 
30 
60 
90 
Year 
3 
80 
180 
330 
Year 
4 
50 
350 
565 
graduated 
Year 
5 
Year 
6 
Year 
7 
340 
480 
200 
225 
Total 
160 
1,150 
1,700 
2,850 
20 
10 
30 
* year 1 will be devoted to preparatory activities and partnership building with limited village level outreach  
Total 
150 
510 
915 
820 
425 
104.  Contents of the BPs: These BPs will present a holistic outline of strategic, 
operational and financial elements of the businesses. They will include i) institutional 
details about the leadership, member composition and activities of the CI; ii) the 
description of the business concept/business model along with the background and 
rationale for selecting it; iii) target beneficiaries, particularly women and youth, along 
with socio economic category and projected increase in outreach of benefits over 3-5 
years; iv) operational details outlining how the business will be operated and managed; 
v) marketing and market development plans for establishing the necessary contractual 
arrangements; (vi) market-oriented production plans and measures for improved 
production efficiencies, addressing the effects of climate change and sustainable use of 
natural resources (further elaborated and implemented under Component 2); vii) 
projected revenue and profitability over 3 to 5 years and revenue retention and 
reinvestment plans; viii) financing needs and sources of finance for meeting all 
organizational and technical capacity building requirements; production needs; market 
development and marketing plans and working capital requirements; and ix) impact on 
the income level, and nutrition and resilience of the target households. The businesses 
identified will be demand driven based on consultations between the CDA, PMAs, IGEs, 
target households and other stakeholders and would not necessarily be limited to one 
item or commodity. The business plans will mostly be 5-8 pages long. 
105.  The PMAs and the IEGs which are responsible for implementing the BPs will in 
principle be the owners of these BPs. However, since these are informal entities and 
have difficulty in linking directly with financial institutions and development partners, the 
support to these BPs will be directed through the host CDAs. Simultaneously, CDAs, 
cooperatives and private enterprises, especially when graduating from the PMAs and 
IEGs, are also eligible to prepare and submit BPs. CDAs and PMAs will be at different 
levels of maturity, ranging from mature CDAs/PMAs engaging in contract farming and 
27 
processing, to newly created CDAs/PMAs which will still need support to strengthen their 
capacity and physical capital. Because of these varying levels of organizational maturity, 
STAR will seek opportunities to involve the more mature CDAs in the support of the 
younger organizations and will organise exchange visits and experience and knowledge-
sharing events across CDAs and PMAs.  
106.  BP development process: A CIs interested in preparing a BP will draft a short 
concept note (1-2 pages) with the help of the community mobilisers and young 
professionals deployed by STAR. The host CDA will submit the concept note to STAR and 
the main STAR partner financial institutions that can potentially finance the 
implementation of the business. The concept note will be 1-3 pages long and will present 
a summary of the business idea, expected number of beneficiaries and their economic 
category, expected level of financing required, sources of finance, key risks and plans for 
mitigating these. When a financial partner agrees to finance the business in principle, the 
GPCU will approve and provide suggestions for the development of a good quality BP. 
The community mobilisers and the YPs, who are already trained in the development of 
the BPs, will hold detailed discussions with the CI to assist them to think through their 
business idea and develop the detailed BPs. The investment officers of the financial 
institutions that have expressed interest in financing the implementation of the business 
plans will also be consulted to provide their inputs during the development of the BPs. 
The development and approval of the concept note will take around two weeks in the 
development of the BP will take another one month. Once ready, the business plan will 
be submitted to the STAR GPCUs through the partner CDA. 
107.  BP review process: STAR will form a BP review committee chaired by the GPCU 
Director and including technical representatives from the GCPU, CDA, MALR directorate, 
apex financing institution (MSMEDA, ADP) and local financial partner, as other members. 
BP review committee meeting will be organized quarterly to review and approve 
submitted BPs.  
108.  All BPs should demonstrate that the proposed activities and investments comply 
with the following eligibility criteria: suitable for financing by local financing partners;  
supporting efficient use of water and sustainable use of resources; beneficiary co-
financing; social inclusiveness (generation of benefits to women, youth, very poor and 
poor households ); market prospects; plans for new jobs in the future that can absorb 
youth; no duplication of previous similar support to the same group; increasing 
livelihood, resilience and nutrition security for target households; and financial and 
organisational feasibility; prospects of partnership with other government and donor 
initiatives; measures to address environment and climate change concerns.   
109.  The business plans will be assessed based on the following criteria: i) Readiness 
and capacity: previous business history and financial performance; existing activity, 
capacities and group cohesiveness; ii) business plan quality: identification of market 
needs, prospective clients, realistic targets and pricing, etc.; iii) projected 
profitability/cash flow: the business plan should include a multi-annual cash flow 
analysis, including profitability indicators and  demonstrated savings capacity for 
Operation and Maintenance and asset replacement; iv) funding sources: clear 
specification of public and private funding sources; v) demonstrated contractual and 4-Ps 
arrangements linkages: number and coverage of pre-agreed contracts, volume of sales, 
embedded services. 
110.  Contract agreement and partnerships: STAR aims to support smallholder 
farmer and PMAs to enter into inclusive commercial partnerships with other value-chain 
actors. This can either be done through public-private producers’ partnerships/4Ps 
approach, and or direct contractual agreements. The aim of these partnerships is to 
28 
secure volumes of sales and agreed pricing mechanisms (either fixed or spot), to 
facilitate finance and access embedded services from agribusiness on improved 
productivity and quality, as well as promote value-addition processing. The market 
development and marketing partnership development activities will be led by the 
Business Development and Marketing Specialist (BMS) with overall technical oversight 
and guidance from the STAR technical Specialist (STS) in the NPCU. They will support 
the marketing linkages and partnerships through: i) access to market information; ii) 
marketing partner identification; iii) partnership brokering; and (iii) start-up the 
partnership through partnership financing and other support.  
111.  Access to market information: STAR will adopt both direct and indirect measures to 
promote access to market information for target households. The direct measure will 
involve organising a set of buyers’ orientation workshop at the beginning of the 
programme where the potential buyers (agribusinesses, exporters, domestic buyers) 
identified through the initial studies will be invited to learn about the STAR programme, 
its approach, opportunities and benefits for the buyers. The representatives of the 
partner CDA’s will also participate in these workshops. At the end of the workshops the 
interested buyers will be invited to express their interest in partnering with STAR 
supported the PMAs along with the broad details about the type of business relationship 
they are interested in. STAR will make the list of the interested buyers and the broad 
details of their offers available to the partner CDA’s and the PMAs.   
112.  The indirect measures for promoting access to market information will involve 
STAR investment in to develop producers’ knowledge of prices related to market quality 
demands, volume and timing of domestic and export markets, including seasonal 
variations. Further, STAR will also promote networking opportunities between value-
chain stakeholders and will support participation of CDAs and PMAs in trade fairs, 
roundtables, information campaigns and fora to boost linkages and broker contracts with 
larger value chain actors (including institutional buyers).  
113.  Marketing partner identification: STAR will sensitise the PMAs on the set of factors 
to be considered for identifying marketing partners based on the information made 
available to them through the above-mentioned steps. These factors will include areas 
such as: i) type, quality and quantity of produce demanded by the buyer: ii) whether 
buyer will facilitate access to quality inputs and services (regular monitoring and 
agronomic advice) to achieve the quality standards; iii) produce delivery logistics; iv) 
pricing, mode of payment, time taken for; iv) willingness to pre-finance and broad terms 
and conditions for recovery of the financed amount; v) arrange production financing 
through financial institutions. The awareness about these factors will put PMAs and its 
members in a better position to negotiate contracts, establish 4-Ps, negotiate deals and 
receive a fair price from buyers. Price transparency will enable the PMAs to know when 
and where to sell, plan the next cropping schedule and help to target those buyers/off-
takers offering the best financial return.  
114.  Brokering partnerships: STAR will organise and facilitate partnership workshops 
between the PMAS (with approved BPs) and the identified buyers before the start of the 
production season. These workshops will serve as platforms for both the PMAS and the 
buyers to raise and clarify their concerns, negotiate the terms and conditions of the 
partnership based on the factors discussed earlier, and finalise the different points of 
partnership. The partnerships can take various formalization levels: (i) business models 
resting on mainly informal agreements between PMAs and the buyers; (ii) integrated 
business models with a formalized agreements (e.g. contracts, fully integrated 
outgrowing schemes) and; (iii) joint-venture models with investment in joint facilities 
where the business’ assets, ownership, revenues and expenditures are shared by 
producers and a private entrepreneur.  
29 
115.  Start-up the marketing partnerships: STAR with the help of the partner PMAs start 
up the partnerships by ensuring the timely production of the quality and the quantity of 
produce contracted for supply to the buyer. Simultaneously, it will follow up with the 
buyer were irrelevant to ensure adequate and timely payment of these contracts 
according to prior agreements. To assist the PMA is to meet the quality and quantity 
standards STAR, along with the partner CDAs will support the PMAs in a range of areas 
including i) institutional capacity building of the PMAS in areas such as developing work 
plans to ensure timely delivery against the contracts, mobilisation of farmers and 
ensuring inclusive and fair participation and operational guidance during the production 
process; ii) facilitating linkages of the PMAs to agro dealers and machinery service 
providers for accessing quality inputs such as planting material and fertilisers, machinery 
service for production and post production functions and other infrastructure such as 
nets and micro irrigation systems; iii) supporting access to advisory services through 
linkages to government extension system, private sector crop production and post 
production advisory services and digital extension systems. These areas are detailed 
further in component 2.  
116.  Other market development and marketing support interventions: Some of 
the other areas in which STAR will invest to support market development and linkages 
between PMAS and buyers (domestic and export) are described below. 
117.  Certification: STAR will contract service providers to guide the CDAs and PMAs on 
the importance, mechanisms and process for obtaining different kinds of certification. 
The CDAs and the PMAs will become aware of organic certification, basic certification 
(e.g. pesticide free) for local markets and more demanding certification to comply with 
export and domestic food safety standards. STAR will facilitate the linkages with CDAs to 
apex professional associations in support of compliance, such as the Union of Producers 
and Exporters of Horticultural Crops (UPEHC) and the Horticultural Export Improvement 
Association (HEIA). PMAs can receive STAR support for meeting some of the cost for 
certification against (i) clear assessment in the BPs that certification will be an 
advantage for production and marketing and (ii) presence of clear marketing agreements 
(formal and informal) for the certified produce.  
118.  Post-harvest processes and other marketing support: STAR will provide technical 
assistance and facilitate investments in necessary equipment and technologies for 
improving post-harvest practices. STAR will contract technical service providers to 
provide practical demonstrations to the farmers on a range of post-harvest techniques 
including proper harvesting technique, cooling, cleaning, sorting and packing in order to 
increase the shelf life of the produce and reduce wastage and losses. Similarly, the 
project will provide technical assistance to the CDAs and PMAs, assist them to 
collaborate with other NGOs and other initiatives in the region, for developing product 
identity, brand development, packaging and labelling related initiatives that will facilitate 
the producers to earn higher margins from specially from the domestic markets. (UNIDO 
– this is an apt example). The STAR supported credit linkages to the CDAs and PMAs will 
help these institutions and the member producers to meet the cost of adopting post-
harvest technologies and improve packaging and branding and labelling related 
activities. 
119.  Market Infrastructure development: STAR will support investment in market 
infrastructure development in order to ensure effectiveness of investments made under 
the BPs and to generate positive impacts on improving the physical environment for 
marketing and value addition. During the first year of the project, an inventory and 
needs assessment will be undertaken. This will be prioritized in close consultation of the 
concerned entities at the district and governorate level. Investments in marketing 
30 
infrastructure will include collection centres, cold chains, markets, and storage facilities. 
A key criteria for prioritising specific items of marketing infrastructure and their locations 
will depend on the additional benefit it will deliver to the target households for marketing 
their produce resulting from the implementation of the STAR supported BPs. Secondly, 
the volume of such produce (from the implementation of the STAR supported BPs) that 
will be mediated to the final markets through the marketing infrastructure should also be 
clearly estimated. 
120.  STAR will also work in close consultation with the Ministry of Supply and Internal 
Trade Master Plan, in the promotion of formalised domestic trade through district level 
mobile markets and the development of 4 wholesale markets at governorate level in 
Upper Egypt. The programme will aim to rehabilitate or develop 3 market places (and/or 
market outlets) at selected strategic locations.  
121.  The STAR supported marketing infrastructure can either be private (e.g. private 
company setting up a cold storage facility), public (e.g. a government owned market) of 
or semi-public (a collection center in a village owned by CDA) in nature. When private, 
STAR will facilitate the promoters to access technical services from STAR SPs for 
preparing feasibility studies, business plans and technical drawings with services charges 
paid directly to the SP. For public, STAR will share the cost with the government and for 
semi-public, STAR will support 80% of the technical cost. Additionally, STAR will facilitate 
access to STAR supported credit for the implementation of all types of marketing 
infrastructure. Even in cases where there marketing infrastructure is supported through 
a public investment, STAR will encourage private management of these facilities by 
supporting the development of suitable public-private partnership models. 
122.  Financing business plan implementation: STAR will support the eligible 
community institutions to access credit at preferential interest rates and flexible 
collateral terms to in order to implement their approved BPs. Given the long history of 
existing funds with preferential terms, supporting MSME’s and agriculture in Egypt, STAR 
will employ existing financing channels to direct appropriate resources to its 
beneficiaries. It will establish a network including Credit Wholesalers (CW), Commercial 
Banks (CB), Microfinance Institutions (MFI), Credit Cooperatives (CC), and NGO-MFIs to 
make available access points for all types of beneficiaries. STAR will support four broad 
types of credit investment. 
123.  Rehabilitation of on-farm irrigation infrastructure and crop production inputs: About 
85,000 target households, corresponding to 55% of total STAR outreach, will benefit 
from STAR supported credits for on-farm irrigation and crop production activities. About 
70% of the STAR credit investments will be directed to support on-farm irrigation and 
crop production improvements to increase the income of the target households. 
 
Irrigation improvement: The average cost per feddan for on-farm irrigation 
rehabilitation is estimated to reach an amount of EGP 50,000 (EUR 2,283-
2,740). The amount will cover costs such as pumps, pipes, civil works, 
hydrants, water meters, digital technologies and model irrigation systems 
(drip or sprinkler) for improving irrigation efficiencies. The financial product 
structured for such type of beneficiaries will involve a credit line for loans 
between EGP 10,000 to EGP 60,000, with tenure of 5-6 years and one-year 
grace period. The smallholders will access these loans through WUAs with 
membership ranging from 250-500 members. The experiences and the 
lessons from the OFIDO project will be taken into account while implementing 
these activities. Most of the targeted households are poor and own less than a 
feddan and the average required investment per beneficiary is expected to be 
around EGP 25,000 (EUR 1,370) with a projected repayment period of 5 
years. Refer component 2.1 for details. 
31 
  Production improvement: The credit requirement per household for production 
improvement is estimated to range between EGP 5,000 -25,000 (EUR 274-
2,283). The amount will cover cost of production inputs (planting materials, 
fertilizer, etc.), mechanized services (e.g. tractor hire), technology adoption 
(solar, greenhouse, digital) for production improvement and addressing the 
effects of climate change, post-production (packaging, branding, labelling) 
activities and certification costs. These loans will be of 2-3 years duration with 
grace period of six months. The smallholders will access these loans through 
CDAs and PMAs based on the requirements presented in the approved BP’s of 
these community institutions. The smallholders will access these loans 
through PMAs, with average membership of around 50 members, supported 
by CDA. Refer component 2.2 for details. 
124.  Income generation activities: About 25,000 target households, corresponding to 
15% of total STAR outreach, will benefit from investments involves smallholders (men, 
women or youth) engaging in income-generating activities. STAR will propose a set of 
small investments in income generation activities such as small ruminants, poultry, crop, 
drying of fruits, vegetables and herbs, process fruits and vegetable, roof gardening, 
dairy produce. These activities will require investments ranging from EGP 5,000-20,000 
(EUR 457-1,370) with quick returns usually within a year. The appropriate financial 
product for this investment type is a credit line for loans between EGP 1,000 to EGP 
25,000, with one-year maturity, payable in quarterly installments and with the possibility 
of grace period of 2-3 months for repayment of the first installment. The target 
households with access credits for these activities based on business plans approved for 
the IGE groups connected to relevant CDAs. The CDA will establish revolving funds for 
managing these activities as discussed later. The smallholders will access these loans 
through IGEs comprising both women’s, men’s and youth income generation groupswith 
average membership of around 20 members, supported by CDA. 
125.  Youth enterprises and other small enterprises: About 35,000 target households, 
corresponding to 20% of total STAR outreach, will benefit from youth enterprises and 
relatively larger enterprises (independent CDAs and companies mostly graduating from 
STAR supported enterprises) investing in a range of enterprise opportunities along the 
agricultural value chains. The will engage in a range of collective enterprises such as the 
production of handicrafts and artefacts from agricultural residue; dairy and fishery -
related activities; provision of agro inputs and machinery services; businesses involving 
digital aggregation models; fruits and vegetables and herbs processing (jam, jelly, 
tomato paste) and commercial operations of marketing infrastructure such as cold 
storage, storage, etc. (PIM) The seed capital for such investments will come in the form 
of a credit line addressed to credit cooperatives that can demonstrate financial 
healthiness and produce appropriate guarantees (rather than to individuals that would 
not be able). STAR credit support from EGP 100,000 – 500,000 (EUR 4,566-27,395) for 
youth enterprises and from EGP 0.5 to 1.5 million (EUR 27,395-82,186) for larger 
enterprises which graduate mainly from the youth enterprises either as enterprise CDAs 
or small companies. The approximate tenure of these credits will be from 3 to 5 years 
with grace period around 12 months. The smallholders will access these loans through 
youth enterprise groups benefiting 20 to 50 youth members and enterprise CDA’s and 
companies benefiting from 250 to 500 members. 
Table 3: Summary of STAR supported investments  
32 
Type 
investment 
of 
Investm
ent  Size 
(EGP) 
Access 
through 
Tenure 
(years) 
Grace 
period 
(months) 
No, of 
HH 
Target 
bens. 
(approx. %) 
STAR credit 
investments 
(%) 
Items financed 
Agricultural production 
10,000 – 
farm 
-  On 
60,000 
Irrigation 
improvement 
-  Production 
improvement 
WUA 
5-6 
12 
7,000-
15,000 
PMA, CDA, 
Coops 
2-3 
6 
85,000 
55% 
70% 
Microenterprises 
- 
Income 
generating 
activities 
- 
Collective 
youth 
enterprises 
- MSMEs 
Total 
1,000 – 
20,000 
IGE groups, 
CDA 
1-2 
3 
40,000 
25% 
20% 
100,000-
500,000 
0.5-1.0 
million 
youth 
enterprise 
gps., CDA 
CDA, coops 
company 
3-5 
12 
35,000 
20% 
10% 
160,000 
100% 
100% 
Pumps,  pipes, civil  works,  hydrants,  water  meters, 
digital  technologies  and  model  irrigation  systems 
(drip or sprinkler) for improving irrigation efficiency 
Inputs,  mechanized  services;  technology  adoption 
(solar, 
post-production 
(packaging, branding, labelling); Certification. 
greenhouse, 
digital); 
Poultry,  small 
ruminants,  honey,  homestead 
production; trading; fruits, vegetables, herbs drying 
and processing; dairy produce; roof garden. 
agro-processing  and  agro-allied  production  e.g. 
handicrafts  from  agri-residue;  dairy,  fishery;  agro-
inputs  and  machinery services;  digital  aggregation 
models;  processing  (jam,  jelly,  tomato  paste); 
commercial operation of cold storage, storage, etc. 
126.  Youth and women will be targeted horizontally through all four credit lines and 
their participation will be monitored closely. Overall, women’s participation in MFI 
financing is currently close to 50% (EMFF data), indicating that most likely the 
introduction of women-specific credit lines will not be necessary. Youth, on the other 
hand, has been reported to be unable to meet collateral requirements. To overcome this 
impediment STAR will channeling larger investments (requiring collateral) through 
cooperatives (or CDAs), thus bypassing the need for collateral. Most MFIs (NGOs etc.) 
along with the ABE do not require collateral for micro-investments. Still, if collateral 
requirements prove to be a threat to STAR’s smooth implementation, there is an 
envelope of EUR 0.9 million, to be used for setting up a credit guarantee with the CGC to 
promote unsecured loans at a higher premium. 
127.  STAR will utilize existing channels for disbursing the necessary financial resources 
to its beneficiaries. In this respect, it does not need to be inventive. Its innovative aspect 
will be seated on the way it engages with the several stakeholders, with the aim to instill 
among them an element of healthy competition and beneficial cooperation. It will do so 
by exploiting synergies among partners and promoting each other’s comparative 
advantage. The ultimate goal being, enhanced efficiency from synergetic effects, 
improved capacity of rural financing institutions and an expanded financing spectrum for 
IFAD’s target group. 
128.  Like previous IFAD’s projects, STAR will use credit wholesalers (CWs – MSMEDA 
and ADP) for the implementation of this subcomponent. It will also engage with ABE 
(and any other commercial bank or eligible financial institution) to use its extensive 
branch network to reach some segments of the beneficiary group. Credit lines will be 
distributed on performance-based criteria to a selected group of financial institutions 
chosen through a competitive process. These institutions will receive credit lines for on-
lending to MFIs, Credit Cooperatives (CCs) and NGOs, which in turn will offer the 
specified loan products to STAR beneficiaries. 
129.  Through the initial survey carried out by the service provider star will identify the 
potential financial institutions in brackets NGO MFIs, MFIs and bank branches) that are 
closer to the star supported clusters and are better suited for partnering with the target 
households. The GPCUs will further validate the results of this survey through 
assessments of the pre-screened financial institutions and prepare a short list of 
potential partners using the criteria presented below and also including other criteria that 
may be requested by the CWs). To the extent possible this assessment will be a joint 
exercise carried out in collaboration with the CWs. The shortlisted financial institutions 
33 
will then be invited to respond to a call for proposals where participants will demonstrate 
their commitment to and understanding of the STAR’s objectives and will be selected by 
the CWs in consultation with STAR on the basis of the following performance indicators: 
speed of processing loans,  
 
  effectiveness and width of outreach network, 
  quality of outreach (awareness activities to promote project value propositions to 
beneficiary groups), 
  project portfolio size, 
  project portfolio quality, 
 
 
 
  Monitoring of the performance of Financial Intermediaries (banks, MFIs, NGOs, 
competitiveness of offered interest rates, 
reduced collateral and own participation requirements, 
simplicity and user-friendliness of the loan application process, 
CCs) 
  Monitoring of the performance of investments (micro-level), 
  Monitoring of repayment rates and support mechanism to instill a culture of 
 
responsible financing among the beneficiaries. 
Institutional Capacity Building (ICB) plan (for the institution and its 
partners/financial intermediaries) 
130.  Once the Cooperating Financial Institutions (CFIs) have been selected, they will 
receive consecutive tranches of credit lines for on lending. The tranches will be released 
on a first-come-first-served basis, i.e. CFIs with higher disbursement rates and better 
overall performance will be entrusted with larger tranches. STAR will maintain 
permanent staff in the NPCU and the GPCUs to monitor the process and intervene 
correctively whenever appropriate. Performance of CFIs will be monitored and re-
evaluated at regular intervals (twice a year) and corrective actions will be negotiated 
with the project’s staff and the implementation support missions. 
131.  CFIs will be encouraged to undertake capacity building activities across the board 
(in fact this is one of their performance assessment criteria). The project may assist CFIs 
to identify capacity building needs and design relevant plans. It may additionally offer 
financial resources in the form of a loan. CFIs may borrow from the credit line proceeds 
to finance capacity-building activities, that they will have to repay at an agreed interval. 
132.  CFIs will then start on lending to their established network of partners (or directly 
to beneficiaries as in the case of MSMEDA and banks) who in turn will be lending to 
project’s beneficiaries at market terms. STAR will not interfere on credit risk assessment 
procedures, or impose ceilings on interest rates and/or collateral and own participation 
requirements. The competitive process will clearly favor however, the avenues that will 
offer milder and more effective credit terms. The dedicated STAR staff will monitor the 
effectiveness of the system, and will assist in the resolution of eventual problems, or will 
come up with proposals for improvements. The STAR staff will have the option to revert 
to international expertise for support, whenever needed. 
133.  The contribution and engagement of the dedicated STAR staff responsible to 
promote the financing part of the programme is crucial and will be in the form of 
Financial Services Specialists in each GPCU who will be supported by the STAR technical 
specialist in the NPCU). They will have to act as brokers between beneficiaries, financial 
institutions and CFIs. They will be responsible for identifying beneficiary financing needs 
and map them against the several offerings of the financial sector. They will dilute 
information asymmetries by regularly updating this map and making it available to both 
demand and supply for credit stakeholders. Programme staff will identify capacity 
development needs on both the beneficiary side and the financial service provider’s side 
34 
and will package relevant training propositions accordingly. They will identify potential 
synergies among stakeholders in the sector and will leverage partnerships to capitalize 
on synergetic effects. They will be proactive in their work and act as leaders of this 
subcomponent’s priorities. 
134.  CBE has recently adopted (and promotes) an agricultural development strategy 
very relevant and compatible to STAR’s priorities and objectives. STAR staff will liaise 
with CBE to investigate mutually beneficial additionality. For instance, CBE’s aspiration to 
introduce targeted incentivized funding to enhance banks and ABE to extend coverage at 
micro-level can directly benefit from STAR’s value proposition. Similarly, STAR can 
benefit from CBE’s SuSME project under which EBI is tasked to enhance the capacity of 
bankers, CGC, and NGOs through training. Both CBE and STAR are developing initiatives 
in digital agriculture. Co-ordination between them will leverage synergetic effects. 
135.  Under the principle of brokering beneficiary interests to the financial sector, STAR 
will also monitor the beneficiaries’ ability to meet collateral and own participation 
requirements. For any eventual involvement, the project will consistently maintain a 
neutral position, trying not to introduce unnecessary distortions to the credit market. 
Doing so, it will allow the financial sector to respond positively and crowd-in additional 
financing resources to support the beneficiary investment needs; it will secure the credit-
lines’ sustainability and will leave a positive footprint on the sector itself. With this in 
mind, banks, MFIs, credit cooperatives, and NGOs will adjust collateral and own 
participation requirements as per their risk assessment procedures. In case this poses a 
problem to a segment of the target group, the project will encourage CFIs to reduce own 
participation and/or collateral requirements by increasing the entailed interest rate or 
recur to a system of credit guarantees. The project will cooperate with CGC to structure 
a relevant product and will promote more extensive use of moveable assets as collateral. 
136.  Previous IFAD credit lines in Egypt have been absorbed in the pool of funds of ADP 
and MSMEDA and reached the beneficiaries as their own funding. The beneficiaries never 
became aware of IFAD’s participation and contribution. The project will make sure that 
on-lending partners disseminate information on IFAD’s commitment and financial 
support to rural development. 
137.  Other financial services for the target group 
138.  A critical factor for the success of the project is the engagement of the target group 
on income-generating activities (and other types of investments that the project 
proposes). To make sure of that targeted beneficiaries are both interested and able to 
undertake such ventures, the project provides for a relevant training process. Together 
with capacity building activities on irrigation, production improvement, and marketing, 
the project will provide entrepreneurship and financial responsibility skills. Relevant 
exercises must be practical, realistic and hands-on, instead of theoretical, class-based. 
An indicative curriculum must include the following elements: a) why is investing good 
for me (risks and rewards of entrepreneurship); b) what is a business opportunity and 
how to identify it; c) how to evaluate an idea and assess if the market is ready for it; d) 
trial-runs to validate concepts and refine business plans; d) financial decisions a 
smallholder must make as early as possible; e) how to approach the financial sector; f) 
what are the pros and cons of getting registered and licensed; g) small business 
management and bookkeeping; h) how to make sure I can repay a loan and why this is 
important; i) the benefits of savings (you always have some money to save). 
139.  The project will be responsible for preparing and consolidating the curriculum (as it 
will do for other capacity-building activities at cluster level), yet it will entrust its delivery 
to two channels: a) the regular delivery mechanism that the project will adopt for all 
35 
types of training and dissemination (including with digital means e.g. pico-projectors 
etc.), and b) CFIs will be encouraged to incorporate the curriculum as part of their 
outreach strategy. 
140.  Project staff will investigate and identify existing micro-insurance options pertinent 
to the beneficiaries. Since 2016, after the resolution No. 902 that set the terms of 
operation for micro-insurance, the industry has become active. Apart from the existing 
micro-insurance products, there is active analytical work on crop-insurance (MSMEDA) 
and rural micro-insurance (JICA). The project will tap on the findings of existing analysis 
and will promote further efforts in developing products for the target group, in 
partnership with the existing active players. Similarly, the project staff will investigate 
the possibility to develop leasing products for the beneficiaries. 
141.  Finally, the project will promote savings culture within the target group. Project 
staff will first investigate the possibility to structure savings products with collaborating 
financial institutions (free savings accounts – digital or not). It will then promote the 
benefits of using such products to the beneficiaries and the target group in general.  
142.  To finance these activities, the project provides for a capacity development pool. 
Project staff will revert to this pool for ad-hoc expert support, on any of the above 
topics. The pool will be used for training design and delivery, implementation support, 
brief technical contributions, and studies.  
143.  Digital marketing technologies:  
144.  Increased use of digital technologies will open up new markets and opportunities. 
STAR digital strategies will help introduce the data driven marketing applications by 
including the production data and farm profiling of target farmers. For this, an integrated 
marketing platform will be developed or piggybacking will be done either with Knowledge 
Economy Foundation's Bashaier Network or with eFinance Platform. The platform will be 
available both in web app form and mobile app format. From the inventory of available 
market players and emerging traders, agribusiness and exporters, linkages will be built 
with the MAs. STAR Mobile App will have a component that allows sellers to submit a 
request for selling a specific produce/commodity. A mechanism will be built to pilot STAR 
Digital Marketing by demand aggregation.  
145.  Central to the Digital market Intervention is building a STAR market platform that 
will drive different activities. 
146.  STAR Market Platform  
147.  The platform will be both on web based and mobile based. The platform will be 
anchored by department of agriculture and is facilitated by e-finance or by Bashaier. The 
content development and data upload will be facilitated by the project staff. If the 
platform has to be built afresh, the budget provision will be made for outsourcing the 
development and maintenance work. This will have cross links to the STAR Portal. The 
platform will have the following functionalities. 
•  Market Players Inventory: A database of market players and potential players will 
be maintained along with their contact details. The demand and supply data 
commodity- wise and quality wise will be maintained. 
•  E Market Place: Digitally connects farmers to the online market place, compares 
the prevalent market prices for the crop, determines farmer revenues & 
profitability and suggests the most optimal market price. The market prices of 
different commodities are displayed for the benefit of the farmers. This feature is 
36 
linked to the aggregation feature. Farmers can choose an option for willingness to 
sell, upload their produce pictures, minimum sale price, willingness to aggregate 
etc., The buyers, entrepreneurs, agri-business players can view the details of the 
produce available for sale (at farmer, village, cluster, governorate level) on 
dynamic basis. The preconditions for getting the credit in kind (inputs are 
provided instead of cash) , such as group formation,  registration,  willingness to 
aggregate for the markets, type of produce,  using collective decision etc.., could 
be digitized.  The data related to individual farmers,  groups, credit profiling, 
crops grown, likely harvest dates,  quality and visual marketing could be best 
harnessed.  This can be linked with the production dimensions.  
•  STAR Input Dealer Connect: Digital display and access to inventory data of some 
of the most reliable agro input providers such as the seeds, fertilizers and 
pesticide dealers, agro equipment dealers and manufacturers, logistics and 
storage service providers etc., 
•  STAR Payment: In the later stages of the project, the market platform will be 
linked to the payment gateways, subject to feasibility. 
148.  Implementation Plan: With intense campaigns and media support, the STAR Digital 
marketing will be piloted in three clusters covering the three governorates. This Proof of 
Concept will be put forth during the business meetings between newly formed agri-
business entities (of STAR), major players (traders and exporters) for forging the further 
partnerships to roll out across the three governorates. The success indicators include 
better market price realization and revenues of target farmers increase by at least 20%, 
among many others. 
149.  Visual agriculture marketing 
150.  In recent years, the visual agricultural platforms have upgraded traditional 
agriculture, deployed e-commerce to rural areas, upgraded store service, produced new 
orders and other forms in the market. The community development agencies or the 
youth entrepreneurs can handle this work with low cost digital camera or a smart phone. 
At critical growth stages of the crop, photographs will be captured and placed on the 
digital marketing platform. This will give an assurance to the quality production of the 
agriculture produce that might interest exporters or the merchants. This will also 
generate huge data about the producers who register for the visual agricultural 
marketing scheme. The project may take help of WFP mechanism to convince farmers or 
a group of farmers.  The platform can be integrated with the existing online market 
platforms. 
151.  “Visual agriculture” mainly refers to the use of the Internet, the Internet of Things, 
cloud computing, radar technology and modern video technology to present models, 
means and methods of cultivation or livestock. “Visual agriculture” also has a primary 
function, which is a reliable future order effect. Many agri-business / Merchants may use 
“visual agriculture” to observe and order remotely.  We can observe the entire 
production and management process of products such as vegetables, fruits, poultry, 
cattle and sheep. 
152.  Digital Finance: The programme will pursue a longer term investment in digital 
finance. The programme will offer granular farmer level data (STAR Platform) for 
financial service providers such as banks and insurance companies for credit profiling. 
Based on the profiling and the production interventions undertaken during the 
programme, STAR finance cards will be made available in collaboration with leading 
financial institutions, such as CIB. The cards will provide the users with access to a 
37 
minimum amount of credit. Cards will be made available for individual farmers as well as 
collective cards (for CDAs, NGOs and other associations), Using this card, the individual 
or groups can access credit for buying inputs at outlets that accept the cards / digital 
money. A cap will be worked out for each type of card. Digital transactions will be 
encouraged through these wallets for providing the time critical inputs from the dealers. 
In due course, STAR wallets will be promoted for digital market interventions (linking 
them with the market transactions). A rigorous campaign will be undertaken involving 
stakeholders. STAR Money (STAR Money which encompasses Mobile Wallet and 
Integrated App/Supply Chain) will be introduced during the 2nd tier of digital strategies 
(from 2023).  
153.  As the financial needs of every farmer are different, STAR activities may help 
financial agencies leverage technology to create and get the data metrics which would 
add value to their services while at the same time advise them on curating new schemes 
and plans to engage with farmers in a better way. 
154.  The e-finance platform can be customized to pilot financial inclusion component. At 
CPMU level, e-finance would be integrated with the STAR Digital Platform/ Dashboard. 
The dashboard will give complete data related to credit profiling of the farmers, current 
loan requirement, linking them with the crop/ enterprise, finally to efficient management 
adoption. Performance indicators do include the ability of the farmers to adopt innovative 
technologies in his field (contributing to any component - resilience, water saving, 
productivity enhancement, participation in e-market and aggregation). 
155.  The implementation steps for Digital Finance; 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The STAR digital finance strategy provides beneficiaries with the savings and 
insurance products. A comprehensive farmers data available with STAR Platform 
will be synergized with the financial data (credit requirements, profiles, 
insurance and savings etc.,). 
For this, a tender will be called for inviting financial institutions who may be 
interested in offering savings product for the poor farmers, digitally. And 
probably insurance will be introduced for both for crops and animal husbandry 
based on the need 
The winner gets the opportunity to partner with the STAR project.  
Star project will provide the capacity to the farmers and to the institutions as 
how to backstop the farmers.  And the institutions will be responsible for 
providing a platform and the product.  
The institutions will get an opportunity to work with a scale of 180000 
beneficiaries.  
This will be a pilot and based on the success the project will scale up to other 
regions as well.  
This may cost the project 0.9 million EUR. 
156.  Sub-component 1.2: Microenterprise development 
157.  This sub-component will increase women’s involvement in economic activities, 
develop youth enterprises, support youth jobs creation and facilitate the graduation of 
microenterprises. It will invest to develop around 1,500 IGEs, 200 collective youth 
enterprises and 50 small and medium enterprises which will create around 20,000 part-
time and 3,000 full-time jobs. SC 1.2 will help to develop microenterprise business 
ideas, strengthen entrepreneurial skills and provide technical knowhow around 
agricultural services delivery, agribusinesses and the management of marketing 
infrastructure with the aim of generating income opportunities and employment. It will 
38 
(i) ensure that trained youth and women interested in starting or expanding small agri-
business receive business development and financial support. This can include 
homestead production, agro-processing and agriculture allied production, such as 
handicrafts from agricultural residue; and (ii) promote private agricultural services to 
complement public extension services, improve the provision of inputs, and other 
agricultural services, such as compost making, nurseries and renting of machinery.  
This sub-component will focus on the poor and the extremely vulnerable, to provide 
income generating activities for the landless. It will lead to an increase in the number of 
microenterprises in the programme area catalysed by the business opportunities 
unlocked in the value chains through STAR supported activities. 
158.  Formation of income generation and enterprise groups: The CDCs will 
mobilise the IEGs with support from the YCF and the YPs at the village level. The IEGs 
will comprise between 20-30 individuals and can be categorised into women’s groups, 
men’s groups and youth groups. To the extent possible the members of these groups will 
belong to the same neighbourhood and will come together voluntarily. Each group will 
select a group leader, a secretary and a treasurer. The groups will meet at least once a 
month.  
159.  The groups will be informal in nature and will be developed under the umbrella of 
the host CDA. All the IGE members must be members of the general body of the CDA. 
The IGEs will carry out all formal financial transactions through the CDA. The host CDAs 
will open bank separate bank accounts dedicated to the IGE, with the IGE treasurer 
serving as one of the signatories to this account, to facilitate financial transactions for 
the IGE. The CDAs will also support the IGEs to develop the IGE bylaws, description of 
activities and rules and regulations.  
160.  The IGEs will start operations with regular savings activities. The accumulated 
savings will be distributed as short-term internal loans to members and the interest 
earned through this process will be recycled as loans. IGEs can also decide to invest the 
accumulated savings in collective income generation activities such as drying and 
processing activities. The goal of the IGEs will be to accumulate their capital in order to 
finance larger internal loans and invest more in collective enterprises. Therefore, the 
group funds will not be liquidated at the end of the year. If required, a part of the funds 
will be set aside to meet emergency expenses of the members. Based on the 
performance of the internal savings and credit operations the CDAs will facilitate the 
IGEs to develop their BPs and access external credit to expand their business activities. 
161.  IGE activities: Women play significant role in production/rearing and processing at 
the homestead level in Upper Egypt. However, many are illiterate, have limited access to 
resources, and lack the skills due to limited educational opportunities. As a consequence, 
they have difficulty in taking advantage of economic opportunities. STAR will boost 
female beneficiaries’ knowledge and skills, to become more self-reliant, self-confident 
and, therefore, empowered to take on a more active role in their families and 
communities. Specifically targeting women, the programme will promote poultry and 
small ruminants (e.g. ducks, goats, sheep) and homestead processing and services. 
Furthermore, roof and homestead gardens will be promoted, complemented with 
nutritional awareness campaigns and food conservation.  
162.  Sensetisation and capacity building of the IEGs: The LSP will prepare the 
training modules related to institutional development of IGEs, savings and credit 
activities and microenterprise development. The YPs and YCFs will be trained as master 
trainers at the village level. The YCF and the YPs will be responsible for the mobilising 
the IGEs, training them on basic aspects of institutional development and enterprise 
39 
development and facilitating their activities based on the guidelines in the training 
modules. Capacity building and sensitization activities will be directed to the 
communities, in particular targeting the poor, women and youth with the aim of raising 
awareness on livelihood opportunities. These activities will be closely linked to 
mobilization activities for the marketing associations (under SC 1.1). These will include 
(i) communication campaigns targeting the target command areas, including social 
media and rural radio  programmes; (ii) capacity building of youth volunteers to mobilise 
the communities (community and house visits); (iii) special communication events on 
market days, harvest days, as well as sensitization events targeting producers and their 
organizations (iv) showcasing of successful entrepreneurs and motivational talks by 
experienced entrepreneurs.  
163.  Entrepreneurial and technical capacity development: The lessons learned 
from PRIME and other projects show that lack of awareness of business opportunities, 
practical training and start-up capital are key constraints to sustainably engaging youth 
in agriculture and processing activities. Training packages, ensuring readiness for 
trainees with entrepreneurial skills and practical technical knowledge, coupled with 
access finance through a dedicated seed capital financing with favorable financing 
conditions will be provided.  
164.  The sub-component will invest in: (i) tailored entrepreneurial training, for example 
Start and Improve Your Own Business; (iii) Specific technical capacity building in 
production, processing and agricultural services and the marketing of these products; 
and (iii) applied skills and practical training through apprenticeship programs with 
established agribusiness; and (iv) mentoring and coaching from experienced 
entrepreneurs. The target households will receive practical, realistic and hands-on, 
instead of theoretical, training. The curriculum will include the following elements: a) 
why is investing good for me (risks and rewards of entrepreneurship); b) what is a 
business opportunity and how to identify it; c) how to evaluate an idea and assess if the 
market is ready for it; d) trial-runs to validate concepts and refine business plans; d) 
financial decisions a smallholder must make as early as possible; e) how to approach the 
financial sector; f) what are the pros and cons of getting registered and licensed; g) 
small business management and bookkeeping; h) how to make sure I can repay a loan 
and why this is important; i) the benefits of savings (you always have some money to 
save). 
165.  Service providers (e.g. financial institutions, NGOs, MESMEDA) with expertise in 
access to finance and financial education will assess the needs and adapt accordingly 
training modules, key messages and delivery methods and tools. Financial education will 
combine one-off sessions with continuous multi-channel dissemination in order to 
support the changes in financial behaviours and attitudes over the long run. To develop 
and implement multi-channel communication STAR will take stock of technology-based 
information developed through the MIS (market information system). Fostering a 
savings culture, will also develop group cohesiveness amongst the target group. 
166.  Service providers for supporting entrepreneurial capacity development: While the 
YPs and CYFs will provide basic training for mobilisation and starting up the IEG groups, 
specialised entrepreneurship development training will be delivered through specialised 
service providers. These will include, i) CFIs which will incorporate the entrepreneurship 
and income generating training as a part of their outreach strategy; ii) specialised 
technical service providers such as MSMEDA, NGOs, hired through through a competitive 
bidding process, to diversify its existing training curricula, developing new modules on 
sources of finance and repayment; iii) ARC, MoI, Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training (TVET) to diversify curricula, developing new modules on (pre) processing, 
post-harvest, food conservation and processing, agricultural services, and digital 
40 
agriculture, iv) UNIDO, on agro-processing such as tomato paste, sun dried tomatoes, 
and pomegranate; v) WFP technical training on processing; vi) Innovation and 
Technology Centres of the Ministry of Industry.  
167.  This subcomponent will establish these micro-enterprise groups (either collective 
(up to 9) or as individual), under existing CDAs, that will benefit from the formalized 
institutional structure and linkages with the MAs. Similarly, a graduation model will be 
developed to facilitate the progression of mature micro-enterprise groups into 
independent income generating associations and private enterprises. 
168.  Enterprise graduation models: STAR will incentivise a microenterprise 
graduation model to motivate leading microenterprises to grow and expand the outreach 
of their businesses. For example, the model will support the IGE enterprises to develop 
into collective youth enterprises and independent medium sized companies on 
achievement of a set of conditions such as a i) certain level of internal capital; ii) 
expanding membership base; ii) number of jobs supported; iv) proportion of very poor 
and poor, women and youth members; v) readiness to form independent credit linkages 
and other institutional linkages. The STAR will incentivise the enterprise graduation 
process by facilitating access to larger credit volumes, facilitating access to marketing 
infrastructure support, supporting technical and institutional capacity building needs, 
assisting the legal formalities and costs for registering and facilitating larger credit 
linkages. 
169.  Business plan preparation: Microenterprises must develop BPs in order to 
benefit from STAR credit support and other services. The BP development, review and 
approval process will be the same as described in SC 1.1. The YPs and the CYFs 
responsible for facilitating the BP development process will encourage, where possible, 
joint proposals between the entrepreneur/s and the marketing association, with 
contracting arrangements and joint resources already in place. These joint proposals 
could potentially benefit from additional programme support, both financially and in 
terms of technical assistance.  
170.  Access to finance. STAR will support the approved microenterprise BPs to access 
credit support from CFIs. The process for gaining access to finance, potential products, 
interest rates, collateral mechanisms and access to guarantee fund support will be the 
same as described in SC 1.1. STAR will use IFAD resources as well as co-financing 
resources from AfBD to support the relatively large 200 collective youth enterprises and 
the 50 independent small enterprises.  
171.  Digital microenterprise solutions: The sub-component will complement 
business development and financial services with the promotion of digital technology 
services. These digital services and applications are aimed at improving both the 
marketing and production of farming communities, while providing employment and 
business opportunities for the rural youth.  For example, entrepreneurs can develop 
mobile based and on-line ordering system for delivery of fresh local produce to the 
consumers. Similarly, an ''uber'' model can be used as ride sharing technology to 
aggregate village level produce to the urban markets, or sharing farm technology such 
as tractors. Rural youth will also be involved in e-commerce activities particularly in door 
(field) delivery of the inputs, animal husbandry products, which at a scale this will prove 
to be an income generation activity. For small and medium scale enterprise will et digital 
support through project report, business risk, bank loan feasibility and relevant 
government schemes, subsidies and other options in the market to support such 
business and support their growth. 
41 
172.  Component 2 Improvement of smallholders’ productivity and resilience
173.  The objective of this component is to improve the resilience of smallholder crop 
producers by: securing their access to water resources, and active participation in water 
users associations (WUA); enhancing the efficiency and sustainability of their use of soil 
and water resources, and lower production costs; and ensuring compliance with market 
standards including good agricultural practices (GAP) and safe pesticide residues free 
food. It will have two subcomponents: SC 2.1 Investments in irrigation infrastructure 
and management; and SC 2.2 Improved crop farming practices.    
174.  Subcomponent 2.1: Investments in irrigation infrastructure and 
management 
175.  The objective of this subcomponent is to improve water management and supply in 
branch canals and on-farm irrigation efficiency in the 24 selected command areas 
consisting of connected third and fourth order branch canals and mesqas in one water 
unit. This will be achieved through: i) improved irrigation water planning and asset 
management at governorate level for equitable and reliable water distribution 
considering current and futures challenges from climate change; ii) establishment and 
strengthening of at least 320 WUAs to enhance participation of water users in irrigation 
investments, operation, maintenance, and management for sustainability; iii) 
rehabilitation of an estimated xx km of branch canals and upgrading of 320 mesqas level 
irrigation systems; and iv) improved on-farm irrigation systems, for more efficient use of 
irrigation water in 30,000 feddans. 
176.  The SC is a continuation of the interventions implemented under OFIDO. The 
intended results are irrigation command areas with reliable water supply for farmers 
(especially at the tail end), improved irrigation efficiency, increased land values at the 
tail end of the canals and piped mesqas, and water, energy, land and labour saving at 
programme completion. Irrigation efficiency will be improved primarily through reduction 
of losses in the water delivery system (branch canals mesqas and marwas) and at field 
level. These achievements will be complemented by SC 2.2 results and lead to more 
stable and increased production and productivity for smallholder farmers increasing their 
access to food and surplus for marketing. In addition, well defined models of water 
management, investment cost recovery, and on farm irrigation improvement 
interventions will be documented and can be scaled up by the three project governorates 
and by the national Government in other governorates. 
177.  The subcomponent will be implemented lead by the Irrigation Improvement Sector 
IIS) of the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) and their Directorates at 
governorate level, in close collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and its 
Directorates at governorate level, building on the lessons learned from OFIDO. It will 
support the following activities: 
178.  Selection of irrigation command areas. As explained under geographical targeting 
water units/command areas of third and fourth order branch canal and the connected 
mesqas will be selected for improvement under the programme. Improvement efforts 
would cover the whole command area, in order to be able to demonstrate impacts of 
interventions on production and productivity and water saving. The criteria for selection 
of command areas are included in the geographical targeting section. Two additional 
criteria, verified through engagement with farmers and villages, will be used to select 
command areas and mesqas to be prioritized for project investments in the first years of 
the project:(i) higher concentration of poverty; (ii) the main and second order branch 
canals and the drainage system are in good working condition and there is no need for 
major investments for their upstream improvements; (iii) adequate quantity of good 
42 
quality water is available for irrigation from the second order canal; (i) there are no 
major social and environmental problems that require mitigation by the programme; and 
(ii) there is willingness by farmers served by the command area and mesqas to 
participate in the programme including forming WUAs, participate in the management of 
the branch canal, and agree un cost recovery mechanisms. It is expected that an 
estimated 24 branch canal command areas including 320 mesqas will be improved. To 
be confirmed based on the ongoing water infrastructure rehabilitation needs and poverty 
mapping exercise.  
179.  Improved planning and asset management for equitable and reliable water 
distribution at governorate level. To assist in the planning and management of water 
resources at governorate level, the programme will finance technical assistance for the 
development of a water resources management plan (WRMP) and an irrigation asset 
management plan in each governorate participating in the programme. The WRMPs will 
provide for the implementation of a local system of water management that covers all 
irrigation water used in the governorate and ensures high levels of water use efficiency 
are achieved. The WRMPs will consider the challenges from climate change with 
increased inter-year variability in the Nile water flow and plan for water distribution 
management in normal water flow years as well as years with low flows combined with 
an early warning system and advice to farmers on reduced water allocations. In addition, 
the irrigation assets serving each command area in each of the governorates will be 
identified, mapped and their condition ascertained. An asset management system will be 
developed that will identify the necessary frequency for maintenance, and rehabilitation 
and identify the required costs and financing. Maps of the water distribution networks, 
with key features, will be prepared.  
180.  The WUAs details and the individual pump details will be digitized and uploaded 
onto the STAR Platform. Digital water meters will be installed at strategic points in the 
selected branch canal areas to measure the quantity, frequency and quality of irrigation 
water. The data received from the digital water meters will be of immense utility for 
improving the efficiency of the irrigation systems. Empirical evidences of irrigation 
efficiency impacts will lead to data driven irrigation management and crop planning. The 
data driven irrigation management system is a proof of concept (POC) that could 
subsequently be moved upstream to second order and primary canals as a second phase 
in the digitalization at midterm of the STAR implementation.  
181.  In this second phase the automation of water supply, using wireless sensor 
networks, will help to solve problems of inconvenient irrigation schedules and enhancing 
the preparedness of future irrigation systems that will need to be more efficient. Wireless 
sensor networks can potentially pave the way for precision farming in Egypt. While this 
technology may not be scaled across the target geographies, each governorate could 
have one pilot covering the command area of 1-3 branch canals served by the same 
second order canal. 
182.  About 50 Water User Associations will be involved in this initiative. All the new 
installations of irrigation systems (electric and pipe delivery) will be equipped with the 
digital water meters (Electromagnetic Flow meter Model ex: FM600 / 6"), IoT Master 
Control RTU, Communication Booster, Servo Stabilizer and an online UPS. The digital 
water meters will be virtually connected through tab / Smart Phones / Data Logging 
Systems with the project staff. The data will be synced with the Digital Water Module/ 
dashboard of STAR Platform (based on the need – ideally on weekly basis). The quantity, 
quality and time of operation and many other parameters of importance will be collected 
and analyzed to improve the efficiency of irrigation system in 400 installations. This may 
require around 1.3 Million EUR one time investment and 0.7 Million EUR operational 
expenses.  
43 
183.  The digital water management will be clubbed with the introduction of GSM/ Smart 
Phone based automated pump starters (in tier 2 – 2023). About 100 project intervention 
sites (where project is installing electric pumps and pipe delivery systems) will be 
selected for this and automated pump starters will be installed along with a SIM card. 
GSM/ Smart Phone based controller enables the farmer to operate the motor pump set 
from anywhere anytime using his mobile or landline. This activity will bring changes in 
the way the farmers operate the irrigation motors. This system will bring efficiency in 
planning irrigation scheduling, remote access, motor running status, warning alerts in 
built real time clock for accurate timing of irrigation etc., will transform the irrigation 
management in long run.  
184.  Digitalisation of water management. To support the effective implementation and 
continuous updating of the WRMPs, digital water meters will be installed at strategic 
points in the selected branch canal command areas to measure the quantity, frequency 
and quality of irrigation water. The data received from the digital water meters will be of 
immense utility for improving the efficiency of the irrigation systems and the WRMPs. 
Empirical evidences of irrigation efficiency impacts will lead to data driven irrigation 
management and crop planning. The data driven irrigation management system is a 
proof of concept (POC) that could subsequently be moved upstream to second order and 
primary canals as a second phase (tier 2) in the digitalization at midterm of the STAR 
implementation. In this second phase the automation of water supply, using wireless 
sensor networks, will help to solve problems of inconvenient irrigation schedules and 
enhancing the preparedness of future irrigation systems that will need to be more 
efficient. Wireless sensor networks can potentially pave the way for precision farming. 
While this technology may not be scaled across the target branch canals command 
areas, each governorate will be encouraged to select one pilot covering the command 
areas of 1-3 branch canals served by the same second order canal. 
185.  Rehabilitation of branch canals and drainage systems. The third and fourth level 
canals in identified command areas will be improved through reinforced concrete intakes, 
stone pitching, control structures (head and cross regulators if any), tail ends. Stone 
pitching of canals will be done in all areas where the soil conditions are prone to high 
levels of water infiltration. Drainage systems will be improved in the command areas. 
This will include the cleaning of large drains and installation of in-field subsurface drains 
as needed. 
186.  Establishment and strengthening of WUAs to enhance participation of water users 
in irrigation investments and management. Rehabilitation and upgrading needs for the 
mesqas in the selected branch canals will be mapped and discussed with the concerned 
farmers together with investment and improved irrigation management options. Farmers 
sharing the same mesqa and expressing interest in forming a WUA and investing in 
improvement of their mesqa as well as willingness to invest in improved field level 
irrigation systems will be selected for programme support by the governorate project 
team including representatives from the IIS/MWRI.  
187.  In accordance with the Law No 213, formation of WUAs by the beneficiary farmers 
is a prerequisite for the Government support for mesqa improvement. Under the 
programme, WUAs will be formed according to the guidelines developed by the Central 
Directorate of Irrigation Advisory Services of MWRI (IAS). The process includes five 
phases as defined by the IAS guidelines: a) build credibility with the farmers; b) 
formation of the water user association; c) participatory design for mesqa improvement; 
d) participation in mesqa improvement; v) Operation of the improved mesqa. The 
implementation of this process will be led by the IIS/IAS of the MWRI, with support from 
the MoA Directorates at governorate level. No mesqa improvement will be implemented 
44 
unless the WUA is formed and involved in planning and decisions on the design of the 
improvements and the subsequent management and cost recovery mechanisms covering 
both investments and operation and maintenance costs. An implementation agreement 
will be signed between the WUA, IIS/MWRI and MoA agriculture Directorates at 
governorate level including the design of the improved irrigation infrastructures and 
works to be procured, budget and cost recovery conditions and mechanisms.  
188.  It is estimated that about 320 WUAa will be developed under the Management 
Transfer Model. This Model gives the full water management responsibilities and its 
financing (at mesqa level) to the WUAs and minimizes the need for government control. 
The role of the MWRI staffs (District Engineers) will be transformed from implementers 
to technical advisors and monitors. The WUAs will, within the Law and terms and 
conditions of the MWRI (as indicated in the implementation agreement), operate, 
maintain, rehabilitate and improve the water management infrastructure under their 
responsibility and provide the required resources from their own members and/or from 
external sources (e.g. MWRI, Local Government, MSMEDA, etc.). 
189.  WUAs will be trained in irrigation system operation and management tasks, water 
use efficient technologies and irrigation practices, and climate change impacts on Nile 
river flows and early warnings for periods with low river flows and crop planning actions 
to take in years with reduced water allocations. The WUAs will be supported in setting up 
a water management and fee system. The WUAs may also undertake activities that are 
indirectly linked to water management such as waste management to reduce the waste 
dumping in the canal system, which causes high maintenance costs. They may also 
decide to request training and technical advice from the programme for improving their 
crop farming (see SC 2.2). 
190.  Improved irrigation systems at mesqa and on-farm for more rational use of 
irrigation water. The programme will finance (under cost recovery and credit financing) 
the installation of electric pumps and pipe delivery systems (replacing open canals, that 
cause loss of land and water, and individual diesel-based pumping, that increases 
operation costs and pollution) to serve a group of farmers sharing a mesqa on an 
average of 180 feddans. Where solar electricity is feasible, this will be considered instead 
of connection to the grid for water pumping. In the periods where the solar energy is not 
needed for the pumping other alternative uses will be considered, such as for cold 
storage rooms.  
191.  As much as possible, lands under the improved command areas will be levelled 
using laser guided equipment. The programme will provide training in water-use efficient 
technologies and practices. In each WUA willing farmers will be identified as 
demonstration farmers to make the shift from surface irrigation to more water-use 
efficient technologies such as drip irrigation, punched holes and others. This will be done 
as on-farm demonstration plots covering at least 10% of land in each selected command 
area seeking at least one plot in each mesqa. The willing demonstration farmers will 
receive technical assistance and a demonstration credit to cover 50% of the price for 
installing the system on 1.5 feddan. This credit should only be repaid based on actual 
pumping cost savings (maintaining the same yields and as such increase in income) 
demonstrated through a data log over water use time per week, crops cultivated, and 
their yields kept by the farmer and monitored by the WUA. The demonstration credit will 
facilitate that also risk adverse small and extra smallholders can participate as 
demonstration farmers which is important for creating examples to be taken up by other 
farmers with the same conditions.   
192.  With the implementation of digital water meter systems, the whole distribution 
network can be continuously monitored real time by any specified interval reads. This 
45 
will allow for an incentive mechanism where WUAs compete against each other in 
reducing water use and increase use efficiency in their mesqas. The most successful 
WUAs in a branch canal area will be rewarded (could be in form of extra inputs or 
reduction in their credits, or other).  
Farmers’ perception in Upper Egypt is often that drip irrigation can only be used on sandy 
soils primarily found in the new lands and is not relevant for the loam clay soils found in 
the old lands. While it is easier to adjust drip irrigation systems to sandy soils it is totally 
possible to use drip irrigation in loam clay soils. In the latter case the drip frequency needs 
to be slower to allow for the extra time it takes for the soil to absorb the water and avoid 
ponding and runoff. Drip is used all over the world on many different types of soil. What is 
important is the need to design the drip irrigation system and practices to fit to the concrete 
soil type and cropping system. The system and practices used for sandy soils cannot 
directly be transferred to loam clay soils. 
However, when it comes to managing salinity, areas with water quality and soils with the 
tendency of building up high levels of salt concentrations may need the salt to be washed 
down or out ones in a while, and that cannot always be done with drip. In some cases the 
drip irrigation therefor needs to be combined with the option of periodic flood irrigation, 
when needed. 
193.  Investment cost recovery. The MWRI is authorized to recover the full capital costs 
of mesqa improvement from the beneficiaries without interest over a 20-years period. 
Before any investments, arrangements will be discussed and put in place with the WUA 
for the full cost recovery and included in the implementation agreement, in accordance 
with the current legal framework. The WUA should be fully aware of the cost of 
improvements and the terms of the cost recovery prior to any improvement taking place. 
To ensure this and create ownership up-front by the WUAs, alternative approaches will 
be considered. For example, instead of MWRI pre-financing the capital cost and procure 
the equipment and works, farmers can be linked to credits, with the same conditions as 
set in the legal framework (without interest over a 20-years period), making them 
responsible for the financing from the beginning as well as making the WUA responsible 
for managing their own procurement process guided by the MWRI. As mentioned earlier, 
an implementation agreement will be signed, that clearly outlines the conditions and 
expectations from all parties. No mesqa improvement should be started without the 
implementation agreement is in place.  
194.  Subcomponent 2.2: Improved crop farming practices 
195.  The objective of this subcomponent is to facilitate smallholder’s adoption of 
improved crop cultivation practices mainly identified in the business plans under 
subcomponent 1.1. The improvements will consider market product requirements as well 
as current and future challenges from climate change and the sustainability of the use 
and management of soil and water resources. This will be achieved through: i) 
strengthening of public, private and digital extension services; ii) participatory analysis 
of crop production challenges and identification of options for tolerant crops and varieties 
and improved practices and technologies; iii) training of 1000 farmers’ groups 
stimulating their experimental learning; iv) technical and financial support for at least 
640 demonstration farmers; and v) improved access to machinery.        
46 
196.  The intended results are farmers accessing timely and scale adapted advise and 
technical assistance for improving their cropping systems and produce quality and 
safety, increasing nutrient and biomass recycling, soil sustainability and reducing costs 
for agrochemical inputs, and adopting practices that builds resilience against heatwaves 
and actions responding to early warning of reduced water availability in years with low 
Nile flow. These achievements will be complemented by SC 2.1 results and lead to more 
stable and increased production and productivity for smallholder farmers increasing their 
access to food and surplus for marketing. 
197.  The implementation of the subcomponent will be led by the MoA directorates of 
agriculture at the governorate level in partnership with the public Agriculture and 
IAS/MWRI extension services, farmer producer groups (marketing committees/ 
associations or WUAs), CDAs and other NGOs, Agricultural Research Institutions and 
Universities, and private providers of extension services.  
198.  The SC will provide training and assistance to farmers through two types of 
farmers’ groups formed and/or selected under SC 1.2 and SC 2.1: 1) MAs organized 
under CDAs or Cooperatives and with a business plan (developed under SC 1.2) 
identifying their main crop production development needs, and where farmers may have 
their plots in different mesqas in the programme intervention area; and 2) farmers 
organized in WUAs (supported under SC 2.1) sharing the same mesqa who do not 
necessarily initially want to do joint marketing but who have a common interest in joint 
cultivation (land consolidation but conserving individual benefits from their own plots), 
adopting new crops and agronomic practices, or improving their soil, water and irrigation 
management technologies and practices. The approach to facilitating farmer’s adoption 
of new crops, practices and technologies will focus on building their analytical and 
experimental learning skills, knowledge and skills in accessing quality information 
sources, and mutual sharing as a way to empower them to seek advice and inspiration 
beyond the public extension system recognizing its limited outreach. The SC will support 
the following activities: 
199.  Strengthening of extension services. The capacities and outreach of public 
extension services to smallholder farmers, bringing in innovations and jointly with 
farmers addressing barriers for adoption of new practices, are limited. With retirements 
of extension staff and the moratorium on hiring new staff, there are no prospects of 
generational renewal and improvements in these limitations. The SC will therefore 
support new and innovative solutions for providing access to extension services and 
quality, timely and implementable information relevant for smallholder farmers. These 
will include:    
200.  Young professional program. To expand the capacity of extension service providers 
and support STAR targeted farmer groups in adopting new crops, practices and 
technologies a young professional program for at least 180 newly agricultural and 
irrigation graduates from the programme governorates will be established. The program 
will give the young professionals an opportunity to rapidly gain substantial field 
experience and build their CV and capacities in working with farmers. An additional 
advantage of giving this opportunity to young professionals interested in agriculture and 
irrigation and linking them to the project is their ability to bring in new ideas including 
digital solutions and adapt these to the conditions and needs of smallholder farmers. It is 
expected that after the program a part of these graduates will be able to establish 
private extension services or join companies or NGOs providing these services in the 
three governorates. They may also establish agribusinesses strengthening the agro value 
chains in upper Egypt. Each participant will be supported with subsistence allowances 
and complete a one to two years program with the STAR programme. The first activity 
would be their training in facilitation methodologies and simple instruments that can 
47 
support farmer groups’ in building their analytical and learning skills for adoption of new 
crops, practices and technologies. Another feature in their training program will be in the 
digital solutions that the programme is proposing to introduce, including their further 
development as lessons are learned with farmers ensuring their continuous adaptation to 
farmers’ needs and ways of appropriating and using the tools. 
201.  Training of CDAs and government extension staff: To further strengthen the supply 
of facilitators also at least 160 CDA, irrigation and agricultural extension staff will be 
encouraged to participate in the facilitation training provided to the young professionals. 
They may also be trained in other modules for farmer group training and experimental 
learning including in climate resilient cropping systems (see module description later in 
this section). 
202.  Digital Extension Services: Digital transformation strategies of extension services 
will help bringing efficiency in production systems, extension services, early warning 
systems, irrigation management, capacity building and awareness campaigns (ex: 
nutrition). For driving the digital innovations, digital content and services tailored to 
smallholder farmers play an important role. For driving the digital innovations, most 
critical output is building a repository / platform with digital content and services. The 
project will build a robust knowledge repository that includes production know how, 
videos, prices, weather information, crop selection criteria, general package of practices, 
diagnostic information, input management, irrigation management, avenues for 
entrepreneurship development etc. The knowledge repository which is web based, will be 
accessed through various digital (video, smart phones, social media, WhatsApp, 
Television) and other non digital means (field schools, CDAs, Cooperatives, Field Staff). 
203.  The digital platform development will be led by the NPCU (Digital Agriculture 
Coordinator) with the digital core tea, comprising of representatives from Ministry for 
Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) with close collaboration with the Ministry of 
Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) and with the Egyptian Financial Regulatory 
Agency. The core digital team may also comprise the project collaborators such as WFP, 
IFPRI, KEF, eFinance, DigitalGreen, civil society organizations etc. 
204.  The knowledge and service needs of target farmers will be assessed through a 
series of group discussions and a survey. This can be led by the department of 
agriculture. The CPMU will be responsible for the developing Information Architecture, 
design features, outsourcing the software development component. The content 
development, validation and contextualization can be led by ARC. The service 
components of the platform such as credit, input supply, inventory of dealers etc., will be 
anchored by eFinance or KEF (Bashaier) or both.  
205.  The knowledge repository platform will be build using a Content Management 
System by outsourcing. A series of content development workshops will be organized to 
develop and upload the content. This activity will be anchored by department of 
agriculture and will have all the stakeholders on board. The capacity of the stakeholder 
organizations will be built simultaneously. This will eventually develop into a Mobile App 
(STAR App) that will be hosted on Google play store.  
206.   At district level, uptake strategies will be deployed such as awareness generation 
to install and use the mobile app (Digital Pull). The videos available in knowledge 
repository will reach to farmers through video extension model involving community 
organizations, farmers field schools, NGOs and project staff.  The project expects that 
10% of the total target households will directly receive time critical knowledge and 
advises on production, marketing, finance, post harvest, marketing, nutrition and income 
generation activities. 
48 
207.  Fortnightly video shows, sequenced based on local needs will be undertaken by 
Field Schools/CDA/NGOs. Adoption metrics will be updated on STAR Dashboard. 
Necessary capacities will be built with video extension workshops. The project staff 
decides the videos to be projected on fortnightly basis, in a participatory way. A trickle 
down plan will be developed as how to adopt the practices shown in CDA/NGO/ Field 
Schools. 
208.  The SMS gate way developed by WFP can be used for pushing SMS alerts to 
registered farmers: Stakeholders can upload the photograph of the crop / animal 
husbandry/ Poultry etc., at critical growth stages onto the STAR Platform. Images will 
get categorized based on location, type, of quality of produce etc.,  This will also help in 
creating visual agriculture marketing strategies. 
209.  IFPRI’s AIDA will be customized to help farmers, entrepreneurs, agri-business and 
policy makers to make decisions on crop mix. During tier 2(2023), the project will 
identify the potential digital agri-start ups through Digital Hackathon. At least three best 
ideas pitched will be nurtured and piloted in target area. 
210.  As far as possible the STAR platform will have comprehensive information and 
service details pertaining to the three governorates/ While the content is useful to all the 
farmers of the three governorates, specific activities are undertaken by the project to 
“PUSH” the content and services to target farmers. 
211.  STAR Mobile App is developed to provide the farmers with personalized advisory 
without much external interventions. Meaningful, actionable good agricultural practices 
will be developed in response to the market demands. The good agricultural practices for 
five most important crops / animal husbandry / Poultry/ Allied activities will be 
developed by Agricultural Research Centre, in collaboration with other stakeholders. 
These are automatically calenderized based on the individual farmers data, integrated 
with feeds like weather, market price, transport, warehouses and other parameters. 
212.  Video Extension: This approach combines low-cost technology (pico/neat projectors 
with low cost handycams) with social organizations (civil society/ farmers groups) in 
resource poor settings to disseminate information for adoption and behaviour change. 
The community – based participatory approach empowers rural communities to develop 
and share knowledge through peer-to-peer social networks. Short videos are produced 
by local community members trained by the extension functionaries supported by the 
project staff. These video shows are planned sequentially based on the need of the 
farmers in each village. Few expert videos available with the stakeholders particularly 
from ARC and Agriculture channel will be curated to suit to the video extension 
approach. The video extension approach will be anchored by the extension wing of 
department of agriculture, technically supported by the Agriculture Research Centre. At 
village level, the video shows are organized by a STAR Volunteer/ facilitator from 
CDA/Field School Representative, Cooperative member, private dealer or local youth.  
213.  Digital Green (DG) model in India has created evidences of empowering 
smallholder farmers to lift themselves out of poverty by harnessing the power of 
technology and grassroots level partnerships. For the first two years, the video extension 
approach will be implemented in collaboration with Digital Green team. Its ‘video-
enabled extension approach’, amplifies the reach and increases the effectiveness of 
existing private and public extension systems.  
214.  The model will directly benefit 160 villages by involving 80 video facilitators (one 
volunteer / CDA /Field School / Cooperative/ filed staff – responsible for two villages 
49 
each). It is expected that for 48 months, 96 video shows will be organized in each village 
directly reaching 40 farmers / farm women. For a total of 160 villages, the total number 
of videos shows will be 15,360 showcasing a minimum of 30,720 videos (few may repeat 
every season) with a direct reach of 6400 farmers/ farm women. This may trickle down 
to 12800 farmers / farm women through peer to peer sharing. The video will also be 
hosted on STAR platforms and Digital Green website simultaneously. It is proposed to 
reach out to a minimum of 80000 farmers / farmer women in the target villages over a 
period of 5 years using mobile app, social media and youtube.  
215.  The Extension wing of Department of Agriculture will be the lead organization in 
this strategy, but with equal partnership with the ARC.  The core team from these two 
organizations may chalk out the technical program and capacity building activities in 
collaboration with Digital Green. 
216.  Social Media & WhatsApp: A well moderated digital forum for problem Solving 
using WhatsApp groups and Facebook will be initiated.  Farmers can get their problems 
addressed on a real time basis by way of experience sharing, expert counseling, agri-
business connect, nutrition education, domestic and finance advises.  Particularly, this 
will revolve around the contingency alerts to be sent based on climate weather changes 
like heat waves, as part of the early warning system to extreme events. 
217.  The knowledge available on STAR Platform (production, market and irrigation 
components) will be calendarised and posted on weekly basis on social media (Facebook 
/STAR Page) and WhatsApp groups (Each Governorate having hierarchical groups 
numbering around 16 reaching 1600). From each stakeholder organization one member 
will be selected to moderate the group discussion. Specific interest groups for youth, 
women, entrepreneurs, agri-business will be encouraged. The videos available from 
STAR platforms and Digital Green will also be shared for deliberations and decision 
making among the group members.  
218.  Relevant experiences, content and success stories identified from the social media 
and WhatsApp groups will be appropriately uploaded onto STAR Platform for future use.  
219.  Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs): A MOOCs platform for supporting the 
e-learning will be developed to help young professionals and other prospective 
entrepreneurs. The courses will be developed in consultation with the industry players. 
The MOOCs will be hosted on STAR platform. The courses can be accessed through 
smart phones as well. 
220.  The courses will be broadly classified into two components viz., production and 
marketing. The MOOCs platform development will be undertaken by NPCU. The 
production related courses will be anchored by the Extension Division of Department of 
Agriculture and the market related courses will be anchored by the Bashaier (KEF). The 
collaborating organizations under each of these components will be associated for course 
content and development of the courses. 
221.  Climate Resilience with Digital Solutions: The projects can only focus on adaptation 
strategies may be short term, medium term and long term. The STAR Platform will have 
an inventory of climate resilient crops or varieties available. The forewarning alerts, 
contingency advisories, calendarized advisory based on sowing dates, irrigation 
scheduling etc., will be digitally made available on STAR Platform. The same will also be 
personalized / customized to a specific area and pushed through SMS Gateway. 
222.  Private extension services. The programme will strengthen the capacity and 
outreach of private extension services through three main avenues: (i) through 
50 
agribusiness partnerships, embedded private extension services will be provided to small 
holder farmers (at subsidized rates) to ensure compliance to market requirements 
and/or food safety and standards; (ii) regulated extension services by input providers 
and agro-dealers; and (iii) agricultural services provided by rural youth, supported under 
SC 1.2. 
223.  Analysis of challenges and identification of solutions. Each farmer group will be 
supported by a young professional and CDA staff backed up by agriculture and irrigation 
extension staff in a participatory analysis of their production challenges and capacity 
gaps in terms of: introduction of high value and climate resilient crops and varieties; 
meeting market standards and producing safe produce; integrated pest management 
reducing use and costs of agrochemicals; improving the integration of soil quality 
(salinity, nutrients and physical characteristics) and irrigation management; and 
reducing production costs by maintaining healthy soils and cropping systems, minimizing 
the needs for chemical fertilizers, reducing water pumping costs through water use 
efficiency linked to management of soil salinity. To identify suitable solutions, the groups 
will be presented and discuss different options using: technical guidelines already 
developed for different high value crops and crop rotation systems; videos with farmers 
demonstrating their adoption of different practices, and by visiting or bringing successful 
demonstration farmers. The groups will be trained in how to do cost/benefit estimates of 
different practices and crop rotation systems, which will help them to make final 
decisions on which practices to adopt and in keeping simple logs and monitor their actual 
cost/benefits as they are applying the practices. This will enable them to adjust the 
practices or combination of practices as they gain experience. 
224.  Modules for farmers group training and learning. Depending on needs and 
demands resulting from the business development plans and the exercise analysing crop 
production challenges and solutions, different modules for farmer group trainings will be 
developed taking advantage of what already exists. The development and 
implementation of the different modules will mainly be done through specialized service 
providers and partners from agricultural research institutions and universities, NGOs, 
and private service providers. Examples of modules are: 
225.  Introduction of new short cycled, heat tolerant, high value, and/or less water 
demanding crops and varieties in cropping systems – optimize planting and harvesting 
dates based on weather forecasts to avoid ante and post-harvest losses and increase 
product quality in conformity with market demands 
-  Adoption of new irrigation technologies (drip and sprinkler) and optimization of 
irrigation and drainage practices integrated with management of soil salinity based 
on soil analysis 
-  Integrated Pest Management – use of biopesticides, insect traps, crop rotation, 
other organic methods, safe and precise use of chemical pesticides, establish 
traceability and avoid pesticide residuals in final produce, and safe handling of 
empty containers. 
-  Integrated soil facility management – use of compost, manure, integration of 
legumes in crop rotation, and safe, timely and targeted use of chemical fertilizers 
based on soil analysis and crop specific needs. 
-  Organic farming practices and requirements for certification 
226.  Demonstration farmers. The strongest impact on farmer’s adoption of new crops 
and farming practices and technologies in Upper Egypt results from them seeing that it 
works and brings benefits for a similar farmer in their area. When challenges and 
solutions are established in an area, the programme will connect farmers with already 
51 
successful farmers and demonstrations in the area and support additional demonstration 
farmers in adoption of a full package of changed cropping system. Like for the 
demonstration of more efficient irrigation, demonstration farmers will be supported with 
a special demonstration credit covering the cost for 1.5 feddan. The repayment will be 
based on actual increase in profits from the introduction of the new practice 
demonstrated through a data log over crop cultivated, inputs, costs, yields and sails kept 
by the farmer and monitored by the supporting agricultural extension staff. Different 
demonstration plots relevant for the different groups (extra small, small and larger 
landholders) will be developed as well as for livestock activities (animal husbandry 
practices, fattening, poultry among others). Based on field visits it emerged that 
smallholder farmers with limited land available are not willing to use their land for 
demonstration, due to the potential risk associated. In order to further overcome this 
barrier and the availability of demonstrations relevant for all farmers with different 
holding sizes, the programme will consider using demonstration crop or animal loss 
insurance schemes for those willing to be demonstration farmers. 
227.  Access to agricultural machinery. As part of improving crop production practices 
and overcome productivity barriers, farmers’ access to machinery may need to be 
facilitated, such as tractors and different implements, silage machines, residue cutters 
for composting, etc. The programme may train farmers groups in setting up machinery 
sharing schemes including the development of use, operation and maintenance 
regulations, and budget and fee systems to cover operation, maintenance, repair and 
depreciation costs. When these arrangements have been agreed and put in place and 
cash co-financing from beneficiaries have been raised (minimum 30%) the project may 
facilitate the CDA in accessing finance through the credit lines channelled through an 
APEX (see SC 1.2) and managing the procurement process.  
Component 3:  
Component 3.2: Policy engagement: IFAD will engage with the Government of Egypt in 
evidence-based policy dialogue, with key decision makers in MALR, MWRI and Ministry of 
Supply and Internal Trade (MoSIT). This is in line with the COSOP Strategic Objective 2 
supporting the development of enhanced policies for inclusive and sustainable rural 
transformation. At the request of the government, FAO in cooperation with IFAD are in 
discussion to revise the National Sustainable Agriculture Strategy (SADS) 2030 for Egypt, 
together with the Chapter on Agriculture in the Government Strategy Vision 2030, in close 
collaboration with MALR. This policy document determine the national agricultural 
development strategy up to 2030, and together with the a Medium-Term Action Plan to be 
prepared for a 5-10 year period. More specifically, STAR (and IFADs portfolio in Egypt) can 
play significant role in evidence-policy making specifically on (i) strengthening cooperatives 
and marketing associations and their regulatory environment; (ii) promoting inclusive rural 
financial systems for smallholder farmers; and (iii) provide digital solutions for agricultural 
and rural development. Furthermore, the government has requested that IFAD take a leading 
role in policy engagement in water management. IFAD was the first development partner 
tackling water issues in reclaimed lands, and pioneering on-farm irrigation in Upper Egypt. 
STAR focuses on modernising irrigation systems, and strengthening Water Use Associations, 
for collective water management and planning. Furthermore, policy briefs are to be prepared, 
based on the analyses and results of programme interventions, and shared in learning and 
policy dialogue events, both nationally and at the MENA region. Developing policy 
engagement mechanisms and inter-ministerial coordination are a key part of programme 
52 
management and will be handled by the NPCU in close collaboration with the IFAD Country 
Director. 
53 
Chapter 4: Programme implementation structure and 
responsibilities 
A. Project Management, Implementation Structure and Staffing 
The Government’s lead agency for the Programme will be the Ministry of 
1. 
Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) with close collaboration with the Ministry of 
Water Resources and Irrigation and with the Egyptian Financial Regulatory Agency, the 
oversight body for all non-banking institutions (MFIs). STAR implementation will rely on 
a mix of community, public, the private sector and technical service providers. The 
beneficiary households will play a lead role in the programme through community 
institutions (CDAs, ACs, WUAs, PMA and IEGs). 
2. 
Programme Steering Committee (PSC): A high ranking inter-ministerial 
Programme Steering Committee (PSC) would be set up for overall policy decisions and 
guidance at the National level. The Minister of MALR will designate the Chair of the PSC. 
Members of the PSC will include representatives of the Governorates implementing 
STAR, the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation (MIC), Ministry of Water 
Resources and Irrigation (MWRI), partner Credit Wholesalers (CW), selected private 
sector representatives (agribusinesses, exporters).  
The PSC would meet at least once quarterly, and on an ad hoc basis as and when 
3. 
necessary. It would have the primary responsibility of guiding the programme 
implementation activities and in all matters of programme policy. Specifically, the PSC 
would: (i) ensure that STAR activities are in compliance with the Government’s policies; 
(ii) approve the consolidated STAR AWPBs; (iii) oversee the delivery of technical 
assistance for supporting all the components; (iv) oversee the effective coordination 
between the different component; (v) decide about innovative measures to use 
programme resources e.g. facilitating equity investments in agro-industries; (vi) ensure 
that STAR interventions are coordinated with other development programmes and 
projects; and (vii) oversee and monitor the systematic implementation of the 
programme and recommend changes where necessary in coordination with IFAD. 
4. 
Executive Steering Committee: The PSC will constitute an Executive Steering 
Committee (ESC) at the National level comprising members drawn from the PSC. The 
ESC will serve as a standing committee empowered to meet whenever needed to resolve 
implementation bottlenecks that cannot be settled at the Governorate level and requires 
immediate attention.  
5.  Governorate Steering Committee: A Governorate Steering Committee (GSC) 
will be formed in each STAR Governorate to oversee planning, review progress, facilitate 
linkages between programme stakeholders and remove bottlenecks affecting smooth 
implementation. The Head of MALR in the Governorate will Chair the GSC. Other 
members will include the Governorates level heads of MWRI and MoSS, the 
representatives of the technical departments in these Directorates, partner CWs and 
representatives from STAR clusters and the private sector. The GSC will meet on a 
quarterly basis. The GSC will constitute a GSC Technical Committee from within the GSC 
members to meet whenever needed to resolve any programme implementation 
bottlenecks encountered within the Governorates. 
6. 
Implementation structure 
54 
A two-level organisational structure will be established for STAR implementation. At 
7. 
the National level, the National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established 
for overall programme implementation. At the Governorate level, a Governorate 
Programme Coordination Unit (GPCU) (total 3, one in each Governorate) will be set up 
for managing STAR implementation at the Governorate level. Figure 1 below illustrates 
the organizational structure at both levels. 
8.  National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU): The NPCU will be established 
in Cairo at the MALR as a unified coordination unit for consolidated management of all 
IFAD projects/programme in the country in the future. At the time of its inception 
(planned in 2020) the NPCU will be responsible for overseeing the implementation of 
STAR along with three other IFAD projects (PRIDE, PRIME, SAIL). The NPCU will assume 
the responsibility for the overall implementation of STAR on the ground. All NPCU staff 
members will be competitively recruited from the professional labour market and will 
work on a full-time basis for managing all the project/programmes (unless specified 
otherwise) under the NPCU umbrella.  
The National Coordinator (NC) of the NPCU will be selected by the ESC amongst 
9. 
one of its members and will serve as the ESC focal person to provide oversight and 
strategic direction to the NPCU. The NPCU will be headed by the National Programme 
Manager (NPM) to oversee the implementation of all the IFAD projects/programmes in 
the NPCU. The NPM will be assisted by a National technical support team and a National 
operations support team with the following composition.  
  National technical support team: This team will be responsible for overall 
technical planning, implementation oversight and technical guidance for 
55 
National Programme ManagerM&E and KM ManagerHR/Admin ManagerGender & Social Inclusion ManagerFinance ManagerProcurement Manager2 M&E and KM SpecialistHR/Admin AssistantMinistry of Finance NPCU Organizational Structure Support Staff:Office BoySecretaryDriver2 Procurement SpecialistExecutive Steering Committee Finance CoordinatorEnvironmental ManagerM&E, KM and ICT Specialist  Deputy ManagerSAIL Project Technical SpecialistPRIME Project Technical SpecialistSTAR Project Technical SpecialistPRIDE Project Technical SpecialistMinya GPC AgronomistBusiness Development, Marketing and M&EInfrastructure Engineering SpecialistAccountant Social and Community MobilizationM&E Focal Point/Data Collection/Field Monitor Young Professionals in Each Village Governorate Programme Coordinator  Deputy ManagerSohag GPC AgronomistBusiness Development, Marketing and M&EInfrastructure Engineering SpecialistAccountant Social and Community MobilizationM&E Focal Point/Data Collection/Field Monitor Young Professionals in Each Village Governorate Programme Coordinator  Deputy ManagerAssiut GPC AgronomistBusiness Development, Marketing and M&EInfrastructure Engineering SpecialistAccountant Social and Community MobilizationM&E Focal Point/Data Collection/Field Monitor Young Professionals in Each Village Governorate Programme Coordinator Hired from the MarketGovernment EmployeeVolunteer Key:STAR Project  
implementation at the Governorate level. A STAR Technical Specialist (STS) will 
be recruited specifically to provide dedicated full-time technical oversight and 
guidance to STAR implementation at the National level. The rest of the team will 
be responsible for implementing all NPCU projects including STAR and willl 
comprise: i) one M&E and KM Manager (MKM) assisted by two M&E and KM 
Specialists (MKS) and one M&E, KM and ICT Specialist (MKIS); ii) one 
Environment and Climate Manager (ECM); and iii) one Gender and Social 
Inclusion Manager (GSM). 
  National operations support team: This team will be responsible for programme 
financial planning, management and control; overseeing programme 
procurement, contracting and contract management and staff evaluation. Also, it 
will develop an internal system to monitor, record and report in detail all types of 
contributions from community, locality and state levels. The team will be 
responsible for implementing all NPCU projects including STAR and will consist of 
i) one Finance Manager (FM) assisted by one Finance Coordinator (FC), an 
accountant (dedicated to STAR) and an assistance assountant (dedicated to 
STAR); ii) one Procurement Manager (PM) supported by two Procurement 
Specialists (PS); and iii) one HR and Administration Manager (HRM) supported by 
a HR and Administration Assistant (HRA).  
10.  Governorate Programme Coordination Unit (GPCU): STAR will establish three 
GPCUs, one each in Minya, Sohag, and the Assiut Governorate. The GPCUs will be 
dedicated only to the implementation of STAR, unlike the NPCU where project 
management functions will be shared between different projects/programme. The GPCUs 
will be established as separate offices within the Directorate of MALR and will be headed 
by a Governorate Programme Coordinator (GPC) deployed from the Directorate of MALR 
in the Governorate. A Governorate Deputy Manager (GDM) will be competitively 
recruited from the professional labour market and will assist the GPC to manage the 
technical and administrative functions of the GPCU on full time basis.  
11.  The GPC and the GDM will be supported by set of seven full-time staff members 
seconded by the MALR with IFAD’s final approval. These positions will be i) one GPCU 
Agronomist (GA); ii) one Business Development and Marketing Specialist (BMS); iii) one 
Infrastructure Engineer (IE); iv) one Social and Community Mobilisation Specialist (SCS) 
v) one Financial Services Specialist (FSS) vi) one M&E Focal point/data collection officer 
(MFP) and vii) one STAR Accountant (SA). The seven supporting positions in each GPCU 
will be directly managed by the GPC and the GDM while at the same time reporting to 
functional managers at the national level to strengthen the cohesion of implementation 
efforts.  
12.  Village level implementation: The GPCUs will carry out programme 
implementation at the village level with the support of partner CDAs and young 
professionals. At the beginning of the implementation process STAR will train (through 
ToTs) a pool of 5-10 Young Community Facilitators (YCF) in each village. During 
implementation, STAR will support the partner CDA in a village to pay allowances and 
engage 2-4 YCFs, as and when needed, from the pool of trained YCFs, to support STAR 
implementation at the village level. Additionally, STAR will support a STAR Young 
Professional (SYP) scheme which will train and deploy one SYP in each village. The SYP 
will report to the SCS in the GPCU and will support STAR implementation at the village 
level in close coordination with the CDA and the YCFs. The SYPs will be capacitated 
through training and technical assistance support, paid allowances, and provided with 
SYP certificate at the end of the programme. The support to the SYPs will contribute to 
IFAD’s youth inclusion priority.  
56 
13.  Programmatic orientation of the NPCU and GPCUs: The programme 
management structure and functions in the NPCU and the GPCUs will be capacitated and 
oriented to support the continuation of the STAR activities even after the completion of 
the current IFAD financing cycle after six years. Towards this objective the NCPU and the 
GPCU will adopt a set of specific initiatives such as: i) contract short-term technical 
specialists in specific areas (rural finance, marketing, community mobilisation) from the 
open market to join the GPCU teams periodically with the responsibility to assist with 
work volumes, examine and improve the existing technical work processes, share 
knowledge, suggest improvements, and upgrade the knowledge and skills of the GPCU 
staff; ii) operate a “STAR programme support” initiative in the NPCU and GPCUs which 
will involve the MALR deputing young officers from different departments to these Units 
for 6 to 12 months on a rotational basis for orientation and hands-on experience of STAR 
implementation and iii) establish streamlined and clearly documented technical and 
administrative processes and regularly update the PIM, including staff roles, 
responsibilities and decision making authorities, to enable the smooth continuation of 
these units (Specially the GPCUs) even after IFAD support. 
B.  Planning and budgeting 
14.  The main planning tool for STAR will be the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
which will be prepared using a participatory bottom-up approach within the clusters. 
15.  The AWPB is an essential covenant in the legal Financing Agreement. The failure to 
prepare it on a timely, annual basis, may lead to delay or suspension of loan and grant 
disbursements on the part of IFAD.  AWPB serves both as a tool for guiding project 
implementation and as a collection of benchmarks against which actual implementation 
progress can be measured throughout the year. A poorly thought-through and prepared 
AWPB may cause a loss of purpose and direction in implementation, give rise to the need 
for resource- consuming ad-hoc problem solving when unforeseen (but foreseeable) 
obstacles to implementation surface during the year, and make it difficult to ascertain if 
implementation progress is on track.  
16.  The AWPB is the outcome of the annual project planning process. Through annual 
work planning, the project decides what activities will be carried out over the next 12 
months, by whom, the resources and the time needed to complete them. The AWPB is 
therefore a planning and management tool that specifies what is expected to be done 
during the year, how and at what cost. The AWPB should be results-oriented and with 
clear descriptions of the results that the project is expected to achieve in the AWPB 
period. 
17.  Participatory bottom-up approach within the clusters. Once the priorities have been 
set at the cluster level and activities defined, the AWPB will be compiled for each 
governorate and the 3 GPCUs will combine the drafted AWPBs for their respective 
governorates and submit to the NPCU. The NPCU will consolidate and streamline the 
three AWPBs and submit it to PSC for review and approval. The PSC will insure the 
inclusion of STAR under the national budget. The draft AWPB will be sent to IFAD for 
review and no-objection 60 days prior to start of each year of implementation. 
18.  The NPCU will prepare the Annual Workplan and Budget Report using the following 
table of contents: 
Main Text: 
A. Introduction 
-  Project Outline 
57 
-  The Annual Planning Process and This AWPB 
B. Implementation Progress and Performance  
C. Project Strategy and Focus for the Coming Year 
-  Key Constraints and Required Actions 
-  Overall Strategic Focus 
-  Components 
D. Consolidated Annual Budget 
Annexes: 
Annex 1. The Logical Framework 
Annex 2. Procurement Plan 
Annex 3. Staff Development Plan 
Annex 4. Detailed Work Plans and Budgets 
19.  Data and information to be provided in each one of the above sections are described in the 
following paragraphs. 
A. 
Introduction 
20.  The introduction would give brief background information about the project and the 
AWPB in two sub-sections: (i) Project Outline; and (ii) the AWPB.  
21.  The Project Outline would give a quick overview of the project, summarizing the 
main features. This outline will be written once and used for all future AWPBs, with minor 
changes as may be necessary, as follows: 
The project cost and financiers (government, and financing agreements details); 
 
  Key project dates (signing of agreements, project completion and closing dates); 
 
 
  A  short  description  of  the  project  components  and  stating  the  purpose  of  the 
for 
The project area and target group; 
The project goal and objectives;  
interventions,  and  who 
responsible 
types  of 
is 
component, 
the 
implementation; 
The main coordination and management bodies. 
 
22.  Annual Plan and Budget: This sub-section should briefly describe the process 
that has led to this AWPB, such as community-based planning that has taken place, 
consultations with other stakeholders, planning workshops held to discuss and 
synchronize the plans of various implementing agencies, etc.. It is useful to describe 
what really happened, and if there are weaknesses in the process, mention them and 
what should be done to improve the situation next year. This sub-section could also be 
used to highlight some key considerations that influenced the AWPB, for example: plans 
and budgets were reduced because they were considered too ambitious compared to 
implementation capacity and the performance of previous years. Finally, explain the 
structure of the AWPB itself, especially if it has changed since last time.  
B. 
Implementation Progress and Performance  
23.  This section of about 2-4 pages should present information on the project’s current 
status, progress with implementation to date, problems experienced, lessons learned 
and changes in the external environment. The stage the project has reached in general 
terms and overall performance from a financial point of view could be illustrated with 
expenditure to date: this information can be based on last year’s Annual Report and 
updated with data for the current year. It will set the stage for next year’s plan. Since 
58 
this section looks at the past, the information can to a large extent be copied from last 
year’s Annual Report, and then updated based on experience of the current year. This 
section would summarize at least the overall performance of the project and progress by 
component over the past years and what specific outputs have been produced, what 
interventions have been successful and why, where implementation progress has been 
good and where it has been problematic. Presenting this information by component 
would provide a basis for setting priorities for the next year. The facts and figures should 
be available from the M&E system, and analysis of implementation performance should 
be available in implementing agency reports and from (annual) review workshops. 
C.  Project Strategy and Focus for the Coming Year 
24.  The AWPB should explain the activities expected to be carried out during the next 
year. This section should describe the annual planning process that took place, 
summarize critical constraints that have been identified and that need to be addressed, 
and describe the main focus for the year, new strategic directions, and the scope of 
activities for each project component. It would typically be 4-8 pages in size. This key 
narrative section should find a balance between simply listing proposed activities without 
sufficient explanation and justification, and too complicated presentation with excessive 
detail, in which case the AWPB would almost become another appraisal report. 
25.  Key Constraints and Required Actions: The purpose of this sub-section in the 
AWPB is to list the constraints that will need particular attention during the coming year; 
to identify what should be done to resolve these constraints; and to indicate who should 
be involved in problem solving. A simple table may be a good way to present this in the 
AWPB and the “actions required” in this table should be translated into project activities 
in the detailed activity and budget tables. 
26.  Overall Strategic Focus: Any changes in the logical framework, and the general 
focus and direction of project implementation, would be described and justified in this 
sub-section. This could include aspects such as proposed expansion of the project area; 
changes in the management structure or implementation responsibilities; launching a 
general capacity building campaign; and an indication whether the focus is on 
consolidation and replication of interventions of previous years or the opposite, on 
venturing into new research and pilot activities. 
27.  Components: This sub-section would describe the general focus; types of 
activities to be implemented and specific outputs to be produced by each component and 
specific outputs to be produced; whether there is any particular geographical focus; and 
whether new implementing institutions or a different division of responsibilities among 
implementing institutions will be put in place. Where necessary, reference would be 
made to the planning and budget tables in Annex 4, where details can be found for each 
specific activity. 
D. Consolidated Annual Budget 
28.  This section with budget summary tables should present a clear overview of the 
financial picture for the coming year: where and on what will the money be spent? As a 
minimum, budget summary tables should present three budget summaries: (a) 
consolidated budget by component and cost centres; (b) consolidated budget by 
category and cost centres 9); and (c) consolidated budget by financier. 
29.  Cost centres can be geographical areas where the project is implemented (e.g. the 
3 governorates each could be a cost centre), or institutions, or both. For each 
component, category and cost centre, the budget amount should be given as the 
59 
proportion of the total annual budget. This makes it easy to compare how the budget will 
be divided between different areas, institutions, components, and categories. The tables 
should be accompanied by brief comments; to explain anything that might raise 
questions in the tables, for example why a certain district will receive much less money 
or why a certain component takes such a high proportion of the overall budget.  
Annex 1. The Logical Framework 
30.  The Project’s Logical Framework should be presented as a part of the AWPB. This 
matrix may be a different version from the one in the project design or from last year, in 
which case the changes that have been made should be pointed out. 
Annex 2. Procurement Plan 
31.  Procurement Plan for Works goods and services is an important requirement and 
should be included in the AWPB and updated every year. The format of the Procurement 
Plan should follow that of eth 18 Month Procurement Plan presented in Project Design 
Report and in Annex B4 of this Manual..  
Annex 3. Staff Development Plan 
32.  Staff capacity development involves defining the staff who should be involved in 
project implementation in the first place (numbers, qualifications and experience); and in 
addition, defining who should be trained, in what they should be trained, and how 
training should be carried out. This Annex should show the key areas where staff 
development will be focused, by listing the proposed capacity building activities for the 
year. 
Annex 4. Detailed Work Plans and Budgets 
In addition to the main text, the AWPB should contain tables with detailed 
33. 
output/activity tables and their costs listed as line items, organized by component, 
geographical area, or institution. See the following AWPB Forms. 
TABLE -1:  ACTIVITY BY QUARTER AND AREA OF OPERATION  
Project Year: __ (1 July – 30 June 20___ ) 
Component/ Sub-component:______________________ 
Items of Expenditure 
Units 
Physical Target  
Total 
Area of Operation 
Qtr 1 
Qtr 2 
Qtr 3 
Qtr  4 
Governorate 
Cluster 
I. Investment Costs 
Sub-component 1 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
      Activity 3 
Sub-component 2 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
      Activity 3 
II. Recurrent Costs 
Sub-component 1 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
      Activity 3 
60 
TABLE -1:  ACTIVITY BY QUARTER AND AREA OF OPERATION  
Project Year: __ (1 July – 30 June 20___ ) 
Component/ Sub-component:______________________ 
Items of Expenditure 
Units 
Physical Target  
Total 
Area of Operation 
Qtr 1 
Qtr 2 
Qtr 3 
Qtr  4 
Governorate 
Cluster 
Sub-component 2 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
      Activity 3 
TABLE - 2:  DETAILED BUDGET 
Project Year: __ (1 July – 30 June 20___ ) 
Component/ Sub-component:______________________ 
Items of 
expenditure by 
Subcomponent 
Units  
Unit  
Cost 
Quantity  
Cost  (EUR) 
Category 
Qtr 
1 
Qtr 
2 
Qtr  
3 
Qtr  
4 
Total 
Qtr 
1 
Qtr 
2 
Qtr 
3 
Qtr 
4 
Total 
 (according 
to 
Financing 
Agreement) 
Investment 
I. 
Costs 
Sub-component 1 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
      Activity 3 
Sub-component 2 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
II. Recurrent Costs 
Sub-component 1 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
      Activity 3 
Sub-component 2 
      Activity 1 
Recurrent 
Total 
Costs 
Total Costs 
TABLE - 3:  DETAILED BUDGET BY COMPONENT; SUB-COMPONENT & FINANCIERS 
Project Year: __ (1 July – 30 June 20___ ) 
Component/ Sub-component:______________________ 
Qtr 
1 
Qtr 
2 
Qtr  
3 
Qtr  
4 
Total 
(EUR) 
Category 
GOE 
IFAD  OFID  AfDB  WFP  Benef.  Others 
EIB 
Financiers 
Items of 
expenditure  
Component and 
Subcomponents 
I. Investment 
Costs 
    Component 1 
61 
      Sub-
component 1 
        Activity 1 
        Activity 2 
     Sub-
component 2 
        Activity 1 
   Component 2 
     Sub-
component 1 
Total 
Investment 
Costs 
II. Recurrent 
Costs 
  Component 1 
     Sub-
component 1 
         Activity 1 
         Activity 2 
    Sub-
component 2 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
Total Recurrent 
Costs 
Total Costs 
TABLE -4: THE TIME PLAN OF ACTIONS 
Project Year: __ (1 July – 30 June 20___ ) 
Component:______________________ 
1st Quarter 
2nd Quarter 
3rd Quarter 
4th Quarter 
July 
Aug.  Sept.  Oct.  Nov.  Dec.  Jan.  Feb.  Mar.  April  May  June 
Activity Schedule  
No 
Planned 
Activities 
Sub-component 1 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
      Activity 3 
Sub-component 2 
      Activity 1 
      Activity 2 
      Activity 3 
62 
TABLE -5 ANNUAL FINANCING PLAN  
Project Year: __ (1 July – 30 June 20___ ) 
Component/ 
Subcomponents 
Total 
Cost 
(EUR) 
Disbursement 
Category 
Financiers 
GOE 
IFAD 
Loan  Gant 
OFID  AfDB 
WFP 
Benef. 
Others 
EIB 
Component 
Sub-
Component 
Activity 
Component 
Sub-
Component 
Activity 
Component 
Sub-
Component 
Activity 
Component 
Sub-
Component 
Activity 
Component 
Sub-
Component 
Activity 
Component 
Sub-
Component 
Activity 
Component 
Sub-
Component 
Activity 
Activity 
Item 1 
Activity 
Item 2 
Activity 
Item 3 
Activity 
Item 1 
Activity 
Item 2 
Activity 
Item 3 
Activity 
Item 1 
Activity 
Item 2 
Activity 
Item 3 
Activity 
Item 1 
Activity 
Item 2 
Activity 
Item 3 
Activity 
Item 1 
Activity 
Item 2 
Activity 
Item 3 
Activity 
Item 1 
Activity 
Item 2 
Activity 
Item 3 
Activity 
Item 1 
Activity 
Item 2 
Activity 
Item 3 
C.  M and E 
34.  M&E for IFAD programme in Egypt has been consistently a low performing area for 
the programme. The necessary efforts to develop capacity to ensure the proper functioning 
of an M&E system has not been carefully supported enough by both sides. There has been 
very little data collection in relation to benefits achieved and over-emphasis on outputs -
and not on the links between inputs and outcomes and impact. STAR will ensure that a 
strong M&E system is in place and will build on lessons learnt from IFAD interventions in 
the NEN region. 
63 
35.  Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system for STAR will  be developed by the NPCU 
M&E  unit  with  the  assistance  of  IFAD  within  the  first  year  of  the  project  as  a  tool  for 
effective project implementation management. The M&E system will enable IFAD, MALR 
and the stakeholders to monitor Project’s internal performance. The objective of the tool 
is to collect reliable data and information for measuring performance and progress towards 
achievement  of  results;  and  to  provide  information  about  success  and  failures,  so  that 
corrective measures  can  be  taken  for  successful  implementation  of  project  activities. It 
will be also used as a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection on project 
strategies and operations and supporting decision-making at various levels as a basis for 
results  based  management.  During  the initial years,  the  project  monitoring  system  will 
provide  information  to  see  how  the  project  activities  are  being  implemented  and  what 
adjustments are required to be made in the course of implementation, and later as a tool 
to assess achievement of outcomes and impacts. 
Results Based Approach and Managing for Impact 
The results-based approach will be adopted, involving regular recording of, and 
36. 
accounting  for  progress  against  AWPB  targets;  and  routine,  periodic  assessments  of 
movement towards beneficiary impact. The M&E and Knowledge Management unit will be 
responsible for all M&E activities, based on the IFAD Guide, which specifies a matrix and 
performance checklist to orient the selection of indicators, baseline data, methods for data 
collection, synthesis and a communication strategy for lessons learned. Service providers, 
contractors, and beneficiary groups will be the prime sources of data emanating from grass 
roots activities. The Project draft M&E matrix will be prepared in a participatory manner 
as part of the start-up activities in line with the logical framework. 
37.  Managing  for  impact  means  to  respond  to  changing  circumstances  and  increased 
understanding by adapting the project so that it will be more likely to achieve its intended 
impacts. This is only possible if there is reliable information about the progress of activities 
and their outcomes, the reasons for success and failure, and the context in which activities 
are  taking  place.  This  information  is  the  output  of  the  M&E  procedures.  Analyzing  this 
information with key stakeholders can support good decisions that improve the project. 
Box 1.  illustrates how to assess how well the project is doing in terms of managing for 
impact. 
Elements 
Project that manages for impact 
Project that does not manage 
for impact 
Box 1 Managing for Impact 
A focus on 
poverty 
A learning 
environment 
The  implementing  partners,  including 
primary  stakeholders,  collect  data  on 
impact and meet  regularly  to  consider  if 
impacts  can  be  seen  and  whether  they 
meet expectations  
Project  and  partner  staff  and  primary 
stakeholders regularly and openly discuss 
progress  and  problems.  Problems  and 
mistakes are the basis for learning how to 
work  better.  People  feel  safe  enough  to 
share  their  ideas  and  observations  with 
higher authorities and peers.  
Effective 
operations 
Clear  systems  exist  for  tracking  staff 
performance, equipment use, etc. People 
are clear  about their  responsibilities  and 
leaves 
project 
The 
impact 
assessment to outside organizations 
and only  focuses  on monitoring  the 
implementation of activities  
Staff  focus  only  on  implementing 
activities, without asking if they are 
relevant  to  local  poverty  needs. 
Project/Partner  organization  staff 
feel that their ideas and observations 
are not valued and do not speak up 
when  they  see  things  going  wrong. 
Primary  stakeholders  are  rarely 
asked their opinions.  
People are often unclear about what 
they  should  be  doing,  when  and 
where. Vehicles and other resources 
64 
and 
outcomes 
deadlines, and the resources they need to 
do their work are available. The managers 
allocate sufficient budget and are building 
capacity where needed.  
The project manager has quick and easy 
access  to  information  about  progress. 
Staff  and  partners  generate  information 
impact 
about 
achievements. 
about 
progress  is  shared  regularly  with  all 
stakeholders  in  a  visually  appropriate 
way. The walls of the project office show 
up-to-date  information,  graphs,  pictures 
etc.  about  project  progress.  Studies  are 
undertaken  to  explain  any  emerging 
problems. 
reports  make 
interesting reading and tell both the good 
and  bad  and  how  improvements  will  be 
made.  
Information 
Project 
are poorly coordinated and often not 
available  on  time.  Much  time  is 
wasted  inactivity.  No  efforts  are 
made to fill capacity gaps.  
Few  people  know  what  the  project 
has achieved to date. There is little 
evidence  about  whether  all  the 
activities  of  the  project  are  leading 
anywhere. M&E is seen largely as an 
external  reporting  function.  Project 
reports  are  uninteresting,  are  not 
analytical, and exaggerated success 
while not mentioning problems. Little 
information  is  shared  with  project 
stakeholders.  
A supportive 
M&E system 
38.  To know how best to mobilize project resources and partnership for reducing poverty, 
the implementers  need  to understand the  strategy  and  redirect  it  when  problem  arise. 
Guiding the strategy is largely about asking the right questions-and getting answers-at 
the right moments (Box 2). M&E processes are critical for making collaborative decisions 
about adjusting the project’s direction.  
Box 2. Five Strategic M&E questions to manage for impact 
Relevance 
Effectiveness 
Efficiency 
Impact 
Sustainability 
M&E question 
Is what we are doing now a good idea in terms of improving the situation 
at hand? Is it dealing with the priorities of the target groups? Why or why 
not?  
Have the plans (purposes, outputs and activities) been achieved? Is the 
intervention logic correct? Why or why not? Is what we are doing now the 
best way to maximize impact?  
Are resources used in the best possible way? Why or why not? What could 
we do differently to improve implementation, thereby maximising impact, 
at an acceptable and sustainable cost?  
To what extent has the Project contributed towards poverty reduction (or 
other long-term goals)? Why or why not? What unanticipated positive or 
negative consequences did the Project have? Why did they arise?  
Will there be continued positive impacts as a result of the Project after 
the Project funds run out in 4-5 years? Why or why not?  
Setting up the M&E system 
39.  The  M&E  system  is  the  set  of  planning,  information  gathering  and  synthesis, 
reflection  and  reporting  processes,  along  with  the  necessary  supporting  conditions  and 
capacities  required for the outputs  of M&E to make a valuable contribution to decision-
making and learning. Key project stakeholders need to develop the different elements of 
the system together if they are all to use the outputs to improve implementation. 
40.  Setting  up  an  M&E  system  involves  six  steps  that  need  to  be  dealt  with  twice  - 
generally at initial design and in detail at start-up: 
1.  Establishing the purpose and scope - Why do we need M&E and how comprehensive 
should our M&E system be? 
2.  Identifying performance questions, information needs and indicators - What do we 
need to know to monitor and evaluate the project in order to manage it well?  
65 
3.  Planning information gathering and organizing - How will the required information 
be gathered and organized? 
4.  Planning critical reflection processes and events - How will we make sense of the 
information gathered and use it to make improvements? 
5.  Planning for quality communication and reporting - What, how and to whom do we 
want to communicate in terms of our project activities and processes?  
6.  Planning for the necessary conditions  and capacities  - What is needed to ensure 
that the M&E system actually works? 
41.  These  steps  can  be  used  when  initiating  a  new  project  or  when  revising  and 
expanding the M&E system of an existing project. Existing projects might have planned 
for some of these M&E elements but miss or undervalue others, so M&E does not perform 
optimally. This might seem like a lot to remember but in practice is often quite clear.  
42.  The purpose of monitoring the activities and the different components of the project 
is to enable the management to track the progress or any obstacles facing the project and 
modify the plan if required. This requires designing a plan for monitoring and evaluation 
including the actual activities that are implemented and their indicators. In developing the 
M&E system, it was taken into consideration the IFAD requirements that were provided in 
the  project  design  and  the  project  implementation  manual.  In  the  following  the  tasks 
required for the monitoring and evaluation will be presented with highlighting the IFAD 
requirements. 
The role of M&E in IFAD projects 
43.  The following table summarizes the expected M&E tasks during the different stages 
in IFAD projects life cycle.  
Phase 
Tasks 
Early design 
phase 
(formulation and 
appraisal)  
  Establish the scope and purpose of the M&E system. 
  Indicate key performance questions and indicators, plus associated 
monitoring mechanisms. 
  Identify organizational arrangements for M&E. 
  Develop terms of reference for M&E staff. 
  Indicate the process for how M&E is to be established during start-up. 
  Establish an indicative M&E budget. 
  Document the above in the M&E framework. 
Start-up prior to 
loan 
effectiveness 
(with the Special 
Operating Fund) 
Start-up after 
loan 
effectiveness  
  Revise performance questions, indicators and monitoring mechanisms after 
reviewing the project strategy. 
  Organize training with staff and partners likely to be involved in M&E. 
  Initiate baseline studies, as appropriate. 
  Prepare a project implementation manual with key staff. 
  Review project design in relation to M&E with key stakeholders.  
  Develop a detailed M&E plan, taking into consideration existing 
mechanisms with partners.  
  Put in place necessary conditions and capacities for M&E to be 
implemented. 
Main 
implementation 
  Ensure information needs for management are met. 
  Coordinate information gathering and management. 
66 
  Facilitate informal information gathering and communication. 
  Support regular review meetings and processes with all implementers. 
  Prepare for supervision missions. 
  Prepare for and facilitate the annual project review. 
  Conduct focused studies on emerging questions.  
  Communicate results to stakeholders.  
  Prepare annual progress reports.  
Mid-term review 
(MTR) 
  Collate information for the mid-term review. 
  Facilitate the internal review process to prepare for the external review 
process. 
  Help respond to MTR feedback. 
  Adjust the M&E system, as necessary. 
Phasing-out and 
completion  
  Assess what the implementers can do to sustain impact and sustain M&E 
after closing down - and implement these ideas. 
  Hold workshops and do field studies with key stakeholders to assess 
impacts. 
  Identify lessons learned for the next phase and/or other projects. 
Operational Results Management System (ORMS) 
44.  A revised Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), including new output and 
outcome Core Indicators (CIs), was approved by the Executive Management Committee 
(EMC) in January 2017 and endorsed by the Evaluation Committee and Executive Board 
in  March  and  April  2017,  respectively.  The  new  RIMS  CIs  consist  of  a  set  of  new  and 
improved  output  and  outcome  indicators,  that  measure  the  more  recurrent  results 
achieved  through  IFAD  operations.  The  new  CIs  and  related  measurement  approaches 
have  been  developed  to  be  consistent  with  and  complementary  to  IFAD’s  impact 
assessment  programme,  thus  ensuring  that  the  performance  of  IFAD  operations  is 
measured across the results chain, i.e. at the output, outcome and impact levels.  
45.  The ORMS is a full-fledged online system that builds on interconnected templates for 
the online presentation, analysis, reporting, and approval of project design, supervision 
and completion documents. Although, the data entered into the system for the project will 
be done at IFAD level, yet the project will have to provide this data on an annual basis.  
46.  On an annual basis, the M&E unit will compile the progress of all indicators under the 
project log frame and send it to IFAD no later than the 31 January of the following year.  
Annual Outcome Surveys 
47.  The  annual  outcome  survey  (AOS)  is  a  simple  household  survey  that  will  be 
undertaken  annually  by  project  staff  and  will  cover  a  small  sample  of  around  200 
households  selected  randomly.  The  survey  will  be  conducted  exclusively  in  villages 
targeted  by  the  project  or  receiving  project  interventions,  and  will include  both  project 
beneficiaries and non beneficiaries (the latter used as control group). Overall, the exercise 
is expected to take no more than 3 months and can be implemented by project staff and 
extension officers, with or without external support. The main objectives of the survey are 
to: (i) measure changes happening at the household level in terms of livelihoods and food 
security  during  the  project life;  (ii)  assess targeting  efficiency;  (iii)  provide  evidence  of 
67 
project success or failure; and (iv) provide timely performance information necessary to 
undertake corrective actions.  
48.  The AOS will provide information on “why” and “how” some outcomes were or were 
not achieved. The project will use the standard AOS questionnaire as the main frame for 
conducting the survey and will modify it accordingly as per the project thematic areas of 
intervention. The AOS will be implemented staring from the end of PY2. 
Progress Reporting 
49.  The progress reports are to be prepared semi-annually and, at a minimum, should 
address  (i) quantitative and qualitative progress  made in implementing the Project and 
achieving its objectives, (ii) problems encountered during the reporting period, (iii) steps 
taken  or  proposed  to  be  taken  to  remedy  these  problems,  and  (iv)  the  proposed 
programme of activities and the progress expected during the following reporting period. 
Sufficient information must be made available about what money is spent on, how much 
is spent on what, and what the results are. 
50.  The main functions of progress reports are: 
(a)  Review  current  progress  compared  to  planned  activities,  and  expenditure 
compared to budget; 
(b)  Provide overall status information on the project since it started, in terms of 
physical progress and total expenditure; 
(c) 
Identify  problems  during  the  reporting  period  and  steps  to  solve  these 
problems; 
(d)  Analyse strengths and weaknesses, opportunities and threats; 
(e)  Discuss  quantitative  and  qualitative  progress  made  in  achieving  overall 
objectives; and 
(f) 
Provide strategic direction for the next planning cycle. 
Preparation of Progress Reports 
51.  Each Governorate will submit six-monthly progress report to NPCU though respective 
GPCU. The reports will record the financial and physical activities against AWP/B targets. 
The  NPCU  will  prepare  the  reporting  formats  and  contents  to  be  submitted  and  be 
responsible  for  the  compilation  of  six-monthly  and  annual  reports.  The  reports  will  be 
submitted to PSC and IFAD with the format and content described in the following section, 
no later than two months after the end of each reporting period.  
52.  The six-monthly progress  reports  will be submitted to NCPU no later than 15 July 
and 15 January, each year. The NPCU will, in turn, submit the Project Progress reports to 
PSC and IFAD within one month from the end of these reporting periods ( no later than 31 
July  and  31  January  respectively).  The  Project  Progress  Report  will  have  the  following 
format and content. 
Format of Progress Reports 
53.  Section A – Introduction: A brief summary of the Project Objectives and the design 
features as is given in the Project Design Report will be presented in this section. It will 
be written once and used for all future Progress Reports, with minor changes as may be 
necessary. 
54.  Section B - Executive Summary: A brief summary of the content of the report will 
be  presented in  this  section,  highlighting  performance  during  the  project  period  and to 
date; trends; explanations for large variations from the initially set Project Design Report 
68 
targets and objectives; problems and issues, if any; and proposed action during the next 
reporting period and beyond. 
55.  Section  C  -  Detailed  Report:  This  section  will  include  the  following:  (a) 
Descriptions of the Progress made during the reporting period and to date (by components, 
sub-components and activities); (b) Sources and Uses of Funds Statement; (c) Statement 
of Use of Funds by Expenditure Type and by Components; (d) Reconciliation of the IFAD 
funded Special Accounts; (e) Output Monitoring Report; (f) Procurement Report; and (g) 
Other  Relevant  Reports.  The information contained in the  above  statements  and tables 
will provide the linkages between physical and financial progress.   
(a)  Progress  Made  by  the  Project:  This  part  will  be  a  summary  of  the  most 
important  aspects  of  project  implementation  to  date  including  any  special 
issues that have surfaced and with suggestions for resolution. It will concisely 
describe  and  highlight:  progress  of  all  key  project  components  including 
physical works, implementation and project output, actual costs incurred vs. 
estimates,  financing  received  from  IFAD  and  GOE,  as  well  as  major 
expenditures, large procurements carried out and disbursement performance, 
critical studies  undertaken, technical assistance and training received. It will 
assess performance in reaching and benefiting the intended target groups, in 
particular the poorer, as well as gender equity in participation and benefits. It 
will include numerical information on activities, numbers of participants (male 
and  female)  and  information  about  the  socio-economic  status  of  individual 
participants. 
(b) 
(c) 
 Sources  and  Uses  of  Funds  Statement  for  the  Reporting  Period  and 
Year-to-Date. This  table  will indicate the  opening  cash  and  bank  balances, 
listing  of  the  sources  and  amounts  of  funds  received  and  expenditures  by 
project component and in line with the IFAD loan/ grant withdrawal schedule 
in the respective agreements, and the cash and bank balances. It also shows 
cumulative figures to date side by side. 
 Statement  of  Use  of  Funds  by  Expenditure  Type  -  These  tables  list 
expenditures  by  component,  by  expenditure  type,  and  by  disbursement 
categories. An important feature of these tables will be the comparative listing 
of  the  actual  expenditure  figures  with  the  estimates  from  the  latest  Annual 
Work Plan & Budget (AWPB) and the showing of the variances and appropriate 
explanation  for  each  such  variance.  The  total  estimated  base  costs  of  the 
project components and expenditure categories as per the appraisal report will 
also be shown side by side.  
(d)  Output Monitoring Report - Physical progress and expenditures in relation 
to  such  progress  will  be  presented  here. The  output  indicators  will  be  taken 
from the physical performance targets set at appraisal. Here again, actual and 
targets  set  at  appraisal  will  be  compared  and  explanation  provided  for 
deviations.  
(e)  Procurement  Report  (Updated  Procurement  Plan)  -  The  Procurement 
Report consists of the approved Procurement Plan at grant effectiveness and 
duly up dated and all the key procurements made on behalf of the project and 
their status as at the end of the reporting period. The Procurement Report will 
also  include  all  key  procurement  of  works,  vehicles,  equipment,  goods  and 
consulting and other services undertaken by the project since project start up.  
(f)  Other Relevant Aspects - Status on the following aspects of the project will 
be included in this part of the progress report: 
69 
(i)  Organization  and  Staffing:    The  progress  report  will  include  the  latest 
organization chart of the Project. The Chart will give the names, titles, and 
sex of all senior staff and any changes in the senior management and project 
compensation details will be reported.    
(ii)  Accounts and Audit:  This part will describe the status of the NPCU’s books 
of accounts, preparation of quarterly accounts, readiness for the accounts 
for  annual  audit  and  progress  or  completion  of  the  audit  (during  the 
appropriate  quarter).  Where  audits  have  been  completed,  key  findings, 
observations,  qualifications,  and  recommendations  of  the  auditors  will  be 
provided in this part of the progress report. 
(iii)  Compliance with Conditionality/Legal Covenants: Status of compliance with 
all stipulated conditions included as covenants in the loan agreement will be 
given. Problem relating to non-compliance of any legal covenant will also be 
highlighted with suggested resolution. 
Internal Progress Reports 
Monthly progress reports 
56.  Each GPCU shall produce a monthly progress report covering the key issue related 
to  the  implementation  progress  in  each  governorate  (including  clusters)  and  to  be 
submitted to the M&E unit at the NPCU no later than 7 days after the end of each month. 
The following sections will be included in the monthly progress reports: 
  Introduction and summary of achievements: this will show the summary 
of the achievements in relation to what was planned under the AWPB. 
  Physical progress: the list of indicators under the M&E matrix will be shown 
in this table including the actuals for each month and the cumulative for the 
AWPB and the project targets. 
  Financial progress: financial table to show the actual expenditures by 
activity in comparison with the targets from the AWPB and the appraisal 
targets. 
  Key Issues for the month and recommendations: any issues related to 
delays in implementation or any obstacles that require management attention 
will be presented in this section. 
Quarterly progress reports 
57.  Each GPCU will produce a quarterly progress report and submit it to the M&E unit at 
the  NPCU  no  later  than  2  weeks  after  the  end  of  the  respective  quarter.  The  progress 
reports will include: 
  qualitative and quantitative progress made in implementing the project and 
achieving objectives;  
  problems encountered during reporting period;  
 
steps taken or proposed to be taken to remedy these problems. This section 
includes proposals on how to resolve the issue, and will serve to inform 
decision-making in the NPCU and the PSC;  
the proposed programme of activities and progress expected during the 
following reporting period. 
 
58.  While the primary users of the information on quarterly implementation progress are 
project management and other local stakeholders, there is also a need for M&E systems 
and reports to satisfy minimum requirements by IFAD. 
70 
Other key aspects 
Baseline Survey  
59.  The  baseline  survey  will  provide  information  that  will  fit  into  the  M&E  system; 
basically  baseline  data  for  the  programme  M&E  indicators.  The  survey  will  cover  both 
beneficiary villages as well as control villages with a representative sample size. Data from 
the baseline for the M&E indicators will be updated on annual basis to track the different 
project indicators over time, including for the MTR. Under the M&E system the data will be 
analysed to ensure that STAR activities are on the right directions and assess whether or 
not the targets for the indicators will be achieved. 
60.  The  goal  of  the  baseline  study  is  to  understand  the  level  of  poverty,  agricultural 
activities, community development, gender inequality of the population, with special focus 
on women and youth within the three targeted Governorates.  
61.  The  survey  should:  (i)  focus  on  key  indicators required  to measure  the  outcomes 
and  impact  of  the  planned  activities  as  it  was  mentioned  in  the  Project’s  Logical 
Framework; (ii) not duplicate existing available data; (iii) not require an excessive amount 
of interviewees time; (iv) generate accurate and reliable results based on sound statistical 
best practice, and; (v) allow disaggregation by gender, age, and targeting categories.  
62.  The data collected will be both qualitative and quantitative in nature and will include 
information gathered on the outcome and impact indicators that will be later used for the 
programme  ongoing  monitoring  and  impact  assessment  studies.  In  conducting  the 
baseline, the consultant will have the following uses in mind: 
  Baseline data will be used by the project management and M&E staff to compare 
the changes and effectiveness of the interventions on a regular basis during the 
life of the programme; 
  Baseline data will set the basis for proper measurement of mid-term performance 
and impact assessment including at completion, as well as for possible ad-hoc 
studies. 
63.  The specific tasks of the consultant will be to perform the following:  
  Review project design documents, in particular, review the project indicators and 
project log frame within the relevant context of their use and value; 
  Develop a detailed sampling and design methodology of the survey. The sample 
should be a mixture of beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries and a representative 
sample of project areas. Decisions on the final sampling strategy should be made 
in consultation with IFAD. Power calculations for optimal sample size will have to 
be performed based on poverty measures. 
  The household questionnaires shall use MS Excel or other software which will be 
incorporated in the final report in English. 
  The questionnaire will be tailored to project objectives (using log frame indicators 
will include socio-economic, livelihoods and nutrition indicators).  
  Data analysis and report writing in English language. 
64.  The data to be captured should include but not limited to the following categories 
and modules: 
71 
Household 
  Demographics 
  Nutrition and Food security 
  Poverty levels 
 
Income, expenditure and consumption 
  Household enterprises 
  Shocks and coping strategies 
  Asset ownership  
Community  
  Basic information 
  Community needs, actions & achievements 
  Access to basic services 
  Communal resource management 
  Economic activities  
  Agriculture activities 
  Communal organization 
  Organizations and institutions in the communities 
  Stakeholders’ and activities  
  Farm and off-farm activities 
Farm Level 
  Average plot size  
  Land ownership 
  Land usage  
  Land allocation 
  Plot details  
  Labour details 
  Market details 
  Farm inputs  
  Details on other farm inputs  
  Agricultural activities  
  Agricultural production Stats 
  Sales and storage 
  Livestock and crops  
72 
  Machinery 
  Details on farmer groups and associations  
 
Insurance and other services available  
  Access to extension services 
65.  Control  group:  In  order  to  better  understand  the  attribution  of  the  project 
interventions  on  beneficiaries,  a  control  group  (counterfactual)  will  also  be  used.  This 
group  will  be  identified  based  on  similar  characteristics  of  the  beneficiaries  (nearby 
locations with similar demographics). However, care would be taken to ensure that this 
group does not include indirect project beneficiaries.  
66.  The  Consultant  will  be  responsible  for  collection/analysing  data  from  secondary 
sources that would allow for the benchmarking of the key indicators in the project targeted 
area which will be the basis for the comparison during the impact assessment/completion 
survey.   
67. 
In addition to standard collection of gender and age disaggregated data, the baseline 
and  impact  surveys  will  employ  the  Progaramme  -level  Women  Empowerment  in 
Agriculture Index (Pro-WEAI) which measures women’s empowerment relative to that of 
men within their households. 
68.  The Women’s  Empowerment in  Agriculture  Index  (WEAI),  launched  by IFPRI,  Oxford  Poverty 
and Human Development Initiative (OPHI), and USAID's Feed the Future in February 2012, is the first 
comprehensive  and  standardized  measure  to  directly  capture  women’s  empowerment  and  inclusion 
levels in the agricultural sector. The RALP baseline survey will include separate questionnaires, which 
will  be  administered  to  inform  the  project-level  Women’s  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  (Pro- 
WEAI).  There  is  consistent  and  credible  evidence  that  when  the  status  of  women  is  improved, 
agricultural  productivity  increases,  poverty  is  reduced,  and  nutrition  improves.  More  information  is 
available at www.ifpri.org/book-9075/ourwork/program/weai-resource-center.  
69.  The Programme-level WEAI (pro-WEAI) measures  women’s empowerment in various types of 
agricultural  development  projects.  This  version  uses  the  A-WEAI  as  a  starting  point,  and  adds 
specialized project-relevant modules, designed and tested by the WEAI team, as well as an enhanced 
livestock  module  and  an  add-on  module  specific  to  nutrition  and  health  projects.  Standardized 
components of the survey will be comparable across all projects using the pro-WEAI, and specialized 
project-relevant modules will be comparable within clusters of projects addressing similar pathways to 
empowerment  in  the  agricultural  sector.  Additionally,  pro-WEAI  includes  qualitative  protocols  to  add 
nuance  to  the  quantitative  results. The  pro-WEAI is  not  directly  comparable  to  the  original Feed  the 
Future WEAI baselines.  
70.  Pro-WEAI is made up of 12 indicators that measure three types of agency: intrinsic 
agency  (power  within),  instrumental  agency  (power  to),  and  collective  agency  (power 
with). 
71.  The indicators are grouped by type of agency as follows: 
Intrinsic agency 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Autonomy in income 
Self-efficacy 
Attitudes about intimate partner violence 
Respect among household members 
Instrumental agency 
• 
Input in productive decisions 
73 
Ownership of land and other assets 
Access to and decisions on financial services 
Control over use of income 
• 
• 
• 
•  Work balance 
• 
Visiting important locations 
Collective agency 
• 
• 
Group membership 
Membership in influential groups 
Mid-term Review  
72.  The  MALR,  as  the  lead  project  agency  and  IFAD  will  jointly  carry  out  a  review  of 
Project implementation at the end of project year three, (Mid-term Review), based on the 
following terms of reference:  
73.  The  main  thrust  of  the  Mid-term  Review  (MTR)  will  be  to  evaluate  the  overall 
progress of project implementation, particularly in achieving its goals and objectives and 
make recommendations for the remaining project period. In particular, MTR will: 
(a) 
review the achievements of each project component and sub-component vis-
a-vis  Project  Design  Report  estimates,  including  their  financial  and  physical 
progress; 
(b)  assess the validity and relevance of project goals, objectives, and strategies, 
taking into account the implications of evolving public policies and the country’s 
socio-economic circumstances;  
(c) 
review the effectiveness of participatory approaches and targeting, focusing on 
constraints  for  reaching  the  poorest  and  the  adequacy  and  effectiveness  of 
support to women beneficiaries;  
(d)  assess  the  post  project  sustainability  of  the  assets  and  other  development 
outcomes created through project support;  
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
(j) 
identify the  critical  factors  and constraints that  have  inhibited timely  project 
implementation, both in global terms and by component and sub-component, 
including the institutional and socio-economic policy issues, in addition to any 
other external factors unforeseen at design; 
examine  the  arrangements  for  project  implementation,  co-ordination  and 
management, including the roles and responsibilities of all key players at the 
national, regional and local levels, in particular assess the adequacy, the overall 
effectiveness and the institutional; 
the  process  of  formation,  financial  management  and  performance  of  WUAs; 
their Management Boards and respective service providers. 
review  the  adequacy  of  existing  policies  and  procedures  governing  project’s 
financial  management,  external  audit,  liquidity  and  the  use  of  the  special 
account facility, and staff training needs and make practical recommendations 
to  improve  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  project  co-ordination  and 
management; 
examine the efficiency and overall adequacy of the arrangements for  annual 
planning, budgeting, and the flow of funds; 
assess the efficiency of procurement and disbursement procedures, and make 
recommendations to redress any constraints encountered with a view to ensure 
the timely delivery of goods and services required for the project; 
74 
(k)  examine  the  effectiveness  of  the  M&E  system,  in  particular  its  capacity  to 
collect and analyse data and information, and report on the performance of the 
project in line with the key performance indicators highlighted in the project’s 
results framework; 
(l) 
examine the need, nature and scope for adjustments or reorientation of project 
design and implementation strategy, and propose practical recommendations 
for  corrective  remedial  measures  by  component  and  sub-component  to  be 
carried out during the remaining or extended period of implementation with a 
view to achieve the project goals and objectives; 
(m)  critically  examine  project  costs  and  financing  plan  by  component,  sub-
component and categories, bearing in mind any revisions to the physical and 
financial targets; 
(n)  assess  the  effectiveness  of  supervision  process  in  terms  of  implementation 
support, its timeliness and ability to identify and deal with problem issues, the 
adequacy  of  its  expertise  mix,  and  effectiveness  in  following  up  on  its 
recommendations; and 
(o)  evaluate the important lessons learnt in the course of project implementation 
and highlight their implications on future project activities 
74.  The MTR will largely be based on, inter-alia, the Project Design Report; 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Reports, Procurement Plans, the Reports 
of Supervision and Follow Up Missions; the Project’s Annual Work Plans and Budgets as 
well as Progress Reports; and Financing Agreements; evolving government policies and 
strategies; and additional data and information collected through commissioned studies. 
The MTR will include extensive field visits and consultations with key implementation 
agencies at the national, district and local levels, in addition to interacting and 
conducting interviews with beneficiary households in the three project governorates. 
75.  The findings of the MTR will be communicated promptly to the implementing 
agencies and discussed jointly between the GOE and IFAD. On the basis of conclusions 
and recommendations of the MTR, necessary adjustments will be made in the Project 
design and the Financing Agreements to remove constraints and put the Project on track 
to achieve its objectives. The GOE will ensure that the recommendations resulting from 
the Mid-term Review are implemented within the specified time and to the satisfaction of 
IFAD. 
Project Completion Survey 
76.  Programme completion survey (impact evaluation) will use the same 
questionnaires used for the baseline to allow for comparison against baseline results. 
Analysis will be done by beneficiary status, region and gender of household head. 
77.  The impact evaluation will assess the project impact using the same indicators 
(ORMS and project specific derived from the LF) as the baseline survey. The key 
elements of the Survey will include: (i) socio-economic characteristics of the Project 
primary target group; and (ii) status of social and economic infrastructure. The Survey 
will be aimed to measure the changes brought about by the Project in the socio-
economic development of its beneficiaries. It is anticipated that the Survey will combine 
a formal household sample survey with a more qualitative and in-depth study. The 
Survey will also compare the socio-economic situation of beneficiaries and non-
beneficiaries in order to better attribute the impact to the project. Detailed analysis will 
be undertaken of the changes observed between baseline survey and the impact survey. 
75 
Where possible, panel data will be used i.e. some of the beneficiaries interviewed during 
the baseline survey will also be included in the sample of the impact survey. 
Staffing for M&E 
78.  The Monitoring and Evaluation unit at the NPCU will be responsible for ensuring 
that a responsive M&E system is established and regular monitoring and progress 
reporting is in place for Project activities. The M&E unit at the NPCU will comprise one 
M&E manager and 3 specialists. At each of the 3 GPCUs one focal M&E persons will be 
assigned and will have day-to-day responsibility for collecting and analysing data and 
preparing, as required but at minimum monthly reports, on progress and results 
achieved and implementation issues arising from monitoring activities. The young 
professionals will have a key role in collecting the data from the field and reporting to 
the M&E focal person at the governorate. Consolidation will be done by each M&E focal 
person and data is to be sent to the M&E unit at the NPCU. 
79.  An early task of the M&E unit will be to establish a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 
including a matrix to identify data sources and periodicity of reporting for the agreed 
indicators. The reports will be directed at Project management, but may be shared with 
the Project Steering Committee. Provisions have been made under the Project 
Management Component for office equipment and supplies that may be required. 
Implementation support and training for M&E/KM will be provided by IFAD regularly.  
80.  All Project staff are expected to be active participants in the M&E system where the 
overall coordination of information collection and flow will be guided by the M&E unit at 
NPCU. Quantitative and qualitative information will be collected at beneficiary level by 
the young professionals using M&E indicators that have been developed by the M&E unit 
based on the M&E plan that includes a matrix to identify for the Project.  
81.  The gathered information will be shared both with GPCU staff involved with the 
Project at the district as well as at the governorate levels. Clear reporting lines will be 
established with NPCU in Cairo. The objective is to develop and operate a systematic 
Management information system (MIS) that focuses on strategic analysis, rather than on 
data compilation with limited transformation into information. The task will be to go from 
outputs, up the monitoring scale, to outcomes by transforming the information into 
knowledge about Project’s impact. The accurate dissemination and reporting of the 
transformation will be dependent on the M&E staff’s capacity to generate narratives on 
the why and how of the changes documented. 
Beneficiary Database 
82.  A Database of programme beneficiaries will be established by each GPCU for use at 
governorate level. This database will include detailed information about each beneficiary 
(socio-economic indicators such as age, gender, targeting category, HH level assets and 
land size and farming activities). The database will be consolidated at the NPCU by the 
M&E unit. This database will be utilized for different purposes including sampling for the 
different surveys, tracking the beneficiaries outreach as well as selection of beneficiaries 
to visit during the supervision missions. 
Geo-referencing 
83.  Geo-referencing. The program will adopt the geo-reference methodology developed 
in NEN to support implementation and M&E processes. The use of the geo-referencing 
76 
methodology will be embedded in the M&E plan of the program. The young professionals 
will be responsible for ensuring that the different project sites and interventions are geo-
referenced. To a minimum, the secondary and branch canals will be geo-referenced 
including the catchment area and rehabilitation costs and will be linked to the project 
MIS along with Agribusinesses, demonstration plots and other relevant interventions in 
each cluster. 
D. KM and communications 
Learning 
84.  KM and Learning is the integrated approach of identifying, capturing, evaluating, 
retrieving and sharing information. It is the using of knowledge more effectively with 5 
interconnected functions: 
  Learning and Adaptation: Seeking regular feedback, learning lessons to improve 
performance, regular reviews for collective decision making, documentation of 
decision that leads to change, flexibility for the use of knowledge and new 
innovation. 
  Learning oriented M&E: Setting benchmarks, indicators and learning question; 
collective qualitative and quantitative data, analyzing data, monitoring process, 
continuous follow up of progress and performance. 
  Internal  and External Communication: Internal communication to support 
learning, foster teamwork and joint responsibility, culture of feedback and 
appreciation, creating visibility and advocacy, sharing lessons across projects and 
organizations 
  Innovation and Experimentation: Sourcing new ideas and innovations, seeking 
and embracing new opportunities, enriching new ideas through Communities of 
Practice (CoPs/ TWGs) groups of people who focus on particular aspects and trying 
out new ideas. 
  Information management: Electronic archives with reports and lessons, capturing 
and documenting information, systematizing and organizing information, packaging 
information to suit the targeted audience into websites and blogs as well as keeping 
data banks. 
77 
Figure 1 Integrated Knowledge Management and Learning System 
85.  Building on lessons from IFAD country programme, special attention will be put on 
making sure: (i) programme launch is effective for visibility (ii) knowledge management 
indicators are included in the M&E system; (iii) of setting up solid information 
management systems (e.g. electronic archives); (iv) clarifying roles and responsibilities 
in knowledge management in the programme management and implementation teams; 
(v) facilitating internal programme learning and cross-project exchanges; (vi) organising 
exchanges with other projects and agencies through SSTC, organising targeted 
workshops, and other activities to disseminate results and attract the interest of 
government and development partners for improvement of their practices, replication 
and scaling up of tested and documented innovations. 
78 
In order to enhance the learning process and the dissemination of results, a 
86. 
knowledge management and communication strategy (KMC strategy) will be developed 
and integrated into the management of the programme. The strategy will include which 
thematic areas of learning the programme will be focusing on. The strategy will outline 
how the knowledge generated will be disseminated and will identify most appropriate 
channels. 
Knowledge Management and Communication 
87.  The KMC strategy will be formulated based on the IFAD’s knowledge management 
and learning framework which recognizes 5 interconnected functions which include: 
learning for adaptation, learning oriented monitoring and evaluation, internal and 
external communication, information management and innovation and experimentation.  
88.  Based on this, the KMC will focus on 2 areas namely; Knowledge harvesting, 
storage, and processing and Knowledge sharing and learning partnerships which 
embodies information management, learning oriented M&E and internal communication 
and adaptation. The strategy will be reviewed and revised annually by conducting a 
knowledge audit to identify key needs and opportunities as well as specification of 
activities to be included in the work plan and budget. 
89.  STAR KMC strategy will be guided by two strategic pillars; 1. Knowledge 
harvesting, storage, and processing and, 2. Knowledge sharing and learning 
partnerships.  
90.  These two pillars falls under IFAD’s KM&L framework pillars of information 
management, learning oriented monitoring and evaluation and internal and external 
communication principles. STAR KMC pillar number 1 is aligned to information 
management, and learning oriented monitoring and evaluation while pillar number 2 is 
aligned to internal and external communication pillar under the IFAD’s KM&L framework. 
Pillar 1:  Knowledge Harvesting, Storage and Processing 
In order to ensure that knowledge generated is used and applied, the strategy will 
91. 
promote information harvesting, storage and processing to adapt to its users. Resources 
will be made available to harvest, store, process and disseminate information to 
stakeholders that need it, and to ensure best use of knowledge generated by other 
initiatives in Egypt and the region. Electronic databases, will be made accessible through 
the programme website. STAR will finance additional hardware and software, so as to 
better maintain and disseminate data, and library services for document acquisition and 
storage at various work stations. 
Pillar 2:  Knowledge Sharing and Learning Partnerships 
92.  After information is captured, there will be value addition through interpretation 
and analysis, drawing on information from other sources, and adapting it for use by a 
range of partners. The knowledge sharing and learning instruments to be deployed are 
as follows: (i) studies and publications on lessons learned; (ii) case studies documenting 
successes and failures; (iii) publicity material including newsletters, radio and television 
programmes; (iv) formation of national and regional learning networks; (v) periodic 
meetings and workshops to share knowledge and lessons learned; (vi) research-
extension liaison/feedback meetings; (v) study tours; (vi) preparation and distribution of 
technical literature on improved agricultural practices, including crop and farm budgets; 
and (vii) the routine supervision missions, mid-term review and project completion 
79 
report. Special efforts will be made to incorporate stakeholders at district and community 
level in the learning partnerships to ensure that they contribute to and benefit from the 
sharing of knowledge. 
93.  Knowledge management will play a central role in the programme. Both GoE and 
IFAD perceive STAR as a significant learning and knowledge management investment in 
addressing economic and social imbalances between urban and rural areas. STAR has 
the potential to bring immense field experience into the policy discourse on digital 
agriculture, rural youth and women agribusiness development in Egypt and disseminate 
that to a wider international audience. Knowledge generated by this programme will 
contribute significantly to the design and implementation of youth empowerment 
agricultural interventions within the agriculture sector as a whole with support from the 
GoE.  
94.  Therefore, knowledge generation will be the main scaling up pathway. The 
programme will help GoE to generate knowledge on the impact of cluster investment 
partnerships and subsidies and inform programme pipeline development and best use of 
subsidies to benefit rural upland farmers. 
95.  The success of implementing the KMC strategy rests on active and collective 
participation of all stakeholders involved. The stakeholders include those from the public 
sector (, development partners, civil society and the smallholder farmers involved in 
STAR. Policy guidance and enforcement implementation mechanisms will be provided by 
MALR at national level.  A designated focal person (STAR KM and ICT Specialist) based in 
NPCU will coordinate the implementation of the strategy. IFAD will provide a technical 
assistant to assist the designated focal person with coordination and setting up the 
systems. 
80 
Chapter 5: Guidelines for the implementation of Rural Finance 
Activities 
Addressing Limited Access to Finance for Rural Beneficiaries 
The Project acknowledges the current consensus that accessing finance is one of the 
main hindrances for rural development and therefore mainly focuses on making available 
credit lines tailor-made for its target group. Financial instruments will be appropriately 
structured to support all types of investments, expected to be undertaken by the 
160,000 beneficiary households. Through this apparatus, the Project will also dilute 
information asymmetries relative to offered interest rates, collateral and other terms of 
credit. The Project will investigate the possibility to alleviate collateral requirement 
constraints (especially for youth - if they arise) with the use of the credit guarantee or 
the secured transactions mechanism. The Project will liaise with relevant stakeholders to 
consider the development of sector-specific insurance products. Finally, the Project will 
stimulate entrepreneurship and financial responsibility among beneficiaries and will 
promote the savings culture. It will liaise with banks to develop relevant products and 
services.  
This project does not have a dedicated Rural Finance component. Financing (offered by 
the project) provides primarily the means for the realization of the investments ensuing 
from the two main components (Production and Marketing). In that sense, financial 
products are being designed to support the market opportunities identified by these two 
main components. These products will be monitored, adapted and improved in 
consultation with the targeted clientele and the participating financial institutions along 
the project’s lifespan. 
Finance for beneficiary investments 
The core endeavor of the financing subcomponent is to provide credit that will allow 
beneficiaries to accomplish their investment plans for production improvement and 
marketing development. Given the long history of existing funds with preferential terms, 
supporting MSME’s and agriculture in Egypt, the project will employ existing financing 
channels to direct appropriate resources to its beneficiaries. It will establish a network 
including Credit Wholesalers (CW), Commercial Banks (CB), Microfinance Institutions 
(MFI), Credit Cooperatives (CC), and credit NGOs to make available access points for all 
types of beneficiaries.  
The Project provides for four broad types of investment.  
a)  The larger percentage of investments involves irrigation. Production improvement 
and therefore increase in income for the beneficiary will be the result of a 
collective investment on common irrigation infrastructure, together with a private 
investment on modern (drip or sprinkler) irrigation system at the field level, 
combined with the use of improved inputs. The average cost per fedan for such 
investments is estimated to reach an amount of EGP 50,000. Most of the targeted 
beneficiaries are poor and own less than a fedan. The average required 
investment per beneficiary would, therefore, be around EGP 20,000 with a 
projected repayment period of 5 years. A financial product structured for such 
type of beneficiaries should involve a credit line for loans between EGP 10,000 to 
EGP 60,000, with tenure of 5-6 years and one year grace period. 
b)  The second largest type of investments involves smallholders (men, women or 
youth) engaging in income-generating activities. The project will propose a set of 
small investments in animal, poultry, crop, etc. value chains that will require an 
81 
amount of EGP 10,000 initial investment (on average) with quick returns within a 
year. The appropriate financial product for this investment type is a credit line for 
loans between EGP 1,000 to EGP 20,000 , with one-year maturity, payable in 
quarterly installments and with the possibility to delay the first installment. 
c)  The project will support marketing associations (initially informal) promoting 
activities along the value chain. Groupings of 50 producers (on average) will 
consolidate efforts under the auspices of a cooperative to promote their produce 
at higher strata of the value chain. This will require common investments of EGP 
150,000 (on average or EGP 3,000 per beneficiary) with an expected payback 
period of 3 to 5 years. The project will channel financing to the cooperatives in 
the form of loans ranging in size from EGP 50,000 to EGP 200,000, with a tenure 
of 3 to 5 years and one-year grace period.  
d)  The project will also support youth enterprises or associations investing in value-
addition of agricultural production for an amount of EGP 300,000 on average (per 
investment). The payback period for such type of ventures would be longer-term 
(3-5 years). Youth groupings of 20 (on average) will work together using a 
cooperative as a shell until they graduate to become fully-fledged private 
enterprises. The seed capital for such investments will come in the form of a 
credit line addressed to credit cooperatives that can demonstrate financial 
healthiness and produce appropriate guarantees (rather than to individuals that 
would not be able). The offered principal will range between EGP 50,000 and 
300,000 with 2 to 5 years term and one-year grace period. 
Investment 
Size EGP 
Tenu
re 
(year
s) 
1 
Grace 
period 
(month
s) 
3 
% of 
targeted 
beneficiari
es 
50% 
% of total 
investmen
ts 
1,000 – 20,000 
10,000 – 
60,000 
50,000-
200,000 
100,000-
400,000 
5-6 
3-5 
3-5 
12 
12 
12 
40% 
30 
10 
35% 
55% 
5% 
5% 
Type  of 
community 
institutions  or  type  of 
investment 
Generating 
Income 
Activity 
Irrigation  and  production 
improvement 
Marketing Association 
Collective 
Facility (Youth) 
Processing 
Youth and women will be targeted horizontally through all four credit lines and their 
participation will be monitored closely. Overall women’s participation in MFI financing is 
close to 50% (EMFF data), indicating that most likely the introduction of women-specific 
credit lines will not be necessary. Youth, on the other hand, has been reported to be 
unable to meet collateral requirements. To overcome this impediment the project is 
channeling larger investments (requiring collateral) through cooperatives (or CDAs), thus 
bypassing the need for collateral. Most MFIs (NGOs etc.) along with the ABE do not 
require collateral for micro-investments. Still, if collateral requirements prove to be a 
threat to the project’s smooth implementation, there is an envelope of EUR 0.9 million, 
to be used for setting up a credit guarantee with the CGC to promote unsecured loans at 
a higher premium. 
As mentioned already, the project will utilize existing channels for disbursing the 
necessary financial resources to its beneficiaries. In this respect, it does not need to be 
inventive. Its innovative aspect will be seated on the way it engages with the several 
stakeholders, with the aim to instill among them an element of healthy competition and 
beneficial cooperation. It will do so by exploiting synergies among partners and 
promoting each other’s comparative advantage. The ultimate goal being, enhanced 
82 
efficiency from synergetic effects, improved capacity of rural financing institutions and 
an expanded financing spectrum for IFAD’s target group. 
Like previous IFAD’s projects, STAR will use credit wholesalers (CWs – MSMEDA and 
ADP) for the implementation of this subcomponent. It will also engage with ABE (and 
any other commercial bank or eligible financial institution) to use its extensive branch 
network to reach some segments of the beneficiary group. Credit lines will be distributed 
on performance-based criteria to a selected group of financial institutions chosen 
through a competitive process. These institutions will receive credit lines for on-lending 
to MFIs, Credit Cooperatives (CCs) and NGOs, which in turn will offer the specified loan 
products to STAR beneficiaries. 
The competitive process will involve a call for proposals where participants will 
demonstrate their commitment to and understanding of the project’s objectives and will 
be selected on the basis of the following performance indicators: 
speed of processing loans,  
 
  effectiveness and width of outreach network, 
  quality of outreach (awareness activities to promote project value propositions to 
beneficiary groups), 
  project portfolio size, 
  project portfolio quality, 
 
 
 
  Monitoring of the performance of Financial Intermediaries (banks, MFIs, NGOs, 
competitiveness of offered interest rates, 
reduced collateral and own participation requirements, 
simplicity and user-friendliness of the loan application process, 
CCs) 
  Monitoring of the performance of investments (micro-level), 
  Monitoring of repayment rates and support mechanism to instill a culture of 
 
responsible financing among the beneficiaries. 
Institutional Capacity Building (ICB) plan (for the institution and its 
partners/financial intermediaries) 
Once the Cooperating Financial Institutions (CFIs) have been selected, they will receive 
consecutive tranches of credit lines for on lending. The tranches will be released on a 
first-come-first-served basis, i.e. CFIs with higher disbursement rates and better overall 
performance will be entrusted with larger tranches. The project will maintain permanent 
staff to monitor the process and intervene correctively whenever appropriate. 
Performance of CFIs will be monitored and re-evaluated at regular intervals (twice a 
year) and corrective actions will be negotiated with the project’s staff and the 
implementation support missions. 
CFIs will be encouraged to undertake capacity-building activities across the board (in 
fact this is one of their performance assessment criteria). The project may assist CFIs to 
identify capacity-building needs and design relevant plans. It may additionally offer 
financial resources in the form of a loan. CFIs may borrow from the credit line proceeds 
to finance capacity-building activities, which they will have to repay at an agreed 
interval. 
CFIs will then start on lending to their established network of partners (or directly to 
beneficiaries as in the case of MSMEDA and banks) who in turn will be lending to 
project’s beneficiaries at market terms. The project will not interfere on credit risk 
assessment procedures, or impose ceilings on interest rates and/or collateral and own 
participation requirements. The competitive process will clearly favor however, the 
83 
avenues that will offer milder and more effective credit terms. The dedicated project 
staff will monitor the effectiveness of the system, and will assist in the resolution of 
eventual problems, or will come up with proposals for improvements. The project staff 
will have the option to revert to international expertise for support, whenever needed. 
The contribution and engagement of the dedicated project staff responsible to promote 
the financing part of the project is crucial. They will have to act as brokers between 
beneficiaries, financial institutions and CFIs. They will be responsible for identifying 
beneficiary financing needs and map them against the several offerings of the financial 
sector. They will dilute information asymmetries by regularly updating this map and 
making it available to both demand and supply for credit stakeholders. Project staff will 
identify capacity development needs on both the beneficiary side and the financial 
service provider’s side and will package relevant training propositions accordingly. They 
will identify potential synergies among stakeholders in the sector and will leverage 
partnerships to capitalize on synergetic effects. They will be proactive in their work and 
act as leaders of this subcomponent’s priorities. 
CBE has recently adopted (and promotes) an agricultural development strategy very 
relevant and compatible to STAR’s priorities and objectives. The project staff will liaise 
with CBE to investigate mutually beneficial additionality. For instance, CBE’s aspiration to 
introduce targeted incentivized funding to enhance banks and ABE to extend coverage at 
micro-level can directly benefit from STAR’s value proposition. Similarly, STAR can 
benefit from CBE’s SuSME project under which EBI is tasked to enhance the capacity of 
bankers, CGC, and NGOs through training. Both CBE and STAR are developing initiatives 
in digital agriculture. Co-ordination between them will leverage synergetic effects. 
Under the principle of brokering beneficiary interests to the financial sector, the project 
will also monitor the beneficiaries’ ability to meet collateral and own participation 
requirements. For any eventual involvement, the project will consistently maintain a 
neutral position, trying not to introduce unnecessary distortions to the credit market. 
Doing so, it will allow the financial sector to respond positively and crowd-in additional 
financing resources to support the beneficiary investment needs; it will secure the credit-
lines’ sustainability and will leave a positive footprint on the sector itself. With this in 
mind, banks, MFIs, credit cooperatives, and NGOs will adjust collateral and own 
participation requirements as per their risk assessment procedures. In case this poses a 
problem to a segment of the target group, the project will encourage CFIs to reduce own 
participation and/or collateral requirements by increasing the entailed interest rate or 
recur to a system of credit guarantees. The project will cooperate with CGC to structure 
a relevant product and will promote more extensive use of moveable assets as collateral. 
Previous IFAD credit lines in Egypt have been absorbed in the pool of funds of ADP and 
MSMEDA and reached the beneficiaries as their own funding. The beneficiaries never 
became aware of IFAD’s participation and contribution. The project will make sure that 
on-lending partners disseminate information on IFAD’s commitment and financial 
support to rural development. 
Other financial services for the target group 
A critical factor for the success of the project is the engagement of the target group on 
income-generating activities (and other types of investments that the project proposes). 
To make sure of that targeted beneficiaries are both interested and able to undertake 
such ventures, the project provides for a relevant training process. Together with 
capacity building activities on irrigation, production improvement, and marketing, the 
project will provide entrepreneurship and financial responsibility skills. Relevant 
exercises must be practical, realistic and hands-on, instead of theoretical, class-based.  
84 
An indicative curriculum must include the following elements: a) why is investing good 
for me (risks and rewards of entrepreneurship); b) what is a business opportunity and 
how to identify it; c) how to evaluate an idea and assess if the market is ready for it; d) 
trial-runs to validate concepts and refine business plans; d) financial decisions a 
smallholder must make as early as possible; e) how to approach the financial sector; f) 
what are the pros and cons of getting registered and licensed; g) small business 
management and bookkeeping; h) how to make sure I can repay a loan and why this is 
important; i) the benefits of savings (you always have some money to save). 
The project will be responsible for preparing and consolidating the curriculum (as it will 
do for other capacity-building activities at cluster level), yet it will entrust its delivery to 
two channels: a) the regular delivery mechanism that the project will adopt for all types 
of training and dissemination (including with digital means e.g. pico-projectors etc.), and 
b) CFIs will be encouraged to incorporate the curriculum as part of their outreach 
strategy. 
Project staff will investigate and identify existing micro-insurance options pertinent to 
the beneficiaries. Since 2016, after the resolution No. 902 that set the terms of 
operation for micro-insurance, the industry has become active. Apart from the existing 
micro-insurance products, there is active analytical work on crop-insurance (MSMEDA) 
and rural micro-insurance (JICA). The project will tap on the findings of existing analysis 
and will promote further efforts in developing products for the target group, in 
partnership with the existing active players. Similarly, the project staff will investigate 
the possibility to develop leasing products for the beneficiaries. 
Finally, the project will promote savings culture within the target group. Project staff will 
first investigate the possibility to structure savings products with collaborating financial 
institutions (free savings accounts – digital or not). It will then promote the benefits of 
using such products to the beneficiaries and the target group in general.  
To finance these activities, the project provides for a capacity development pool. Project 
staff will revert to this pool for ad-hoc expert support, on any of the above topics. The 
pool will be used for training design and delivery, implementation support, brief technical 
contributions, and studies. 
Institutional Aspects and Implementation Arrangements 
STAR, on its financing subcomponent, mainly facilitates beneficiaries to access necessary 
resources to invest on improving production, extend their reach to higher levels of the 
value chain through marketing and other income generating activities. Error! R
eference source not found. depicts the flow of planned activities and project logic. A 
crucial factor for the success of this subcomponent is the facilitation process and 
brokering between the financial sector and the beneficiaries. This will be the 
responsibility of the project staff. The functions, responsibilities and reporting lines of the 
relevant project staff are described below.  
The component wil be managed by the technical specialist in the CPCU and the Financial 
services Specialists in the GPCUs 
Revolving credit lines for beneficiaries (timeline and operation details) 
Following the appointment of the Technical specialist, the project will start the process 
for tendering the implementation of the revolving credit lines.  
Call for Tenders and selection of CWss 
85 
The FC will liaise with ADP, MSMEDA, ABE and other banks that are suitable for 
extending micro-loans to rural beneficiaries in the three project governorates, with the 
aim to explain the project’s logic, priorities and novel approach. The FC will then prepare 
the tendering documents and will launch the call. The FC will make efforts to secure 
extended participation. 
Once proposals are received they will be evaluated by a committee including the Project 
Director and the FC. Proposals will be evaluated under the following criteria: 
Competitiveness of offered interest rates. The applicant must provide the structure 
 • 
Short approval times. The loan approval process described by the applicant will 
have to prove the short intervals between application and approval of a beneficiary loan. 
• 
Extended outreach network. The applicant must describe the existing and intended 
network that will permit easy access for the beneficiaries. 
• 
Quality of outreach. The applicant must describe the awareness activity plan 
through which the applicant will proactively solicit value propositions to the beneficiaries 
promoting responsible financing and savings principles. 
• 
of the terms of credit for the different products. To do so the applicant must already 
have an understanding with the network of PFIs they will be using. 
• 
• 
• 
must demonstrate the monitoring system that will provide information updates on the 
quality and size of the portfolio of each PFI. 
• 
partners/financial intermediaries). The applicant must identify the institutional problems 
that may possibly hinder its performance and propose relevant solutions. 
Reduced collateral and own participation requirements. Same as above. 
Simplicity and user-friendliness of the loan application process.  
Monitoring of the performance of PFIs (banks, MFIs, NGOs, CCs). The applicant 
Institutional Capacity Building (ICB) plan (for the institution and its 
Disbursement of funds 
Once the CWs have been selected, they will sign a contract specifying the terms of 
cooperation with the project and will receive an initial tranche of EUR  4.6 million to start 
preparatory work and initial on lending activities to their network of PFIs (if they are not 
direct lenders). CWs will be allowed to use proceeds of their loans for capacity building 
and promotional activities to be returned to the revolving fund at an agreed time. The 
Technical specialist (with the approval of the Project Director) will be negotiating the 
term of their loan, and their agreement will require IFAD’s non-objection. 
CWs will be authorized to request additional EUR  4.6 million tranches, as soon as they 
already have disbursed the original amount (or amounts) to beneficiaries. They will have 
to demonstrate relevant project portfolio size, and acceptable project portfolio quality 
(NPLs not exceeding 2%). The decision for each new disbursement will be ratified by 
IFAD with a non-objection. 
Eligibility criteria 
CFIs, will be offering loans to beneficiaries, as per the project’s financing needs – for 
investments on small irrigation and production improvement; production improvement 
only; income generating activities; and investments of youth and marketing 
associations. All investments will have to be part of the project’s activities and loans will 
be approved if they fall within the following typology: 
(refer to PDR for updated table) 
86 
Investment 
type 
Marketing 
Association 
Loan 
Size 
EGP 
50,000-
200,000 
Tenure 
(years) 
3-5 
Grace 
period 
(months) 
12 
Eligible Investments 
 
Inputs (planting materials, fertilizer, 
etc.) 
  Mechanized services (e.g. tractor hire) 
  Technology adoption (drip, solar, 
Income 
Generating 
Activity 
Irrigation 
and 
production 
improvement 
Youth 
enterprise 
1,000 – 
20,000 
10,000 – 
60,000 
100,000-
400,000 
1 
3 
5-6 
12 
 
greenhouse, digital) 
Post-production (packaging, branding, 
labelling) 
  Certification 
 
Poultry, small ruminants, honey 
production, etc. 
  Small trading activities 
 
- on-farm irrigation equipment – 
pumps, pipes, lining etc. 
3-5 
12 
  handicrafts, articles from agricultural 
residue 
  dairy, fishery, 
  provision of agro-inputs and machinery 
services, 
  processing: jam, jelly, tomato paste 
 
making 
- commercial operation of marketing 
infrastructure: cold storage, storage, 
etc. 
Monitoring the on-lending process 
CWs have updated records on the disbursement rate, the portfolio size and portfolio 
quality (PAR, NPL). The technical specalist will have to monitor the overall performance 
of credit lines and FSS will be monitoring performance at governorate level. The 
distribution of the portfolio per investment type should be balanced, as follows: 
Marketing associations should cover 30% of the total number of beneficiaries and absorb 
5% of total credit portfolio; Youth enterprises should cover 10% of the total number of 
beneficiaries and 5% of the total credit line; Income Generating Activities should cover 
50% of the total beneficiaries and account for 35% of the total investment; and loans for 
irrigation projects should cover 40% of beneficiaries and 55% of the total credit 
portfolio.  
Any irregularities on the disbursement rate or portfolio quality will be identified 
immediately and corrective actions will be taken. Project staff will prepare bi-annual 
reports and action plans. 
Other Services 
As soon as the credit lines are operational and credit reaches the intended beneficiaries 
the technical specialist will start exploring the possibility to facilitate the introduction of 
new financial products for the beneficiaries.  
Micro-insurance: the technical specialist will liaise with MSMEDA, JICA and all other 
stakeholders who are researching the feasibility of the introduction of micro, indexed and 
87 
other types of insurance, with the aim to overview and better understand the sector. The 
FC will engage with micro-insurance providers to investigate if such products can be 
structured to cover the needs of project beneficiaries. 
Savings: the technical specialist and the FSS will liaise with banks (at central and local 
level respectively) with the aim to structure savings propositions for the project’s 
beneficiaries. Savings products will be linked to relevant training modules addressed to 
the target group that will convey the benefits of savings to the beneficiaries’ longer-term 
financial well-being. 
Collateral: Six months after the beginning of the operation of the credit lines, the 
technical specialist will take stock of impediments hindering the target group from 
accessing finance e.g. collateral and/or own participation requirements. If such obstacles 
are present, the technical specialist will negotiate solutions with the financial institutions 
to ease them off (e.g. lower the requirements against higher interest rate, introduction 
of a credit guarantee etc.). The technical specialist will negotiate with the partner 
financial institutions the introduction of moveable assets as accepted collateral in their 
operation and will give them relevant incentives. 
Capacitating the beneficiaries: As soon as clusters are formed and operating the FSS 
will be participating in cluster meetings to assess the capacity (or lack thereof) of the 
different strata of beneficiaries on financial and entrepreneurship matters. Once FSS 
develop a solid understanding of the capacity-building needs (2-3 months later), they 
will put together a relevant curriculum (including topics, content, method of delivery, 
hours involved), with the help of external expertise if necessary. To solicit external 
expertise FSS will come with the proposition to the FC and the Project Director on how to 
acquire it. The Project Director may choose to require further assistance from IFAD on 
how to identify appropriate expertise.  
FSS will also liaise with financial institutions and CFIs to explore the extent to which they 
can (and are willing) to deliver the said curricula. FSS will try to identify any other public 
or private sector institution, with interest to assume the responsibility (both delivery and 
cost) for capacitating some segments of the target group. The project will make every 
effort to incorporate capacity-building activities on entrepreneurship and responsible 
financing as an integral part of PFIs lending operations, thus etching the ideal into their 
core with the aim to secure sustainability of this intervention. As a last resort, FSS will 
recur to the Capacity Building Pool (CBP). Capacity-building offered by the project should 
be unified and EFREs will be coordinating entrepreneurship and financial responsibility 
development with other training modules offered by the project  
Diluting information asymmetries:  FSS will constantly keep track of the existing 
financial offerings (commercial, preferential, public or private) and the relevant terms 
(including interest rates, tenure, collateral requirements etc.). Whenever necessary, 
EFREs will communicate this knowledge (and the method to acquire it) to the target 
group, which will gradually become proficient. 
Brokering better loan terms: In their interaction with CFIs, FSS will be regularly 
reviewing the possibility to improve the lending terms to the benefit of the target group. 
Credit Guarantees (CGs) 
The project has set aside a EUR 0.9 million amount for the eventual establishment of a 
Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF), should collateral be an important issue impeding 
beneficiaries from accessing credit lines. The technical specialist will negotiate with the 
CGC to establish CGF under its wing. CGC has been operating guarantee funds for years 
88 
and lately (with the help of the CBE) is streamlining and improving operation. The CGC 
will admit similar conditions and operating procedures to CGC’s standard operating 
procedures to avoid disruption and relevant cost increase. The CGF will operate therefore 
with a maximum leverage of 15 times the value of guarantees; with 80% individual loan 
coverage and a 10% cap on portfolio. If the Project Director together with the te decide 
that there is no need for the establishment of such a funchnical specialist d, the relevant 
resources will be redirected into the credit lines. 
The Capacity-Building Pool (CBP) 
The project has also set aside an amount of EUR  457.000 for capacity building needs, 
and product development ad hoc expertise. The technical specialist and FSS will include 
in their bi-annual action plan the required expertise (type, amount, sourcing) for the 
period to be reviewed and approved by the Project Director. The CBP may be used to 
hire external expertise for:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
drafting capacity-building curricula for the beneficiaries;  
delivering capacity-building events (when other sources cannot be made 
available);  
assisting CFIs to identify capacity-building needs and design relevant plans; 
structuring insurance products for the beneficiaries;  
setting up the CGF;  
using moveable assets as collaterals; 
other topics or studies. 
89 
Chapter 6: Guidelines for the implementation of Digital Solutions 
The world is witnessing a revolution in information and communications technology 
(ICT), the scope of which stretches far beyond the realm of the sector itself. No country 
seeking real, sustainable development and progress can hope to achieve these aims 
without a strong ICT sector in place to drive the necessary change 
(http://www.mcit.gov.eg/ICT_Strategy). 
Digital technologies such as internet and mobile phone technology have a profound 
effect on production processes, knowledge exchange and social relations worldwide. 
Their perceived capacity to support far-reaching socio-economic change has brought 
digital technologies to the centre of the development discourse (Brown & Grant, 2010). 
To “significantly increase access to digital tools and strive to provide universal and 
affordable access to internet in LDCs by 2020” is one of the proposed sustainable 
development goals. Though some donor agencies’ treatment of digital strategies as a 
panacea for poverty reduction, socio-economic development and sustainability might be 
exaggerated, appropriate choice of digital strategies may create profound and often 
rapid changes in agrarian societies. There is an excellent opportunity to rationalize the 
use of digital tools in development endeavors.  
Egyptian agriculture, particularly Upper Egypt, apparently requires a paradigm shift. 
Especially, in applying digital agriculture to all fields related to agriculture, including 
modernizing extension services, value chains, financial inclusion, market linkages, 
capacity development etc., with the state of art, yet low cost digital solutions. 
IFAD/ STAR is uniquely positioned to provide a leadership in Digital Agriculture with 
ability to engage through partnerships, bringing agricultural technology, digital 
technology and services together and thereby ushering new digital agricultural systems. 
In this context, STAR project offers an excellent opportunity to leverage the strengths of 
digital technologies in the overall design of the project. Some of the digital approaches 
piloted in this project will have far reaching positive consequences in redefining the way 
agricultural development is dealt with in recent times. Though there have been few 
digital agriculture projects initiated in Egypt (particularly in delta region / lower Egypt), 
there are no evidences of comprehensively harnessing the digital agriculture strategies 
in Upper Egypt. 
6.1. Overview 
Unlike many development projects, the STAR is unique in terms of integration of digital 
strategies in every project component. The purpose of digital strategies in the STAR 
project is to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of project management, 
sustainable production systems, improved irrigation management, enhanced 
opportunities for marketing and agri business, redefining the extension processes, 
bringing climate resilience, providing new opportunities of financial access, encouraging 
entrepreneurship and finally empowering the rural communities with increased access to 
information and services on near real time basis. 
90 
Absence of adequately funded public extension services and slow adoption of effective 
and sustainable production practices is evident in the Upper Egypt. Public extension 
services are not adequately funded and have limited capacities and outreach in particular 
to smallholders that hinder smallholders in the uptake of more resources-use efficient 
and sustainable technologies and practices. Agribusinesses with backward linkages 
organize technical support for producers but this is accessible only to a handful of 
contract farmers. However, there is a high penetration of telecommunication network 
and mobile phones and there are some reports of farmers turning to social media for 
agronomic and market related support. Growing familiarity with digital technologies and 
social media in the villages provides the basic platform for strengthening a range of 
digital services including digital extension, aggregation, market identification, price 
transparency, financial inclusion and agronomic support services tailored to smallholders. 
Recent developments in web-based and mobile technologies hold considerable promise 
to overcome the problems of inadequacy of extension advisory services. Timely 
information and services provided through digital strategies (enabling more efficient 
production, irrigation, marketing, agri-business and climate resilience) are expected to 
bolster the technology interventions of the project. Digital strategies complement 
extension agents / group of farmers for collective action.  
6.3. Outcomes of STAR Digital Agriculture Strategies 
• 
STAR  platform , Dashboard, Mobile App, SMS Gateway, Video Extension 
Platform set up –and working with 160000 smallholder farmers in Upper 
Egypt 
91 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Increased access to knowledge, extension services for enhanced productivity 
through digital and non-digital means. Each target small holder household 
receiving and getting benefitted from atleast three digital services over a 
period of five years. Increased access to extension services among 40000 
small holder farmers’ access agriculture extension services via mobile phones 
and other digital services. 
The Video extension model will directly benefit 160 villages by involving 80 
video facilitators. For 48 months, 96 video shows will be organized in each 
village directly reaching 40 farmers / farm women. For a total of 160 villages, 
a total of 15,360 video shows showcasing a minimum of 30,720 videos (few 
may repeat every season) with a direct reach of 6400 farmers/ farm women. 
This may trickle down to 12800 farmers / farm women through peer to peer 
sharing.  
Outreach of the STAR videos to a minimum of 80000 farmers / farmer women 
in the target villages over a period of 5 years using mobile app, social media 
and youtube.  
Increased market access among the 10% of target beneficiaries with digital 
market interventions contributing to 20% increase in their income with the 
benchmark market prices existing in 2019. Product worth 18.3 Million EUR 
sold through the digital market interventions 
Increased access to financial services among 40000 target farmers through 
the effective use of STAR Money / Wallet. 
Enhanced capacity of entire value chain players, extension functionaries 
(public and private), women, youth and farmers on digital tools. Empowering 
the communities in accessing and applying the digital agriculture services for 
transforming their production and marketing practices. By the end of the 
project atleast 50% of the target farmers using digital tools for their 
information and services needs. 
Atleast half of the target WUAs sensitized in using the digital water meters 
and 100% compliance of irrigation efficiency using digital applications. 
Atleast three advanced digital POCs identified and piloted (ex: sensor 
networks, uber model, aggregation model etc.,) for creating evidence based 
policy advocacy. Capacity of 600 officials from government departments, 
representatives from NGOs, CDAs,  Field Schools trained on use of digital 
platforms for improving the efficiency of extension 
100 Young professionals and SMEs trained on digital opportunities and 
business skills and a MOOCs platform in place with 5 toolkits and 5 courses. 
The digital driven extension services with a minimum of 50000 installations of 
STAR App by the stakeholders by the end of the project 
Increased public awareness and knowledge on the success of STAR digital 
strategies.  
6.4. MARKETING & FINANCE 
Increased use of digital technologies will open up new markets and opportunities. STAR 
digital strategies will help introduce the data driven marketing applications by including 
the production data and farm profiling of target farmers. For this, an integrated 
marketing platform will be developed or piggybacking will be done either with Knowledge 
92 
Economy Foundation's Bashaier Network or with eFinance Platform. The platform will be 
available both in web app form and mobile app format. From the inventory of available 
market players and emerging traders, agribusiness and exporters, linkages will be built 
with the MAs. STAR Mobile App will have a component that allows sellers to submit a 
request for selling a specific produce/commodity. A mechanism will be built to pilot STAR 
Digital Marketing by demand aggregation.  
Central to the Digital market Intervention is building a STAR market platform that will 
drive different activities. 
6.4.1. STAR Market Platform:  
The platform will be both on web based and mobile based. The platform will be anchored 
by department of agriculture and is facilitated by e-finance or by Bashaier. The content 
development and data upload will be facilitated by the project staff. If the platform has 
to be built afresh, the budget provision will be made for outsourcing the development 
and maintenance work. This will have cross links to the STAR Portal. The platform will 
have the following functionalities. 
•  Market Players Inventory: A database of market players and potential players will 
be maintained along with their contact details. The demand and supply data 
commodity- wise and quality wise will be maintained. 
•  E Market Place: Digitally connects farmers to the online market place, compares 
the prevalent market prices for the crop, determines farmer revenues & 
profitability and suggests the most optimal market price. The market prices of 
different commodities are displayed for the benefit of the farmers. This feature is 
linked to the aggregation feature. Farmers can choose an option for willingness to 
sell, upload their produce pictures, minimum sale price, willingness to aggregate 
etc., The buyers, entrepreneurs, agri-business players can view the details of the 
produce available for sale (at farmer, village, cluster, governorate level) on 
dynamic basis. The preconditions for getting the credit in kind (inputs are 
provided instead of cash) , such as group formation,  registration,  willingness to 
aggregate for the markets, type of produce,  using collective decision etc.., could 
be digitized.  The data related to individual farmers,  groups, credit profiling, 
crops grown, likely harvest dates,  quality and visual marketing could be best 
harnessed.  This can be linked with the production dimensions.  
•  STAR Input Dealer Connect: Digital display and access to inventory data of some 
of the most reliable agro input providers such as the seeds, fertilizers and 
pesticide dealers, agro equipment dealers and manufacturers, logistics and 
storage service providers etc., 
•  STAR Payment: In the later stages of the project, the market platform will be 
linked to the payment gateways, subject to feasibility. 
Implementation Plan: With intense campaigns and media support, the STAR Digital 
marketing will be piloted in three clusters covering the three governorates. This Proof of 
Concept will be put forth during the business meetings between newly formed agri-
business entities (of STAR), major players (traders and exporters) for forging the further 
partnerships to roll out across the three governorates. The success indicators include 
better market price realization and revenues of target farmers increase by at least 20%, 
among many others. 
93 
6.4.2. Visual agriculture marketing 
In recent years, the visual agricultural platforms have upgraded traditional agriculture, 
deployed e-commerce to rural areas, upgraded store service, produced new orders and 
other forms in the market. 
The community development agencies or the youth entrepreneurs can handle this work 
with low cost digital camera or a smart phone. At critical growth stages of the crop, 
photographs will be captured and placed on the digital marketing platform. This will give 
an assurance to the quality production of the agriculture produce that might interest 
exporters or the merchants.  
This will also generate huge data about the producers who register for the visual 
agricultural marketing scheme. The project may take help of WFP mechanism to 
convince farmers or a group of farmers.  The platform can be integrated with the 
existing online market platforms. 
“Visual agriculture” mainly refers to the use of the Internet, the Internet of Things, cloud 
computing, radar technology and modern video technology to present models, means 
and methods of cultivation or livestock. “Visual agriculture” also has a primary function, 
which is a reliable future order effect. Many agri-business / Merchants may use “visual 
agriculture” to observe and order remotely.  We can observe the entire production and 
management process of products such as vegetables, fruits, poultry, cattle and sheep. 
6.4.3. Digital Finance: The programme will pursue a longer term investment in digital 
finance. The programme will offer granular farmer level data (STAR Platform) for 
financial service providers such as banks and insurance companies for credit profiling. 
Based on the profiling and the production interventions undertaken during the 
programme, STAR finance cards will be made available in collaboration with leading 
financial institutions, such as CIB. The cards will provide the users with access to a 
minimum amount of credit. Cards will be made available for individual farmers as well as 
collective cards (for CDAs, NGOs and other associations), Using this card, the individual 
or groups can access credit for buying inputs at outlets that accept the cards / digital 
money. A cap will be worked out for each type of card. Digital transactions will be 
encouraged through these wallets for providing the time critical inputs from the dealers. 
In due course, STAR wallets will be promoted for digital market interventions (linking 
them with the market transactions). A rigorous campaign will be undertaken involving 
stakeholders. STAR Money (STAR Money which encompasses Mobile Wallet and 
Integrated App/Supply Chain) will be introduced during the 2nd tier of digital strategies 
(from 2023).  
As the financial needs of every farmer are different, STAR activities may help financial 
agencies leverage technology to create and get the data metrics which would add value 
to their services while at the same time advise them on curating new schemes and plans 
to engage with farmers in a better way. 
The e-finance platform can be customized to pilot financial inclusion component. At 
CPMU level, e-finance would be integrated with the STAR Digital Platform/ Dashboard. 
94 
The dashboard will give complete data related to credit profiling of the farmers, current 
loan requirement, linking them with the crop/ enterprise, finally to efficient management 
adoption. Performance indicators do include the ability of the farmers to adopt innovative 
technologies in his field (contributing to any component - resilience, water saving, 
productivity enhancement, participation in e-market and aggregation). 
The implementation steps for Digital Finance; 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The STAR digital finance strategy provides beneficiaries with the savings and 
insurance products. A comprehensive farmers data available with STAR Platform 
will be synergized with the financial data (credit requirements, profiles, 
insurance and savings etc.,). 
For this, a tender will be called for inviting financial institutions who may be 
interested in offering savings product for the poor farmers, digitally. And 
probably insurance will be introduced for both for crops and animal husbandry 
based on the need 
The winner gets the opportunity to partner with the STAR project.  
Star project will provide the capacity to the farmers and to the institutions as 
how to backstop the farmers.  And the institutions will be responsible for 
providing a platform and the product.  
The institutions will get an opportunity to work with a scale of 180000 
beneficiaries.  
This will be a pilot and based on the success the project will scale up to other 
regions as well.  
This may cost the project 0.9 million EUR. 
6.4.4. Micro enterprise development 
The sub-component will complement business development and financial services with 
the promotion of digital technology services. These digital services and applications are 
aimed at improving both the marketing and production of farming communities, while 
providing employment and business opportunities for the rural youth.  For example, 
entrepreneurs can develop mobile based and on-line ordering system for delivery of 
fresh local produce to the consumers. Similarly an ''uber'' model can be used as ride 
sharing technology to aggregate village level produce to the urban markets, or sharing 
farm technology such as tractors. Rural youth will also be involved in e-commerce 
activities particularly in door (field) delivery of the inputs, animal husbandry products, 
which at a scale this will prove to be an income generation activity. 
For small and medium scale enterprise will et digital support through project report, 
business risk, bank loan feasibility and relevant government schemes, subsidies and 
other options in the market to support such business and support their growth. 
6.5. PRODUCTION 
6.5.1. STAR Platform 
For driving the digital innovations, most critical output is building a repository / platform 
with digital content and services. The project will build a robust knowledge repository 
95 
that includes production know how, videos, prices, weather information, crop selection 
criteria, general package of practices, diagnostic information, input management, 
irrigation management, avenues for entrepreneurship development etc., 
The knowledge repository which is web based, will be accessed through various digital 
(video, smart phones, social media, WhatsApp, Television) and other non digital means 
(field schools, CDAs, Cooperatives, Field Staff). 
The digital platform development will be led by the NPCU (Digital Agriculture 
Coordinator) with the digital core tea, comprising of representatives from Ministry for 
Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) with close collaboration with the Ministry of 
Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) and with the Egyptian Financial Regulatory 
Agency. The core digital team may also comprise the project collaborators such as WFP, 
IFPRI, KEF, eFinance, DigitalGreen, civil society organizations etc., 
The knowledge and service needs of target farmers will be assessed through a series of 
group discussions and a survey. This can be led by the department of agriculture. The 
CPMU will be responsible for the developing Information Architecture, design features, 
outsourcing the software development component. The content development, validation 
and contextualization can be led by ARC. The service components of the platform such 
as credit, input supply, inventory of dealers etc., will be anchored by eFinance or KEF 
(Bashaier) or both. Digital pull and digital push services Automation of irrigation with 
digital water meters and IOT/ Sensor networks will be initiated by CPMU in collaboration 
with the concerned irrigation staff of STAR project. The essential factor is MWRI staff to 
facilitate the whole process of digital water management system. Other collaborating 
partners such as WFP, CDAs, Civil society organizations, Digital Green, private players, 
CDAs, farmers groups etc., will be involved in digital extension activities that cuts across 
the project components (production, market, irrigation, climate resilience, agri-business 
etc.,). These digital extension activities will be led by extension wing of department of 
agriculture. 
The knowledge repository platform will be build using a Content Management System by 
outsourcing. A series of content development workshops will be organized to develop 
and upload the content. This activity will be anchored by department of agriculture and 
will have all the stakeholders on board. The capacity of the stakeholder organizations will 
be built simultaneously. This will eventually develop into a Mobile App (STAR App) that 
will be hosted on Google play store.  
 At district level, uptake strategies will be deployed such as awareness generation to 
install and use the mobile app (Digital Pull). 
The videos available in knowledge repository will reach to farmers through video 
extension model involving community organizations, farmers field schools, NGOs and 
project staff.  The project expects that 10% of the total target households will directly 
receive time critical knowledge and advises on production, marketing, finance, post 
harvest, marketing, nutrition and income generation activities. 
Fortnightly video shows, sequenced based on local needs will be undertaken by Field 
Schools/CDA/NGOs. Adoption metrics will be updated on STAR Dashboard. Necessary 
capacities will be built with video extension workshops. The project staff decides the 
96 
videos to ne projected on fortnightly basis, in a participatory way. A trickle down plan 
will be developed as how to adopt the practices shown in CDA/NGO/ Field Schools. 
The SMS gate way developed by WFP can be used for pushing SMS alerts to registered 
farmers.  
Stakeholders can upload the photograph of the crop / animal husbandry/ Poultry etc., at 
critical growth stages onto the STAR Platform. Images will get categorized based on 
location, type, of quality of produce etc.,  This will also help in creating visual agriculture 
marketing strategies. 
IFPRI’s AIDA will be customized to help farmers, entrepreneurs, agri-business and policy 
makers to make decisions on crop mix. During tier 2(2023), the project will identify the 
potential digital agri-start ups through Digital Hackathon. At least three best ideas 
pitched will be nurtured and piloted in target area. 
Digital water meters will be installed in the new irrigation system to measure the 
quantity, frequency and quality of irrigation water. The data received from the digital 
water meters will get transmitted to the STAR platform (server) which will be of 
immense utility for improving the efficiency of irrigation systems.  Digital water meters 
will be set up to measure the efficiency of modern irrigation systems at tertiary canal 
level and below. Empirical evidences of irrigation efficiency, impacts will lead to data 
driven irrigation management and crop planning. The data driven irrigation management 
system is a proof of concept (POC) that could be tried from tier 2 (2023). 
The STAR Platform will have the following components; 
As far as possible the STAR platform will have comprehensive information and service 
details pertaining to the three governorates/ While the content is useful to all the 
farmers of the three governorates, specific activities are undertaken by the project to 
“PUSH” the content and services to target farmers. 
The critical component of STAR Platform is a comprehensive farmers database. Farmers 
Database ensures a complete and comprehensive data of farmers and farms, weather 
conditions, soil fertility, land use pattern, type of crop and yield data of the upcoming 
cycle and the previous crop cycle. This baseline information will help both the project 
functionaries and the potential value chain players (entrepreneurs and agri-business 
players).  
The indicative components include; 
Dashboard Services 
Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) 
Soil Health 
Farm Machinery 
Government Schemes 
Fertlizers and Seeds details 
97 
Pesticides and other inputs 
Water Management techniques 
Training Resources 
Digital Market Platform 
Agro- met advisories 
A moderated Message Board  
Digital Water Meters – dashboard 
MOOCs Platform 
Video gallery 
Agri-business Resources 
Step by Step Guide for technology Interventions 
Extension Toolkits 
Entrepreneurs Corner 
Aggregation Corner 
STAR Mobile App* 
STAR Wallet / Money details 
Links to other platforms 
RSS Feeds / News / Discussion For a 
SMS Gateway 
AIDA Tool 
*The idea behind STAR Mobile App is to provide the farmers with personalized advisory 
without much external interventions. Meaningful, actionable good agricultural practices 
will be developed in response to the market demands. The good agricultural practices for 
five most important crops / animal husbandry / Poultry/ Allied activities will be 
developed by Agricultural Research Centre, in collaboration with other stakeholders. 
These are automatically calenderized based on the individual farmers data, integrated 
with feeds like weather, market price, transport, warehouses and other parameters. 
To host the STAR platform the third party cloud services (like AWS) can be utilized. Or 
STAR can procure (which may not be cost effective) hardware servers (Content 
Management), Application Servers, Database Servers, LDAP directory services, SMS 
server with adequate back up facilities and disaster recovery mechanism for 24 X 7 
availability. 
98 
The project management can decide on this - based on the availability of cloud services 
of Government of Egypt. 
6.5.2. Video Extension 
There are evidences from the world that the open-air video presentations facilitated 
unsupervised learning; unleashed local creativity and experimentation; and built 
confidence, trust and group coherence among youth, women and farmers. To trigger the 
growth in production, post harvest and skill oriented off farm activities, a cost effective 
Video Extension approach will be deployed by the project. 
Digital Green (DG) model in India has created evidences of empowering smallholder 
farmers to lift themselves out of poverty by harnessing the power of technology and 
grassroots level partnerships. Its ‘video-enabled extension approach’, amplifies the reach 
and increases the effectiveness of existing private and public extension systems. 
Globally, Digital Green has also supported our grassroots partners to integrate our 
video-enabled approach in non-farm activities, institution building and financial inclusion 
amongst others. STAR project introduces the video extension model to the Upper Egypt 
with contextual innovations that eventually empowers the farmers, farm women and 
other key players equally. 
This approach combines low-cost technology (pico/neat projectors with low cost 
handycams) with social organizations (civil society/ farmers groups) in resource poor 
settings to disseminate information for adoption and behaviour change. The community 
– based participatory approach empowers rural communities to develop and share 
knowledge through peer-to-peer social networks. Short videos are produced by local 
community members trained by the extension functionaries supported by the project 
staff. These video shows are planned sequentially based on the need of the farmers in 
each village. Few expert videos available with the stakeholders particularly from ARC and 
Agriculture channel will be curated to suit to the video extension approach. The video 
extension approach will be anchored by the extension wing of department of agriculture, 
technically supported by the Agriculture Research Centre. At village level, the video 
shows are organized by a STAR Volunteer/ facilitator from CDA/Field School 
Representative, Cooperative member, private dealer or local youth.  
For the first two years, the video extension approach will be implemented in 
collaboration with Digital Green team. The existing platforms and resources of Digital 
Green (COCO, Analytics, Dashboard etc.,) will be utilized. To this effect an MOU or Letter 
of Agreement may be signed for two years between the STAR project and Digital Green. 
The model will directly benefit 160 villages by involving 80 video facilitators (one 
volunteer / CDA /Field School / Cooperative/ filed staff – responsible fro two villages 
each). It is expected that for 48 months, 96 video shows will be organized in each village 
directly reaching 40 farmers / farm women. For a total of 160 villages, the total number 
of videos shows will be 15,360 showcasing a minimum of 30,720 videos (few may repeat 
every season) with a direct reach of 6400 farmers/ farm women. This may trickle down 
to 12800 farmers / farm women through peer to peer sharing. The video will also be 
hosted on STAR platforms and Digital Green website simultaneously. It is proposed to 
reach out to a minimum of 80000 farmers / farmer women in the target villages over a 
period of 5 years using mobile app, social media and youtube.  
99 
The Extension wing of Department of Agriculture will be the lead organization in this 
strategy, but with equal partnership with the ARC.  The core team from these two 
organizations may chalk out the technical program and capacity building activities in 
collaboration with Digital Green. 
Identify technology and information / skill needs in the target villages,  
 
  Training in video-enabled approach (a. Video production: b. Video facilitation: c. 
Data Management: technology platform – Connect Online Connect Offline, for 
collecting, recording and analysing data 
  Supportive Supervision and Follow-up and quality assurance 
6.5.3. Social Media & WhatsApp  
A well moderated digital forum for problem Solving using WhatsApp groups and 
Facebook will be initiated.  Farmers can get their problems addressed on a real time 
basis by way of experience sharing, expert counseling, agri-business connect, nutrition 
education, domestic and finance advises.  Particularly, this will revolve around the 
contingency alerts to be sent based on climate weather changes like heat waves. 
The knowledge available on STAR Platform (production, market and irrigation 
components) will be calendarised and posted on weekly basis on social media (Facebook 
/STAR Page) and WhatsApp groups (Each Governorate having hierarchical groups 
numbering around 16 reaching 1600). From each stakeholder organization one member 
will be selected to moderate the group discussion. Specific interest groups for youth, 
women, entrepreneurs, agri-business will be encouraged. The videos available from 
STAR platforms and Digital Green will also be shared for deliberations and decision 
making among the group members.  
Relevant experiences, content and success stories identified from the social media and 
WhatsApp groups will be appropriately uploaded onto STAR Platform for future use. 
6.5.4. MOOCs 
A MOOCs platform for supporting the e-learning will be developed to help young 
professionals and other prospective entrepreneurs. The courses will be developed in 
consultation with the industry players. The MOOCs will be hosted on STAR platform. The 
courses can be accessed through smart phones as well. 
The courses will be broadly classified into two components viz., production and 
marketing. The MOOCs platform development will be undertaken by NPCU. The 
production related courses will be anchored by the Extension Division of Department of 
Agriculture and the market related courses will be anchored by the Bashaier (KEF). The 
collaborating organizations under each of these components will be associated for course 
content and development of the courses. 
6.6. Digitalization of water management 
The WUAs details and the individual pump details will be digitized and uploaded onto the 
STAR Platform. Digital water meters will be installed at strategic points in the selected 
branch canal areas to measure the quantity, frequency and quality of irrigation water. 
The data received from the digital water meters will be of immense utility for improving 
100 
the efficiency of the irrigation systems. Empirical evidences of irrigation efficiency 
impacts will lead to data driven irrigation management and crop planning. The data 
driven irrigation management system is a proof of concept (POC) that could 
subsequently be moved upstream to second order and primary canals as a second phase 
in the digitalization at midterm of the STAR implementation.  
In this second phase the automation of water supply, using wireless sensor networks, 
will help to solve problems of inconvenient irrigation schedules and enhancing the 
preparedness of future irrigation systems that will need to be more efficient. Wireless 
sensor networks can potentially pave the way for precision farming in Egypt. While this 
technology may not be scaled across the target geographies, each governorate could 
have one pilot covering the command area of 1-3 branch canals served by the same 
second order canal. 
Implementation Plan: About 50 Water User Associations will be involved in this initiative. 
All the new installations of irrigation systems (electric and pipe delivery) will be equipped 
with the digital water meters (Electromagnetic Flow meter Model ex: FM600 / 6"), IoT 
Master Control RTU, Communication Booster, Servo Stabilizer and an online UPS. The 
digital water meters will be virtually connected through tab / Smart Phones / Data 
Logging Systems with the project staff. The data will be synced with the Digital Water 
Module/ dashboard of STAR Platform (based on the need – ideally on weekly basis). The 
quantity, quality and time of operation and many other parameters of importance will be 
collected and analyzed to improve the efficiency of irrigation system in 400 installations. 
This may require around 1.3 Million EUR one-time investment and 0.7 Million EUR 
operational expenses.  
The digital water management will be clubbed with the introduction of GSM/ Smart 
Phone based automated pump starters (in tier 2 – 2023). About 100 project intervention 
sites (where project is installing electric pumps and pipe delivery systems) will be 
selected for this and automated pump starters will be installed along with a SIM card. 
GSM/ Smart Phone based controller enables the farmer to operate the motor pump set 
from anywhere anytime using his mobile or landline. This activity will bring changes in 
the way the farmers operate the irrigation motors. This system will bring efficiency in 
planning irrigation scheduling, remote access, motor running status, warning alerts in 
built real time clock for accurate timing of irrigation etc., will transform the irrigation 
management in long run. For this activity, an amount of 91 317 EUR will be allocated. 
6.7. Climate Resilience with Digital Solutions 
The projects can only focus on adaptation strategies may be short term, medium term 
and long term. The STAR Platform will have an inventory of climate resilient crops or 
varieties available. The forewarning alerts, contingency advisories, calendarized advisory 
based on sowing dates, irrigation scheduling etc., will be digitally made available on 
STAR Platform. The same will also be personalized / customized to a specific area and 
pushed through SMS Gateway. 
----------------End of PDR ----------------------------- 
101 
6.8. Digital Agriculture Framework of STAR (for PIM) 
Level 
Project 
Management  
Timeline 
Tier 1 
(2020-26) 
Tier 2 
(2023-26) 
Tier 1 
Strategies 
Tools 
 STAR Dashboard  
 Realtime Governance 
 Dynamic Collaborations 
 STAR App 
ERP Solution 
Tier 2 
 Digital Hackathon 
 The e-Granery model 
LBM 
Cloud 
for marketing. 
 STAR Money (Mobile 
Wallet – and Integrated 
App) 
 Mezzanine model with 
Mobile Service Provider 
for unique ID based 
Ecosystem – end to 
end solutions 
 (STAR Money* + 
Integrated App / 
Supply Chain). 
 Data management 
 Knowledge repository 
that includes video, 
prices, knowledge 
 Digital Push - 
Contingency alerts 
 Digital Awareness 
campaigns on issues of 
relevance 
 Participatory Video 
production and video 
curation. 
Governorate 
Tier 1 
Tier 2 
Activities 
& 
Responsible  
Outsourced work 
Defining the workflows 
Information Architecture 
Design & development 
Operationalizing 
dashboard 
Development of STAR App 
Capacity building  
Identifying the potential 
digital agri-start ups 
Piloting few digital POCs 
in project location 
With CIB – Mobile 
vouchers / cards / wallets 
– Building an ecosystem 
around 
Content 
Management 
System 
SMS Gateway 
Pico projectors 
Handy cams  
CMS development by a 
private agency 
Content development and 
uploading by stakeholders 
Capacity development 
Campaigns through Smart 
Phones, SMS, Tele Vision, 
Social Media, Stakeholder 
organizations. 
Capacity development 
workshops  
Capacity building of 
Agriculture, Irrigation, 
Social Solidarity 
departments and 
Community Organizations 
for effective digital 
process flows. Making 
them future ready 
10% of the total target 
households will receive 
time critical knowledge 
and advises on 
102 
Cluster / 
District 
Tier 1 
 Digital Pull from Direct 
STAR App 
(Apps, Touch) 
 Digital Pull from Non-
Digital (like pico 
projectors) 
 Digital Fora for problem 
Solving 
 Credit with eFinance – 
Link it to performance 
indicators 
 Advanced Decision 
Making Tools like AIDA 
Pico projectors 
Social Media 
AIDA 
Sensor 
networks 
Digital water 
meters 
Mobile App for 
Irrigation 
Management 
Automated 
Irrigation 
System 
Tier 2 
 Digital Pilots – POCs  
Digital Water 
Monitoring Strategies, 
Sensor based networks 
 Adaptation – New 
varieties – New crops – 
Adjusting the sowing 
dates – linking them to 
the irrigation 
scheduling – 
Automation 
 Crowd Sourcing of data 
and experiences on 
production, marketing, 
value chain, credit, 
capacity building 
 Digital Aggregation 
Models 
 Uberization –inputs / 
services 
 Smart Phone based 
Automation of irrigation 
Systems 
production, marketing, 
finance, post harvest, 
marketing, nutrition and 
income generation 
activities. 
Fortnightly video shows – 
sequenced based on local 
needs – by Field 
Schools/CDA/NGOs. 
Adoption metrics will be 
updated on STAR 
Dashboard. 
Moderated problem 
Solving For a, where 
farmers can get their 
problems addressed – by 
way of experience 
sharing, expert 
counseling, agri-business 
connect, nutrition 
education, domestic and 
finance advises.  
IFPRI’s AIDA will be 
customized to help 
farmers, entrepreneurs, 
agri-business and policy 
makers to make decisions 
on crop mix. 
Digital water meters will 
be set up to measure the 
efficiency of modern 
irrigation systems at 
tertiary canal level and 
below.  
Empirical evidences of 
irrigation efficiency, 
impacts 
The data driven irrigation 
management and crop 
planning 
Digital Aggregation 
models will be 
implemented to support 
emerging entrepreneurs 
to facilitate the virtual 
pooling, shared 
transportation and a 
business model. 
Individual 
Tier 1 
 Digital Pull from Direct 
(Apps, Touch) 
Pocket size 
projectors / 
The project staff decides 
the videos to ne projected 
103 
Pico / Neat 
projectors 
 Digital Pull from Non-
Digital (like pico 
projectors) 
 SMS Gateway 
 Adoption Metrics – 
Production, Market, 
Financial Inclusion 
 STAR Finance Connect 
– Linking farmers with 
the Finance Agencies 
 Farm women / Youth 
as Entrepreneurs – of 
Digital Infomediaries 
 Visual Marketing 
Interventions, Quality 
and Traceability  
Tier 2 
 Big Data Analytics for 
Hadoop 
Agricultural 
Transformation 
 Pull services – 
Integrating with data 
analytics 
on fortnightly basis, in a 
participatory way. 
A trickle down plan will be 
developed as how to 
adopt the practices shown 
in CDA/NGO/ Field 
Schools  
SMS alerts will be pushed 
through the SMS 
gateway. 
Farmers can register for 
STAR Finance Connect – 
(Mobile Wallet – Virtual 
Pooling – e vouchers – 
payments) 
Stakeholders  can upload 
the photograph of the 
crop / animal husbandry/ 
Poultry etc., at critical 
growth stages onto the 
STAR Platform. 
Images will get 
categorized based on 
location, type, of quality 
of produce etc.,   
A system would be 
developed to provide 
personalized knowledge 
and services at one go. 
Data will flow from 
individual farmers. 
Two tier Approach 
Tier 1 (2020 – 2026): What is existing – possible – low hanging fruits and quick 
& dirty – will have specific digital approach for each component 
Tier 2 (2023 -2026): Advanced Technologies – POCs – Moving into Data driven 
Ecosystem- Future ready – the boundaries of components blur  
104 
Chapter 7: Programme Cost and Financing  
Main assumptions 
1.  Introduction. This annex describes the assumptions underlying the derivation of costs, 
estimated costs and financing plan for the programme. Total programme costs are based 
on June 2019 prices. 
2.  Programme Period. The programme will be financed over a seven-year period starting 
from beginning 2020. 
3.  Inflation.  The  base  rate  of  domestic  inflation  has  been  set  at  around  8  per  cent 
throughout programme duration while international inflation is estimated at 1.7 per cent 
during the first year of implementation and reaches 1.8 percent at programme end. 
Table 1:  International Inflation (%) 
Domestic Inflation Rate 
1.7 
1.7 
1.8 
1.8 
1.8 
1.8 
1.8 
2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026 
4.  Exchange Rate. The exchange rate was fixed at 1EUR= 21.9954 EGP as per average 
market fluctuation in 2018/2019. Programme costs  are presented in both EGP and  EUR 
currency.  
5.  Physical and price contingencies. Both types of contingencies have been taken into 
account and included in the costing of programme. In particular, in the category “works” 
a 5 per cent physical contingency is considered.   
6.  Taxes and Duties. There is VAT of 14% levied on all imported and locally procured 
goods  and  services.  The Government  would  finance  the  cost  of  all taxes  on  goods  and 
services procured under the programme. Most items procured under the programme would 
be purchased locally.   
7.  Expenditure Accounts. Programme ’s expenditure accounts will be the following:  
Technical Assistance and Consultancies 
Trainings, Workshops and Meetings 
Civil Works 
i. 
ii.  Goods, Services and inputs 
iii. 
iv. 
v.  Grants and Subsidies 
vi. 
vii.  Operating costs 
Salaries and Allowances 
8.  Total cost and Financing.  Total programme cost (investment cost and incremental 
recurrent cost, including physical and price contingencies) is estimated at about EUR 246 
million, EUR 58.6 million (24% of the total cost) of which will be financed by IFAD through 
a loan and a grant. Ifad contribution will finance all programme components as follows: 
105 
EUR 21 million (9% of total cost) to finance Component 1, EUR 34.4 million (14% of total 
cost) for Component 2, and EUR 3.2 million for component 3 (1% of total cost).  
9.  The Arab Republic of Egypt (GoE) would provide EUR 14.1 million (5.7% of total cost) 
to the entire programme. Resources amounting to around EUR 2.7 million (1.1% of total 
costs) will be used to finance component 1. About EUR 9.4 million (almost 3.8% of total 
cost)  will  be  financing  component  2,  while  EUR  2  million  (0.8%  of  total  cost)  will  be 
dedicated  to  Component  3.  Contribution  from  GoE  will  mainly  finance  salaries  of 
programme staff as well as taxes of any related expense. 
10.  In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties would be financed out of the 
proceeds  of  the  IFAD  Loan/Grant,  any  future  changes  in  the  rates  and/or  structures  of 
taxes  and duties  would have to be met by the Government. The estimate of taxes  and 
duties was based on the rates prevailing at the time of the design. 
11.  The  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB)  will  co-finance  STAR  with  EUR  49.4  million 
(20% of total cost) that will be allocated mainly to the financing of infrastructures entailed 
in component 2 for  a total cost of EUR 44.4 million (18% of total cost). Another EUR 5 
million (2% of total cost) will support the financing of micro-enterprises under component 
1.  
12.  The Opec Fund for  International Development (OFID) will contribute to financing of 
infrastructure development under component 1 and 2. Contribution from OFID will amount 
to about EUR 18.2 million (7.4% of total cost). 
13.  The World Food Programme (WFP) will co-finance STAR programme with about EUR 9 
million  (3.7%  of  total  cost)  supporting  the  strengthening  of  rural  institution  and  the 
development of micro-enterprises.  
14.  Grant resources of the Financing Gap for about EUR 2.6 million (1.1% of total cost) 
will be allocated across all three components with a financing of about EUR 0.7 million to 
component 1, EUR 1.4 million to component 2 and EUR 0.4 million to component 3 (8% 
of total programme costs). 
15.  The STAR programme would also be supported by European Investment Bank (EIB) 
contributing  about  EUR  82.2  million  (33.4%  of  total  cost),  allocated  mainly  to  the  co-
financing of component 2. Contribution from beneficiaries, both in-kind and in-cash, are 
expected to amount to EUR 11.6 million (4.7% of total cost). 
16.  The foreign exchange component is estimated at EUR 38.5 million. Taxes and duties 
are estimated at EUR 10.2 million. Funds allocated to the Programme Management Unit 
are  of  EUR  5.7  million,  equal  to  2.3%  of  the  total  cost.  Tables  below  summarizes 
Programme costs and financing. Detailed cost estimates are provided in annex A and B to 
this appendix. 
106 
Table 2: Programme cost by components (EGP ‘000 / EUR ‘000) 
Table 3: Programme expenditure accounts by components (EUR ‘000) 
Table 4: Financing Plan by Components (EUR ‘000) 
107 
%% Total(EGP '000)(USD '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 254 74247 453302 19412 7372 37315 1101662. Micro enterprises development 673 20234 750707 95233 6601 73835 398514Subtotal 927 94482 2031 010 14646 3974 11050 507820B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 2 410 802158 0202 568 822120 5407 901128 4416512. Production related investments under business plans 775 743552 1651 327 90738 78727 60866 3954226Subtotal 3 186 545710 1853 896 729159 32735 509194 8361877C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 96 2537 140103 3934 8133575 170722. M&E and Knowledge Management 13 7056 61020 3156853311 01633-Subtotal 109 95813 750123 7085 4986886 185112Total BASELINE COSTS 4 224 446806 1375 030 583211 22240 307251 52916100Physical Contingencies 115 170-115 1705 759-5 759-2Price Contingencies 1 623 462337 3501 960 81310 2402 11312 353175Total PROJECT COSTS 5 963 0781 143 4887 106 566227 22142 420269 64116107Improvement of smallholdersproductivity and resilienceStrengthening RuralProductionInstitutions, EnterprisesrelatedProject Management,and MarketsInvestments ininvestmentsM&E and KMStrengtheningMicroirrigationunderProjectM&E andmarketingenterprisesinfrastructurebusinessManagementKnowledgeinstitutionsdevelopmentand managementplansUnitManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 3 68148315 1113 01617480223 267B. Goods, Services and Inputs 4403 7241 77064 291552-70 777C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 5 4562941 574992777 439D. Civil Works 3 964-124 167---128 131E. Grants and subsidies 2 41131 332-1 058--34 801Total Investment Costs 15 95335 568141 05369 9388251 079264 416II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances ----3 436-3 436B. Operating costs /c --869-920-1 789Total Recurrent Costs --869-4 356-5 225Total PROJECT COSTS 15 95335 568141 92269 9385 1811 079269 641  Taxes 1 6125203298 45921213311 265Foreign Exchange 2 4481 7988 33029 13236135242 420 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenanceLocalIFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentAfDBOFIDWFPAdaptation FundPrivate FITotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesTechnical assistance and Consultancies 7 47432.13501.5--1 6207.013 40457.6--370.23831.6--23 2678.610 17812 108982Goods, Services and inputs DA 24 84533.54170.63 7225.09 79313.23 0044.02 4113.23 2874.41 4421.925 32634.174 24627.532 24233 3638 641Grants and subsidies 16 25851.9--6892.20-2 5088.0--5 91018.95271.75 44017.431 33211.6-31 332-Training, workshops and meetings 5 14469.15397.2--1 11615.0----6418.6----7 4392.8-6 648792Civil Works_DA 7 1005.5--8 3536.56330.571 12555.517 58913.7----23 33118.2128 13147.5-127 499633Salaries and Allowances_DA 2 40570.0----73121.3------3008.7--3 4361.3-3 436-Operating costs_DA /a 50.3----1 56587.5------21912.3--1 7890.7-1 571217Total PROJECT COSTS 63 23023.41 3060.512 7644.715 4575.790 04133.420 0007.49 8743.72 8711.154 09720.1269 641100.042 420215 95611 265 _________________________________\a including maintenance 
Table 5: Financing Plan by Expenditure Accounts (EUR ‘000) 
108 
LocalIFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentAfDBOFIDWFPAdaptation FundPrivate FITotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 7 47432.13501.5--1 6207.013 40457.6--370.23831.6--23 2678.610 17812 108982B. Goods, Services and Inputs 23 78733.64170.63 7225.39 79313.83 0044.2--3 2874.61 4422.025 32635.870 77726.231 11131 0268 641C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 5 14469.15397.2--1 11615.0----6418.6----7 4392.8-6 648792D. Civil Works 7 1005.5--8 3536.56330.571 12555.517 58913.7----23 33118.2128 13147.5-127 499633E. Grants and subsidies 17 31649.8--6892.00-2 5087.22 4116.95 91017.05271.55 44015.634 80112.91 13233 669-Total Investment Costs 60 82023.01 3060.512 7644.813 1615.090 04134.120 0007.69 8743.72 3520.954 09720.5264 41698.142 420210 94911 047II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 2 40570.0----73121.3------3008.7--3 4361.3-3 436-B. Operating costs /c 50.3----1 56587.5------21912.3--1 7890.7-1 571217Total Recurrent Costs 2 41046.1----2 29543.9------5199.9--5 2251.9-5 007217Total PROJECT COSTS 63 23023.41 3060.512 7644.715 4575.790 04133.420 0007.49 8743.72 8711.154 09720.1269 641100.042 420215 95611 265 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Annex A:  Summary Cost Tables 
Table of Contents 
Table 1A:   Components Programme Cost Summary (EGP ‘000 / EUR ‘000) 
Table 2A:  Expenditure  Accounts  by  Components  –  Total  Including  Contingencies  (EUR 
‘000) 
Table 2AA: Expenditure  Accounts  by  Components  –  Total  Including  Contingencies  (EGP 
‘000) 
Table 3A:   Programme Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000)  
Table 3AA: Programme Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000)  
Table 4A:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000) 
Table 4AA: Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000) 
Table 5A:   Programme Components by Financiers (EUR ‘000) 
Table 5AA: Programme Components by Financiers (EGP ‘000)  
Table 6A:   Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (EGP ‘000) 
Table 6AA: Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (EUR ‘000)   
109 
Table 1A:  Components Programme Cost Summary (EGP ‘000 / EUR ‘000) 
110 
%% Total(EGP '000)(EUR '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 249.28443.118292.40111.3601.96513.3251562. Micro enterprises development 674.50634.818709.32430.7371.58732.324514Subtotal 923.79077.9361.001.72542.0973.55145.648820B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 2.413.348158.1132.571.461109.9757.205117.1806512. Production related investments under business plans 780.667552.7931.333.46035.57525.19160.7654127Subtotal 3.194.015710.9063.904.921145.55032.396177.9451878C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 96.4297.152103.5814.3943264.720722. M&E and Knowledge Management 13.7316.62320.35462630292833-Subtotal 110.16013.775123.9355.0206285.648112Total BASELINE COSTS 4.227.965802.6175.030.581192.66636.575229.24116100Physical Contingencies 115.298-115.2985.254-5.254-2Price Contingencies 1.623.962336.7721.960.7349.3361.92311.259175Total PROJECT COSTS 5.967.2251.139.3897.106.613207.25738.498245.75416107 
Table 2A: Expenditure Accounts by Components – Total Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000) 
111 
Improvement of smallholdersproductivity and resilienceStrengthening RuralProductionInstitutions, EnterprisesrelatedProject Management,and MarketsInvestments ininvestmentsM&E and KMStrengtheningMicroirrigationunderProjectM&E andmarketingenterprisesinfrastructurebusinessManagementKnowledgeinstitutionsdevelopmentand managementplansUnitManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 2.89544113.7772.93615973320.940B. Goods, Services and Inputs 4013.4011.61858.659504-64.583C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 4.9722541.437912536.782D. Civil Works 3.620-113.288---116.907E. Grants and subsidies 2.19428.612-966--31.772Total Investment Costs 14.08332.479128.68663.998753985240.985II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances ----3.137-3.137B. Operating costs /c --793-840-1.633Total Recurrent Costs --793-3.977-4.770Total PROJECT COSTS 14.08332.479129.47963.9984.730985245.754  Taxes 1.4144753007.74119412110.245Foreign Exchange 2.0291.6427.59626.58132932138.498 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Table 2AA:  Expenditure Accounts by Components – Total Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000) 
112 
Improvement of smallholdersproductivity and resilienceStrengthening RuralProductionInstitutions, EnterprisesrelatedProject Management,and MarketsInvestments ininvestmentsM&E and KMStrengtheningMicroirrigationunderProjectM&E andmarketingenterprisesinfrastructurebusinessManagementKnowledgeinstitutionsdevelopmentand managementplansUnitManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 75.19411.204414.64267.8463.98419.746592.617B. Goods, Services and Inputs 11.36694.70644.8981.759.15711.893-1.922.021C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 142.23159211742.2992.5015.948193.689D. Civil Works 109.439-3.452.625---3.562.065E. Grants and subsidies 64.032631.603-29.259--724.894Total Investment Costs 402.263738.1063.912.2831.898.56218.37825.6946.995.286II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances ----68.831-68.831B. Operating costs /c --24.054-18.443-42.496Total Recurrent Costs --24.054-87.274-111.327Total PROJECT COSTS 402.263738.1063.936.3371.898.562105.65225.6947.106.613  Taxes 40.68313.0798.573229.5644.4783.155299.532Foreign Exchange 54.90945.166226.968795.8097.8778.6601.139.389 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Table 3A:  Programme Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000) 
113 
Totals Including Contingencies (EGP '000)2020202120222023202420252026TotalA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 41.04569.338117.757115.19154.5814.350-402.2632. Micro enterprises development 25.546152.375168.018144.875127.25064.48455.558738.106Subtotal 66.591221.714285.774260.066181.83268.83455.5581.140.368B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 16.376116.5301.327.9261.516.931771.603186.972-3.936.3372. Production related investments under business plans 40.48783.138192.947508.276519.693399.122154.8991.898.562Subtotal 56.863199.6681.520.8732.025.2061.291.296586.094154.8995.834.899C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 32.53615.39313.29412.71812.74412.7726.195105.6522. M&E and Knowledge Management 3.5652.4622.9382.6632.7693.3057.99125.694Subtotal 36.10117.85516.23315.38115.51316.07714.185131.346Total PROJECT COSTS 159.555439.2371.822.8802.300.6541.488.641671.005224.6427.106.613 
Table 3AA:  Programme Components by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EUR ‘000) 
114 
Totals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)2020202120222023202420252026TotalA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 1.7532.6934.0983.7471.667125-14.0832. Micro enterprises development 1.1026.7167.1736.3235.7422.8922.53232.479Subtotal 2.8559.40811.27110.0707.4093.0172.53246.562B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 6944.39246.11749.34323.5715.364-129.4792. Production related investments under business plans 1.7353.4327.23917.68716.98612.3154.60363.998Subtotal 2.4297.82453.35667.03040.55717.6794.603193.477C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 1.4356836035765765762824.7302. M&E and Knowledge Management 161108127112114134229985Subtotal 1.5967917296886907105125.716Total PROJECT COSTS 6.88018.02465.35677.78748.65621.4057.646245.754 
Table 4A:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EGP ‘000) 
115 
Totals Including Contingencies (EGP '000)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 54.89446.230188.843188.73987.83211.52914.550592.617B. Goods, Services and Inputs 38.277116.347233.992505.723495.469383.874148.3391.922.021C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 27.79634.75643.78139.23035.36712.759-193.689D. Civil Works 10.26094.6981.170.9751.385.489716.888183.754-3.562.065E. Grants and subsidies 10.511129.664167.274163.624134.78063.48455.558724.894Total Investment Costs 141.738421.6941.804.8652.282.8051.470.336655.399218.4476.995.286II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 11.69710.77010.77010.17010.17010.1705.08568.831B. Operating costs /c 6.1206.7727.2447.6798.1355.4361.11042.496Total Recurrent Costs 17.81717.54218.01417.84818.30515.6066.195111.327Total PROJECT COSTS 159.555439.2371.822.8802.300.6541.488.641671.005224.6427.106.613 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Table 4AA:  Expenditure Accounts by Year – Totals Including Contingencies (EUR ’000) 
116 
Totals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Technical assistance and consultancies /a 2.3681.8836.6546.2402.80046752820.940B. Goods, Services and Inputs 1.6214.6328.59317.51816.14811.7674.30464.583C. Trainings, Woskshops and Meetings /b 1.1791.3161.5291.2861.092379-6.782D. Civil Works 4353.56940.66645.06721.8995.271-116.907E. Grants and subsidies 4655.8607.1486.9325.9722.8632.53231.772Total Investment Costs 6.06817.26064.59077.04547.91120.7487.364240.985II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 5334914914634634632323.137B. Operating costs /c 279273276279282194511.633Total Recurrent Costs 8127647677427466572824.770Total PROJECT COSTS 6.88018.02465.35677.78748.65621.4057.646245.754 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Table 5A:  Programme Components by Financiers (EUR ‘000) 
117 
(EUR '000)IFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%AmountA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 4.61932,81.1528,2--2.21015,7----5.23637,26074,32581,814.0832. Micro enterprises development 15.22246,9--6291,94751,52.2917,14.96815,3--8.41325,94811,532.479Subtotal 19.84142,61.1522,56291,42.6855,82.2914,94.96810,75.23611,29.02019,47391,646.562B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 8.7936,828-7.6185,91.6061,277.15359,621.27816,413.00310,0----129.4792. Production related investments under business plans 25.60640,0--3.3965,37.74112,12.7434,323.10636,1----1.4062,263.998Subtotal 34.39917,828-11.0145,79.3474,879.89641,344.38422,913.0036,7--1.4060,7193.477C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 2.35349,7----1.90440,2--------47410,04.7302. M&E and Knowledge Management 84786,0----13814,0----------985Subtotal 3.20056,0----2.04235,7--------4748,35.716Total PROJECT COSTS 57.44023,41.1800,511.6434,714.0745,782.18733,449.35120,118.2397,49.0203,72.6201,1245.754 
Table 5AA:  Programme Components by Financiers (EGP ’000) 
118 
(EGP '000)IFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%AmountA. Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets 1. Strengthening marketing institutions 127.87231,831.6077,9--64.30316,0----155.99838,816.3914,16.0911,5402.2632. Micro enterprises development 335.19445,4--13.8051,913.0791,850.2676,8109.01014,8--202.45427,414.2971,9738.106Subtotal 463.06640,631.6072,813.8051,277.3826,850.2674,4109.0109,6155.99813,7218.84519,220.3891,81.140.368B. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management 263.8886,7652-233.0425,946.6091,22.343.45759,5650.90916,5397.77910,1----3.936.3372. Production related investments under business plans 748.00639,4--102.8135,4229.56412,180.9754,3699.81736,9----37.3872,01.898.562Subtotal 1.011.89517,3652-335.8555,8276.1724,72.424.43241,61.350.72723,1397.7796,8--37.3870,65.834.899C. Project Management, M&E and KM 1. Project Management Unit 52.08749,3----43.15940,8--------10.4069,8105.6522. M&E and Knowledge Management 22.13286,1----3.56213,9----------25.694Subtotal 74.21956,5----46.72135,6--------10.4067,9131.346Total PROJECT COSTS 1.549.18021,832.2600,5349.6604,9400.2755,62.474.69934,81.459.73620,5553.7777,8218.8453,168.1821,07.106.613 
Table 6A:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (EGP ‘000) 
119 
(EGP '000)IFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Technical assistance and Consultancies 165.95428,08.2301,4--38.5686,5370.64762,5----9520,28.2661,4592.6178,3Goods, Services and inputs DA 676.01133,510.8370,5102.8135,1262.07513,080.9754,0699.81734,764.0323,283.5404,135.2131,72.015.31228,4Grants and subsidies 325.79851,6--13.8052,20-50.2678,0109.01017,3--118.42718,814.2972,3631.6038,9Training, workshops and meetings 135.06569,713.1936,8--29.50415,2------15.9278,2--193.6892,7Civil Works_DA 198.0865,6--233.0426,517.4740,51.972.81055,4650.90918,3489.74513,7----3.562.06550,1Salaries and Allowances_DA 48.16670,0----14.65321,3--------6.0128,768.8311,0Operating costs_DA /a 1000,2----38.00289,4--------4.39510,342.4960,6Total PROJECT COSTS 1.549.18021,832.2600,5349.6604,9400.2755,62.474.69934,81.459.73620,5553.7777,8218.8453,168.1821,07.106.613100,0 
Table 6AA:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (EUR ‘000) 
120 
(EUR '000)LocalIFAD loanIFAD grantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentEIBAfDBOFIDWFPFinancing GapTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesTechnical assistance and Consultancies 6.55231,33211,5--1.4446,912.24058,5----330,23501,720.9408,59.07811.001861Goods, Services and inputs DA 22.67133,53800,63.3965,08.93713,22.7434,023.10634,12.1943,23.0024,41.3141,967.74327,629.41930.4397.885Grants and subsidies 14.84651,9--6292,20-2.2918,04.96817,4--5.39718,94811,728.61211,6-28.612-Training, workshops and meetings 4.69669,24787,1--1.01915,0------5888,7--6.7822,8-6.059723Civil Works_DA 6.4755,5--7.6186,55780,564.91355,521.27818,216.04513,7----116.90747,6-116.329578Salaries and Allowances_DA 2.19570,0----66821,3--------2748,73.1371,3-3.137-Operating costs_DA /a 50,3----1.42887,5--------20012,31.6330,7-1.435199Total PROJECT COSTS 57.44023,41.1800,511.6434,714.0745,782.18733,449.35120,118.2397,49.0203,72.6201,1245.754100,038.498197.01110.245 
Annex B:  Detailed Cost Tables 
Table of Contents 
Table 1B:  Strengthening marketing institutions (EUR ‘000) 
Table 2B:   Microenterprise development (EUR ‘000) 
Table 3B:   Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management (EUR ‘000) 
Table 4B:  Production related investments under business plans (EUR ‘000) 
Table 5B:   Programme management (EUR ‘000) 
Table 6B:   M&E and knowledge management (EUR ‘000) 
122 
Table 1B: Strengthening marketing institutions (EUR ‘000) 
123 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 1.1. Strengthening marketing institutions Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Studies and traninig material developed by service providers Service provider for preparation of training material /a lumpsum29------29Community mobilization, awareness package, training material preparation and guidelines /b lumpsum69-36----105Istitutional need assessment /c no. of studies3------34.57014------14Market studies /d no. of studies3-3----64.57014-14----28Agribusiness landscape and opportunities /e no. of studies3-3----64.57014-14----28Quantitative assessment on access to finance, demand and supply no. of studies1------17.3107------7Analysis of climate risks local VC40------401.83074------74Subtotal 221-64----285B. Sensitisation and mobilisation for CDAs, cooperatives, women groups and MAs Training of trainers /f training sessions3444---154.57014191919---71Communication and mobilisation campaign /g lumpsum141477---42Community mobilisation meetings and training roll-out /h no of meetings/trainings18247048---1604568113323---76Community mobilisation meetings for women no of meetings/trainings25------2591023------23Sensitisation events and exposure meetings /i no. of visits23688--272.74068172324--78Targeting and gender Training of Gender and Social Inclusion experts / Social Focal Points at CDAs people100-100----200273-3----6Development of training material for TOT trainings on targeting and gender /j lumpsum3------3Exchange for Women's groups /k no. of people-60-60-60-18055-3-4-4-11Women's leader participate to exibition ( agri-food product ) no. of people-25-25-25-7555-1-1-2-4Gender / targeting / Nutrition mainstreaming training for Gender and Social Developemnt expert at Governorate level no. of people3-3----6370-0----0Leadership training for Women in VSC&L Groups no. of people500-500----1.0003719-19----38Finance Literacy Training /l no. of people2.000-2.000----4.0003775-77----152Women enterprise development trainings ( 10 per villages) /m no. of people1.0001.000-----2.000373738-----75Institutional support to partner CDAs and Ag coops (office refurbishment, and equipment) no.18247048---1602.2804156167116---380Support registration costs for new businesses lumpsum0,050,050,40,40,050,05-191.31955383955-96Other specialized training lumpsum12234142---117Subtotal 2581794222752910-1.173C. Market related investments under the business plans Certification costs /n lumpsum-210102--2410.960-2613013327--316Participation to Expos, trade fairs and other fora lumpsum-64656668--263Post-harvest specialized technical assistance lumpsum262710911156--328Financing of post-harvest equipment /o no. of business plan1501501.0001.000---2.300910138140950967---2.194Market structures and outlets no. of structures-222---618.260-474848---143Collection centres /p no. of centres-21282--2418.260-4728619449--576(Cold) storage facilities /q no. of facilities-26106--2491.320-2347141.212740--2.901Subtotal 1645842.3022.731941--6.721D. Demonstration plots Nutrition Demo Plot ( Roof-Garden) established at cluster level no. of demos1010-----209101011-----21Home ( roof top) garden demonstrations no. of demos1010-----2045655-----11Subtotal 1616-----32E. Capacity development of rural institution Capacity building on climate change issues lumpsum210------210F. Digital agriculture setup Development of Digital market Platform and Customization of Bashaier of KEF lumpsum10236152----516Digital Finance STAR Wallet and Mobile Money - Platform Integration lumpsum10236152----516Visual agriculture marketing Module, Uber Model and Aggregation lumpsum19358238----615Mobile Interface of Digital Market Platform lumpsum--109----109Content development and inventory on digital agriculture /r no. of trainings/ meetings303030303010-1609.132315320326332338115-1.745Business Meetings, Hackathon for Digital market Solutions, Handholding /s meetings-12----39.130-1122----32Implementation of Digital Solutions at village level no.1040404040--1707.30584342348354360--1.487MOOCs platform lumpsum105------105Certified courses for operationalising capacity building on digital technology no30303010---1004.56615716016355---536Subtotal 8851.9131.310741698115-5.662Total 1.7532.6934.0983.7471.667125-14.083 _________________________________\a Responsible also for the training of trainier\b Done by the service provider; related to community mobilisation, development of rural institutions, business plan development; including farming as a business and crop budget module, marketing modules, business modules, financial management modules;     revisi\c One per governorate\d One per governorate\e One per governorate\f Training workshop 30 members per w/s, SP trains Yps, and CDTs.\g Per cluster; carried out by the mobilisers in CDTs, CDT and Yps based on awareness package developed by the service provider\h Per village; roll out carried out by the CDAs and Yps and CDTs\i 20 women per village; this will also include buyers orientation workshops\j this includes guidance on Wealth ranking Exercise\k Learning village to village on diferent topics: agriculture/off-farm enterprise\l 20 women per village\m 10 people per village\n per cluster\o Machinery and equipment\p Estimated one collection centre per cluster\q One per cluster\r Including campaigns, publicity, group discussions\s Mentoring 3 pilot projects 
Table 2B: Microenterprises development (EUR ‘000) 
124 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 1.2. Micro enterprises development Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Studies Gender / nutrition sensitive Value Chain analysis as part of VC / Market analysis no. of studies1------14.5705------5Gender Impact Assessment /a no. of studies1-1--1-34.5705-5--6-16Poverty Impact Assessment /b no. of studies1-1--1-34.5705-5--6-16Subtotal 16-11--11-38B. Demonstrations Small income generation activity by women (innovative businesses) /c no.4510515060---36054828679840---233Collective youth enterprises (processing and agro-residue based enterprises) /d no.614208---4822.830157374543221---1.296Individual youth loans through youth groups (innovative  technology adoption) /e no.15355020---1201.14020476828---162Collective VC enterprises through MAs, CDAs Etc (energy saving technolgy etc) /f no.37104---2445.660157374543221---1.296Support to individual farmers in the MAs (innovative production technologies, climate resistant varieties etc) /g no.80185265110---6405485011917373---415Subtotal 4139801.425583---3.401C. Financial support for MSME Credit line for small income generation by women lumpsum1422.8402.8402.8402.8401.4201.27814.202Credit line for collective youth enterprises lumpsum244764764764762382142.381Credit line for individual youth loans through youth groups lumpsum1032.0702.0702.0702.0701.03593110.349Credit line for collective VC enterprises through MAs, CDAs Etc lumpsum122402402402401201081.199Entrepreunership and financing specialist pers.year333333-184.570161616171717-99Training in business management to beneficiaries lumpsum25------25Study on opportunities for microinsurance lumpsum73------73Assessment and mapping of the demand for credit lumpsum73------73International technical assistance on rural finance issues /h lumpsum157------157Subtotal 6275.6425.6425.6435.6432.8302.53228.559D. Support to innovations for climate adaptation Development of innovative climate-resilient micro-enterprises no. of grants102020202010-1004.570469495979950-481Total 1.1026.7167.1736.3235.7422.8922.53232.479 _________________________________\a At start, mid-term and completion\b At start, mid-term and completion\c 15 demos per cluster identified\d 2 demos per cluster identified\e 5 demos per cluster identified\f 1 demo per cluster identified\g 15 demos per cluster identified\h expertise on insurance, credit guarantee, secured transactions 
Table 3B: Investments in irrigations infrastructure and management (EUR ‘000) 
125 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 2.1. Investments in irrigation infrastructure and management Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Technology demonstration Irrigation rehabilitation (use of modern technology) /a no307010040---2402.28072172250102---596B. Irrigation related investments under the business plans Irrigation rehabilitation no of HH1501.2509.75011.1005.7502.000-30.0002.2803623.06924.35928.23114.8875.271-76.181Development of Water User Associations /b no.5050909040--3204.500227231423430195--1.505Rehabilitation of branch canals no. of branches--10104--241.369.761--15.01015.2806.222--36.511Branch canal design no of branches--10104--24241.080--2.5162.5611.043--6.120Branch canal construction and supervision no of branches--10104--24241.080--2.5162.5611.043--6.120Subtotal 5893.30044.82349.06323.3905.271-126.437C. Digital solutions to water management Digital water DashBoard, server and software lumpsum31------31Digital water meters /c no. of units-200200----4003.200-748761----1.510Irrigation automation with Smart Phone based automated Pump Starters /d no. of units--100----100910--108----108Workshops, meetings, group discussions /e no. of meetings666666-3691111111-4Subtotal 32749870111-1.653Total Investment Costs 6944.22145.94349.16623.3915.272-128.686II. Recurrent Costs A. Operational expenses Implementing digital strategies for water management lumpsum-4040404020-1803.650-17117417718092-793Total Recurrent Costs -17117417718092-793Total 6944.39246.11749.34323.5715.364-129.479 _________________________________\a 10 demos per cluster identified\b This involves, mobilisation, training, capacity building and institutional development support to WUAs\c Electromagnetic flow meter model ex: FM600 / 6"), IoT master control RTU, communication booster, servo Stabilizer and an online UPS\d Electromagnetic flow meter model ex: FM600 / 6"), IoT master control RTU, communication booster, servo Stabilizer and an online UPS\e Two for each governorate 
Table 4B: Production related investments under business plans (EUR ‘000)  
126 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 2.2. Production related investments under business plans Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Demonstrations Establishment of demonstration plot for climate resilience businesses no. of demo plots2525-----5010.960315320-----635B. Production related investments Credit line for collective youth enterprises ( direct agricultural production and marketing related) no.-101520201068145.660-5258011.0861.1065633444.425Credit line for individual youth loans through youth groups ( direct agricultural production and marketing related) no.-5001.5004.5004.0003.00050014.0001.140-6551.9996.1035.5234.21771519.213Credit line for collective VC enterprises through MAs, CDAs Etc( direct agricultural production and marketing related) no.-2466632768.490-1573204894985072582.229Credit line for support to individual farmers in the MAs no.-2.0006.00020.00020.00014.0006.12768.127365-8392.5618.6858.8416.3002.80730.033Production related training and capacity building lumpsum131354552814-179Establishment of water efficient irrigation at plot level no. of feddan150150250250---800910157160271276---863Contribution to credit guarantee funds lumpsum--0,50,250,25--1913.174--476243247--966Subtotal 1702.3506.48316.93716.24311.6014.12457.907C. Digital solutions to support production Digital Platform development (STAR Platform), Dashboard, Databases, Design, Development, Hosting lumpsum1791801801801801801801.261Data logging systems for Project Staff and the Collaborators (Tabs) lumpsum0------0Video extension strategy, digital green model lumpsum2992992992992992992992.092STAR integrated app development design development and content development lumpsum315------315SMS Gateway - Customising the Existing gateway of WFP or development afresh lumpsum31------31Overall implementation of digital strategies in production component no. of meetings161616161616-969.131168171174177180183-1.053MOOCs platform development and course development execution. Input dealer certified training lumpsum5253-----106Social media and whatsapp components - Content development and network graph theory implementation lumpsum474849505152-296AIDA tool customization and implementation lumpsum52------52Digital hackathon for pitching 3 ideas - POC to pilot and handholding lumpsum-112211---43Input dealer certified courses - private extension model - linking it to input supply - extension performance /a lumpsum--151515--451.826--333334--100Development of digital tools for early warning outreach lumpsum105------105Subtotal 1.2507627567507447144795.456Total 1.7353.4327.23917.68716.98612.3154.60363.998 _________________________________\a Piloted in 5 locations in each governorate every year 
Table 5B: Project management (EUR ‘000) 
127 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 3.1. Project Management Summary DivisionsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. Office supplies MIS System & Istallation no.1------136.53042------42STAR specific accounting software /a no.1------19.13010------10Vehicles vehicle10------1018.260210------210Laptops no.30------3036513------13Printers no.5------54573------3Photocopier No2------29102------2Fax / telephone No10------10911------1Tabs with open data kits no.400------400274126------126Handicam and video production equipments no.160------16036567------67Pico projectors / neat projectors no.80------8027325------25Other office equipment sets30------301375------5Subtotal 504------504B. Meetings and workshops Project startup lumpsum1------113.70016------16Financial management training workshops /b lumpsum111111-68.22091010101010-59Subtotal 251010101010-75C. Advisory services Digital technology advisor /c Lumpsum11-----268.4907980-----159D. Policy dialogue Policy dialogue platforms lumpsum1------113.70016------16Total Investment Costs 6239010101010-753II. Recurrent Costs A. National Programme Coordination Unit - NPCU National programme manager person.month6121212121267291051111111111566STAR programme technical specialist person.month612121212126722.28014272727272714164Adaptation Fund Programme management lumpsum274------274M&E and KM manager person.month612121212126721.64010202020202010118M&E and KM specialist person.month122424242424121441.28015313131313115184M&E and ICT specialist person.month612121212126721.28081515151515892Gender and social development manager person.month612121212126721.460918181818189105Digital agriculture specialist person.month121212----362.280272727----82Financial manager person.month612121212126722.01012242424242412145Financial coordinator person.month612121212126721.460918181818189105Procurement manager person.month612121212126721.83011222222222211132Procurement coordinator person.month612121212126721.37081616161616899Accountant person.month612121212126721.83011222222222211132Accountant assistant person.month612121212126721.10071313131313779Human resources and administrative manager person.month612121212126721.64010202020202010118Human resources and administrative assistant person.month6121212121267291051111111111566Office assistant person.month61212121212672731499999453Office clerk person.month61212121212672183122222113Driver person.month61212121212672365244444226Subtotal 4433103102832832831412.052B. Governorate Programme Coordination Unit - GPCU Governorate Programme Coordinator person.month1836363636361821645781616161616899Deputy manager person.month1836363636361821691016333333333316197Agronomist person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Gender and social development experts person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Business development, marketing and M&E person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Digital agriculture specialist person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Digital agriculture facilitators / volounteers person.month3672727272723643291377777339Infrastructure Engineer specialist person.month1836363636361821641171515151515789Accountant person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Social and community mobilization specialist person.month1836363636361821632061212121212669Young professionals person.month90180180180180180901.08022821414141414121246Subtotal 90181181181181181901.084C. Operating costs Car fuel and maintenance lumpsum510101010105604.57026525252525226313Office supplies lumpsum0,5111110,562.280133333116Office operating costs lumpsum0,5111110,5638.35022444444444422262Travel allowances lumpsum0,5111110,562.740133333116Annual maintenance of softwares lumpsum-11111-5910-11111-5Adaptation Fund agency fees lumpsum228------228Subtotal 27910210210210210251840Total Recurrent Costs 8125935935665665662823.977Total 1.4356836035765765762824.730 _________________________________\a Access to 5 users\b Attended by 6 project staff and 1 IFAD employee /consultant - in Cairo\c International consultant 
Table 6B: M&E and knowledge management (EUR ‘000) 
128 
Egypt Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt [STAR] Table 3.2. M&E and Knowledge Management Summary DivisionsDetailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)Unit2020202120222023202420252026Total(EUR)2020202120222023202420252026Total I. Investment Costs A. M&E studies and activities Baseline survey lumpsum1------191.320105------105Completion survey lumpsum------1191.320------115115Annual Outcome surveys lumpsum-11111-522.830-2727282829-138Annual M&E and planning workshop lumpsum-11111-59.130-1111111111-55Knowledge management activities lumpsum-11111-518.260-2122222323-111M&E data collection activities lumpsum111111-64.570555666-33Technical assistance lumpsum1-1--1-313.70016-16--17-49Website and social media lumpsum111111-62.740333333-20Impact assessment study------1191.320------115115Communication and KM products on success stories lumpsum333333-189.130313233333434-197Audit audit-11111-57.850-99101010-48Total 161108127112114134229985 
Chapter 8: Financial Management 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt 
(STAR) 
Version date: July 2019 
Financial Management section of PIM 
Contents 
Glossary of terms ..................................................................................................... 131 
1.introduction .......................................................................................................... 131 
2. Flow of funds ....................................................................................................... 132 
3.project cycle and financial management activities .................................................. 136 
4.pre-implementation activities ................................................................................ 137 
5.ifad anticorruption policy ...................................................................................... 138 
6.fm organisational structure, roles and responsibilities ........................................... 139 
7. Planning and budgeting........................................................................................ 139 
8. Internal controls .................................................................................................. 140 
9. Accounting........................................................................................................... 144 
10. Cash flow forecasting ......................................................................................... 148 
11. Disbursements ................................................................................................... 148 
12. Processing of payments...................................................................................... 152 
13. Financial reporting ............................................................................................. 165 
14. Audit matters ..................................................................................................... 169 
15. Records management ......................................................................................... 172 
16. Fixed asset management .................................................................................... 173 
17. Ifad financial management support .................................................................... 174 
18. Project completion and closure ........................................................................... 175 
19. Ifad financing agreements – amendments and budget reallocations .................... 176 
20. Management of implementing partners – financial management considerations... 177 
21. Useful links ........................................................................................................ 178 
22. Annexures ......................................................................................................... 179 
22.1 AWPB STRUCTURE AND PREPARATION CHECKLIST ................................................................ 179 
22.2 INFORMATION CHECKLIST – PREPARING FOR IFAD MISSIONS .................................................... 183 
22.3 TERMS OF REFERENCE: FINANCIAL MANAGER ..................................................................... 185 
22.4 TERMS OF REFERENCE: NPCU SENIOR ACCOUNTANT .............................................................. 188 
22.5 TERMS OF REFERENCE: NPCU ACCOUNTANT ....................................................................... 189 
22.8 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION FOR WITHDRAWAL APPLICATIONS ............................................... 192 
22.9 TERMS OF REFERENCE: EXTERNAL AUDITOR ...................................................................... 193 
22.11 ILLUSTRATIVE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS .......................................................................... 197 
22.12 APPENDIX 1 ....................................................................................................... 220 
22.13 PETTY CASH FORMS ............................................................................................... 223 
22.14 VEHICLE AND FUEL DOCUMENTS ................................................................................. 226 
129 
22.15 IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS – SUBSIDIARY AGREEMENTS / MOUS ............................................... 227 
22.16 MONTHLY REPORTING TEMPLATE – IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES .................................................. 230 
22.17 REQUEST FOR FUNDS FORM ...................................................................................... 231 
22.19 ACCOUNTING SOFTWARE TOR .................................................................................... 232 
22.20 RURAL FINANCE – LOAN APPROVAL PROCESSES ................................................................. 237 
130 
Glossary of terms 
Term 
AdB 
AF 
AfDB 
Borrower 
NPCU 
DSA 
EGP 
FM 
GoE 
GCF 
IAs 
ICP 
IFAD 
Intermediaries 
IPSAS Cash 
GPCU 
MALR 
MoIIC 
MoF 
MoP 
MWRI 
TSA 
Participating bank 
PIM 
Project 
SOE 
TOR 
WA 
WFP 
1.Introduction 
Description 
African Development Bank 
Adaptation Fund 
African Development Bank 
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt (via MoIIC as 
signatory on financing agreement) 
National Programme Coordinating Unit 
Daily Subsistence Allowance 
Egyptian Pound 
Financial Management 
Government of Arab Republic of Egypt 
Green Climate Fund 
Implementing Agencies  
IFAD Client Portal 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Not-for-profit organisations, Micro-finance institutions, 
Participating Banks, Cooperatives 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards - Financial 
Reporting Under the Cash Basis of Accounting 
Governorate Programme Coordinating Unit 
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation 
Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation  
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Planning 
Ministry of Water and Irrigation 
Treasury Single Account 
Commercial banks in partnership with CIB 
Project Implementation Manual 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper 
Egypt (STAR) 
Statement of Expenditure 
Terms of reference 
Withdrawal Application 
World Food Programme 
The Project is jointly implemented by the NPCU and implementing partners in line with the 
terms  and  conditions  of  the  financing  agreement  signed  between  the  GoE  (MoIIC  as 
Borrower)  and  IFAD.  The  NPCU  and  implementing  partners  have  the  responsibility  to 
implement  sound  financial  management  practices.  This  financial  manual  outlines  the 
financial management processes and procedures to be implemented by the Project. 
Refer to section xxx of the PIM for an overview of the implementation arrangements. 
In terms  of financial management  arrangement,  this  document  focusses  largely  on the 
financial management arrangements  of the NPCU and GPCUs. Specific  requirements for 
other implementing partners are specified as  applicable in line with the following broad 
principles: 
  The  NPCU  has  full  oversight  over  activities,  transactions  of  MWRI  as  implementing 
partners of subcomponent 2.1. 
131 
  The NPCU has limited oversight over activities of MSMEDA /ADP (rural finance partners) 
and will place reliance on their respective financial management structures. NPCU plays 
coordination role in terms of financial reporting / auditing. 
Project summary 
Project name 
Financiers, 
contributors, 
facilities 
Project effective date 
Implementation 
period 
Project completion 
date 
Project closure date 
Project area 
THE PROJECT 
IFAD Loan (# xxxx) = $ 
IFAD Grant (#xxxx) = $ 
AF Grant (#xxxx) = $ 
GCF Grant (#xxx) = $ 
OFID Grant (#xxx) = $ 
AdB Loan (#xxx) = $ 
WFP Loan (#xxx) = $ 
GoE = $ 
Beneficiaries = $ 
Minya, Aysut, Sohag (governorates in Upper Egypt) 
Reference material 
This document should be read together with the: 
  Project financing agreements entered into between the Borrower and financiers 
(including Letter to the Borrower etc.) 
  Subsidiary agreements with implementing partners 
  IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing 
  IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook 
  IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-funded Projects 
  List other financiers’ documents as applicable 
Updates and changes to financial management arrangements 
STAR  is  an  IFAD-funded  Project,  therefore,  in  line  with  IFAD’s  efforts  to 
capacitate  and  support  Projects,  this  section  was  developed  during  the 
Project  design  process.  It  is  envisaged  that  ongoing  improvements  and 
updates to financial management arrangements be updated in this section 
of the PIM under supervision of the Financial Manager and subject to IFAD 
no objection. 
2. Flow of funds 
A flow of funds arrangement has been designed for the NPCU, MSMEDA and ADP 
separately as outlined below: 
2.1 NPCU 
The flow of funds for NPCU is depicted below:  
132 
  Funds (including IFAD Loan, IFAD Grant, AF, OFID and GCF) will be transferred from 
IFAD to the Ministry of Finance Treasury Single Account (TSA). Funds disbursed to the 
TSA is managed on a ring-fenced basis using unique codes for each source of finance. 
Payments from the TSA on behalf of the Project is made by a dedicated MoF accounting 
unit, based within MALR, using the Government Payment System. Payments are made 
electronically to suppliers of goods and services. Payments via the Government Payment 
System are subject to approval by authorised signatories from the MALR and MoF.  
  Government contributions will be disbursed from the National Investment Bank on behalf 
of the Government into the Ministry of Finance Treasury Single Account and ring-fenced 
for the project using a unique TSA code. Disbursement is subject to written request from 
the MALR to the Ministry of Planning and in line with pre-approved expense categories. 
  Payments for Project expenses from the MoF Special Accounting Unit is made via the 
Government Payment System (GPS) which allows for electronic payments. 
o  The approved Project budget is registered in the GPS 
o  Payments are allowed subject to available funds in the special accounting unit – 
ring-fenced for the Project 
o  Payments are created using the Project unique identified code, indicating the 
applicable budget category 
o  Payments are approved by MALR authorised signatory and MoF authorised 
signatory (using tokens to log into the GPS) 
o  Payments are made to suppliers of goods and services 
  MWRI receive advances from NPCU (via TSA) for implementation of subcomponent 2.1 
activities. 
  Beneficiary contributions for purchase of equipment paid directly to approved suppliers 
and matched with rural finance facilities as applicable. 
133 
                     Loans to beneficiaries Refer detailed diagrams for each Rural Finance Implementer IFAD Loan IFAD Grant AF Grant GCF Grant Source of Finance Government of Egypt via Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation Borrower Government Suppliers MWRI Direct pmt to suppliers  MoF - Treasury Single Bank Account Gov contribution transferred from National Investment Bank OFID Grant Civil works contractors Providers – mobilisation activities Activities related to subcomponent 2.1. Advances provided by NPCU. Taxes Beneficiaries Contribution towards purchase price of machinery / equipment Electronic payments via Government Payment System – processed via accounting units based at central and governorate levels Project staff Payments to staff include salaries, wages, incentives, travel advances. Travel advances recorded as staff loans in GPS until cleared. AfDB WFP AfDB and WFP flow of funds managed separately from IFAD funds. Included here for completeness MSMEDA  CIB  
Overview of the Treasury Single Account system (TSA) 
The MoF has a unified structure of government bank accounts via a treasury single account system. 
All government expenditure is managed via the TSA with oversight from the Ministry of Finance 
(MoF).  
  The MoF has accounting units in all ministries and at all levels of government which use the 
Government Payment System to make electronic payments to suppliers of goods and services. 
  The TSA ledger chart of accounts for the Project is aligned with the cost categories 
and sources of finance as outlined in the Financing Agreement. 
  Payments are allowed for processing subject to 1) available unutilised budget in the relevant 
category budget code, 2) available cash resources within the TSA bank account. 
  Processed payments are recorded against the unique Project code / cost category and source of 
finance which allows for reconciliation with the Project accounting records. 
2.2 MSMEDA 
134 
                      IFAD Loan IFAD Loan - Designated account USD  (Central Bank of Egypt)  Source of Finance Local currency accounts (EGP) Bank  Beneficiaries (CDAs, WUAs) Flow of funds – MSMEDA Purchase of agricultural inputs – seeds, equipment etc. NGO  NGO  On-lending to intermediaries  
  A portion of the IFAD Loan will be utilised for the provision of credit lines via 
implementing partners MSMEDA and ADP. For this purpose, funds will be disbursed to 
EUR designated accounts, opened at bank(s) suitable to the Borrower. From the 
respective designated accounts, MSMEDA and ADP will disburse to participating banks / 
intermediaries for the purposes of providing loan to beneficiaries. All transfers from the 
designated account are subject to 2 authorised signatories as outlined in the subsidiary 
agreements. IFAD loan disbursement to the designated account is subject to submission 
of withdrawal applications from MSMEDA 
  MSMEDA approves wholesale lending facilities to intermediaries such as commercial 
banks, NGOs (depending on the type of loan, commercial banks can on-lend to NGOs) 
  Approved loans to intermediaries are disbursed directly from the IFAD Designated 
account (EUR)  
  The Designated account (EUR) has 4 authorised signatories (including Head of the 
Financial Sector, Assistant General Managers) 
  Loans to intermediaries are disbursed in tranches 
o  First tranche is disbursed subject to list of prospective beneficiaries for 
agricultural loans being submitted to MSMEDA 
o  Thereafter each consecutive tranche is disbursed when at least 50% of the most 
recent tranche is disbursed and 100% of all other tranches (supported by evidence 
of loans provided) 
 
Intermediaries use internal credit policies and procedures to approve and disburse loans to 
beneficiaries 
Refer to 22.20 for overview of MSMEDA intermediary loan approval process. 
2.3 ADP 
135 
                       ** Intermediaries include NGOs, MFIs, CDAs, WUAs who obtain loans from the participating bank on behalf of a group of beneficiaries. IFAD Loan IFAD Loan – Tranches account - USD  Source of Finance $ CIB bank accounts EGP/$ Local currency accounts (EGP) CIB Head Office Cairo IFAD Loan – Disbursement account - EGP  Community level Participating banks - branches Beneficiary - individual Intermediaries** Beneficiary Companies Flow of funds – Agricultural Development Programme Funds disbursed directly to CIB as the ADP fund manager  Purchase of agricultural inputs – seeds, equipment etc. Loan applicants Investment of funds on short-term /long term basis with sufficient funds on deposit for short-term cash needs  
  Funds allocated to ADP in terms of the IFAD financing agreement is disbursed directly to 
CIB as fund manager 
  ADP is responsible for preparation of withdrawal applications with input from CIB 
  The ADP Executive Director and Project Director are responsible for releasing the 
 
withdrawal application on ICP 
IFAD disburses funds to a EUR designated account opened with CIB - ”Tranches 
account” 
  MALR gives instructions to CIB to transfer from Tranches account to Disbursement 
account   
  CIB transfers funds from the EUR account to various investment accounts as part of fund 
investment activities   
  Once the ADP Board of Trustees approve beneficiary loans (see ADP loan approval 
process), funds are disbursed to the participating bank. 
  The participating bank has up 15 days to disburse funds to end-users which are either 
individuals, companies or intermediaries 
  Funds disbursed to intermediaries are disbursed from this central point to end 
beneficiaries. 
Refer to 22.20 for overview of ADP beneficiary loan approval process. 
3.Project cycle and financial management activities 
The Financial Manager of the NPCU will have final responsibility for the execution of the 
financial management activities at each stage of the Project cycle as outlined below: 
The Projectt-up
Implementation
Project closure 
and completion
FM activities at each stage of the Project cycle 
Project closure and 
completion 
 
IFAD Specific 
completion and 
closure procedures  
  Final audit  
  Asset and inventory 
handover 
  Budget wrap up 
Start-up 
Implementation 
  Staff NPCU and GPCUs 
 
Implement accounting 
software module in 
NPCU accounting 
software 
  Prepare first annual 
work plan and budget  
  Open bank accounts 
(as applicable) / 
ensure integration of 
Project with TSA in 
collaboration with MoF 
  Project start-up 
training  
  Ongoing 
improvements to the 
PIM 
  Budgeting  
  Accounting  
  Disbursements and 
withdrawals 
  Record keeping  
 
Internal controls  
  Cashflow forecasting 
  Auditing  
  On-going training 
 
Implement 
performance 
evaluation5 
 
5 Develop (in consultation with the Project Director) a performance 
evaluation process for FM staff within 1 year of Project commencement and 
136 
  Financial reporting  
IFAD ongoing support 
NB: The NPCU Financial Manager will have the final responsibility to prepare consolidated 
financial reports for submission to IFAD. Refer to 13. for more detail. 
4.Pre-implementation activities 
During the start-up of the Project it is recommended that Project, MSMEDA 
and  ADP  undertake  the 
following  activities.  These  activities  are 
recommended  to  ensure  that  Project  staff  are  well  informed  and 
knowledgeable  with  regards  to  the  financial  management  aspects  of  the 
Project once implementation commences: 
Activity 
Financial 
management 
staff 
appointment 
Accounting 
software  
Overview 
  Appoint Project staff to NPCU and GPCUs. Refer to 5. for the 
proposed organogram. 
  NPCU/GPCUs implement integrated accounting software with 
dedicated module for the Project (other IFAD Projects managed 
by NPCU to have dedicated modules for ring-fenced accounting 
of each Project). ToR for procurement of accounting software is 
outlined in 22.19. 
  NPCU incorporate correct chart of accounts in accounting 
software (categories and components) in line with the detail in 
Annexure 2 of the Financing agreement with IFAD. 
  NPCU upload the Cost Table (Annexure 2 of the Financing 
Agreement) to the accounting software for the purposes of 
budgeting / monitoring. 
  MSMEDA / CIB – create ring-fenced module for THE PROJECT 
within existing accounting systems / databases / management 
information systems used. 
Inclusion of 
Project in TSA 
  The NPCU Financial Manager and MoF will be responsible to 
ensure that the Project is included in the TSA ledger in line with 
IFAD requirements. 
Preparation of 
first annual work 
plan and budget 
  The NPCU Financial Manager will be responsible for the 
compilation of the first Annual Workplan and Budget, as 
directed by the Project Director, subject to IFAD no-objection. 
This budget will be a consolidation of the budgets obtained from 
MSMEDA, ADP (CIB) and MWRI following the process as 
outlined in 7. 
Staff training and 
capacity building 
  Newly appointed NPCU financial management staff will be 
required to complete the IFAD FM e-learning (available in 
Arabic) and submit completion certificates to IFAD within 1 
month of date of appointment. Refer 21. for link to training. 
document process in the PIM. This process should identify skills gaps and 
assist with identifying appropriate training interventions.  
137 
(also to be completed by MSMEDA /ADP staff who managed the 
Project and have not yet completed this training) 
  All staff are required to study the Project related documents at 
Project Start-up 
  PROJECT Financial management training workshop for all 
implementing agencies. This training to be presented by the 
NPCU Financial Manager with the assistance of IFAD staff. 
Training to focus on Project requirements (monthly reporting, 
document retention etc.) and cover practical issues). 
  Start-up training to be repeated on an annual basis if required. 
5.IFAD Anticorruption policy 
The management of Project funds shall be sufficiently rigorous to safeguard against Fraud 
and  Corruption.  Fraud  and  corruption include, but  are  not  limited to  (as  defined  in the 
IFAD anticorruption policy): 
  Corrupt practice - offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, 
anything of value to influence improperly the actions of another party. 
  Fraudulent practice - any act or omission, including a misrepresentation, that 
knowingly or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain a financial 
or other benefit or to avoid an obligation. 
  Collusive practice - an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve 
an improper purpose, including influencing improperly the actions of another party. 
  Coercive practice - impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions 
of a party. 
IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive 
actions in Projects financed through its loans and grants. ‘Zero tolerance’ means that 
IFAD will pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate 
sanctions will be applied to parties or entities involved where the allegations are 
substantiated. IFAD takes all possible actions to protect individuals who submit 
allegations of fraudulent or corrupt practices in its activities from reprisal. The primary 
responsibility for enforcing the Anticorruption Policy lies with the Project, and the first 
defence for controls shall be exercised by Project staff and counterparts Pursuant to this, 
the Project shall have the responsibility to incorporate pertinent provisions of the 
Anticorruption Policy in its contracts with Project staff, cooperating/implementing 
partners, and suppliers/consultants.  
It  is the  Project  Director  and  the  NPCU  Financial  Manager’s  responsibility to  make sure 
that all Project staff (including implementing agency staff) are aware of IFAD's  and the 
National’s anticorruption policies and whistle blowing procedures. 
How to contact the IFAD Office of Audit and Oversight 
All communications are treated with the utmost CONFIDENTIALITY. 
By phone: +39 06 54592888 
By fax: +39 06 54597888 
By e-mail: anticorruption@ifad.org 
Through the online complaint form: 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm 
In person or by mail to: 
IFAD Office of Audit and Oversight, Investigation Section 
Via Paolo di Dono, 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
(Mark all mail “Personal and confidential”) 
Refer to 21. Useful links. 
138 
6.FM organisational structure, roles and responsibilities 
6.1 Overview of FM organisational structure (excluding procurement) 
  The NPCU financial manager has overall responsibility for all financial management 
aspects of all IFAD-funded Projects managed within the NPCU, including STAR. 
  STAR has a dedicated senior accountant, accountant and accounts assistant based at the 
NPCU. 
  The MoF controller allocated to the NPCU is responsible for review of payment request 
documentation and forms part of the payment cycle. 
  The MALR internal auditor reviews payment request documentation and forms part of the 
payment cycle.  
  Each GPCU has a coordinator and accountant involved in Financial Management. 
Detailed job descriptions for the NPCU Financial Manager, Senior Accountant and 
Accountant is outlined in 22.3, 22.4 and 22.5. 
7. Planning and budgeting  
Project  financing  has  been  approved in line  with  the  following  expenditure  components 
and categories which will be an important reference for preparation and monitoring of the 
AWPB and progress in line with the approved financing agreements: 
Components 
Component 1: Marketing and enterprises 
1.1 Water 
1.2 Market Access 
1.3 Marketing and infrastructure 
Component 2: Production 
2.1 Water 
2.2 Production Improvement 
Expenditure categories 
 
 
139 
                    Project Director Accounts Assistant Accountant IFAD CPMU Coordinator Accountant Minya PCU Coordinator Accountant Coordinator Accountant MoF Controller   Shared expense Paid from STAR budget Asyut PCU Sohag PCU MALR Internal auditor PRIDE Financial Manager STAR FM within CPMU Shared resources – oversight over PRIDE, PRIME and STAR Dedicated STAR resources Dedicated STAR resource Shared resources within MARL Senior Accountant  
Components 
Component 3: Project Management, M&E and KM 
3.1 Project Management Unit 
3.2 M&E and Knowledge Management 
Expenditure categories 
 
[INSERT TABLES FROM ANNEX 2 OF FINANCING AGREEMENT] 
The NPCU Financial Manager will be responsible for preparing a consolidated AWPB with 
input  from  the  Project  technical  team  and  by  obtaining  the  individual  budgets  from 
MSMEDA, ADP and MWRI. MSEDA, ADP and MWRI are required to prepare a budget for 
the components/sub-components for which they are responsible. The budget is prepared 
in Excel using the required format as outlined in 22.1. A bottom up approach is required. 
The Financial Manager shall commence with the AWPB process with sufficient time to seek 
IFAD no objection as required in terms of the financing agreement. 
Once  the  AWPB  has  been  developed  and  approved,  it  must  be  inserted  in  the  budget 
module of the accounting system of each of the agencies for the purposes of monitoring 
actual  implementation  in  line  with  the  budget.  Each  agency  should  monitor  budget  to 
actual expenditure for their individual components/subcomponents at least once a month. 
The Project should monitor the consolidated budget to actual performance on a quarterly 
basis with input from all parties. 
The Financial Manager needs to ensure that consolidated expenditure per category is in 
line with the approved totals in the Financing Agreement. If the budget monitoring process 
indicates and expected over-expenditure on one or more of the cost categories, the Project 
will have to obtain a no objection from IFAD, allowing a reallocation amongst categories.  
Once IFAD provides its no-objection to the AWPB, the NPCU Project Director must ensure 
collaboration  between  MALR  and  MoP  for  the  purposes  of  including  the  Project  in  the 
Government budget which is subject to approval from Parliament. 
Inclusion  of  the  Project  in  the  Government  budget  is  crucial  to  ensure  that 
Government  allocates  its  committed  contribution  (as  outlined  in  the  Project 
Financing Agreement) to the Project and can disburse funds to the MALR TSA-
subaccount upon request from the Project. 
8. Internal controls 
8.1 Overview of internal controls 
It is recommended that the respective entities (NPCU, MSMEDA, ADP and MWRI) 
consider COSO Integrated Framework – Internal Control when developing/improving the 
respective systems of internal control. 
At Project start-up it is recommended that the NPCU Financial Manager use the general 
framework for considering the internal control environment with the intention of 
establishing a sound internal control environment. In terms of the general framework: 
  Perform a risk assessment  
  Develop control activities which address identified risks (or improve existing control 
activities) 
  Implement control activities (by documenting controls, updating the information 
systems, communicating to relevant parties) 
  Develop a system for monitoring the effectiveness of controls implemented 
Control activities should be developed with consideration of the following categories: 
Control activities 
Authorisation and 
approval procedures  
Description 
Authorisation controls require certification that a transaction 
or event is acceptable for further processing.  The delegated 
authority of staff should ensure efficient implementation 
while mitigating related risks. Authorisation levels of Project 
staff should be in line with their underlying roles. For 
example, only the Project director may be authorised to 
approve payments.  
140 
Control activities 
Segregation of duties  
Access to resources 
and records 
Verifications 
Reconciliations  
Reviews of operating 
performance 
Reviews of operations, 
processes and 
activities; 
Supervision  
Information and 
technology related 
controls 
Description 
An important element in any control system is the separation 
of those duties which would, if combined, enable one 
individual to record and process a complete transaction.  For 
example, an Accountant might prepare a document, but it 
would then be reviewed and cleared by the Financial 
Manager, and then approved by the Project Director.  It is 
the Financial Manager’s responsibility to ensure that certain 
duties are segregated, including authorising, processing, 
recording and reviewing.  
All data, records and assets should be kept in a physically 
secure environment. Petty cash should be kept secure. 
Financial data and other records should also be protected by 
back up procedures and copy records should be stored 
securely off site.  
Transactions and significant events are verified before and after 
processing, e.g. when goods are delivered, the number of goods 
supplied is verified with the number of goods ordered. 
Afterwards, the number of goods invoiced is verified with the 
number of goods received. 
Reconciliations between independent, corresponding sources 
of data are a key control for identifying errors and 
discrepancies in balances. The reconciliations should be done 
on a monthly basis. Any reconciling or balancing amounts 
should be promptly cleared. Unusually long outstanding 
reconciling items should be investigated. Physical checks 
should also be performed on assets and petty cash.  
Operating performance is reviewed against a set of standards 
on a regular basis, assessing effectiveness and efficiency. If 
performance reviews determine that actual accomplishments 
do not meet established objectives or standards, the 
processes and activities established to achieve the objectives 
should be reviewed to determine if improvements are 
needed. 
Operations, processes and activities should be periodically 
reviewed to ensure that they are in compliance with current 
regulations, policies, procedures, or other requirements. 
Competent supervision helps to ensure that internal control 
objectives are achieved. This includes assigning, reviewing, 
and approving an employee's work. 
Information and technology controls can be both general and 
related to applications. The major categories of general 
controls are (1) entity-wide security program planning and 
management, (2) access controls, (3) controls on the 
development, maintenance and change of the application 
software, (4) system software controls, (5) segregation of 
duties, and (6) service continuity. Application controls are the 
structure, policies, and procedures that apply to separate, 
individual application systems, and are directly related to 
individual computerized applications. These controls are 
generally designed to prevent, detect, and correct errors and 
irregularities as information flows through information 
systems. 
141 
Entities should reach an adequate balance between detective and preventive control 
activities. Corrective actions are a necessary complement to control activities in order to 
achieve the objectives. 
The Financial Manual incorporates practical guidance on recommended control activities 
in the sections that follow which can be considered by the NPCU Financial Manager when 
developing/improving internal controls. New/improved controls should be 
documented in detail in the Financial Manual.  
8.2 Authorisation and approval of payments 
  Payment requests approved by Project Director, MALR internal auditor and MoF 
controller 
  MoF accounting unit uploads payments to Government Payment System 
  Payment released by 1st (MALR) and 2nd (MoF) authorised signatory 
8.3 Segregation of duties 
  Payment requests prepared by accounts assistant 
  Payments reviewed/approved by Financial Manager / Project Director 
  Payments recorded in accounting software by Senior Accountant / Accountant 
  Payments released on Government Payment System by authorised signatories 
(MALR/MOF representatives) 
8.4 Access to resources and assets 
  Financial Management Offices to be locked after hours and key retained by the 
Financial Manager and/or Project Coordinator 
  Other Project offices locked after hours are when not in use 
8.5 Verifications 
  Semi-annual fixed asset verifications (register to floor and floor to register) 
  Fixed assets are tagged with unique number or barcode 
8.6 Reconciliations, reviews, supervision 
The following reconciliations, checks, monitoring and review activities should be 
prepared on a monthly basis as applicable: 
Note 1: MSMEDA and ADP will follow their own systems of internal control as 
documented in their respective operating manuals (with exception of designated account 
reconciliations which is mandatory). Implementing agencies that receive advances from 
the NPCU are required to implement the outlined controls. 
Type 
EUR Designated 
account bank 
reconciliation  
Local bank 
account 
reconciliations 
Petty cash 
reconciliation 
Petty cash spot 
checks 
NPCU 
GPCU 
Other 
Description 
n/a 
n/a 
MSMEDA 
and APD 
n/a 
n/a 
Note 1 
 
 
 
 
Note 1 
Note 1 
Reconciliation of the 
bank balance of the 
designated accounts to 
the cash book balance. 
(IFAD format outlined in 
Appendix 22.11) 
Reconciliation of the 
bank balance to the 
cash book balance. 
Reconciliation of petty 
cash to relevant cash 
book. Refer 22.13 for 
reconciliation form. 
NPCU Financial Manager 
/GPCU Coordinators to 
undertake random sport 
checks of petty cash 
142 
Type 
NPCU 
GPCU 
Other 
Advance 
justifications 
Applicable 
to 
advances 
made to 
MWRI 
n/a 
Note 1 
 
n/a 
Note 1 
Review of monthly 
reports from 
Implementing 
agencies (as per 
22.16) 
Quarterly and 
Monthly internal 
report 
 
n/a 
Note 1 
Description 
(compare cash balance 
to petty cash book) 
NPCU to receive 
monthly report from 
MWRI in format outlined 
in 22.16 for purposes of 
clearing advances. 
Other advances include 
staff travel advances 
(recorded as staff loans 
in TSA). 
Obtain monthly reports 
from MWRI and 
confirm: 
  Report was 
approved by MWRI 
authorised 
representative 
  Bank balances agree 
to bank statement / 
bank reconciliation 
  Petty cash balances 
agree to petty cash 
reconciliation 
  Listed expenses are 
supported by valid 
invoices and other 
supporting 
documentation 
(review original 
documentation) 
  All advances from 
Project are recorded 
in line with advances 
recorded in 
accounting software 
  Expenses have been 
incurred in line with 
the approved AWPB 
Prepare internal reports 
for the purposes of 
monitoring Project 
progress and identifying 
issues. Refer section 
13.7. 
In all instances, issues identified during the review/reconciliation process should be 
followed up and resolved in a timely manner. 
8.6 General Information and technology related controls 
  Password is required to log into accounting software 
  accounting software to require password change on a regular basis 
  User rights are defined and documented and linked to log-in credentials 
  Daily back-up of accounting software data on server 
143 
  Sensitive information (e.g. payroll files) are password protected 
  Regular software updates are undertaken to ensure that accounting software version 
is supported by technical team at accounting software 
  Offsite backup of data on a weekly basis 
  Financial Management staff are not allowed to share accounting software passwords 
or use login credentials of another 
  Desktop access requires login with a password 
  Operating system software updates are performed regularly 
  Use authorised signatory to have log-in credentials for on-line banking 
8.7 Internal control environment – implementing agencies (including MSMEDA and ADP) 
The Financial Manager or PROJECT will be responsible for the assessment of the internal 
control environment of implementing agencies which report to it. In terms of the 
subsidiary agreements it will be required that implementing agencies perform an annual 
self-assessment of their financial management arrangements are outlined in 22.15. It is 
recommended that the Financial Managers use the information contained in this section 
to consider the soundness of the internal control environments and provide guidance on 
improving controls if weaknesses are identified. 
9. Accounting 
9.1 Overview of Project accounting 
  The Project accounting system will be managed via accounting software  
o  The accounting function will be centralised in the NPCU.  
o  The transactions of the GPCUs will be recorded on offline templates at GPCU 
level and posted centrally at the NPCU 
o  The accounting function should consider the transaction data from the 
treasury single account system and be reconciled thereto on a regular basis 
(at a central and governorate level). 
144 
                         GPMU offline accounting software templates posted centrally at CPMU CPMU GPCU GPCU GPCU Project accounting system MSMEDA ADP Independent accounting systems Accounting system maintained outside Project accounting system. Submission of perioding financial reports for purposes of manual consolidation (outside Project accounting system) MoF Treasury Single Account System MoF Accounting unit Reconciliation of MoF accounting unit transaction listings (for payments made on behalf of project at both NPMU and GPCUs) MoF Accounting unit MoF Accounting unit MoF Accounting unit  
  MWRI will be responsible for maintaining their own accounting software which is not 
integrated with the NPCU. 
o  MWRI to provide monthly report in the format outlined in 22.16. The NPCU will 
record  the  transactions  in  the  accounting  software  accounting  software  and 
clear related advances. 
o  Advances to  MWRI  are  recorded  in  accounting software.  Only  once  advances 
are cleared, expenses are recorded at the historical exchange rate / within the 
correct component and expenses category. 
  MSMEDA and ADP will be responsible for managing their internal accounting software 
systems which is not integrated with the NPCU accounting software. 
GPCUs: 
  The GPCU accountant will be required to record transactions in an offline template of 
the accounting software and retain related supporting documentation. 
  The GPCU to ensure that the transaction listing is reconciled with the transaction data 
from the Governorate TSA accounting unit before submission to the NPCU. 
  The  GPCU  coordinator  to  review  and  approve  the  transaction  listing  in  the  off-line 
template on a monthly basis with reference to supporting documentation and the TSA 
reconciliation. 
  The GPCU accountant to provide the off-line transaction listing to the NPCU for review 
and posting. 
NPCU  
GPCU  
Central recording of GPCU transactions 
using offline template 
Offline recording of GPCU transactions 
processed via Government Payment system 
RECONCILE 
Project payments made via Government 
Payment System, via TSA 
9.2 Chart of accounts 
The accounting software should include the appropriate Chart of Accounts. 
The Chart of Accounts should be developed to cater for: 
Governorate accounting unit 
  All  components  and  sub-components  are  incorporated  in  the  AWPB  (outlined  in  the 
financing in agreement) 
  All categories as outlined in the financing agreements 
  Sources of finance  
  Sub categorisation to cater for activities at the various states 
The Chart of Accounts should mirror the cost tables (as presented in the Project design 
report and section 1 of this manual) to enable comparison of actual Project costs during 
implementation with those estimated during the Project preparation.  
NB: The Project should liaise with MoF to ensure that the Treasury Single Account General 
ledger includes the same chart of accounts.  
9.3 Recording and processing of transactions 
Transactions are recorded on the cash basis of accounting which requires the recognition 
of cash flows when they occur (inflows and outflows). 
Each transaction should be recorded in the accounting software based on the following: 
  Use  double  entry  accounting  (debit  and  credit,  with  cash  always  being  one  of  the 
entries) 
  Capture the transaction using the correct account code (as determined by the chart of 
accounts) – for all transaction, to be confirmed the Financial Manager 
  Capture transactions which has the required supporting documentation 
145 
  Capture information accurately and completely. 
For detailed instructions on how to record the expenditures in the accounting 
software, please refer to the accounting user manual (to be developed by 
accounting software developer). 
9.4 Accounting for in-kind contributions 
In  terms  of  the  IFAD  Handbook  for  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing  for  IFAD-financed 
Projects, the Project is required to account for and disclose in-kind contributions received 
from Government, beneficiaries and other Project parties (as applicable). This requirement 
extends  to  contributions  as  outlined  in  the  Financing  Agreement  or  other  additional 
contributions received.  
  The  NPCU  will  obtain  inputs  from  Government  departments  regarding  in-kind 
contributions made by Government at both a central and Governorate level and record 
in the accounting software (at least quarterly recording is required). Such contributions 
may include staff salaries, payment of rent and utilities for dedicated Project offices, 
tax payments. 
  The  NPCU  will  obtain  inputs  from  MWRI  regarding  their  in-kind  contributions  (if 
applicable)  to  the  Project  and  record  on  a  monthly  basis  in  the  NPCU  accounting 
software. 
  MSMEDA and ADP are required to include their in-kind contributions in their financial 
reports for the purposes of manual consolidation at NPCU level (refer financial reporting 
requirements xxx). 
The guideline for estimating / calculating in-kind contributions are outlined below. In all 
instances, related supporting documentation should be retained for inspection.  
(Table below should be further developed by the NPCU Financial Manager once all types 
of in-kind contributions have been determined) 
Type  
Measurement calculation  Supporting documentation 
Beneficiary Labour 
hours 
Value = total hours worked 
X applicable wage rate (in 
most cases the applicable 
minimum wage rate for 
uneducated labour in the 
country) 
Construction material 
provided by 
beneficiaries 
Value = cubic meters of 
gravel  
Construction material 
– other provided by 
beneficiaries 
Value = actual cost of 
materials purchased 
Government seconded 
staff salaries and 
incentives 
Rent and utilities for 
Project offices (paid by 
Government) 
Cash salaries and incentives 
paid. 
Apportionment of expense 
based on square meterage 
of Project office space in the 
Government building. 
to be retained  
Time sheet by the Community 
Group outlining the persons, 
and the hours they 
contributed during a specified 
time period. The time sheet 
should be duly signed by the 
Community Group 
representative and Project 
technical/M&E staff   
Bill of lading prepared by the 
consulting engineer which 
indicated the estimation of 
gravel volume. The sheet 
should be duly signed by the 
community representative 
and Project technical/M&E 
staff   
Copies of invoices. Duly 
signed by the community 
representative and Project 
technical/M&E staff   
Transaction report from 
central TSA unit – certified by 
MoF controller. 
Excel-based apportionment 
calculation accompanied by 
transaction report from 
central TSA unit – certified by 
146 
Type  
Measurement calculation  Supporting documentation 
to be retained  
MoF controller. (the 
transaction report from TSA 
to show overall expenses 
which is subject to 
apportionment). 
When recording the in-kind contributions, it is important that the in-kind contributions 
are classified according to the same principles as regular Project expenditures; that is, 
every contribution must be by linked to an activity/component, by category and by 
financing source (government and/or beneficiaries) to ensure that consolidated financial 
reports can be produced without any extra effort.    
In-kind contributions should be disclosed separately in the financial statements. The 
notes of the financial statements should also briefly explain the methodology of how it 
was calculated. On the other hand, when in-kind contributions cannot be reliably 
measured, this fact should be disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. 
NB: Government will pay for Project related taxes. This is not considered in-kind unless 
Government provides an exemption instead of transferring the tax portion to the Project. 
9.5 Accounting for exchange rate matters 
When claiming expenditures in local currency in Withdrawal Applications (forms 101, 102 
and 104) or preparing a financial report, it is important to use the prevailing rate (historical 
exchange rate) at the time of transfer of funds from the Designated Account (denominated 
in EUR) to the local currency account. Subsequent expenditures should be recorded on the 
First in First Out basis. 
For example: 
Conversion of local currency expenditures funded from the designated account.  
 
IFAD transfers funds to the Designated Account (in EUR) as per the approved WA  
  A portion of the funds in the Designated Account (in EUR) is transferred to the local 
currency account with Central Bank of Egypt.  
  Local currency expenditures are then funded from the local currency account via the 
TSA.  
  When  justifying  the  local  currency  expenditures  to  IFAD,  these  expenditures  are 
converted into the denomination of the designated account, using the prevailing rate 
(historical exchange rate) at the time of transfer of funds from the Designated Account 
to the local currency account.  
9.6 Accounting for advances 
The Project may make advances (petty cash, travel related, advances to implementing 
agencies etc.) either in the form of cash or by bank transfer. 
In terms of accounting for advances: 
  Advances are recorded in the accounting system at the date that the advance is 
made, subject to the required approval process. 
  The transaction is not recorded as an expenditure (in terms of categories, 
components) on this date.  
  All advances should be cleared in a timely manner by the submission of original 
invoices. 
  All outstanding advances should be cleared by no later than 10 days after the end of 
 
the fiscal year-end. 
In terms of the cash basis of accounting advances at the end of the period should be 
expensed and disclosed in the financial report. 
147 
10. Cash flow forecasting 
The preference should be to limit withdrawal from the IFAD facilities to the amounts 
needed. This is avoid exchange rate exposure in the local currency accounts. For this 
purpose, the NPCU Financial Manager should take overall responsibility for cashflow 
forecasting to determine the amount of funds to be transferred to the TSA. The cash flow 
forecast should consider the needs of the NPCU, GPCUs and MWRI. 
(MSMEDA and ADP to manage cashflows to local currency accounts in line with same 
principles). 
Cash flow forecast should be finalised 15 days before commencement of the relevant 
quarter. The forecast is prepared by the NPCU Financial Manager and approved by the 
Program director. 
The Financial Manager is required to prepare a cash flow forecast per source of finance 
to avoid the risk of pre-financing amongst financer. On a per financier basis, the 
following cash flow forecast can be prepared: 
IFAD 
Forecast expenses for the quarter per the AWPB 
Plus contingency/buffer  
= Cash required for the forecast quarter 
Less opening IFAD cash balance per the ledger 
= Additional transfer from IFAD designated 
account 
The Financial Manager to liaise with the GPCUs and MWRI to confirm their cash flow 
forecast requirements for incorporation. Reference should be made to the cash flow 
forecast of MWRI as outlined in the monthly reporting template (22.16). 
11. Disbursements 
The IFAD disbursement procedures as outlined in this section are governed by 
the Letter to the Borrower (LTB) and the IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
The handbook is also available on the IFAD website and Project should ensure 
that they refer to the most recent version as published at 
http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm.  
11.1 Eligibility of expenditures 
In  accordance  with  the  IFAD  disbursement  procedures,  between  the  date  of  entry  into 
force  of the  Financing Agreement  and the  Financing  Closing  Date,  Project  may  request 
withdrawals from the IFAD facilities for eligible expenditures.   
Eligible expenditures are defined in the IFAD General Conditions Section 4.08 as follows:  
The  Financing  shall  be  used  exclusively  to  finance  expenditures  meeting  each  of  the 
following eligibility requirements:   
o  The  expenditure  shall  meet  the  reasonable  cost  of  goods,  works  and  services 
required  for  the  Project  and  covered  by  the  relevant  AWPB  and  procured  in 
conformity with the Fund’s Procurement Guidelines.   
o  The expenditure shall be incurred during the Project Implementation Period, except 
that expenditures to meet the costs of winding up the Project may be incurred after 
the Project Completion Date and before the Financing Closing Date.   
o  The expenditure shall be incurred by a Project Party.   
o 
If the Agreement  allocates  the  amount  of  the Financing  to  categories  of Eligible 
Expenditures  and  specifies  the  percentages  of  such  Eligible  Expenditures  to  be 
financed  by  the  Financing,  the  expenditure  must  relate  to  a  category  whose 
allocation has  not  been  depleted  and  shall  be eligible  only up to the  percentage 
applicable to such category.   
148 
o  The  expenditure  shall  be  otherwise  eligible  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the 
Financing Agreement.   
o  The  Fund  may  from  time  to  time  exclude  certain  types  of  expenditure  from 
eligibility.   
o  Any payment prohibited by a decision of the United Nations Security Council taken 
under  Chapter VII  of  the  Charter  of the  United  Nations,  shall  not be  eligible  for 
financing by the Financing.   
o  Any  payments  to  a  person  or  an  entity,  or  for  any  goods,  works  or  services,  if 
making  or  receiving  such  payment  constitutes  a  coercive,  collusive,  corrupt  or 
fraudulent practice by any representative of the Borrower/Recipient or any Project 
Party, shall not be eligible for financing by the Financing.    
o  All  expenditures  must  be  supported  by  sufficient  supporting  documentation  as 
stated in the LTB and the IFAD disbursement handbook (please see section below 
on supporting documentation). 
o  The proceeds of the financing shall not be used to pay taxes. However, taxes paid 
by the ultimate recipient of an expenditure (e.g. withholding tax, income taxes paid 
by a Project employee or taxes on the profits of a contractor) are not considered 
to be taxes paid by the Project. 
11.2 Disbursement procedures 
The following disbursement procedures may be used for withdrawal from the IFAD Grant: 
Type 
Description 
Advance 
withdrawal 
 
The advance withdrawal modality for PROJECT is imprest. For specific 
limitation (imprest account):  
  The ceiling amount is usually sufficient to cover average Projected 
eligible expenditures for a period of approximately 6 months.  
It may be disbursed in one or several applications, depending on 
the type of financing and level of expenditures to be incurred.  
  Replenishment application should be requested when the amount 
withdrawn from the designated account is equal to about 20-30% 
of the advance.  
Direct payment  The direct payment modality is used for eligible Project expenditures 
to be paid directly by IFAD. This payment method is used when IFAD 
has been requested to pay the Supplier directly and is suitable in the 
following situations:  
  Payment of large civil works  
  Retention payments  
  Consultancy fees  
 
  When exchange control regulations are present in the country.  
Importing goods (when a letter of credit is not practical)  
The Withdrawal Application MUST indicate the date on which 
payment becomes due to the supplier. 
Reimbursement  Reimbursement  is  applicable  when  eligible  Project  expenditures  are 
pre-financed by the Recipient before access to IFAD finance is possible. 
Such  reimbursements  are  expected  to  be  claimed  no  later  than  90 
calendar days from the date of payment by the Recipient. 
Written request for disbursement from Government into the MALR TSA sub-account 
should be submitted to the Ministry of Planning, quarterly in advance. 
11.3 Evidence of Authority to sign Withdrawal Applications 
IFAD  requires  PROJECT’s  representative,  as  designated  in  the  financing  agreement,  to 
furnish  satisfactory  evidence  of the  authority  and  authenticated  specimen signatures  of 
the individuals who will sign WAs on behalf of PROJECT. This evidence must reach IFAD 
149 
before  the  first  WA  is  presented  by  PROJECT  and  should  be  the  original  (photocopies, 
facsimiles  or  other  means  of  transmission  are  not  acceptable).  A  sample  template  is 
provided in annex 1 of the IFAD Loan disbursement handbook. Each WA should be signed 
by such duly authorized individuals, and the Fund must be notified of any change in the 
signatories authorized to withdraw funds from the loan/grant account.  
IFAD  must  also  be  notified  of  the  designated  signatories  for  operating  any  designated 
and/or  Project  or  other  accounts,  including  changes  thereto,  whether  or  not  these 
authorized signatories are included in the financing agreement. Such changes, as effected 
during  the  life  of  the  Project,  must  be  communicated  promptly  to  the  IFAD.  PROJECT, 
guided by the sample in annex 1 of the IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook, should provide 
the names  and specimen signatures  of the newly appointed signatories and include the 
date  when  such  change  is  to  take  effect.  The  original  of  such  changed  documentary 
evidence is to be provided to IFAD.  
11.4 The Designated Account 
The  IFAD  funds  will  flow  to  the  designated  accounts,  in  accordance  with  IFAD’s 
requirements identified in the Financing Agreement and the Letter to the Borrower (EUR 
denominated).  The  NPCU,  MSMEDA  and  APD  will  be  responsible  for  managing  their 
respective  Designated  Accounts,  including  preparing  a  monthly  reconciliation  and 
statement in line with the IFAD templates as outlined in 22.11.  
11.5 Withdrawal of Financing Proceeds using withdrawal applications 
The Financial Managers is required to ensure that WAs are prepared and submitted to IFAD 
with consideration of the following requirements: 
Requirement  Guidance 
Timeliness 
Withdrawal  applications  should  be  prepared  when  the  expenditure 
equals  30% of the advance in the designated account or quarterly 
(whichever occurs first) 
Completeness 
and accuracy of 
supporting 
documentation 
Prepare and submit the required forms and supporting documentary 
evidence of expenditure as outlined in the IFAD Loan Disbursement 
Handbook. (refer to IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook for detailed 
guidance). Ensure that information is complete and accurate. 
Account 
reconciliation 
The Project should submit the designated account reconciliation and 
statement, prepared the same reporting period in which the eligible 
expenditures are being claimed. This form needs to be accompanied 
by bank statements of the designated account and that of any other 
operating Project accounts ensuring that the closing bank balances 
for all these accounts correspond to the balances at the end of the 
same reporting period as indicated in the WA period. 
Duly authorised  Ensure  that  WAs  are  duly  authorised  in  terms  of  Project’s 
authorisation  procedures  and  signed  by  the  duly  authorised 
representatives. 
Document 
retention 
Submit  copies  of  supporting  documentation  with  the  WA.  Retain 
original documentation for inspection by IFAD upon request. 
11.6 Initial advance 
In  order  to  request  the  initial  advance,  ensure  the  disbursement  conditions  as  per  the 
financing agreement and the Letter to the Borrower (LTB) have been met. 
11.8 Withdrawals using Statements of Expenditures (SOE) and the SOE Thresholds 
The  statement  of  expenditure  (SOE)  procedure  is  normally  used  for  those  expenditure 
types  where  it  is  impracticable  or  unduly  burdensome  to  require  submission  of  full 
150 
documentation.  However,  the  supporting  documentations  for  the  Statements  of 
Expenditures  must  be  maintained  by  Project  and  made  available  for  review  by  IFAD 
supervision missions upon request and to external auditors during their annual review of 
Project accounts to enable issuing of an independent audit opinion.  
Details regarding the use of the Statement of Expenditure (SOE) are provided in section 4 
of the IFAD Loan disbursement handbook.  
In  accordance  with  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower,  the SOE  procedure  may  be  used  for  all 
Project expenditures up to EUR 45 659 (to be updated in line with LTB)  
11.9 Foreign exchange conversion in preparing withdrawal applications 
When claiming expenditures in local currency in Withdrawal Applications (forms 101, 102 
and 104) or preparing a financial report, it is important to use the prevailing rate (historical 
exchange rate) at the time of transfer of funds from the Designated Account (denominated 
in EUR) to the local currency account. This type of conversion is  also called the First in 
First out (FIFO) basis.  
The historical exchange rate/FIFO basis of converting is to be used in the following two 
cases in particular:  
  When preparing a designated account reconciliation as part of a WA or a financial 
report, the closing balance of the local currency account(s), and any expenditures 
already incurred in local currency but not yet claimed must be converted to the 
denomination currency of the designated account using the historical exchange 
rate/FIFO basis of converting. 
  When preparing withdrawal applications (form 101 and 102) the expenditures incurred 
in  local  currency  (or  any  other  currency  than  the  denomination  currency  of  the 
designated account) and claimed in the WA, must be converted to the denomination 
currency of the designated account using the historical exchange rate/FIFO basis  of 
converting.   
Example: 
The  Project  has  a  Designated Accounts  denominated  in  EUR  and  an  Operating Account 
denominated in EGP: 
  USD 100 000 is transferred to the Project Operating Account in EGP on 1 Oct 2018 at 
a prevailing rate of 15 EGP to 1 USD (equalling 1 500 000 EGP). 
  During the reporting period of 1 Oct to 31 Dec 2018 the Project incurs expenditures in 
local currency up to 500 000 EGP. 
  Replenishment request for total expenditures incurred during the reporting period is 
submitted to IFAD in Jan 2019, but the exchange rate is now 17 EGP to 1 USD. 
  The withdrawal application should be prepared using the historical rate of 15 EGP   
11.10 Suspension and the designated account  
During a full suspension, IFAD will not replenish the designated account.  However, 
Borrowers may continue, except as otherwise indicated, to use any balance in the 
designated account to meet eligible expenditures and applications documenting these 
expenditures should continue to be regularly submitted.  
11.11 ICP 
151 
The IFAD client portal (ICP) enables the Project to: 
  access real-time financing information on country portfolios as well as operational 
 
and financial information related to Projects 
submit Withdrawal Applications directly and obtain electronic approvals required 
both from concerned ministries and IFAD 
  manage banking instructions electronically 
create and download relevant reports 
 
The  Project  may  submit  electronic  copies  of  its  withdrawal  applications  and  maintain 
hardcopies  for  audit  purposes.  (The  NPCU,  MSMEDA  and  ADP  each  has  own  log-in 
credentials and authorised signatories) 
11.12 Refund of withdrawals 
If the IFAD determines that any amount withdrawn from the Loan and/or Grant Accounts 
was not used for the purposes indicated or will not be needed thereafter to finance 
Eligible Expenditures, the Borrower shall promptly refund such amount to the IFAD upon 
instruction by the Fund.   
12. Processing of payments 
  Payment processing is centralised at the NPCU to the extent possible. If processing of 
payments take place at GPCUs, the guidelines in this section may be tailored to 
consider the organisational structure at GPCUs (Financial Manager = PCU 
Coordinator, Senior Accountant/ Accountant = GPCU accountant) 
  IFAD funds may not be used for payment of taxes, customs or duties. 
  MWRI to implement proposed payment processes 
  MSMEDA; ADP and CGC is responsible for establishment of payment processes 
related to disbursement of rural finance facilities to intermediaries / end-
beneficiaries. Related requirements are outlined in section 12.8. 
12.1 Supporting documentation 
The processing of all payments are subject to the Project retaining the following original 
supporting documentation after processing: 
152 
Expenditure type 
All  
Goods 
Civils works  
Services (including 
consultants) 
For payment of Trips, fuel, 
stationary and other 
expenses  
Supporting documentation 
  Signed contract or confirmed purchase order – 
showing the specified amount that is due to be paid;  
  The bank guarantee for: 
o  advance payment, as specified in the contract 
documents;  
o  performance, as specified in the contract 
documents;  
  Copies of communications sent by the IFAD country 
Project manager to the Project providing the ‘no 
objection’ to the contract award; and  
  Evidence of payment made by the Project.  
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  Supplier’s invoice, duly certified for payment by the 
Project Director– specifying the goods, their 
quantities, and prices;  
  Bills of lading or similar documents; and  
  As appropriate, the certificate of delivery (to include 
condition of goods on delivery). 
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  The claim of the contractor, including a financial 
progress report, stating the work performed and the 
amount due;  
  A certificate – signed by the Project consultants or 
owner’s representative, if any, or by the borrower’s 
chief engineering officer or resident supervising 
engineer assigned to the Project, to the effect that 
the work performed is satisfactory and the payment 
claimed is due in accordance with the terms of the 
contract; and  
  A copy of the contract payment monitoring form 
signed in original by the certifying officer. 
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  The supplier’s or consultant’s claim duly certified for 
payment by the Project director and showing 
sufficient detail.  
  As appropriate, a certificate of delivery of 
satisfactory services.  
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  Supplier invoices;   
  Evidence of payment; 
  Back to office report; 
  Training certificate, 
  Travel authorization; and/or   
  Expense reports by the traveller (including invoices) 
  Boarding passes 
Subsistence payments – 
young professional 
program 
  Confirmation of training attendance 
  Copy of graduate participation agreement which 
indicates the name, ID number, bank details of the 
participant (including copy of ID document) 
153 
Expenditure type 
Payment related to 
software development 
(e.g. MOOCs, Mobile Apps) 
Supporting documentation 
  Supporting documentation which provides evidence 
of milestone achievement (payments based on 
milestones are encouraged- to be negotiated 
during procurement stage and documented in 
supplier contract) 
  Milestones may include: 
Installation 
o 
o  Software tailoring and customisation 
o  End-user testing 
o  Live running 
Pro forma invoices are not acceptable replacements for invoices. In all instances, 
supporting documentation need to include final invoices. 
12.2 General guidelines for processing of payments 
For invoice related payments, the following general process is applicable:  
Activity 
Procedures 
Request and approve 
activity in line with 
AWPB 
Service delivered, or 
goods received 
Request for payment 
Prepare payment 
request 
Review and approval of 
payment request – 
Financial Manager and 
Project Director 
Generally, ensure that expenses are in line with the 
AWPB/Procurement Plan and that IFAD no objection has 
been obtained if required. 
Obtain evidence that the goods were delivered / services 
received to the satisfaction of the Project. Evidence to be 
retained for the purposes of providing supporting evidence 
for processing of invoice. (delivery notes, completion 
reports etc.) 
Technical team requests a payment for goods delivered / 
services received and provides supporting documentation 
to accounts assistant for purposes of preparing payment 
request. 
  The accountant prepares a payment request which 
includes supporting documentation and indicates 
accounting codes, category of payment, component of 
payment and source of finance. 
  The Senior Accountant reviews the payment request for 
accuracy and validity. 
  The Senior Accountant adds the correct account codes 
for the purposes of recording the transaction in the 
accounting software. 
The accounts assistant forwards the payment request with 
supporting documentation to the Financial Manager for 
review and sign off. 
The Financial Manager shall review and sign the payment 
request, checking/confirming: 
  The expenditure is included in the approved AWPB  
 
IFAD no objection was obtained (if applicable). 
  All expenditures are eligible in line with the financing 
agreement and has been incurred before/completed 
before Project completion date. 
154 
Activity 
Review and approval of 
payment request – 
MALR internal auditor 
and Financial Controller 
Process payment 
Record payment 
Procedures 
  Payment was cleared by the relevant component 
technical officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation is attached (refer 12.1) 
The Project Director shall sign the payment request after 
the Financial Manager. 
Once approved by the Financial Manager/Project Director, 
payment requests are reviewed and approved by the MALR 
internal auditor (on a sample basis) and MoF Financial 
Controller. 
  The approved payment request with related documents 
shall be sent to MoF accounting unit for processing via 
the Government e-Payment System.  
  Once loaded on the Government Payment System, the 
payment to be released by 2 authorised signatories 
(using unique digital signatures) – one from MALR and 
one from MoF 
  The accountant / accounts assistant to record the 
transaction in the accounting software, using the 
correct codes as captured on the payment request. 
  File supporting documentation, include proof of 
payment (bank statement/bank confirmation of 
payment) 
  Reconcile transactions to the Government e-Payment 
System on a periodic basis. 
12.3 General guidelines for processing of payments when beneficiaries contribute to the 
purchase price 
12.4 Travel related payments 
The following type of travel may take place by Project staff or Project beneficiaries: 
International travel – 12.4.1 
 
  Local travel – 12.4.2 
All types of travel payments follow the general process: 
Request for 
travel
Approval of 
travel 
request
Advances 
provided (if 
applicable)
Travel 
undertaken
Justification 
of travel 
expenses
Approval of 
travel 
expense 
payment
Recording of 
travel 
expense
The proses for each type of travel is outlined below: 
12.4.1 International travel 
155 
International travel 
Type of travel 
Overview of entitlement 
  Training which is conducted for Project staff or 
beneficiaries at an international location. 
  Business trips 
 
Individuals are entitled to DSA, paid based on the 
number of days of travel for training purposes.  
  The per diem should be used to pay for the cost of 
accommodation, meals and travel  
  Taxi trips to/from airport and visa is paid for 
separately based on actual cost estimates. 
  Unused per diem is not returned to the Project. 
  The per diem amount is determined in line 
Government decree. 
  The per diem is reduced in the event that meals or 
accommodations is provided to the individual. 
  100% of the DSA is advanced before 
commencement of the travel. 
  The number of travel days are calculated from date 
of departure from home until last day of the training. 
  Air travel is booked by the Project and paid for by 
the Project directly. 
Request for travel 
The relevant department will prepare a request for 
travel which includes: 
  List of individuals to attend external training 
  Dates of training 
 
Invitation to training / training registration 
confirmation 
  Overview of training (agenda, location noted) – 
brochure / email correspondence or other suitable 
evidence 
  Related AWPB classification (category, component) 
  Calculation of total per diem due (100%) 
  Estimated cost of air travel  
  Estimated cost of visas 
(Air travel is paid directly by the Project) 
  The travel request is reviewed by the accountant for: 
o  Accuracy and compliance with the 
Government decree in terms of the per diem 
rate applied. 
o  Alignment with the approved ABPB 
  The travel request is submitted to the Project 
 
Director for approval. 
IFAD no-objection should be obtained for travel 
request after approval by the Project Director (as 
applicable). 
  Upon approval of the travel request by the Project 
Director, the Project accountant will advance 100% 
of the total per diem to individuals or the team 
leader as appropriate. (advance made to employee 
bank account via Government e-Payment System 
and recorded as staff loan until justified) 
156 
Approval of travel request 
Advance provide 
International travel 
Justification of travel 
expenses 
  The Project accountant will record the advance in the 
accounting system, indicating the amount, date of 
advance, to who advanced and related budget line 
item. (advance is not recorded as an expense at this 
stage) 
  Within 10 business days after the travel, the team 
leader / individual is required to prepare a travel 
expense report which includes: 
o  Advance report (refer 22.10) 
o  Boarding passes for air travel 
o  Attendance register completed at the training 
event  
o  Back to the office report  
o  Confirmation of IFAD/Ministry no objection 
(email correspondence) 
  The travel expense claim is submitted to the 
accountant who confirms the accuracy and validity of 
the travel expense claim. 
  The accountant reviews the travel expense claim for 
accuracy and validity and captures the correct 
account codes on the request (in line with AWPB line 
items). (sign as evidence of review) 
Approval of travel payment 
  The travel expense is approved by the Project 
Director by way of signing the travel expense report. 
Review and approval of 
payment request – MALR 
internal auditor and 
Financial Controller 
Recording of expense 
  Once approved by the Financial Manager/Project 
Director, payment requests are reviewed and 
approved by the MALR internal auditor (on a sample 
basis) and MoF Financial Controller. 
  The total travel expense is recorded as training 
expenditure/business trip, by clearing the travel 
advance, in terms of the correct category and 
component, in line with the account codes which are 
captured on the travel expense report. 
In  all  instances,  unjustified  travel  advances  will  need  to  be  reimbursed  to  the 
Project by the traveller within one months after the travel date or the amount 
will be deducted from the payroll (initial advances paid is recorded as staff loan 
in GPS for purposes of tracking). 
12.4.2 Local travel 
Local travel 
Type  
Overview of entitlement 
Training / field visits 
  The number of travel days used for the calculation of 
per diem is calculated from date of departure from 
home until last day of the training. 
If Project vehicles are used, the driver is responsible 
for ensuring the vehicle is refuelled in terms of the 
process outlined in 16.4. 
If private vehicles are used, staff are reimbursed in 
line with the allowable rate per kilometre as 
 
 
157 
Local travel 
specified in the staff bylaws, based on actual 
distance travelled. 
Request for travel 
The relevant department will prepare a request for 
travel which includes: 
Approval of travel request 
Advance provide 
Justification of travel 
expenses / return of 
unused fuel advance 
Training: 
  List of individuals to attend training  
  Dates of training  
  Overview of training (agenda, location noted) – 
brochure / email correspondence or other suitable 
evidence 
  Related AWPB classification (category, component) 
  Confirmation from the Officer Manager that a Project 
vehicle(s) is available for the travel dates should this 
be the mode of transportation 
  Calculation of per diem in line with Government 
decree. 
Field visits: 
  Request for field trip from technical department 
  The travel request is reviewed by the accountant for: 
o  Accuracy and compliance with the staff 
bylaws in terms of the pocket money 
allowance / estimation for fuel costs 
o  Alignment with the approved ABPB 
  The travel request is submitted to the Project 
Director for approval. 
  Once approved, the team leader or individual should 
submit a request for vehicle use. 
  No fuel advances are provided in cash (use fuel 
vouchers) 
  Applicable per diem is advanced to employee bank 
accounts via the Government e-Payment system and 
recorded as a staff loan. 
  Within 5 business days after the travel, the team 
leader / individual is required to prepare a travel 
expense report which includes: 
o  Attendance register completed at the training 
o 
event 
If a private vehicle was used, indication of 
total distance travelled in kilometres with 
payment due to vehicle owner, based on the 
approved rate in the bylaws. 
o  Back to the office report (in case of field 
visits) 
o  Copies of used fuel vouchers and related 
invoices 
  The accountant confirms the accuracy and validity of 
the travel expense claim and determines the per 
diem which is due. 
158 
Local travel 
  The accountant reviews the travel expense claim for 
accuracy and validity and captures the correct 
account codes on the request (in line with AWPB line 
items). (sign as evidence of review) 
Approval of travel payment 
  The travel expense is approved by the Project 
Director by way of signing the travel expense report. 
Review and approval of 
payment request – MALR 
internal auditor and 
Financial Controller 
Recording of expense 
  Once approved by the Financial Manager/Project 
Director, payment requests are reviewed and 
approved by the MALR internal auditor (on a sample 
basis) and MoF Financial Controller. 
  The total travel expense is recorded as expenditure 
in terms of the correct category and component, in 
line with the account codes which are captured on 
the travel expense report. (advance cleared at this 
stage) 
  Only fuel expenses may be charged to the training 
budget code. If other vehicle maintenance was 
incurred, this expense is recorded as maintenance. 
12.5 Civil works, equipment and tools 
Activity 
Request and approve 
activity in line with AWPB 
Prepare payment request 
Procedures 
  Civils works, equipment and tools are defined and 
outlined in both the AWPB and the Procurement 
Plan. 
  Civil works, equipment and tools is contracted via a 
 
procurement process as outlined in the PIM. 
IFAD no objection is required on the bidding 
document, recommendation of award and contract 
outline before the final bid award is made. (refer to 
Letter to the Borrower)  
  The procurement officer will request payment of 
invoices, subject to providing the following 
supporting documentation: 
-  Copy of civils contract with award letter (for civils 
only) 
-  Contract amendment letter (if applicable) 
-  Bid analysis and evaluation report  
-  Evidence of IFAD no objection related to the 
contract award 
-  Purchase order / Invoice 
-  Progress report prepared by consulting engineer  
  The accounts assistant/accountant prepares a 
payment request which includes supporting 
documentation and indicates accounting codes, 
category of payment, component of payment and 
source of finance. 
  The Senior Accountant reviews the payment request 
for accuracy and validity. 
159 
Activity 
Review and approval of 
payment request 
Review and approval of 
payment request – MALR 
internal auditor and 
Financial Controller 
Process payment 
Record payment 
Procedures 
  The Senior Accountant adds the correct account 
codes for the purposes of recording the transaction 
in the accounting software. 
The Financial Manager reviews and signs the payment 
request before submission to the Project Director. The 
Project Director shall review and sign the payment 
request, checking/confirming: 
  The expenditure is included in the approved AWPB  
 
IFAD no objection was obtained related to 
procurement as applicable 
  All expenditures are eligible in line with the financing 
agreement and has been incurred before/completed 
before Project completion date. 
  Payment was cleared by the relevant component 
technical officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation is attached (refer 
12.1). 
  Where stipulated in the contract, the required 
bank guarantees are valid and is retained in 
the Project’s safe. 
Once approved by the Financial Manager/Project 
Director, payment requests are reviewed and approved 
by the MALR internal auditor (on a sample basis) and 
MoF Financial Controller. 
  The approved payment request with related 
documents shall be sent to the MoF Accounting unit 
for processing via the Government e-Payment 
System.  
  The accountant shall confirm that the bank details 
provided by the supplier corresponds to the signed 
legal agreement / original bank letter provided. 
  Once loaded on Government e-Payment System, the 
payment to be released by 2 authorised signatories 
(using unique digital signatures) 
  Accountant / accounts assistant record the 
transaction in the accounting software, using the 
correct codes as captured on the payment request. 
  File supporting documentation, include proof of 
payment (bank statement/bank confirmation of 
payment) 
  Accountant to reconcile accounting records with MoF 
Treasury ledger information. 
12.6 Payments for consultant services 
Activity 
Procedures 
Request and approve 
activity in line with AWPB 
  The process for requesting and approving 
consultants is outlined in the procurement section of 
the PIM (and LTR) and is dependent on whether the 
service is recruited internationally, nationally, locally 
or on a single source basis. 
160 
Activity 
Procedures 
 
In all instances the procurement of consulting 
services is subject to IFAD’s no objection. 
Prepare payment request 
Review and approval of 
payment request 
Review and approval of 
payment request – MALR 
internal auditor and 
Financial Controller 
Process payment 
-  The procurement officer will request payment of 
consulting services subject to providing the 
following supporting documentation: 
-  Copy of consulting contract and invoice 
requesting payment (invoice to specify bank 
details in line with contract) 
-  Copy of output (report / study etc) 
-  Copy of timesheets (if time-based payment is 
required) 
-  Written recommendation for payment from the 
relevant technical department which confirms 
that the consultant(s) have delivered the key 
outputs as specified in the consulting contract. 
-  Confirmation of IFAD no objection. 
-  The accounts assistant prepares a payment 
request which includes supporting documentation 
and indicates accounting codes, category of 
payment, component of payment and source of 
finance. 
-  The Accountant reviews the payment request for 
accuracy and validity. 
-  The Accountant adds the correct account codes 
for the purposes of recording the transaction in 
the accounting software. 
The Financial Manager reviews and signs the payment 
request before submission to the Project Director. The 
Project Director shall review and sign the payment 
request, checking/confirming: 
  The expenditure is included in the approved AWPB  
 
IFAD no objection was obtained related to 
procurement as applicable 
  All expenditures are eligible in line with the financing 
agreement and has been incurred before/completed 
before Project completion date. 
  Payment was cleared by the relevant component 
technical officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation is attached (refer 
12.1). 
 
Once approved by the Financial Manager/Project 
Director, payment requests are reviewed and approved 
by the MALR internal auditor (on a sample basis) and 
MoF Financial Controller. 
  The approved payment request with related 
documents shall be sent to the MoF Accounting unit 
for processing via the Government e-Payment 
System.  
161 
Activity 
Record payment 
Procedures 
  The accountant shall confirm that the bank details 
provided by the supplier corresponds to the signed 
legal agreement / original bank letter provided. 
  Once loaded on Government e-Payment System, the 
payment to be released by 2 authorised signatories 
(using unique digital signatures) 
  Accountant / accounts assistant record the 
transaction in the accounting software, using the 
correct codes as captured on the payment request. 
  File supporting documentation, include proof of 
payment (bank statement/bank confirmation of 
payment) 
  Accountant to reconcile accounting records with MoF 
Treasury ledger information. 
12.7 Subsistence payments – Young professional program (extension services) 
Activity 
Procedures 
Request for payment 
Prepare payment 
request 
Review and approval of 
payment request – 
Financial Manager and 
Project Director 
The Governorate Deputy Manager, in consultation with 
xxx, to submit on a monthly basis, the list of graduates 
who participated in the Young Professional Program and 
are due to receive a subsistence payment.  
  The accounts assistant prepares a payment request 
which includes the following supporting documentation 
and indicates accounting codes, category of payment, 
component of payment and source of finance: 
- 
-  Evidence of attendance of training programs 
-  Evidence of field visits (back to the office reports) 
-  Other supporting documentation to confirm 
List of young graduates 
involvement in the program 
  The Senior Accountant reviews the payment request for 
accuracy and validity. 
  The Senior Accountant adds the correct account codes 
for the purposes of recording the transaction in the 
accounting software. 
The accounts assistant forwards the payment request with 
supporting documentation to the Financial Manager for 
review and sign off. 
The Financial Manager shall review and sign the payment 
request, checking/confirming: 
  The expenditure is included in the approved AWPB  
 
IFAD no objection was obtained (if applicable). 
  All expenditures are eligible in line with the financing 
agreement and has been incurred before/completed 
before Project completion date. 
  Payment was cleared by the relevant component 
technical officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation is attached (refer 12.1) 
162 
Activity 
Procedures 
Review and approval of 
payment request – 
MALR internal auditor 
and Financial Controller 
Process payment 
Record payment 
The Project Director shall sign the payment request after 
the Financial Manager. 
Once approved by the Financial Manager/Project Director, 
payment requests are reviewed and approved by the MALR 
internal auditor (on a sample basis) and MoF Financial 
Controller. 
  The approved payment request with related documents 
shall be sent to MoF accounting unit for processing via 
the Government e-Payment System.  
  Graduates to be registered as employees in GPS for the 
purposes of receiving subsistence if possible. 
  Once loaded on the Government Payment System, the 
payment to be released by 2 authorised signatories 
(using unique digital signatures) – one from MALR and 
one from MoF 
  The accountant to record the transaction in the 
accounting software, using the correct codes as 
captured on the payment request. 
  File supporting documentation, include proof of 
payment (bank statement/bank confirmation of 
payment) 
  Reconcile transactions to the Government e-Payment 
System on a periodic basis. 
12.8 Rural finance related payments / supporting documentation 
MSMEDA and ADP will be responsible for rural finance activities which include the 
provision of loans to beneficiaries. These parties will be responsible for using internal 
systems and procedures to disburse funds to beneficiaries using adequate controls 
related to authorisation, segregation of duties and verifications.  
At all times, these parties are responsible to ensure that disbursements to intermediaries 
and end-beneficiaries are evidenced by supporting documentation. Supporting 
documentation should be retained in line with 15.5. Where intermediaries receive funds 
for on-lending, related intermediary loan agreements should specify the requirement to 
retain supporting documentation in line with 15.5. 
An overview of loan approval processes is outlined in 22.20 which provides a basis for 
understanding required supporting documentation as outlined below: 
Loans to beneficiaries (via ADP): 
  Signed loan application template  
  Signed minutes of ADP technical committee meeting minutes (indicating loan terms, 
technical recommendations) 
  Signed minutes of Board of Trustee meeting (indicating approved loan, amount, 
beneficiary name) 
  Signed loan agreement between CIB participating bank and beneficiary 
  Proof of payment by participating bank to beneficiary  
Loans to intermediaries (via MSMEDA): 
163 
  Approval of intermediary loan (MSMEDA Credit Committee meeting minutes) – 
indicating amount, tranches etc. 
  Signed loan agreement between MSMEDA and intermediary 
  Proof of payment – tranche disbursements to intermediaries 
Loans to beneficiaries (via MSMEDA intermediaries): 
  Signed loan application template  
  Signed minutes of ADP technical committee meeting minutes (indicating loan terms, 
technical recommendations) 
  Signed minutes of Board of Trustee meeting (indicating approved loan, amount, 
beneficiary name) 
  Signed loan agreement between CIB participating bank and beneficiary 
  Proof of payment by participating bank to beneficiary  
NB: Loans provided to WUA for mesqa improvements as per subcomponent 2.1 is 
allowed in line with a signed implementation agreement entered into between the 
WUA/MWRI and MALR. Signed copies of implementation agreements should be attached 
to loan agreements and retained as required. In addition, evidence that the WUA was 
duly established in line with Law 213 should be retained. 
Beneficiary contributions 
Beneficiaries (such as CDAs) may access lines of credit via MSMEDA / ADP for the 
purposes of purchasing machinery and equipment (subcomponent 2.2. Improved crop 
farming practices), subject to providing a minimum cash contribution. In such instances: 
  The beneficiary loan agreement should stipulate the minimum required beneficiary 
contribution in line with the requirements of the relevant technical / other committee 
(refer minutes of meetings) 
  Beneficiary contributions are paid directly to the selected supplier and evidence of 
such payment should be retained with other supporting documentation. 
12.7 Grants to demonstration farmers 
Under subcomponent 2.2, demonstration farmers will receive a grant for the purchase of 
1.5 feddan, to be used as demonstration land. In addition, such farmers may be eligible 
to receive a grant which covers 50% of the price of installing water efficient irrigation 
systems. 
12.9 Petty cash payments and replenishments 
Petty cash is not used for travel advances (paid via GPS to staff bank accounts) 
or for purchase of fuel (use fuel vouchers). 
The NPCU and Governorate PMUs will maintain petty cash accounts. The purpose of the 
petty cash is to make payments for low value items in a quick and efficient manner. 
Payments through petty cash will only be allowed for amounts up to xxx EGP. 
To update – document how cash is disbursed to the Project via the MoF TSA. Staff loan 
advances? 
The advance to petty cash is xxx EGP (at each location) and is managed by the Officer 
Manager (or administrative assistant). The purpose of the petty cash is to make 
payments for low value items in a quick and efficient manner. 
The Petty cash disbursements may be in the form of an advance or a reimbursement. 
Advances must be justified with proper supporting documentation (receipts etc.) on a 
timely basis. 
  An initial petty cash advance is made… 
  The cash is placed in a locked cash box which is kept in the Officer Manager’s 
custody.  The Petty cash disbursements may be in the form of an advance or a 
reimbursement (when the staff member has personally advanced the funds).   
  For advances, the Officer Manager delivers petty cash advances on the basis of the 
approved request. After the purchase is made, the requestor must return the 
164 
invoice/receipt along with the change, if any, to the Finance Officer for recording into 
the Accounting system. 
  For reimbursements (i.e. when the goods or services have already been delivered), 
the invoice or receipt is given to the Officer Manager who reimburses the requesting 
staff member or directly pays the supplier.  The form is signed by the individual who 
receives the money. 
  All disbursements from the Petty Cash must be recorded on a Cash Voucher form 
showing all particulars: the amount, the account being charged, the description of 
the transaction, authorization (by Office Manager) and the signature of the payee.  
The necessary documents (invoice, payment tapes, receipts) must be firmly 
attached. The Office Manager must never disburse from the petty cash to herself 
without the Finance Manager’s authorization. 
  The petty cash replenishment point is set to xxx EGP.  Once the level of the petty 
cash on hand falls below this point, the Officer Manager must request replenishment 
by submitting a completed petty cash replenishment form (22.13).  This form will 
show a listing of all disbursements made, the accounts debited and the total sum 
replenished.  All the necessary petty cash vouchers and their supporting documents 
will be attached.  A payment request will be prepared for the amount to be 
replenished and the Financial Manager is required to review and confirm all 
disbursements on the Petty Cash form before signing the check. 
  Petty cash is replenished upon presentation of actual receipts to the Financial 
Manager.  All Petty cash replenishments will bring the balance of cash on hand to xxx 
EGP. 
  The Petty Cash Vouchers, Receipts and Electronic Petty Cash Reconciliation Sheet 
should be updated frequently.  At the end of each week, the accountant will reconcile 
the petty cash journal with the physical cash count. These will be checked, along with 
a surprise cash count by the Finance Manager, (or Project Director in the absence of 
the Financial Manager) via unannounced inspections at least once per month. 
13. Financial Reporting 
The section on financial reporting deals with: 
  Financial reports for submission to IFAD and other financiers 
 
Implementing agencies – monthly reporting to the NPCU 
 
Internal reporting within each implementing agency 
13.1 Financial reports for submission to IFAD and other financiers 
The Project is responsible for submitting consolidated financial reports to IFAD. The 
applicable financial reporting requirements applicable to IFAD-financed Projects are 
outlined in the IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing for IFAD-financed 
Projects which may be updated from time to time. The Financial Manager should ensure 
adherence to the latest version of the Handbook. 
Project is required to prepare financial reports and submit to IFAD as outlined in the 
table below: 
Type 
Period / Frequency of submission 
Annual 
Financial 
Statements 
  Unaudited:  Prepare  annual  reports  and  submit  to  IFAD  within  4 
months of the end of the financial year-end.  
  Audited: Submit audited financial statements within 6 months of the 
end of the financial reporting period. 
The reports should be prepared in line with requirements are outlined 
in  13.4.  The  annual  financial  statement  should  be  authorised  by  the 
the 
Project  Director 
auditor/IFAD. 
for  authorisation  before  submission 
to 
165 
Type 
Period / Frequency of submission 
Interim 
financial reports 
Prepare quarterly reports and submit to IFAD within 45 days of the end 
of the quarter. The reports should be prepared in line with requirements 
are outlined in 13.4 
13.2 Financial reporting requirements 
The Project is required to prepare financial reports in line with IPSAS, “Financial 
Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting” (IPSAS Cash). Should the Project propose 
to use a different accounting standard, this should be agreed with IFAD. In all instances, 
IFAD required Projects to use internationally accepted accounting standard. 
13.3 General principles for the preparation of financial reports 
The Project shall prepare financial reports with consideration of the following specific 
principles: 
Principal 
Guidance 
Completeness 
  The financial reports shall be complete and include the activities of 
the  NPCU,  GPCUs  and  all  implementing  agencies  and  present  the 
results of a single entity. 
  The sources and uses of all categories/components shall be included 
(including sources received in-kind). 
  The sources and uses from all financiers as outlined in the financing 
agreement. 
Accuracy 
  Ensure  that  the  various  disclosures  as  outlined  in  13.4  are 
reconcilable as appropriate 
13.4 Minimum prescribed content for interim and annual financial reports 
The Project is required to prepare financial reports (annual and interim) which includes 
the following minimum prescribed content (an illustrative financial report is outlined in 
22.11): 
Detailed guidance on the preparation of the disclosures as prescribed by IPSAS Cash can 
be found in the Standard (https://www.ifac.org/publications-resources/revised-cash-basis-
ipsas). PROJECT is required to adopt all reporting requirements as outlined in Part 1 of 
IPSAS Cash. The Project is encouraged to adopt Part 2 of IPSAS Cash on a voluntary 
basis. 
Content 
Statement of 
Cash Receipts 
and Payments 
Source of 
requirement 
Prescribed by 
IPSAS Cash 
Guidance on preparation of content 
  Layout: 
o  Receipts – Payments = Surplus/Deficit 
+ Opening Cash +/- Exchange rate 
difference = Closing Cash Balance 
  The opening and closing cash balance should 
include the balance of the designated accounts 
(EUR) and all Project accounts (Egyptian 
pound) 
  The opening and closing cash balance in the 
Designated Account is derived by applying the 
spot rate on the date of translation 
  Disclose cash receipts using an appropriate 
classification system (Contributions from 
external financiers, Contributions from 
Government, Contributions from Beneficiaries, 
Cash generated from Project activities) 
166 
Content 
Source of 
requirement 
Guidance on preparation of content 
Budget to Actual 
Comparison 
Prescribed by 
IPSAS Cash 
Accounting 
policies and 
explanatory 
notes 
Prescribed by 
IPSAS Cash 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Projects 
Sources and 
Uses of Funds 
Statement 
Designated 
account 
reconciliation 
Designated 
account 
Statement 
  Disclose cash payments in line with the 
categories outlined in Schedule 2 of the IFAD 
financing agreement 
  Disclose the exchange rate gain or loss 
(resulting from the translation of funds in the 
designated account from EUR to Egyptian 
pound). 
  Ensure that the Budget period corresponds to 
the Financial Reporting Period 
  Derive the budget disclosure from the 
approved AWPB. Disclose both the original and 
final approved AWPB. 
  Calculate the variance between budgeted and 
actual results for both receipts (sources) and 
uses (payments) 
  Provide narrative on the reason for the 
variances observed. 
  Develop accounting policies with reference to 
the guidance provided in IPSAS Cash 
  Disclose the authorisation date 
  Disclose the basis of presentation 
  Disclose the presentation currency as Kyrgyz 
Som 
 
Include both cash and in-kind contributions in 
the Sources of Funds 
  Provide disclosure on uses of funds by 
financier/by category and financier/component 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Projects 
  Prepare reconciliation which provide 
justification for the IFAD advance – disclose for 
each designated account. 
  Explain variances. 
  The IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook 
provides detailed guidance on the preparation 
of the reconciliation. 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Projects 
  Prepare for each designated account. 
  Ensure that opening and closing cash balances 
presented in this Statement is reconciled with 
the cash balances used in the Statement of 
Cash Receipts and Payments. 
  Disclose the exchange rate gain/loss separately 
and ensure that this is reconciled with the 
Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments. 
167 
Content 
Source of 
requirement 
Guidance on preparation of content 
  The IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook 
provides detailed guidance on the preparation 
of the reconciliation. 
Summary of 
Withdrawal 
Applications 
Fixed asset 
register 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Projects 
  Ensure that summary information is 
reconcilable with the IFAD historical transaction 
statement (to be requested from the IFAD 
Finance Officer) with regards to the value date 
of the transaction amount of withdrawal in loan 
denomination currency. 
  Cross reference amounts included here per WA 
to amounts included in the Designated Account 
Statement / Designated Account Reconciliation. 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Projects 
 
 
Include a fixed asset register which lists all 
Project assets (including those purchased on 
behalf of the Community Groups if the Project 
retains the title and the assets will be returned 
to the Project at Project closure). 
Indicate the implementing agency which 
procured the asset and related component. 
  Ensure that all fields are included – refer 
illustration included in 22.11. 
In addition to the above disclosures, the Project is required to maintain and Action 
Tracker log which is a log of agreed actions. This document should be maintained on an 
ongoing basis provide together with the financial report (interim or annual). The Action 
Tracker format is outlined in 22.11. It is required that the Action Tracker include actions 
which have been agreed on with IFAD during missions or the Auditor during the audit 
(derived from the management letter). The purpose of the Action Tracker is to keep 
track of progress regarding agreed on actions. 
13.5 Other considerations 
The following specific issues should be considered in the preparation of the financial 
reports: 
  Accrual related information should be disclosure in the notes of the financial 
statements. This includes outstanding advances, which, in terms of the cash basis of 
accounting, should be expensed when provided. This entails that the advance will be 
recorded in the relevant categories /components at year-end. (NB: Best practice is 
that zero advances are outstanding at the end of the fiscal year). 
In-kind contributions from Government should be reported in the financial 
statements in line with the process as outlined in section 9.7. Also refer to 22.11 to 
see the illustrative accounting policy and explanatory notes. 
 
3.6 IAs reporting to PROJECT  
MWRI as implementing agent is required to submit monthly reports to the Project. The 
NPCU will review the reports and verify bank balances/expenses with reference to 
supporting documentation attached to the report. The NPCU will proceed to record 
individual transactions in accounting software and clear related advances. MWRI is 
required to submit monthly reports using the report format as outlined in 22.16. 
13.7 Internal reporting 
168 
Type 
Quarterly 
Project reports 
Period / Frequency of submission 
The NPCU Financial Manager to prepare a quarterly Project report 
which includes (but not limited to): 
  Consolidated budget to actual expenditure comparison with 
 
variance explanation. 
Individual budget to actual expenditure report per implementing 
agency with variance explanation. 
This report to assist the NPCU Project director to monitor overall and 
implementing agency level performance for the purposes of taking 
corrective action if needed. 
Monthly 
management 
accounts 
It is required that each implementing agency prepare monthly 
management accounts for the purposes of monitoring allocated 
components/sub-components. The content may include (but not 
limited to): 
  A financial progress report (sources and uses) 
  Monthly bank reconciliations 
  Cashflow forecast 
  Summary of contract commitments  
  Overview of budget to actual expenditure analysis with variance 
explanations 
  Monthly vehicle maintenance and fuel consumption report  
  Travel and DSA report.  
The monthly management accounts should be prepared within 10 
days of the end of the month and submitted to the respective Project 
Directors for review and discussion during management meetings. The 
purpose of the monthly management accounts is to provide a 
monitoring tool for management with the purposes of identifying 
issues and taking corrective action. 
14. Audit matters 
14.1 Internal Audit  
  Both CIB (as fund manager for ADP) and MSMEDA will continue to rely 
on their own internal audit functions.  
  In the absence of an internal audit function at the NPCU, the Financial 
Manager will consider recommended control environment 
improvements as outlined in the CAO report. 
14.2 External Audit 
(This section is an extract from the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and 
Auditing of IFAD-Financed Projects – refer to the most recent publication on 
the IFAD website) 
The NPCU Financial Manager will be responsible for the preparation of a consolidated 
financial report which includes all sources of funds as outlined in the financing 
agreements and all uses thereof by the NPCU and other implementing partners. 
169 
NB: Stand-alone audit reports for MSMEDA and ADP will not be accepted in lieu of a 
consolidated audit report. 
14.2.1 Auditing standards 
IFAD promotes the use of internationally accepted auditing standards and requires that 
PROJECT be audited in terms of the International Standards on Auditing (ISA). 
14.2.2 Appointment of the auditor 
IFAD required the appointment of a private auditor for the purposes of auditing the Project. 
In selecting a private auditor (via relevant procurement procedure), the following should 
be considered during the assessment process: 
  The auditor must be independent of the Project, its staff and activities, in accordance 
with international best practices.  
  The Project auditor may not provide consultancy services to the Project or prepare the 
Project financial statements or have done so in the previous two years.  
  The auditor must be suitably qualified and be a member of a professional body affiliated 
with the International Federation of Accountants.  
  The auditor’s work must conform to international auditing standards 
  The  audit  firm  must  be  able  to  assign  an  audit  team  to  the  audit  possessing  the 
necessary competence and skills.  
  The audit firm must have a proven track record in conducting audits of a similar nature 
and complexity.  
  If possible, the Project can consider the appointment of a single audit firm to 
conduct the audits of all IFAD Projects managed by the NPCU. 
Auditors should normally be appointed in advance of the start of the period to be audited, 
to allow the auditor sufficient time to plan and carry out a comprehensive examination of 
the borrower’s/recipient’s financial records and accounts.  
The IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects require 
that the following appointment process should be adhered to: 
14.2.3 Auditor terms of reference 
A proposed TOR is included in 22.9. The Financial Manager should use and refine this 
TOR as required. Incorporate all financiers’ requirements (specifically also AfDB and 
WFP) and seek approval from other financiers as appropriate. 
170 
14.2.4 Audit opinion and audit package 
The audit report will outline the audit opinion on the audited financial statements.  
The auditor is expected to submit an audit package that at a minimum includes the audited 
financial statements, the audit report and the management letter. The management letter 
is an integral part of the audit package, which documents internal control issues identified 
by the auditor. The management letter should: 
  Outline  the  auditor’s  recommendations  to  address  identified  internal  control  issues, 
and the responses to them on the part of the Project’s management. 
  Where  applicable,  provide  follow-up  commentary  on  the  issues  identified  in  the 
 
previous year’s management letter.  
Include  any  ineligible  expenditures  identified  during  the  audit  be  outlined  in  the 
management letter. 
14.2.5 Audit reporting period 
IFAD  generally  requires  an  annual  audit  of  Project  financial  statements.  However,  the 
frequency of the audit may be changed by IFAD as a function of the Project’s risk profile. 
In all instances, IFAD will confirm the frequency with which Project’s financial statements 
are to be audited. 
The audit reporting period may be amended for the first and/or final audits, in line with 
the following guidance: 
  For the first audit, in cases in which the Project commences during the financial year, 
the following procedures will generally apply:  
o  When the period between the first disbursement and the end of the financial year 
is less than six months, IFAD may allow the results for the first financial period to 
be included in the following financial year’s audit; or 
o  When the period between the date of the first disbursement and the financial year-
end  is  greater  than  six  months,  audited  financial  statements  for  the  period  are 
always required. 
  For the final audit, IFAD may recommend an audit reporting period that is longer or 
shorter than 12 months, but that in no case may exceed 18 months. This is to ensure 
that the final audit can be concluded and the audit report submitted to IFAD by the 
Project Closing Date.  
In such instances, IFAD will discuss and agree on its requirements with the borrower well 
in advance of commencement of the final audit.  
14.2.6 IFAD Audit reviews 
IFAD will conduct reviews of Project’s audit reports. The main purpose of the reviews is to 
determine  whether  the  private  auditor  conducted  a  quality  audit  resulting  in  an  audit 
opinion  acceptable  to  IFAD,  and  to  assess  the  quality  of  the  financial  reporting  of  the 
Project. 
IFAD  will  communicate  the  results  of  the  audit  report  review  process  within  sixty  days 
following receipt of the audit package. If required, the Project will be requested to take 
corrective  actions  within  a  specified  time  frame.  These  actions  should  be  included  and 
monitored in the Action Tracker (illustrated in 22.11). 
14.2.7 Public disclosure of audit reports 
IFAD will disclose the Project’s Project financial statements and audit reports, subject to 
processes  applicable to their publication. In line with the standards  of the International 
Aid  Transparency  Initiative,  MALR  and/or  MIIC  is  encouraged  to  publish  financial 
information on it’s own website, for increased accountability. The Project must ensure that 
the audit TORs explicitly mention the right of the Project and of IFAD to publish the audit 
report, with no limitation-of-use clause. 
171 
15. Records Management 
15.1 Maintenance of separate accounts and records 
In terms of IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Finance: 
“The Project Parties shall maintain separate accounts and records in accordance with 
consistently maintained appropriate accounting practices adequate to reflect the 
operations, resources and expenditures related to the Project until the Financing Closing 
Date…”  
In order to comply with the above requirement, all Project parties are required to maintain 
accounts. Such accounts and records may include: 
Type 
Electronic 
information 
Example 
  Data  and  information  maintained  within  the  accounting 
software accounting software 
  Other documents and files maintained electronically, either 
on desktops, laptops or removable storage devices 
Correspondence 
  Emails 
  Hard copy correspondence (letters) 
Documents received 
from external 
sources 
  Bank statements 
  Supplier documentation 
Internally generated 
information 
  Employee files 
  Withdrawal applications 
  Forms 
All documents and information are the property of Project and may not be removed. 
15.2 Filing and storage of the financial records 
All Project parties are responsible for filing records. To fulfil this responsibility: 
  Project  parties  should  maintain  files  in  a  chronological  order,  assigning  appropriate 
codes/sequential numbers; 
  Project  parties  should  perform  filing  activities  on  a  regular  basis  to  prevent  the 
accumulation of papers and to ensure that the financial records are always maintained 
in an up-to-date manner. 
  Project parties should allocate an appropriate storage area for the financial records in 
paper format and maintain them in locked cabinets, safe from water and fire, to which 
access is controlled and limited.  
  Project parties should also classify the financial records as "Confidential", or "General".  
15.3 Off-site archiving of financial records 
All  Project  parties  should  ensure  that  the  financial  records  are  archived  at  an  off-site 
location on a regularly basis. Once a year, the respective parties should make sure that 
the completed or inactive files are archived in a manner that will allow for easy retrieval 
of the files in case they are required at some future date.  
15.4 Electronic back-up procedures 
All  Project  parties  should  ensure  that  electronic  back-up  procedures  are  implemented. 
Access to backup files are subject to authorisation by management. The access of external 
persons is prohibited except for the auditors and IFAD staff.  
15.5 Retention period 
Project parties are required to retain accounts and records for at least ten (10) years 
after Financial Close. The NPCU Financial Manager should ensure that all documents and 
172 
records (electronic and paper) are retained at the NPCU for 10 years after Project 
Closure. 
16. Fixed Asset Management  
Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets for the 
purposes of financial accounting and to ensure preventive maintenance, and theft 
deterrence. Adequate Fixed asset maintenance also increases the sustainability of the 
Project. There are three elements in fixed asset management that require the attention 
of the NPCU Financial Manager:  
  Purchase of equipment 
  Setting up and maintaining an asset register including verification 
  Setting  up  a  plan  for  disposal  and/or  handover  of  the  asset  once  the  Project  is 
completed  
16.1 Purchase of Equipment  
The NPCU / Governorate PMUs should follow the following process for each fixed asset 
purchased: 
  Assign a unique, sequential asset number (excluding minor items such as stationary).  
  Tag each item with its unique asset number.  
  Record the item of equipment in fixed asset register module of the accounting 
software. 
16.2 Fixed asset register 
The Project must maintain a fixed asset register in the asset management module of the 
accounting software. The asset register should record the following information for each 
individual piece of equipment (refer 22.11 for illustration):  
  Asset description 
  Asset number 
 
Individual responsible for asset 
 
Implementing agency responsible for purchase 
  Source of funding of asset (IFAD, government etc),  
  Location of the asset 
  Date of purchase 
  Cost of purchase and invoice number 
  Remarks regarding the condition of the asset 
Assets purchased for beneficiary use should be included in the fixed asset register if the 
assets remain under the ownership of the Project (therefore beneficiaries to return to 
Project at Project closure). 
16.3 Asset Verification Review 
Under the management of the NPCU Financial Manager, the Project must conduct an 
annual asset verification process whereby the following checks are performed: 
  Verify that all fixed assets are still held in the location recorded on the register;  
  Confirm the completeness and accuracy of the information recorded on the fixed 
asset register; 
  Check that equipment and vehicles are still in a reasonable state of repair and that 
remarks regarding the condition of the assets are correct as recorded in the fixed 
asset register; 
The verification review must be performed by different staff from those who use the 
equipment, to ensure adequate segregation of duty. Discrepancies between the 
verification exercise and the fixed asset register should be investigated. Where assets 
are missing or seriously damaged, they should be removed from the asset register. The 
removal should be formally documented and approved by Financial Manager and Project 
173 
Director. Moreover, the Financial Manager will undertake random verification of fixed 
assets during field visit. 
16.4 Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel 
Drivers are required to maintain logbooks (22.14). 
The Project purchases fuel vouchers from the Ministry of Oil via the Government 
Payment System, subject to request for purchase approved by the Project Director. 
  Fuel vouchers are not expensed in the accounting system until used.  
  Drivers may request fuel vouchers by submitting approved travel requests which 
indicate the estimated distance of travel. 
  Fuel vouchers are issued and recorded as an advance to the driver. 
  Upon refuelling, the driver should obtain a receipt with an amount which corresponds 
to the voucher amount and indicated the vehicle registration number. – information 
captured on the vehicle log. 
  On a monthly basis the vehicle logs with supporting documentation are submitted to 
the accountant / accounts-assistant for review. At this time, fuel vouchers are 
expensed, and the related driver advance cleared. No outstanding advances are 
allowed at month-end. 
Monitoring of fuel usage 
On a monthly basis the administrative assistant will compare all fuel invoices with the 
relevant logbooks and prepare an analysis of consumption per vehicle. The analysis will 
consider the purposes of the trips undertaken with the intention of allocating the 
monthly fuel expense to the correct budget items in the accounting software. 
Vehicle insurance 
The Financial Manager should ensure that all Project vehicles are comprehensively 
covered and that all drivers are noted on the insurance policy. Under no circumstanced 
may unlicensed drivers drive the vehicles. The insurance policies should be renewed 
annually or as stipulated in the policy. The safety of cars is the responsibility of the 
drivers assigned to the vehicles. Consequently, they must ensure that the vehicles are 
parked in a secure area when not in use or outside working hours.  
Maintenance 
The drivers are required to monitor the maintenance of their assigned vehicles. The 
drivers must notify the xxxx of maintenance needs so that the cars can be serviced on a 
timely basis. The xxx is required to request the car maintenance, subject to approval by 
the Project Director. The assigned cars must always be taken to the selected garage for 
repairs and maintenance.  
17. IFAD financial management support 
17.1 Overview of IFAD support 
IFAD’s Financial Management Division (FMD) will remain involved with Project from 
Project inception to Financial Closure to ensure that PROJECT fiduciary requirements are 
met. 
FMD’s Finance Officer will establish ongoing contact with the Project, by liaising with the 
NPCU Financial Manager and will be available to provide remote support on financial 
management matters (also supporting MSMEDA / ADP as required). In addition, FMD will 
visit the Project during missions to the (represented by either the Finance Officer or an 
appointed consultant). Mission types include supervision missions, mid-term reviews and 
implementation support missions. During missions, FMD will assess and monitor the 
adequacy of Project financial management arrangements such as accounting, budgeting, 
internal controls, flow of funds, financial reporting and the auditing practices. 
If financial management arrangements of the Project are deemed acceptable, IFAD will 
rely on them to provide assurance that the financing proceeds are being used for the 
intended purposes. In the case that IFAD identifies weaknesses in the financial 
174 
arrangements, it will require the Project to take the appropriate measures to mitigate 
those risks.  
The key findings and recommendations of missions will be captured in the Aid Memoire 
which includes an overview of issues identified and proposed actions to be undertaken by 
the Project/IFAD to address issues identified. 
17.2 Roles and responsibilities related to IFAD support 
The Project will be required to participate in IFAD missions as follow: 
Stage 
Project roles and responsibilities 
Before IFAD missions 
During IFAD missions 
  Prepare Appendix 1 (22.12) and submit to the FO/Consultant 
in  electronic  format  (Excel  Workbook,  including  formulae) 
before  commencement  of  the mission  –  the  FO/Consultant 
will specify the date range to be covered within Appendix 1. 
  Each  Project  party  (NPCU,  MSMEDA  and  ADP)  to  complete 
the  Financial  Management  Assessment  Questionnaire 
(FMAQ) and submit to the FO/Consultant in electronic format 
(FO to provide most recent template). 
  Prepare all other information as requested by FO/Consultant 
before commencement of the mission (refer 22.2). 
  Provide the FO/Consultant with all information which was 
requested before the mission. 
  Arrange meeting with the auditors (internal and external) 
and any other selected party requested by the mission. 
  Ensure that all FM staff are available to assist the 
FO/Consultant in performing their duties which may 
include: 
o  Review of financial reports, reconciliations 
o  Physical verification of fixed assets and inventory 
o  Meeting with the auditor 
o  Reviewing and completing the FMAQ 
  Discuss identified FM weaknesses and risks and assist the 
FO/Consultant with developing appropriate actions for 
inclusion in the aide memoire. 
After IFAD missions 
  Respond to any wrap-queries from the FO/Consultant 
  Commence with implementing all actions which are included 
in the Aide Memoire 
  Update the Action Tracker (see illustration in 22.11) with all 
actions raised during the missions. 
Ongoing 
  Monitor and update the Action Tracker to ensure all actions 
are implemented in a timely manner. Liaise with the Financial 
Manager if required. 
  Respond  to  ad-hoc  queries  received  from  the  Financial 
Manager or other IFAD staff as it related to FM matters. 
18. Project completion and closure 
The Project completion date is defined in the financing agreement and the Project 
closure date is 6 months thereafter. The following is relevant to period before Project 
completion up to Project closure: 
175 
STEP 1 
Prior to the Project 
completion date 
STEP 2 
Between Project 
completion and closure 
Subsequent to Project 
closure date 
Project completion 
date 
STEP 3 
Project closure date 
STAGE 1 
Up to the Project 
completion date 
  Submit an advance 
recovery plan to IFAD, 
indicating how the 
advance will be 
recovered up to Project 
closure (in line with 
financing agreement) 
(request template for 
plan from IFAD) 
  Agree on the audit 
scope of work and 
submit to IFAD for no 
objection 
Incur eligible 
expenditure up to the 
Project completion date 
 
STEP 3 
Project closure date 
  Submit final audit 
report on or before the 
Project closure date 
  Submit Project 
completion report on or 
before the Financial 
Closure Date (as 
required in the 
financing agreement) 
  Confirm the final 
withdrawal application 
with IFAD 
  Return outstanding 
advance if applicable (if 
due and not recovered 
via recovery process) 
  Closure of the grant 
with IFAD 
STAGE 2 
Between Project completion 
and closure 
  Commencement of the 
final audit 
 
  Auditor performs the 
final audit in line with 
scope of work approved 
by IFAD 
Incur winding up 
expenditure only (cost 
of audit, staff salaries, 
operating costs, Project 
completion report) 
  Submit final withdrawal 
application and recover 
advance via this 
process 
  Develop an asset 
handover and disposal 
plan (include up to date 
fixed asset register, 
indicate condition of all 
assets and to which 
entity the assets will be 
transferred. 
A notice is sent to the Borrower at least six months prior to the Project Closure Date 
(PCD) to advise that all applications must be submitted before the closing date, and to 
remind the Borrower that expenditures incurred and commitments made after the PCD 
will not be honoured, except for authorised expenditures during the “Winding Up Period” 
(from PCD to Financing Closing Date). This means that goods are delivered, civil works 
are completed and services are rendered on or before such date.  
After the financing closing date, IFAD informs the Borrower of the formal closure of the 
loan/grant account, provides a history of disbursement transactions and cancels the 
unused loan/grant balance. A re-amortisation plan should be sent where relevant.  
Asset handover plan 
The plan should develop report outlining the following for  the purposes of  handing over Project 
assets to the identified beneficiaries: 
  The value of all the assets bought under the Project  
  Summary of the current condition of the assets, 
  To which entity, will the assets be transferred to and on which date and for what purpose. 
  List the assets that will be disposed and the reason for being disposed. 
19. IFAD Financing agreements – amendments and budget reallocations 
176 
If amendments are required to the financing agreement: 
  a formal written request should be submitted to IFAD 
  outlining the required amendment and motivation thereof. 
Amendments to the agreement may be required for (but not limited to): 
  Changes to the Project completion date and grant closing date,  
  Changes to the Project budget/budget reallocation (noting that the budget may not be increased 
above the original total amount) 
Budget reallocations 
 
In some cases, the expenses category amounts as outlined in the financing agreement requires 
a revision if the Project notes that actual expenditure is deviating from the original budget.  
In  such  instances  a  reallocation  is  required,  depending  on  the  size  of  the  reallocation  per 
category (expressed as %) 
 
  Reallocation of equal to or less than 10% (of each category) between the various categories if 
such a reallocation does not change the basic purpose of the Project. 
  For reallocation greater than 10% of any expense category, the Borrower is required to formally 
request a reallocation from IFAD (supported by a detailed motivation). 
  Ensure TSA budget is updated in line with changes – request from MoF in writing (or use process 
as prescribed at the time). 
20. Management of implementing partners – financial management 
considerations 
Some activities are implemented by 3rd party implementing agencies (MSMEDA, ADP and 
MWRI). The financial management specialist and Project Director will have an oversight role 
over the activities of 3rd party implementing agencies and the following should be considered: 
Topic 
Consideration  
Terms of subsidiary 
agreements 
Adherence to laws 
and regulations 
Advances to 3rd 
parties 
Each  implementing  partner  will  enter  into  a  subsidiary 
agreement /MOU  with  the  Project.  This  agreement  will  outline 
the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  both  parties.  Some  proposed 
terms areoutlined in 22.15. The NPCU should monitor adherence 
to  terms  of  these  agreements  with  regards  to  financial 
management related aspects. 
Rural finance implementing partners may be subject to 
regulation by the Egyptian Financial Regulatory Authority 
(previously EFSA) or the Central Bank of Egypt. The NPCU 
should be aware of regulatory changes that may impact 
implementing partners (specifically considering impacts on 
Project financial management) and engage with partners to 
monitor compliance issues. 
MWRI will receive advances from the NPCU (MSMEDA and ADP 
withdraw directly from IFAD). MWRI may request advances 
using the Request for advance form (22.17) and should report 
thereon on a monthly basis using the template provide in 
22.16. The NPCU Financial Manager has overall oversight over 
the advances arrangement and should ensure that advances 
are justified and recorded in the NPCU accounting system on a 
monthly basis. 
Post investment 
monitoring of rural 
finance activities 
The Project will place reliance on MSMEDA and ADP with 
regards to the eligibility of expenditures incurred (specifically 
loans / grants to end-beneficiaries). The NPCU Financial 
177 
Topic 
Consideration  
Manager and M&E specialist to collaborate on post monitoring 
activities in this regard to ensure: 
  Loans to end-beneficiaries were provided subject to a 
duly approved loan agreement 
  Loan funds disbursed were used by end-beneficiary for 
the activity as outlined in the loan agreement. 
21. Useful links  
Document 
IFAD financial management e-
learning 
Revised IFAD policy on 
preventing fraud and 
corruption in its activities and 
operations (December 2018) 
IFAD General Conditions for 
Agricultural Development 
Financing 
IFAD Handbook for Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD 
-financed Projects (English) 
IFAD Handbook for Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD 
-financed Projects (Arabic) 
IFAD Loan Disbursement 
Handbook 
IFAD Financial Administration 
Manual 
IPSAS Cash Standard 
ICP page 
ICP support email 
STAR design report 
Link 
https://www.ifad.org/elearning_cfs_a/index.html 
https://www.ifad.org/en/document-
detail/asset/40189695 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421024/
general_e.pdf/47c5f14b-2903-4285-b0b0-
62c67cd650b8 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421009/I
FAD+Handbook+for+Financial+Reporting+and+Audi
ting+of+IFAD-Financed+Projects/133b165d-15c7-
4f79-8217-aef95b79dd67 
Insert link 
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-
detail/asset/39635782 
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-
detail/asset/39637251 
https://www.ifac.org/publications-
resources/revised-cash-basis-ipsas 
https://icp.ifad.org/ 
icpsupport@ifad.org 
[insert link] 
178 
22. Annexures 
22.1 AWPB Structure and preparation checklist 
The  Project  is  responsible  for  the  development  of  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget 
(AWPB),  generally  covering  a  period  of  12  months,  which  should  include  the  following 
mandatory sections: 
Section 
Description 
Introduction 
  Provide a brief background 
 
Include  narrative  covering  the  strategic  focus,  target  group, 
geographical 
focus  (Project  sites),  outreach  (with  gender 
disaggregation),  Project  components,  specific  activities  to  be 
undertaken and the planned output for each activity. 
Risks and 
mitigation 
Budget and 
financing plan 
  Outline  of  major  risks  that  could  affect  adversely  the  Project 
outcomes and mitigating actions taken. 
  Describe  the  necessary  inputs  and  outputs  for  each  activity, 
financing  source  and  expected 
including  the  expenditures, 
completion date.  
  The expenditures should be classified per  activity and should also 
be linked to a component, expenditure category as per the financing 
agreement and a financing source.  
  Each  activity  should  be  coupled  with  tangible  outputs  or  physical 
targets to facilitate the measurement of Project progress. 
Procurement 
plan 
  Outline  detailed  plan  outlining  procurement  activities,  include 
expected cost for each item, procurement method and timeline.  
  The first Procurement plan should cover the first 18 months of the 
Project  lifecycle  while  the  subsequent  procurement  plans  should 
cover 12 months of the Project lifecycle.   
Progress and 
past 
performance 
(include in 2nd 
AWPB onwards) 
Outline the following with: 
  Summary of the key achievements  
  Problems encountered and how these were resolved 
  Budget 
execution, 
per 
category/component to  prior  AWPB  with  an  indication  of category 
overspend  
expenditure 
comparing 
actual 
Other 
  Training and technical assistance schedule  
  Staff development plan 
  Project  staff  payroll  (including  the  names,  titles,  salaries  and 
incentives) 
179 
(i)  AWPB Check: The checks listed below are 
(ii)  Yes 
(iii)  No 
designed to improve the quality of the AWPB 
during the final preparation stage.   
(iv)  Is the AWPB complete and clearly presented? 
(v)   
(vi)   
Does it disclose sufficient information? 
(vii)  Is the AWPB in line with the Project 
(viii)   
(ix)   
description and rational (schedule 1) as per 
the financing agreement and the Project log-
frame? Are all the activities relevant to the 
Project? 
(x)  Does it contain the necessary summary tables 
(xi)   
(xii)   
by component and financier and by 
expenditure category and financier as well as 
the detailed tables by component? 
(xiii)  Does the implementation schedule seem 
(xiv)   
(xv)   
realistic and does it show appropriate targets 
and milestones? Are the targets and execution 
level realistic compared to past years 
progress? 
(xvi)  Does it contain a separate annex disclosing 
(xvii)   
(xviii)   
the details of the Project payroll? 
(xix)  Does it contain a separate annex containing 
(xx)   
(xxi)   
outlining the planned trainings? 
(xxii)  In the detailed tables are the expenditures 
structured by activity and linked to a 
component, expenditure category and 
financing source? 
(xxiii)   
(xxiv)   
(xxv)  Are the cost categories of the AWPB in line 
(xxvi)   
(xxvii)   
with the Schedule 2 of the IFAD financing 
agreements and are expenditures within the 
agreed allocations? 
(xxviii)  Is any expenditure category going to be 
(xxix)   
(xxx)   
overdrawn during the year? Is a reallocation 
of IFAD funds needed? 
(xxxi)  Does the total (and subtotal) costs add up? 
Are the inputs (unit cost) and outputs 
(physical targets) adequately quantified? Is 
there coherence between the inputs and 
outputs? And does these represent value for 
money (i.e. what is the unit cots for per 
output, e.g. cost per trained farmer)? 
(xxxii)   
(xxxiii)   
(xxxiv)  Are the unit cost are realistic and do they 
(xxxv)   
(xxxvi)   
reflect market prices? 
180 
(xxxvii)  Is the AWPB accompanied by a procurement 
(xxxviii)   
(xxxix)   
plan? Is the procurement plan consistent with 
the AWPB? 
(xl)  Is the format of the AWPB compatible with 
other financial reports and the accounting 
software to allow input in the budget module 
and generation of actual vs budget reports and  
(xli)   
(xlii)   
(xliii)  If last audit, does it take into account 
(xlv)   
(xlvi)   
completion date of the Project as well as 
winding up activities such as Project 
completion report, final audit as 
handover/disposal of Project assets 
(computers, vehicles etc.),  
(xliv)   
181 
182 
22.2 Information checklist – preparing for IFAD missions 
It is required that PROJECT prepare the following in anticipation of IFAD missions: 
Information 
Guidance 
1. 
Appendix 1 
  Prepare Appendix 1 in Excel Workbook and include 
formulae as appropriate. 
2. 
FMAQ 
 
Include comments in the Financial Management 
Assessment Questionnaire (with exception of the 
summary section). 
3.  Withdrawal 
  Make hardcopy files of all recent withdrawal 
applications/ SOEs 
applications/statement of expenditures available (at least 
covering 12 months prior to the missions). Upon request, 
provide supporting documentation for a selection of 
expenditures. 
  Provide a summary of pending withdrawal applications / 
SOEs for review. 
4. 
Bank and petty 
cash reconciliations 
  Make hardcopy files of most recent bank and petty cash 
reconciliations available. Include copies of relevant bank 
statements. Ensure that IFAD designated account 
reconciliations are prepared in the correct format as 
outlined in the IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook 
5. 
Financial reports 
  Provide most recent financial reports (as at end of most 
recent completed month), which include summary 
information (including all sources and uses of funds). 
  Provide most recent interim financial report (format 
illustrated in 22.9) 
  Provide copy of most recent audited financial statement. 
6. 
Fixed asset register    Provide updated fixed asset register in Excel Workbook 
format (export from accounting software).  
7.  Manuals and 
  Provide an electronic of the most recent version of the 
procedures 
Financial Manual (to which IFAD provide a no objection). 
  Provide a copy of the accounting software manual. 
8.  Contract register 
  Make available the update Contract Register and 
and monitoring 
forms 
Contract Monitoring Forms (export from Accounting 
software). 
9. 
Action tracker 
  Update the action tracker with progress to date. 
10.  AWPB/Procurement 
  Make available electronic copies of the AWPB and 
Plan 
Procurement Plan (provide in Excel Workbook format). 
11.  Advances 
  Make available a summary of outstanding advances with 
supporting documentation. 
183 
184 
22.3 Terms of reference: Financial Coordinator 
Post title:  
Financial Coordinator 
Organisation:  STAR NPCU within MALR 
Location:                Cairo, Egypt 
Name of Project: 
STAR 
Duration:  
One-year renewable 
Type of contract: 
short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
MALR  has  established  a  Central  Project  Management  Unit  (NPCU)  to  coordinate  the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Projects in Egypt.  
The Project Financial Management Unit 
The NPCU has a financial management function responsible for financial and accounting 
matters  of  IFAD-funded  Projects  which  it  manages.  The  Financial  Manager  has  key 
responsibility for the financial management function and reports to the NPCU Director. The 
Financial Manager is assisted by an accountant and accounts assistant at the NPCU. 
Job Description 
  The Financial Manager is responsible for the financial and administrative management of the projgramme 
including Accounting, Budgeting, Financial Reporting, Internal Controls, Auditing Arrangements, Flow of 
Funds  and  the  efficient  management  of  Project  resources  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  IFAD.  
He/she  will  report  directly  to  the  NPCU  Director  and  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with  his  or  her 
counterparts at MALR. 
  Operating within a computerized environment, the Financial Manager will perform the following duties: 
o  Develop behavioural ways of working within the finance team that promotes value addition, continuous 
professional improvement and a culture of cost effectiveness by all managers. 
o  Take a leading role on financial aspects of preparation and consolidation of the Annual Workplan and 
Budget. 
o  Ensure timely uploading of the AWPB to the accounting system. 
o  Master IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, procurement guidelines and 
handbook, IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects, the 
Financing Agreement (FA) and the Letter to the Borrower (LTB). 
o  Work closely with the accounting system developer on custoimzing and maintaining an efficient 
accounting system and reliable internal control procedures and guidelines for financial reporting and 
recordkeeping. 
o  Ensure compliance with all legal and statutory reporting requirement in country. 
o  Ensure that administrative and financial directives and guideliness are reflected in all Project financial 
activities. 
o  Ensure that all financial accounts are managed with respect to disbursement and replenishment in 
accordance with the approved procedures stipulated by the financiers.  
o  Take prompt and definite action on non-compliance with procedure and practices. Verify all 
withdrawal applications for submission to IFAD, and ensure the availability of funds for all planned 
activities. Manage the Projects bank accounts, approve and co-sign all payments. 
o  Facilitate timely receipt of Government counterpart funds in the MoF treasury single account system 
with allocation thereof to the Project budget. 
o  Prepare and provide annual financial reports which are compliant with the IFAD Handbook For 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-Financed Projects and the Project’s Financial Manual. 
o  Prepare financial reports as outline in the Project Implementation Manual and as may be requested 
from IFAD, MoF or MALR from time to time. 
185 
o  Act as focal point for all related Project financial correpondances.  
o  Prepare terms of reference for the annual statutory audit in line with the guidelines as outlined in the 
Project Implementation Manual and obtain IFAD no-objection. 
o  Request procurment of statutory audit services well in advance of the audit start-date. 
o  Coordinate and supervise statutory audit arrangements. 
o  Act as focal point for the Central Auditing Organisation audit review. 
o  Consider outcomes of both the statutory audit and Central Auditing Organistation audits with regards 
to control weaknesses / other observations and implement recommendations. 
o  Develop and maintain a system of financial control over all expenditure incurred by the Project and its 
implementing agents. 
o  Review and assess the internal control environment within implementing agencies and propose 
improvements if required to ensure that monthly reporting to the NPCU is accurate and complete. 
o  Manage funds flows to the local currency accounts to ensure sufficient funds are available for Project 
cashflow needs. 
o  Monitor the level of advances/funds to implementing agencies to ensure both that there are sufficient 
funds to implement the Project activities and that the level of advances/fund are adequate and there are 
no idle funds. 
o  Monitor compliance with the Project Financing Agreements. 
o  Monitor compliance with the IFAD Letter to the Borrower. 
o  Approve all reconciliations including bank and advance reconciliations. 
o  Supervise and coordinate the work of staff placed under his/her direct authority as well as supervising 
the work of the financial management staff at the GPCUs. 
o  Undertake annual performance reviews of staff at the NPCU and develop skills development plans as 
required. 
o  Review and regularly update the financial section of the Project Implementation Manual 
o  Take responsibility for the implementation of IFAD mission recommendiations related to financial 
matters. 
o  Act as key contact with the Ministry of Finance controller assigned to the NPCU for the purposes of 
ensuring timely reconciliation of the Projects accounting system with payments made via the treasury 
single account. 
o  Liaise with Ministry of Finance on matters pertaining to required customisations to the TSA ledger for 
the Project / accounting for Projects transactions in the Treasury Ledger and other issues which 
impact the NPCU ability to account for transactions via the Government Payment System. 
o  Undertake any other activities assigned by the Project Director. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification. A Master’s Degree is preferable. 
  A minimum of 15 years professional experience with at least 10 years experience in financial management 
preferably in management position.  
  Experience on donor financed Projects is required. 
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of accounting practices, finance and 
investment.  Familiarity and experience in use of accounting software is a must. 
  Candidates with previous experience in IFI-funded Projects in Egypt will be given preference.   
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written. 
  Prior experience working with government of Egypt regulations and procedures – specifically Minister of 
Finance / Central Bank of Egypt / Egyptian Financial Regulatory Authority. 
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Office.   
  The ability to lead and to work as part of a team. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector companies, civil society 
organizations, and community. 
186 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex assignments efficiently and 
effectively in a high demanding working environment. 
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
187 
22.4 Terms of reference: NPCU Senior Accountant 
(can amend TORs for recruitment of GPCU accountants)  
Post title:  
Senior Accountant  
Organisation:  STAR NPCU within MALR 
Location:                Cairo, Egypt 
Name of Project: 
STAR 
Duration:  
One-year renewable 
Type of contract: 
short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
MALR  has  established  a  Central  Project  Management  Unit  (NPCU)  to  coordinate  the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Projects in Egypt.  
The Project Financial Management Unit 
The NPCU has a financial management function responsible for financial and accounting 
matters of IFAD-funded Projects which it manages. The NPCU accountant plays a key role 
in  financial  management  and  reports  directly  to  the  Financial  Manager.  The  NPCU 
accountant has close contact with counterparts at a Governorate level for the purposes of 
centralized accounting of all Project activities. 
Job Description 
  Assist the Financial Manager with overall financial management activities of the Project. 
  Support preparation of consolidated Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB). 
  Review monthly transactions of the GPCUs. 
  Review  monthly  reports  received  from  implementing  agencies  and  record  related 
transactions in the accounting system, using appropriate cost categories /components 
/sources of finance. 
  Work  alongside  the  Financial  Manager  to  ensure  timely  and  accurate  submission  of 
withdrawal applications to IFAD; 
  Assist the Financial Manager in Preparation and submission of all financial statements, 
budgets,  financial  Projections,  cash  flow  forecasts  and  all  other  Projects  reports  as 
requested by the Project, IFAD and the Ministry of Finance. 
  Prepare   specific  budgetary  documentation,  according to Egyptian   legislation, issue 
payment requests and obtain the necessary approvals for finalizing payments to the 
suppliers/contractors; 
  Review  and  validate  Payment  requests  against  approved  AWPB  and  supporting 
documents; 
  Submit  payment  vouchers  to  the  MALR  internal  auditor  /  MoF  Controller  for  the 
purposes  of  review  and  approval  before  submission  to  the  MoF  accounting  unit  for 
processing. 
  Operate and maintain the financial management software system related to accounting 
and financial management by ensuring that all financial transactions are entered into 
the system; accurately on a regular basis;  
  Ensure that all CPCU's financial transactions (hard and sot copies) are filled properly 
and on daily basis and easily accessible; 
  Monitor actual expenditure and disbursements against allocations for each category; 
188 
  Ensure smooth and timely transfer of approved payments for eligible expenditure to 
Contractors in compliance with FM Manual and Legal Agreement (collaborate with MoF 
accounting unit who is responsible for processing payments). 
  Maintain the master contract register for all contracts issued at central and governorate 
level. 
  Maintain and update the fixed assets register for the entire Project; 
  Maintain and update advance registers and ensure timely clearances; 
  Prepare on monthly bank reconciliations. 
  Follow up and maintain an up to date records on in-kind contributions; 
  Occasional field visit to Governorates to support GPCU accountants if needed. 
  Perform other duties, of financial nature which pertains to the implementation of the 
Project, as may be requested by the Project Director and Financial Manager. 
Qualifications and Experience  
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification.  
  A minimum of 10 years professional experience with at least 5 years experience in accounting and financial 
management.  
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of accounting practices, finance and 
investment.  Familiarity and experience in use of accounting software is a must. 
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written 
  Prior experience working with donor-funded Projects.  
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Office.   
  Ability to work in team and multi-tasking. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector companies, civil society 
organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex assignments efficiently and 
effectively in a high demanding working environment.  
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
22.5 Terms of reference: NPCU Accountant 
(can amend TORs for recruitment of GPCU accountants)  
Post title:  
Accountant  
Organisation:  STAR NPCU within MALR 
Location:                Cairo, Egypt 
Name of Project: 
STAR 
Duration:  
One-year renewable 
Type of contract: 
short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
MALR  has  established  a  Central  Project  Management  Unit  (NPCU)  to  coordinate  the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Projects in Egypt.  
The Project Financial Management Unit 
189 
The NPCU has a financial management function responsible for financial and accounting 
matters of IFAD-funded Projects which it manages. The NPCU accountant plays a key role 
in financial management and reports directly to the Financial Manager.  
Job Description 
  Assist the NPCU Senior accountant with financial management activities of the Project. 
  Support preparation of consolidated Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB). 
  Review monthly transactions of the GPCUs. 
  Review  monthly  reports  received  from  implementing  agencies  and  record  related 
transactions in the accounting system, using appropriate cost categories /components 
/sources of finance. 
  Work  alongside  the  Senior  Accountant  and  Financial  Manager  to  ensure  timely  and 
accurate submission of withdrawal applications to IFAD; 
  Review  and  validate  Payment  requests  against  approved  AWPB  and  supporting 
documents; 
  Submit  payment  vouchers  to  the  MALR  internal  auditor  /  MoF  Controller  for  the 
purposes  of  review  and  approval  before  submission  to  the  MoF  accounting  unit  for 
processing. 
  Operate and maintain the financial management software system related to accounting 
and financial management by ensuring that all financial transactions are entered into 
the system; accurately on a regular basis;  
  Ensure that all NPCU financial transactions (hard and sot copies) are filled properly and 
on daily basis and easily accessible; 
  Monitor actual expenditure and disbursements against allocations for each category; 
  Ensure smooth and timely transfer of approved payments for eligible expenditure to 
Contractors in compliance with FM Manual and Legal Agreement (collaborate with MoF 
accounting unit who is responsible for processing payments). 
  Maintain the master contract register for all contracts issued at central and governorate 
level. 
  Maintain and update the fixed assets register for the entire Project; 
  Maintain and update advance registers and ensure timely clearances; 
  Prepare monthly bank reconciliations. 
  Follow up and maintain an up to date records on in-kind contributions; 
  Perform other duties, of financial nature which pertains to the implementation of the 
Project, as may be requested by the Senior Accountant and Financial Manager. 
Qualifications and Experience  
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification.  
  A minimum of 5 years professional experience with at least 3 years experience in accounting and financial 
management.  
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of accounting practices, finance and 
investment.  Familiarity and experience in use of accounting software is a must. 
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written 
  Prior experience working with donor-funded Projects.  
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Office.   
  Ability to work in team and multi-tasking. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector companies, civil society 
organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex assignments efficiently and 
effectively in a high demanding working environment.  
190 
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance
191 
22.8 Supporting documentation for withdrawal applications 
As  specified  in  chapter  3  of  the  IFAD  Loan  disbursement  handbook,  the  following 
supporting documentation is required:  
Type of payment 
Supporting documentation 
All types of payments 
Payment of goods 
Payments for services 
(including consultants) 
Progress and retention 
payments of civil 
works 
  The  signed  contract  or  confirmed  purchase  order 
(Showing the specified amount that is due paid. If this 
has  been  sent  earlier  to  the  fund  a  reference  to  the 
accompanying  letter  or  document  should  be  given in  a 
footnote  to  the  relevant  Application  summary  Sheet  –
form 100) 
  The bank guarantee for  advance payment, as specified 
in the contract documents 
  The bank guarantee for performance, as specified in the 
contract documents 
  Copies  of  communications  sent  by  the  IFAD  country 
Project  manager  to  the  lead  Project  agency  (LPA) 
providing the IFAD’s no objection (post or Prior) to the 
contract award, and  
  Evidence of payment. 
  Supplier’s  invoice  duly  certified  for  payment  by  the 
Project director  –  specifying the goods, their quantities 
and prices 
  Bills of lading or similar documents; and  
  As  appropriate,  the  certificate  of  delivery  (to  include 
condition of goods to delivery. 
  The  supplier  or  consultant  claim,  duly  certified  for 
payment by the Project director  and showing sufficient 
detail. If such Services relate to the importation of goods 
(for  example, 
insurance  payments), 
adequate  reference  should  be  given  to  enable  IFAD  to 
relate each of these items to specific goods whose cost 
has  been  or  is  to  be  financed  by  the  financing  closing 
date; and  
freight  and 
  As  appropriate,  a  certificate  of  delivery  of  satisfactory 
services 
 
the claim if the contractor, including a financial progress 
report, stating the work performed and the amount due; 
  A certificate-signed by the Project consultants or owner’s 
representative,  if  any,  or  by  the  borrower’s  chief 
engineering  officer  or  resident  supervising  engineer 
assigned  to  the  Project,  to  the  effect  that  the  work 
performed  is  satisfactory  and  the  payment  claimed  is 
due in accordance with the terms of the contract, and  
  A copy of the contract payment monitoring form signed 
in original by the certifying officer. 
192 
22.9 Terms of reference: External Auditor 
Borrower: 
Project:    
Financing Agreements:    Specify 
STAR 
MoIIC (Egypt) 
Background 
  The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and other as specified is 
aiding the Borrower in the form of a loan and grants. 
  The financiers’ requires the Borrower to appoint an independent auditor to audit the 
accounts related to the Project. 
  The entity prepares its financial statements in accordance with the IPSAS Cash Basis 
of Financial Reporting. 
(insert other relevant info) 
 
Objective 
The objective of this audit is to enable the auditor to express an opinion on whether the 
financial  statements  (including  additional  disclosures  as  outlined  in  section  5)  present 
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the reporting entity as at  [insert 
year-end date], and/or the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then 
ended, in conformity with the [applicable accounting standards]. 
Responsibilities of the Borrower 
General 
  Provide financial statements for the activities financed by loans/grants/contributions 
that are reconcilable to its records and accounts. 
  Provide the auditor with access to all legal documents and correspondence with 
consultants, contractors and other persons or firms engaged by the Project, and any 
other information associated with the Project and deemed necessary by the auditor.  
  Ensure that the accounting policies are consistently applied and disclosed. 
  Ensure that appropriate internal controls are implemented to prevent misstatements 
and susceptibility to fraud. 
  Ensure compliance with all relevant laws and regulations that pertain to the entity, as 
well as with the financing agreements between the Borrower and IFAD/xxx. 
  Provide the financial statements to the auditor within a reasonable time and be 
available for any queries that the auditor may have. 
Financial statements 
The Borrower shall: 
  Prepare financial statements covering the reporting period [date] to [date], in 
accordance with IPSAS Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting. In 
addition, the following IFAD specific disclosures will be included in the financial 
statements: 
  Budget to actual comparison - refer to Project Financial Manual for illustration; 
  Withdrawal application summary – refer to Project Financial Manual for 
illustration; 
  Sources and uses of funds statement – refer to Project Financial Manual for 
illustration; 
  Designated Account statement and reconciliation – refer to Project Financial 
Manual for illustration; 
193 
  Fixed asset schedule - refer to Project Financial Manual for illustration 
Responsibilities of the auditor 
Auditing standards 
The audit shall be conducted in accordance with the International Standards of Audit (ISA) 
published  by the  International Auditing  and Assurance  Standards  Board  (IAASB)  of  the 
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). These standards require that the auditor 
plans and performs the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial 
statements  are free of material misstatements. The audit  includes examining, on a test 
basis, evidence, supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The 
audit  also  includes  assessing  the  accounting  principles  used  and  significant  estimates 
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.  
In complying with ISA, the auditor is expected to pay particular attention to the following 
matters, including special considerations for public sector entities: 
 
In planning and performing the audit to reduce audit risk to an acceptably low level, 
the  auditor  should  consider  the  risks  of  material  misstatements  in  the  financial 
statements due to fraud as required by the International Standard of Audit 240: The 
Auditor’s Responsibilities Relating to Fraud in an Audit of Financial Statements.  
  When designing and performing audit procedures and in evaluating and reporting the 
results  thereof,  the  auditor  should  recognize  that  noncompliance  by  the  entity  with 
laws and regulations may materially affect the financial statements as required by the 
International Standard of Audit 250: Consideration of Laws and Regulations in an Audit 
of Financial Statements. 
  The auditor should communicate audit matters of governance interest arising from the 
audit of financial statements to those charged with governance of an entity as required 
by the International Standard of Audit 260: Communication with those Charged with 
Governance. 
  The auditor should communicate appropriately to those charged with governance and 
management deficiencies in internal control that the auditor has identified in an audit 
of  financial  statements  as  required  by  the  International  Standard  of  Audit  265: 
Communicating Deficiencies in Internal Control to Those Charged with Governance and 
Management 
 
 
In order to reduce audit risk to an acceptably low level, the auditor should determine 
overall responses to assessed risks at the financial statement level, and should design 
and  perform  further  audit  procedures  to  respond  to  assessed  risks  at  the  assertion 
level as required by the International Standard of Audit 330: The Auditor’s Responses 
to Assessed Risks. 
In instances where certain aspects of an entity’s operations are performed by a third 
party  service  provider,  the  auditor  is  expected  to  include  an  understanding  and 
assessment of the internal control environment of the service provider during the audit 
process as required by the International Standard of Audit 402: Audit Considerations 
Relating to an Entity Using a Service Organization. 
  As part of the audit process, the auditor is expected to obtain written representations 
from management and, where appropriate, those charged with governance as required 
by the International Standard of Audit 580: Written Representations.   
General principles 
By agreeing to these terms, the auditor confirms that: 
  The firm is independent from the Project, its staff and activities, in accordance with 
international best practices. 
194 
  The firm is not providing consultancy services to the Project or preparing its Project 
financial statements (nor has it done so in the previous two years). 
  The auditor is suitably qualified and a member of a professional body affiliated with 
the International Federation of Accountants. 
  The auditor is able to conduct the audit in line with international auditing standards. 
  The firm can assign an audit team to the audit that has the necessary competence 
and skills. 
  The firm has  a  proven track  record  in  conducting  audits  of  a  similar  nature  and 
complexity. 
Management letter 
The management letter is an integral part of the audit package that documents accounting 
and internal control issues identified by the auditors. The management letter should: 
  Outline  the  auditor’s  recommendations  to  improve  identified  accounting  and 
 
internal control issues; 
Include the responses of Project management to the identified control issues, and 
its proposal to address the issues identified within a specific time period. 
  Where  applicable,  follow  up  on  the  issues  identified  in  the  previous  year's 
management letter.  
 
report on instances of non-compliance with the terms of the financing agreement; 
  quantify and report expenditures that are considered to be ineligible and either paid 
out of the designated (special) accounts or which have been claimed from the IFAD; 
communicate  matters  that  have  come  to  their  attention  during  the  audit  which 
might have a significant impact on the implementation of the Project;  
 
Reporting 
The Auditor is required to deliver an audit package that includes: 
  The  audited  financial  statements,  including  additional  specific  disclosures  as 
specified. 
  An audit opinion on the financial statements 
  A management letter 
  A  report  on  factual  findings,  within  the  scope  of  agreed-upon  procedures  as 
outlined. Any ineligible expenditure identified should be clearly mentioned. 
The  audit  report  should  provide  sufficient  detail  as  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 
procedures performed by the auditor. The auditor is required to provide the audit package 
by no later than [insert date]. Reports are to be delivered in English.  
Scope of the financial audit 
In performing the audit, at a minimum the auditor shall: 
  Obtain an understanding of the internal controls related to the financial reporting 
process, to identify and assess any weakness in internal control that might result 
in misstatements, whether due to fraud or to error; 
  Design and conduct audit procedures in response to any weaknesses identified in 
the  internal  controls  relating  to  the  financial  reporting  process,  to  obtain  audit 
evidence that the financial statements are fairly presented and free from material 
misstatements, in accordance with the applicable accounting framework; 
  Verify whether expenditure that was incurred in the name of the Project is in line 
with  the  terms  of  the  financing  agreement(s)  and  incurred  for  the  purposes 
intended in this agreement. Both IFAD and third-party funding should be taken into 
consideration; 
  Verify  that  the  fixed  assets  held  by  the  entity  exist,  are  complete,  are  properly 
accounted and are used for the Project purposes; 
195 
  Note  any  weaknesses  in  the  internal  control  environment  and  in  the  financial 
reporting process, and communicate those in the management letter.  
[List others]. 
 
Scope of the agreed-upon procedures 
The auditor is required to perform the following specific procedures and report on factual 
findings as outlined:  
Designated account statement(s) (page xxx) 
  Confirm/agree that opening and closing bank balances (in EUR and EGP) disclosed on 
the designated account statement(s) agree to the bank account statement and that 
such balances reconcile with disclosures in the notes the financial statements. 
  Recalculate the closing balance of the designated account statement (in EUR and EGP). 
  Confirm/agree that the EUR denominated amounts disclosed have been accounted for 
in COM at the historical exchange rate, in line with the procedure as  outlined in the 
IFAD Financial Administration Manual (available on IFAD website). 
  Recalculate  the  foreign  exchange  gain  /  loss  as  included  in  the  designated  account 
statement and agree to the amount disclosed in the Statement of Cash Receipts and 
Payments. 
  Agree replenishments / transfers and direct payments to the bank account statement 
and IFAD historical transaction information. 
  Confirm  amounts  disclosed  for  withdrawal  applications  agree  to  the  information 
disclosed on the withdrawal application summary. 
Designated account reconciliation(s) (page xxx) 
  Confirm the accuracy of the reconciliation. 
  Confirm that the designated account has been managed in line with the provisions of 
 
the financing agreement / Letter to the Borrower. 
If applicable, review and determine the reasonability of the explanation for variance as 
disclosed on the designated account reconciliation. 
  Agree  disclosed  amounts  to  supporting  documentation  (bank  statements  /  IFAD 
historical financial information). 
Withdrawal application summary 
  Determine  whether  goods  and  services  have  been  purchased  through  the  SOE 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold. 
  Determine whether the expenditures claimed through SOE procedures were properly 
and appropriately authorized, classified and supported by audit documentation. 
  Select a sample of withdrawal applications and confirm the accuracy of the disclosures 
to the underlying documentation submitted to IFAD. 
  Test a sample of Project expenditure transactions from the withdrawal applications 
and confirming eligibility of expenditure / adequacy of supporting documentation. 
Summarise all ineligible expenditures identified in the conclusions section. 
Fixed asset register (page xxx) 
  Select a sample of fixed assets from the fixed asset register and confirm the accuracy 
and completeness of the information included in the fixed asset register. 
  Select a sample of Project assets from the floor and confirm that the asset is accurately 
recorded in the fixed asset register. 
Rural finance component – loans to beneficiaries 
  Select a sample of loans (10% of loans, sample to cover all governorates) 
196 
  Design and perform procedures to confirm whether loans made in line with approved 
loan  agreements  and  for  eligible  expenditure  as  defined  in  the  IFAD  financing 
agreement. 
  Verify beneficiary contributions (provide in cash and in-kind) if applicable. 
Other 
  Confirm the degree of compliance with the Borrower’s procurement policy and identify 
non-compliance. 
Public disclosure 
IFAD promotes  public  disclosure  of Project financial information to enhance the level of 
transparency and accountability. IFAD will disclose Project audit reports, as appropriate, 
in line with the Fund’s disclosure policy. Management Letters issued by auditors are not 
subject to public  disclosure by IFAD. In agreeing to the terms  of reference, the auditor 
explicitly  acknowledges  IFAD’s  right  to  publicly  disclose  audit  reports  (audited  financial 
statements and audit opinion) and will issue reports without a limitation of use clause. 
To facilitate the public disclosure process, the auditor is requested to submit two separate 
files as follows:  
-  Audited financial statements and audit opinion; and  
-  Management Letter.  
Appendices [list as applicable] 
Appendix: Financing/grant agreement(s) 
Appendix: Letter to the Borrower 
Appendix: IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects 
Appendix:  IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Develop Financing  
22.11 Illustrative financial statements 
[PROJECT NAME] 
ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE 12 MONTH PERIOD ENDING xxx 
197 
[THIS ILLUSTRATION IS BASED ON A NEW PROJECT. FOR EXISTING PROJECT, 
DISCLOSE PRIOR PERIOD COMPARATIVE INFORMATION AND CUMULATIVE 
INFORMATION ON S&U STATEMENT] 
Table of content: 
1.  Background 
2.  Management Statement 
3.  Audit report 
4.  Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments 
5.  Budget to Actual Comparison 
6.  Accounting policies 
7.  Notes to the financial statements 
8.  Designated account statement 
9.  Designated account reconciliation 
10. Withdrawal application summary 
11. Fixed asset register 
12. Action tracker (supplementary) 
Background 
Insert Project background information 
Indicate Project start date 
Indicate reporting lines  
 
 
  Provide overview of categories and components and indicate responsible IAs 
  Provide description of Project activities 
  Status update 
 
  Overview of financing facilities – see table below: 
Indicate the relevant legislation governing the Project activities  
Source of funds 
Facility/agreement number 
Amount approved (indicate 
currency) 
Undrawn balance at period end 
If applicable, interest rates and 
repayment periods 
Restrictions on use of funds (e.g. 
designated account workings, 
authorised allocation) 
Management Statement 
Insert management responsibility statement 
Audit report (illustrative only) 
Independent Auditor’s report (Provided on Auditor letterhead) 
Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements 
Opinion 
We have audited the financial statements of the xxxx PROJECT) funded by the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (loan xxx and grant xxx) and xxx. The 
financial statements comprise of the Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments, Budget 
to Actual Comparison, accounting policies and explanatory notes. 
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements of the Project give a true and fair 
view of the Financial performance and cash flows for the year then ended in accordance 
with IPSAS Financial Reporting Under the Cash Basis of Accounting. 
Basis for Opinion (refer to ISA705 for modifications) 
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). 
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s 
Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are 
independent of the Company in accordance with the International Ethics Standards 
198 
Board for Accountants’ Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (IESBA code) 
together with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial 
statements in Egypt, and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance 
with these requirements and the IESBA Code. We believe that the audit evidence we 
have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. 
Key audit matter 
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgment, were of most 
significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters 
were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in 
forming our opinion thereon. We do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. 
[insert matters if applicable] 
Other information  
The Board of Directors is responsible for the other information. The other information 
comprises the xxxx. Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other 
information and we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon. In 
connection with our audit of the financial statements, our responsibility is to read the 
other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially 
inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or 
otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed, 
we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are 
required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard. 
Responsibilities of Management and Those Charged with Governance for the 
Financial Statements 
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial 
statements in accordance with IPSAS and for such internal control as management 
determines is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free 
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. Those charged with 
governance are responsible for overseeing the Project's financial reporting process. 
Auditors' Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements 
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial 
statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or 
error, and to issue an auditors' report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is 
a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance 
with lSAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can 
arise from fraud or error and arc considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, 
they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on 
the basis of these financial statements. 
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgment and 
maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. We also: 
 
ldentify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements. 
Whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to 
those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a 
basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting 
from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, 
forgery, intentional omissions. misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. 
  Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design 
audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose 
of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Project's internal control. 
  Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of 
accounting estimates and related disclosures made by management. 
  Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, 
including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the 
underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. 
199 
We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, 
the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any 
significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit.  
We also provide those charged with governance with a statement that we have complied 
with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence and communicate with them 
all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our 
independence and where applicable, related safeguards. 
From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine 
those matters that were or most significance in the audit or the financial statements of 
the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in 
our auditors' report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter 
or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be 
communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would 
reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication. 
Public disclosure 
This report has been prepared on request of the Project, the International Fund for 
Agricultural Development and the xxx, however, the report is a matter of public record 
and its distribution is not limited. 
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditors' report is xxx 
from xxxx audit firm. 
200 
Independent Assurance Report prepared for IFAD (provided on auditor 
letterhead) 
This report represents the results and conclusions of the independent assurance 
engagement undertaken on behalf of IFAD. 
Background 
[Summarise details of financiers, facilities and amounts of funding provided for the 
period under review and committed in total to the Project] 
Audit Objectives and Scope 
An assurance engagement was undertaken in line ISAE 3000 Assurance Engagements 
other than audits or reviews of historical financial formation in order to provide a report 
to the International Fund of Agricultural Development on the following: 
1.  Whether the expenditures, reported by the Project are in eligible in terms of the 
financing agreement with the International Fund of Agricultural Development. 
2.  Whether the Project has adhered to other terms and conditions of the IFAD 
Financing agreement / Letter to the Borrower/Recipient and other financial 
management related requirements related to maintenance of the designated 
account records. 
3.  Whether the IFAD specific disclosures are accurate and complete and agree to 
IFAD financial records (statements etc). 
The financial information outlined in pages xxx to xxx was the subject of this assurance 
engagement. 
Summary of work performed 
The following specific work was performed in order to address the scope of work: 
Preparatory 
  Review financing agreements and related amendments to determine key financing 
terms and conditions application to the Project. 
  Review the Letter to the Borrower and related amendments to determine key 
financing terms and conditions applicable to the Project. 
  Obtain IFAD financial information related to the Project from the IFAD finance officer, 
as may be appropriate and required. 
Designated account statement(s) (page xxx) 
  Confirm/agree that opening and closing bank balances (in EUR and EGP) disclosed on 
the designated account statement(s) agree to the  bank account statement and that 
such balances reconcile with disclosures in the notes the financial statements. 
  Recalculate the closing balance of the designated account statement (in EUR and EGP). 
  Confirm/agree that the EUR denominated amounts disclosed have been accounted for 
in EUR  at the historical exchange rate, in line with the procedure as  outlined in the 
IFAD Financial Administration Manual (available on IFAD website). 
  Recalculate  the  foreign  exchange  gain  /  loss  as  included  in  the  designated  account 
statement and agree to the amount disclosed in the Statement of Cash Receipts and 
Payments. 
  Agree replenishments / transfers and direct payments to the bank account statement 
and IFAD historical transaction information. 
  Confirm  amounts  disclosed  for  withdrawal  applications  agree  to  the  information 
disclosed on the withdrawal application summary. 
Designated account reconciliation(s) (page xxx) 
  Confirm the accuracy of the reconciliation. 
  Confirm that the designated account has been managed in line with the provisions of 
 
the financing agreement / Letter to the Borrower. 
If applicable, review and determine the reasonability of the explanation for variance as 
disclosed on the designated account reconciliation. 
201 
  Agree  disclosed  amounts  to  supporting  documentation  (bank  statements  /  IFAD 
historical financial information). 
Withdrawal application summary 
  Determine  whether  goods  and  services  have  been  purchased  through  the  SOE 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold. 
  Determine whether the expenditures claimed through SOE procedures were properly 
and appropriately authorized, classified and supported by audit documentation. 
  Select a sample of withdrawal applications and confirm the accuracy of the disclosures 
to the underlying documentation submitted to IFAD. 
  Test a sample of Project expenditure transactions from the withdrawal applications 
and confirming eligibility of expenditure / adequacy of supporting documentation. 
Summarise all ineligible expenditures identified in the conclusions section. 
Fixed asset register (page xxx) 
  Select a sample of fixed assets from the fixed asset register and confirm the accuracy 
and completeness of the information included in the fixed asset register. 
  Select a sample of Project assets from the floor and confirm that the asset is accurately 
recorded in the fixed asset register. 
Rural finance 
  Select a sample of loans made to beneficiaries. 
  Design  and  perform  procedures  to  confirm  whether  loans  were  made  in  line  with 
approved  loan  applications  and  for  eligible  expenditure  as  defined  in  the  financing 
agreement. (expenditure also included in the approved AWPB). 
  Confirm beneficiary contributions (both in cash and in-kind) if applicable. 
Other 
  Confirm the degree of compliance with the recipient’s procurement policy and identify 
non-compliance. 
Conclusions on procedures performed 
[Summarise findings of procedures] 
Management letter 
Other issues related to internal control weaknesses are included in the management 
letter issued on xxx. 
[Signed by engagement partner] 
Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments 
202 
Budget to Actual Comparison 
(Note: This disclosure is not mandatory in terms of IPSAS Cash given that the PROJECT 
budget is not publicly disclosed, however, IFAD requires this disclosure in terms of the 
IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-Financed Projects) 
203 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Statement of cash receipts and payments'000 (thousands)TABLE 1: STATEMENT OF TOTAL CASH RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTSCurrent period31 December 2022Months in period12CurrencyEGP'000 (thousands)notesTOTAL CASH RECEIPTSProceeds from External financiers 2-                                Proceeds from Borrower3-                                Beneficiary contribution4-                                Private sector contribution-                                Total receipts-                                TOTAL CASH PAYMENTSConsultancies-                                Credit, Guarantees Fund-                                Equipment and material-                                Goods and services-                                Grants and subsidies-                                Workshop and trainings-                                Salaries, allowances and operating costs-                                Total payments-                                INCREASE/(DECREASE) IN CASH-                                Unrealised gains/(losses)5CASH BEGINNING OF THE YEAR1-                                CASH AT THE END OF THE YEAR1-                                 
204 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Budget to actual comparison'000 (thousands)The budget has been prepared on a cash basisTABLE 2:BUDGET TO ACTUAL COMPARISONCurrent period actualCurrent period budgetVariance%31 December 202231 December 2022Months in period1212CurrencyEGPEGP'000 (thousands)notesCASH RECEIPTS BY FINANCIERIFAD loan-                                           -                  #DIV/0!IFAD grant-                                           -                  #DIV/0!GCF grant-                                           -                  #DIV/0!AF grant-                                           -                  #DIV/0!OFID grant-                                           -                  #DIV/0!WFP loan-                                           -                  #DIV/0!AfDB loan-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Beneficiary contributions - cash-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Beneficiary contributions - in-kind-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Government contributions -                                           -                  #DIV/0!Private Sector-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Total receipts-                                           -                                        -                  #DIV/0!Uses - By categoryConsultancies-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Credit, Guarantees Fund-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Equipment and material-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Goods and services-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Grants and subsidies-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Workshop and trainings-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Salaries, allowances and operating costs-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Total payments-                                           -                                        -                  #DIV/0!Uses - By componentMarketing and Enterprises-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Production-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Project Management, M&E and KM-                                           -                  #DIV/0!-                                           -                                        -                  #DIV/0!Explanation of variancesExplain variance 
Accounting policies 
1.  Definitions 
  PROJECT – STAR 
  Designated account – Ring-fenced, foreign denominated bank account which is 
maintained on behalf of the entity. The entity may receive replenishments from 
the direct account in line with the working as outlined in the IFAD Disbursement 
Handbook. 
IFAD – International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Impress account – An account which maintains a record of all cash advances 
made for staff or Project expenses which are either returned to the Project or 
justified by valid expenditure documentation. 
 
 
  Borrower – The Borrower is the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt 
  Add as required 
2.  Reporting entity 
The financial statements are for the Project. The Project is managed centrally by the 
NPCU and has operations in various governorates which are reported on as a single 
entity. The activities of implementing agents are consolidated in the reporting entity. 
3.  Reporting period 
These financial statements include a 12-month reporting period for the current and 
prior year with additional cumulative disclosure (from Project inception) provided in 
the notes where appropriate.  
4.  Basis of preparation 
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the Standard. The 
entity complies with all the requirements as outlined in Part 1 of the Standard and as 
described in the accounting policies. In addition, the entity has elected to adopt the 
following recommended disclosures in line with Part 2 of the Standard: 
  Payments of Third Parties on behalf of the entity (refer 16. Voluntary Disclosure) 
5.  Authorisation date 
These financial statements have been authorised for issue by the Project Director on 
[xxx]. No events after this date are included in the financial statements. 
6.  Presentation currency and level of precision 
The presentation currency is the local currency, EGP. Where appropriate, the 
designated account balances are reported in EUR. The amounts are displayed in 
million (EGP'000) unless otherwise specified in the notes. Additional note disclosures 
may quote EUR amounts if loans or grants from financiers are denominated in EUR. 
7.  Composition of the annual financial statement  
The financial statements comprise the Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments, the 
Budget to Actual Comparison and the notes. The notes include various other 
disclosures which are required by external financiers, including IFAD, which may 
enhance fair presentation and accountability. Additional, supplementary information 
is indicated as such. 
8.  Cash basis of accounting 
In terms of IPSAS Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis, the entity measures 
transactions and events only when cash is received or paid by the entity. The 
measurement focus of the financial statements is balances of cash and changes 
therein.  In terms of the Standard, cash may include cash on hand, demand deposits, 
impress accounts and cash equivalents. Cash equivalents are investments with a 
maturity of less than 3 months.  
9.  Control of cash 
205 
In line with the Standard, cash balances reported at the end of the reporting period 
include all cash which the entity can use or otherwise benefit from at the exclusion of 
other. Therefore, cash will include all IFAD designated account balances which are 
maintained in foreign currency (EUR) to which access is restricted in line with the 
financing agreement entered into between the Recipient and IFAD. 
10. Materiality and disclosure 
The Project discloses material information separately on the face of the financial 
statements or in the notes. The materiality is assessed in line with the nature and 
amount of the item. In all instances, payments of third parties on behalf of the 
Project is considered material and disclosed separately. This will include payments 
made on behalf of the Project to third parties or received "in-kind". – refer "16. 
Voluntary disclosure" 
11. Classification of transactions 
Uses of cash receipts are disclosed in line with categories as defined in the Project 
financing agreements. Additional useful disclosures in terms of components are 
provided in the notes to the financial statements. Receipts of funds are disclosure 
based on the source of finance. 
12. Foreign currency 
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in foreign currency are 
incorporated in the financial statements Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments in 
EGP by applying to the foreign currency amount the spot exchange rate between the 
reporting currency and foreign currency at the date of the receipts/payments. The 
spot rate is defined as the rate of exchange for immediate delivery. 
Closing cash balances held in foreign currency are translated to Kyrgyz Soma the 
spot rate on the last day of the reporting period. Resulting foreign gains / losses are 
reported as a reconciling item on the Statement of Cash Receipts and payments. 
Further information with regard to the gains/losses per financier is disclosed in the 
notes. 
13. Additional note disclosures – accrual basis 
The notes to the financial statements provide additional information about liabilities 
and assets which are not presented on the Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments 
or Budget to Actual Comparison. These may include contingent liabilities related to 
suppliers, advance payments from contractors, staff loan receivable and any other 
material items which will enhance the fair representation of the financial statements. 
14. Voluntary adoption of Part 2 of the Standard – Payments made to 3rd parties on 
behalf of the Project 
In line with Part 2 of the Standard, the Project shall disclose payments made on its 
behalf to 3rd parties. For the Project, this disclosure deals specifically with payments 
made by the Recipient/beneficiaries for items such as salaries and xxx. Additional 
note disclosure is provided which outlines the total of such amounts for the period, 
the nature of activities paid for and the manner in which management has arrived at 
a value for such payments. In the event that management is of the opinion that the 
estimation or value may not be fully reflective of the total value received, this will be 
indicated in the notes. 
ADD AS REQUIRED 
Notes to the financial statements 
206 
207 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Notes'000 (thousands)1Cash and cash equivalents:Cash included in the statement of Cash Receipts and Payments comprise the following amounts:31 December 2022Bank balances per financierEGPIFAD loanIFAD grantGCF grantAF grantOFID grantWFP loanAfDB loanTotal('000)-                                  31 December 2022Bank balance per type of accountEGPMoF TSA (NPCU)MSMEDA designated account USDADP designated account USDCash on handadd as applicableTotal ('000)-                                  -                                  equal zero2Proceeds from external financiersRefer to sources and uses of funds for detail.3Borrower contributionsThe Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt provided contributions to finance taxes, duties and staff salaries.Add additional useful information.4Beneficiaries' contribution31 December 2022EGPBeneficiaries' in-kind contribution0Breakdown:MaterialsLabour0Beneficiaries' cash contribution0Breakdown:Machinery sharing schemes purchasesDemonstration farmers' equipment0Add additional detail as applicable5Unrealised gains/(losses)31 December 2022EGPMSMEDA Designated account (IFAD Loan)ADP Designated account (IFAD Loan)Add additional as applicable-                                  Total unrealised gains/(losses)6Other - accrual based informationOutline description of TSA workings.Add commentProvide info on accrual related info not disclosed in cash receipts and payments. Eg. Staff loans/advances.Contributions from beneficiaries include cash contributions of 30% towards the purchase of agricultural machinery. In-kind contributions include labour and materials in relation to irrigation civils works as outlined below:Provide overview of how in-kind contributions are quantified / valued / measured. 
Sources and uses of funds statement 
208 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Sources and Uses of Funds Statement'000 (thousands)TABLE 3(a): SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS STATEMENTCurrent periodCurrent period31 December 202231 December 2022Months in period1212CurrencyEGPEGPSourcesUsesSurplus/DeficiftIFAD loan0-                             IFAD grant0-                             GCF grant0-                             AF grant0-                             OFID grant0-                             WFP loan0-                             AfDB loan0-                             Beneficiary contributions - cash0-                             Beneficiary contributions - in-kind0-                             Government contributions 0-                             Private Sector0-                             TOTAL -                                -                              -                              
209 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Sources and Uses of Funds Statement'000 (thousands)TABLE 3(b): Summary uses by expenses categoryTotalCat 1Cat 2Cat 3Cat 4Cat 5Cat 6Cat 7IFAD loan0IFAD grant0GCF grant0AF grant0OFID grant0WFP loan0AfDB loan0Beneficiary contributions - cash0Beneficiary contributions - in-kind0Government contributions 0Private Sector0TOTAL USES BY CATEGORY00000000Category 1ConsultanciesCategory 2Credit, Guarantees FundCategory 3Equipment and materialCategory 4Goods and servicesCategory 5Grants and subsidiesCategory 6Workshop and trainingsCategory 7Salaries, allowances and operating costs 
210 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Sources and Uses of Funds Statement'000 (thousands)TABLE 3(b): Summary uses by component categoryTotalComponent 1Component 2Component 3Key:IFAD loan0Component 1Marketing and EnterprisesIFAD grant0Component 2ProductionGCF grant0Component 3Project Management, M&E and KMAF grant0OFID grant0WFP loan0AfDB loan0Beneficiary contributions - cash0Beneficiary contributions - in-kind0Government contributions 0Private Sector0TOTAL USES BY COMPONENT0-                              -                             -                             
Designated account statements 
211 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Designated account statement'000 (thousands)TABLE 4.1: IFAD LOAN DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENT - MSMEDA(Add account number)USDEGPNotes1-                              -                              Add:1-                              -                              Deduct:1-                              -                              2Direct paymentsnoteAdd:3Exchange rate gain/(loss)-                              -                              -                              -                              Note: -                              Opening BalanceReplenishments:Transfers to Operating Accounts:Closing balanceFinancial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Designated account statement'000 (thousands)TABLE 4.2: IFAD LOAN DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENT - CIB(Add account number)USDEGPNotes1-                              -                              Add:1-                              -                              Deduct:1-                              -                              2Direct paymentsnoteAdd:3Exchange rate gain/(loss)-                              -                              -                              -                              Note: -                              Opening BalanceReplenishments:Transfers to Operating Accounts:Closing balance 
Designated account reconciliations 
212 
213 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Designated account reconciliationTABLE 5.1: IFAD LOAN DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENT - MSMEDAIFAD Financing agreement nr: Bank account nr:SECTION 1USD1Total advanced by IFAD to designated account2Less Total amount recovered by IFAD 3= Outstanding amount advanced by IFAD-                              SECTION 24Balance of designated account as per bank statement 5Plus balance of operating accounts Plus cash on hand= Period end cash balance-                           6Plus amount claimed for the period-                           Provide reasons - not yet claimed8-                           9Less: interest earned10= Total advance accounted for-                           11Explanation of difference between outstanding advance (line 3) and advance accounted for (line 10)-                           Insert explanationsPlus amounts claimed in period not yet credited at date of bank statement and claimed after date of bank statement 
214 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Designated account reconciliationTABLE 5.2: IFAD LOAN DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENT - CIBIFAD Financing agreement nr: Bank account nr:SECTION 1USD1Total advanced by IFAD to designated account2Less Total amount recovered by IFAD 3= Outstanding amount advanced by IFAD-                              SECTION 24Balance of designated account as per bank statement 5Plus balance of operating accounts Plus cash on hand= Period end cash balance-                           6Plus amount claimed for the period-                           Provide reasons - not yet claimed8-                           9Less: interest earned10= Total advance accounted for-                           11Explanation of difference between outstanding advance (line 3) and advance accounted for (line 10)-                           Insert explanationsPlus amounts claimed in period not yet credited at date of bank statement and claimed after date of bank statement 
Withdrawal application summaries 
215 
Financial statements for STARFor the annual period ending31 December 2022Withdrawal application statement'000 (thousands)TABLE 6.1: WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT - IFAD LOANWithdrawal application numberType (Direct / Replenish)Implementer (MSMEDA, ADP, NPCU)Date1234567Total local currencyDesignated account currency equivalentValue date (transfer to project)Rejected by IFAD / Recovery in closing periodNet reimbursedNet reimbursedValue date exchange rateUSDUSDUSDLoan currencyApproved withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Pending withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Category key:Consultancies1Credit, Guarantees Fund2Equipment and material3Goods and services4Grants and subsidies5Workshop and trainings6Salaries, allowances and operating 7EGP 
216 
Financial statements for STARFor the annual period ending31 December 2022Withdrawal application statement'000 (thousands)TABLE 6.2: WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT - IFAD GRANTWithdrawal application numberType (Direct / Replenish)Implementer (MSMEDA, ADP, NPCU)Date1234567Total local currencyDesignated account currency equivalentValue date (transfer to project)Rejected by IFAD / Recovery in closing periodNet reimbursedNet reimbursedValue date exchange rateUSDUSDUSDLoan currencyApproved withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Pending withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Category key:Consultancies1Credit, Guarantees Fund2Equipment and material3Goods and services4Grants and subsidies5Workshop and trainings6Salaries, allowances and operating 7EGP 
Fixed asset register 
217 
Financial statements for STARFor the annual period ending31 December 2022Withdrawal application statement'000 (thousands)TABLE 6.3: WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT - Other grants managed by IFADWithdrawal application numberType (Direct / Replenish)Source (AF, OFID, GCF)Implementer (MSMEDA, ADP, NPCU)Date1234567Total local currencyDesignated account currency equivalentValue date (transfer to project)Rejected by IFAD / Recovery in closing periodNet reimbursedNet reimbursedValue date exchange rateUSDUSDUSDLoan currencyApproved withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Pending withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Category key:Consultancies1Credit, Guarantees Fund2Equipment and material3Goods and services4Grants and subsidies5Workshop and trainings6Salaries, allowances and operating 7EGP 
Action tracker (supplementary) 
218 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Fixed asset scheduleTABLE 8: FIXED ASSET SCHEDULEAsset refDescriptionSourceCategoryLocationAssigned toTag nrSupplierInvoice nr/contractDate of purchaseDate of recieptPurchase priceRemarksAsset codeSource of financeNote on condition of asset 
219 
Financial statements for STARFor the period ending31 December 2022Action trackerTABLE 7: ACTION TRACKERDeadline#Audit or IFADRequirements/recommendations/actionsResponsible personCurrent status 
22.12 Appendix 1 
Financial: actual financial performance by financier; by component and disbursements by category 
Table 1: 
Financial performance by financier (EUR ‘000) 
Appraisal  
Disbursements   Percent 
disbursed 
Financier 
IFAD Grant 
IFAD Loan 
Financing Gap 
EIB  (80%  grant,20% 
Loan) 
OFID Grant 
AfDB Loan 
WfP Loan 
Government 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Table 2:  Financial performance by financier by component (EUR ‘000) 
IFAD Loan 
IFAD Grant 
Add column for 
each source 
Component  Appraisal  Actual  %  Appraisal  Actual  %  Appraisal  Actual  % 
220 
Total 
221 
Table 3:  IFAD Loan disbursements (EUR, as at [Insert date: dd-m-yy]) 
Category  Category description 
Original  
Allocation 
Revised  
Allocation 
Disbursement  W/A pending 
Balance 
Per cent 
disbursed 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
Initial deposit 
Total 
Present separate table for each IFAD managed finance 
facility (IFAD Loan, IFAD Grant, etc.) 
222 
22.13 Petty Cash forms 
Petty cash request form 
Date: 
Requested by: 
Signature of requester: 
Mode of payment: (tick selected): 
o  Reimbursement 
o  Advance   
Description of 
purchases 
(goods/services) 
Unit  
price 
Quantit
y 
Total 
cost** 
Activity 
code 
Explanation / 
Comments 
TOTAL AMOUNT 
________________ 
Approved by 
Financial Manager       Accountant  
** Attach supporting document (invoice, receipt, etc.) 
___________________ 
Processed by  
_________________ 
Payment received by 
223 
Date of reconciliation: 
Petty cash reconciliation 
           ______________ 
Part 1. Petty cash reconciliation 
Petty cash balance brought forward (a)  
Replenishments during the current month (b) 
Total petty cash balance (c = a + b) 
Disbursements during the current month (d)  
Petty cash book balance (e = c – d) 
Cash count balance (f) – see part 2. below 
Difference (G = E – F)  
Explanation of Difference 
______________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Part 2 - Cash Count 
            ______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
             ______________ 
______________ 
Description 
Quantity 
Total amount 
Total in EGP 
Counted/reconciled by (Accountant): 
Reviewed by (Financial Manager): 
Date: 
224 
225 
22.14 Vehicle and fuel documents 
VEHICLE LOG 
Driver:  
Vehicle registration number:  
Trips 
Date  
Name 
Trip purpose 
Distance 
km 
Signature 
Passenger 
Driver 
Refueling 
Date 
Speedometer 
reading 
Fuel voucher 
number 
Petrol station 
Amount  
Invoice number 
Attach approved travel requests, fuel invoices. 
Vehicle History Record 
Vehicle registration number     ______________________                   Assigned driver ____________________ 
Date  Repairs 
Description of 
repair 
Garage  Cost  Description 
Garage 
Cost 
Service & maintenance 
of service 
Insurance 
Type  
Period 
covered 
Fitness tests 
Cost 
Cost  Check
ed by  
226 
Report accidents in the space below, providing all relevant details for each occurrence: 
Date: 
Place: 
Name of driver: 
Circumstances: 
Damage to Project vehicle: 
Damage to other vehicles: 
Injuries (indicate name of victims and describe injuries): 
Insurance settlement: 
22.15 Implementing partners – subsidiary agreements / MOUs 
The Project will enter into agreements with Implementing Partners. The following recommended financial management roles and responsibilities 
are proposed for inclusion: 
The Project shall: 
  Provide financial management support to the implementing agency;  
  Ensure that implementing agency performs its duties and enjoys rights indicated in the Subsidiary Agreement. 
  Provide  financial  management  training  at  Project  start-up  (if  required)  and  annually  thereafter  in  order  to  strengthen  the  financial 
management capacity of the implementing partner. 
The implementing partner shall: 
  Implement sound financial management practices and procedures to the satisfaction of the PROJECT. 
  Ensure that all financial management staff responsible for dealing with the Project attend financial management training (hosted by 
PROJECT) at Project start-up and annually thereafter. 
  Ensure that a qualified and experienced accountant is responsible for dealing with the financial management aspects of the PROJECT 
for the duration of the agreement.  
  Inform the PROJECT Financial Manager of any finance staff vacancies. 
  Perform an annual financial management self-assessment (questionnaire template to be provided by IFAD Finance Officer) and submit 
227 
the results to the PROJECT Financial Manager. Cooperate with the PROJECT Financial Manager to address identified shortcomings within 
a specified timeframe. 
  Assist the PROJECT with the annual budgeting process by preparing a budget for the component/sub-component which it is required to 
implement. For this purpose, the PROJECT Financial Manager will provide a budget template which should be used. In addition, strictly 
adhere to deadlines for submission of inputs.  
  Retain all Project related document (invoices, bank statements, supporting documentation) for inspection. Documents should be retained 
in line with the terms and conditions as outlined in the IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing. 
  Undertake monthly internal budget to actual monitoring and take corrective action as required. 
  Respond to queries / resubmit information as requested by the PROJECT Accountant or Financial Manager in a timely manner. 
  Conduct pre- and post investment monitoring activities to confirm eligibility of expenditures (loan disbursements to end-beneficiaries) 
– MSMEDA and ADP 
Additional responsibilities, not applicable to MSMEDA and ADP: 
  When required, submit a written request for funds to the NPCU Project Director. Written requests should be signed by the duly authorized 
representatives. Request letters should clearly indicate the related budget activity as included in the PROJECTs approved AWPB (and 
related procurement plan if applicable). 
  Submit a monthly reporting template to the NPCU Financial Manager (refer 22.16) for the purposes of justifying advances. Attach bank 
statements, a bank reconciliation and supporting documentation. 
228 
229 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
22.16 Monthly reporting template – implementing agencies 
MONTHLY REPORT- IMPLEMENTING AGENT 
Implementing agency: 
Month-end: 
Opening bank balance 
Opening petty cash 
Plus advances from NPCU 
Less expenses (Note 1) 
= Closing bank balance 
Closing petty cash 
EGP 
Total 
Attach bank statement 
Attached signed petty cash 
reconciliation 
Attach bank statement 
Provide detailed list with supporting 
documentation 
0 
Attach bank statement 
Attached signed petty cash 
reconciliation 
Note 1- detailed expenses listing 
Description 
Amount 
(EGP) 
Component  Category  Source of 
Finance 
Supporting doc 
ref# 
Authorised signatory: 
Date: 
Indicate name and title 
Submit the report together with copies of bank statements, petty cash reconciliation, invoices, 
supporting documentation. Cross-reference supporting documentation to report. Include 3-
month forecast cash flow need. 
Page 230 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
22.17 Request for funds form 
REQUEST FOR ADVANCE FORM 
 (Only submit together with monthly report – see 22.16) 
Implementing agent: 
Date: 
Summary of 
advances/justification: 
Advance #1 
Advance # 2 
EGP 
received 
Date 
received 
EGP 
expenses 
% 
Justified 
Supporting 
doc ref 
We certify that at least 70% of the most recent advance has been justified (via providing 
supporting documentation) and 100% of all previous advances. We duly request an advance 
of xxxx EGP which is equal to forecast expenditure for the next 3 months (in line with AWPB 
attached). 
Please disburse the advance to our bank account (details which agree to the signed 
subsidiary agreement): 
ADD BANK DETAILS 
ATTACHED STAMPED BANK LETTER WHICH INDICATES BANK DETAILS / 
AUTHORISED SIGNATORIES 
Date: 
Signed: 
NPCU checks to be performed on request for advance form received: 
  Review supporting documentation which confirm advance justification 
  Compare bank details to stamped bank letter, accounting software (supplier bank 
details module) 
  Confirm authorised signatory 
  Confirm that 100% of all previous advances and 70% of current advance has been 
justified and expenses in NPCU accounting system 
  Submit to Financial Manager for review and approval before preparation of 
payment request 
  Submit payment request to Project Director for approval 
Page 231 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
22.19 Accounting software ToR 
Background 
[INSERT] 
In  order  to  comply  with IFAD’s  reporting  requirements,  the  NPCU  will need to  procure  an 
Accounting Software to be used by the NPCU centrally and the 3 GPCUs: 
 
 
 
to collect, analyze, store, and disseminate information that is useful for decision making 
to provide transparency and accountability of the Project activities, 
to provide timely reports, help detect errors and deficits during Project implementation 
and indicate necessary corrections, and  
to prepare and present progress reports to the PCU and Project financiers and stakeholder 
 
It must be noted that the NPCU will be responsible for the management of a few 
IFAD Projects. It is therefore important that the accounting software be scalable to 
incorporate additional Project modules / users as the NPCU structure expands. 
Specifications of the Software 
General features 
The accounting software should be configured to have ring-fenced Project modules with the 
ability to assigned users to each Project module. 
The  Accounting  software  should  be  configured  as  a  modular  solution  and  the  different 
modules should be suitably integrated, the following are the basic modules: 
1.  Chart of Account 
2.  Accounting 
3.  Financial Reporting 
4.  Budget 
5.  Assets 
6.  Withdrawal Application 
7.  Contract Management and integrating other modules. 
8.  Payroll sub-system 
9.  Purchases  sub-system  classifying  the  levels  of  the  Chart  of  Accounts  into  six  level 
collectively, partially and individually when necessary; 
  Type (Component – Location – Sub-component-Category-Sub-category-Activities) 
  General Ledger Account 
  Subsidiary Ledger Accounts 
  Subsidiary -1 Accounts, to end up with auxiliary accounts. 
10. Handling  all the financial  transactions  of the  Project  according  to the chart  of  account, 
that is used to: 
  Capture the financial data under the appropriate headings 
  Classify and group financial data for the various financial reports.  
11. The  structure  of  the  Chart  of  Accounts  caters  for  data  to  be  captured  by  (per  Project 
the Project components and sub-components  
module): 
 
  expenditure items under each component and sub-component 
  The IFAD disbursement category for the Project 
  Sources of funding 
12. All vouchers used in the system are based on double entries. 
13. Ability to account under different bases of accounting (cash basis, accrual basis. 
14. Using adjusting entry when needed to reverse and correct entries 
15. Handling the definition of various currencies used by the system 
16. Holding multi – donor’s information,  
17. Recording the daily currency rates for all the predefined currencies 
Page 232 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
18. Recording the Grant number and source of fund. 
19. Capacity to customize reports by e.g. exporting data to excel, word or PDF formats. 
Financial reporting 
20. Produce the periodic Financial Reports as requested by IFAD: 
  Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments per Project components showing quarterly, 
yearly and cumulative balances for the period and cumulative;  
  Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments per Project categories showing quarterly, 
yearly and cumulative balances for the period and cumulative;  
  Summary of sources and uses by category - by financier 
  Summary of sources and uses by component – by financier 
  Statement of budget to actual comparison per category and component, 
  Statement of Designated Account reconciling period-opening and end balances;  
  Statement  of  Project  commitments,  i.e.,  the  unpaid  balances  under  the  Project’s 
signed contracts; 
  Statement of fixed assets, 
  Statement of Cash Payments using Statement of Expenditure (SOE). 
  Bank accounts movements and balances 
  Petty cash statements including cleared and un-cleared balances 
  Summary of withdrawal applications per financier 
(Attach the illustrative financial reports as outlined in the PIM) 
(Attached  the  IFAD  Handbook  on  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing  of  IFAD-
Financed Projects) 
21. Produce other financial statements on a quarterly, semi-annual and annual basis, which 
are as follows; 
 
Journal and Payment Vouchers 
  Statement of Special Accounts 
  Contracts monitoring forms 
  Contracts register 
  Contracts paid and committed amounts 
22. Progress  report  (physical)  and  not  financial  by  contract,  component  and  category  (all 
Project units). This request will involve: 
  A  function  will  be  designed  and  developed  to  allow  the  user  to  define  the  planned 
(estimated) physical % completion on each period (monthly, year, Quarter). 
  A function will be designed and developed to allow the user to enter/modify the actual 
reported on physical % completion on each period (monthly, year, Quarter). 
  An Inquiry function to display physical progress on each contract. 
  A report showing detailed physical progress reporting per period 
  A report showing up-to-date physical progress reporting per period 
23. A  fixed  asset  listing  report  indicating  all  relevant  information  (such  as  description, 
location, quantity, tag number, responsible person, purchase price, source of finance etc.) 
which needs to be updated and include any discrepancies between the regular physical 
inspection and the accounting records. 
Specified Features 
Procurement 
24. Keeping detailed records for  all the suppliers, contractors and consultants (ID number, 
Name, Nationality, Address, Phone, Fax, e-mail, contact name “position, phone number, 
fax,  bank  account  bank  address”)  and  other  information  needed,  and  the  accounting 
system should provide information regarding the procurement cycle that take place before 
contract signature and report on the following:. 
Page 233 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
  Prior review thresholds; 
  Procurement methods thresholds; 
  Procurement reference; 
  Activity description; 
  Component (as per the description schedule (1) of the Grant); 
  Category (as per disbursement schedule "2"); 
  Estimated amount; 
  Procurement method used; 
  Prior/Post review; 
  Date of issuance of advertisement; 
 
  Date of bid (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants) submission; 
  Bid opening date (goods/works) or Financial Proposal opening date(consultants); 
 
 
  Date of submission to the IFAD of the Copy of signed contract; 
  The  system  has  to  provide  a  process  and  control  for  the  quoted  contract  analysis 
IFAD No objection to evaluation report; 
IFAD no objection to contract draft; 
IFAD No Objection on bidding documents (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants); 
(technically and financially) selected contracts approval. 
  The system has to enable entering the financial and other payment (e.g. deliverables, 
net of VAT contract value, related category) terms stated in the contract, so that to 
be utilized for matching when executing the payment against the contract. 
  The  system  has  to  provide  a  tool  that  will  monitor  the  execution  of  contract  in 
accordance  with  time  frame  specified  in  the  approved  contract  and  to  report  any 
delays. 
  The system  should  provide the  matrix to  ensure  the  following  before  any  payment 
against  the  contract:  1-obtaining  of  approved  deliverables  certificate  2-advance 
payment  has  to  be  made  against  valid  bank  guarantee  3-  obtaining  of  IFAD  no-
objection whenever that is required 4-the amount to be paid is matching with financial 
terms specified in the contract. 
  The system has to create the accounting double entry by considering the following: 
1-  allocation  of  the  amount  paid  among  the  financiers  in  accordance  with  the 
designated  percentage  for  each  financier  as  stated  in  the  agreement  2-amount 
allocated to donor is net of VAT 3-DR/CR related current accounts of financier(S) when 
required 3- allocation to related category and component. 
  Provide a feature for selecting the appropriate form for reporting the amount related 
to donor. 
  Provide a feature for foreign currency conversion. 
  The  system  has  to  provide  the  report  of  the  contract  payments  as  per  contract 
payment monitoring form C-11. 
  The system has to provide the report of the contracts register as per contracts register 
form C-10. 
  All  contract  related  data  should  be  entered  at  first  (date  of  signature,  date  of 
completion, contract amount, and contract amendments and payments terms). 
Purchases 
The Project has methods of purchasing for each type of procurement as explained in IFAD 
guidelines for procurement and letter to the recipient including the ceiling for obtaining IFAD 
no  objection  (prior  or  post)  which  is  explained  in  the  letter  to  the  recipient  and  the 
requirements for Purchase sub-system are: 
1.  The system has to provide an option for implementing the vendors approved list system 
for particular goods and services purchase. 
2.  The direct purchase to be for particular limit and above that must be routed through the 
3 ways match (PR/PO, Receiving Report and invoice for a certain value and above that 
certain  value  the  4  ways  match  system  can  be  applied  (PR/PO,  Quotation  analysis, 
receiving  report  and  invoice).  The  system  should  provide  the  capability  to  enter  and 
update the limits. 
Page 234 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
3.  The  system  has  to  provide  matrix  that  ensures  the  following  before  any  payment:  1- 
obtaining of IFAD no objection whenever that is required, 2- a valid bank guarantee in 
case of advance payment 
4.  The system has to create the accounting double entry by considering the following: 1- 
allocation  of  the  amount  paid  among the  financiers  in  accordance  with  the  designated 
percentage for each financier as stated in the agreement 2-amount allocated to donor is 
net of VAT 3-DR/CR related current accounts of financier(S) when required 3- allocation 
to related category and component. 
5.  Provide  a  feature  for  selecting  the  appropriate form to  report  the  amount  as  per IFAD 
required form 
6.  Provide feature for foreign currency conversion. 
Payroll 
The Project has a payroll section and is seeking to have the payroll section to be the focal 
point responsible for employees’ entitlements, benefits, advances, deductions and the payroll 
system to be integrated with the general ledger  to create all related financial transactions 
from and to the payroll system. The system requirements are: 
A.  The system has to enable the implementation of the staff manual and the Project by-
laws, contracts or labour office law for: 1- salaries and allowances 2-Computation of 
the vacation dues 3-allowances computation 4-topping computation 5- after service 
benefits  computation  6-  penalties  and  absence  deductions  7-social  insurance 
deductions computation 8- Periodic deductions for personal advances. 
B.  The system has to enable the recording of salaries directly paid by state government. 
C.  The system has to create the accounting double entry by considering the following: 
1-  allocation  of  the  amount  paid  among  the  financiers  in  accordance  with  the 
designated  percentage  for  each  financier  as  stated  in  the  agreement  2-amount 
allocated to donor is net of VAT 3-DR/CR related current accounts of financier(S) when 
required 3- allocation to related category and component. 
D.  Provide a feature for selecting the appropriate form to report the amount  
E.  Provide feature for foreign currency conversion.   
General Ledger 
The Project is planning to have all of the transactions related to the contract, purchases and 
payroll to be created in the related sub-modules as stated above and having the GL module 
to monitor and control these transactions. Other transactions have to be conducted directly 
in the GL. In addition to that the GL is needed to create the required report and financiers 
fund management. The requirements for GL are: 
  GL has to allow for entering the approved annual budget and to provide actual vs. budget 
detailed and summary reports on monthly, quarterly, semi -annually, yearly and year to 
date report. 
  The system has to provide a tool to control the actual expenditure of any category not to 
exceed 120% of budgeted amount unless an approval of the Project is obtained. 
  The system has to allow the revising and re-allocation of budget after getting IFAD no-
objection. 
  Design of chart of accounts to cover the following: 1-PCU for consolidation, 2-The SPCUs, 
-3 Components  ( as  parent and children), 4-  office  location ( PCU and each SPCU), 5-
category (as parent and children), 6- all the sources and uses of funds items. 
  The chart of accounts maintenance to be the sole responsibility of the Financial Manager. 
  The GL to be interfaced with the sub-modules in the PCU and SPCUs offices levels. 
  Application of the reimbursable advances system for all of the SPCUs. Such a system is 
to allow the generation of internal withdrawal application and creation of the related entry 
in both PCU that generates the IWA.  
  Recording of the initial deposit and the initial deposit recovery and related entries 
  Create  the  different  types  of  the  withdrawal  applications  (i.e.  replenishment, 
reimbursement, direct payment and special commitment). 
Page 235 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
  For replenishment withdrawal application the following parameters are to be considered: 
1- to be created only after closing of the month, -2 to be only for donor related spending 
and separate withdrawal applications for co-financed local counterpart with each donor, -
3 to be only for the items actually paid (no payables or accruals), 4- to use the updated 
SMART SOEs form 102/A and 101/A. 
  For reimbursement withdrawal application all of the parameters mentioned in j- above to 
be considered except that to use form 101 B and 102 B 
  For  the  direct  payments  withdrawal  application  the  following  parameters  should  be 
considered: 1- can be generated in any time (even can be before closing of the month), 
-2 To be only for suppliers, contractors and consultants those performed a particular job 
and related amount falling due (i.e. payable), -3 the Financial Manager has to be provided 
a  tool  enabling to  select the  item  to  be  included  in the  in  direct  payments  withdrawal 
application (as per Project documents). 
  The system has to create all of the entries for each withdrawal application form at closing 
of the monthly entries and up to receiving of the fund. Noting the importance of recording 
any withheld amounts and their release or not in the future. 
  Recording  of  individual  financiers  transactions  (e.g.  financier  related  bank  accounts, 
funding  by  each  financier,  inter-financier,  in  kind  contribution,  tax  and  duties 
exemptions). 
  The  system  to  be  able  to  provide  multi  options  for  foreign  currency  translation  for 
reporting this multi options can be provided by 1- spot rate, 2- FIFO-Layer. 
  The  system  should  generate:  1-  Sources  and  Uses  of  Funds  and  all  financial  reports 
 
mentioned before. 
In addition to previous reports the system should generate following reports: 1- status of 
funds for each donor, 2- historic transaction for each donor, 3- donors grants utilization 
and disbursements, 4- GOS disbursement and utilization, progress on AWPB, 5- financial 
performance  by  category  by  financier,  6-  financial  performance  by  component  by 
financier, 7-withheld amount, special accounts reconciliation. 
  The system should provide a tool for users defined reports  
Interface with Ministry of Finance Treasury Single Account system 
Update this section once the NPCU has more details on the reporting functions of the MoF 
system 
Project payments will be made via the Government Payment System using a Treasury Single 
Account.  It  is  required  that  the  Project  reconcile  its  accounting  records  with  the  Treasury 
General ledger (unique Project code allocated). For this purpose: 
  Consider the format in which the Ministry of Finance Controller can provide transaction 
listings  /  reports  from  the  MoF  system  and  design  an  import  tool  to  allow  for  the 
importation of the data into the accounting software for the purposes of reconciliation. 
  Generate exception reports which flag reconciling items between the accounting software 
and the MoF systems reports. 
Off-line capabilities 
  The accounting software to include off-line templates for use by GPCU. NPCU user rights 
to allow for the upload, approval and posting of journals as per the off-line template. 
Security 
  Handling the required security according to predefined system security and privileges. 
  The  Project  should  have  adequate  security  features  including  password  protection  not 
possible to delete a posted transaction, controlled access 
  User access to be allowed on a Project module basis. 
 
Includes proper backup and system maintenance procedures. 
Page 236 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Training and support 
  Training the NPCU and GPCU staff on all features of the software  
  Provide a complete and a user-friendly manual 
  Configuration and Full installation of the software in the NPCU and 3 GPCU (number of 
desktops = xxx) 
A.  Delivery timetable 
The commencement of services for this assignment is expected to be no later than [xxx] 
The main objective of the firm is to deliver well designed software, that facilitates reflection 
of  Project  needs  and  be  designed  to  provide  the  financial  information  required  by  all 
interested  parties  and  fulfil  the  legal  and  regulatory  requirements  of  the  Government  of 
Egypt. 
22.20 Rural finance – loan approval processes 
CIB/ADP loan approval process 
Page 237 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
MSMEDA intermediary loan approval process 
Page 238 of 370 
                    Participating Banks CIB Agent Bank  Monitoring Unit (within MALR)   Technical Committee  ADP Board of Trustees Loan applicants Step 1: Loan applicants (individuals, companies or intermediaries) submit a Loan request to a participating bank. Step 2: Participating banks perform credit assessment, confirm suitability from credit perspective. The applicant signs ADP application .The participating bank endorses the application and send it to CIB (Agent Bank) Step 3: CIB Agent Bank “Development Finance Dept. “receives loan applications from participating banks. Performs desk assessment (confirm target group, sector, in line with IFAD requirements). Step 4: The monitoring unit (which is within MALR) reviews technical aspects of loan application and performs field visit. Meet with beneficiaries to confirm technical aspects, develop recommendations for loan.  Step 5: Loan applications are reviewed by the technical committee which considers outcome of field visits, technical recommendations. Approve loans for submission to ADP Board of Trustees. Technical committee is composed of members from agent bank, senior level technical experts and program manager. Step 6:  ADP Board of Trustees gives the final decision on the submitted loan application. Approval by Board will trigger disbursements from CIB to participating banks.         Beneficiary loans Intermediary contracts Step 1: MSMEDA governorate level offices identify NGOs/Corporate Banks as potential intermediaries and propose a contractual relationship to MSMEDA Central Office. Subject to a successful evaluation process by the business sector and internal audit sector, prospective intermediaries and allocated loan amounts are approved by the MSMEDA credit committee  Step 2: Beneficiaries apply to intermediaries for loans. Each intermediary follows internal credit processes to approve loans to beneficiaries.  
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Chapter 9: Procurement and Contracting 
I. Assessment of Procurement Systems  
A. Country Procurement Systems Assessment 
B. Programme Specific Assessment 
II. STAR Procurement Arrangements 
A. General Considerations 
B. Institutional Arrangements 
C. Applicable Procurement Rules and Regulations 
D. Procurement Planning 
E. Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
F.  Definition  of  the  applicable  Procurement  methods  for 
Goods, Works and Non-consulting Services 
G. IFAD Prior Review Thresholds 
Appendix 1: Procurement Procedures 
Appendix 2:  Measures of Combating Corruption  
Page 239 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
I.  Assessment of Procurement Systems 
A.  Country Procurement Systems Assessment 
Procurement Regulations applicable to STAR: IFAD’s procurement guidelines specify 
1. 
that national procurement systems will be used under the conditions that the systems are 
assessed as satisfactory or better. The Programme will adopt the new Egypt Public 
Procurement Law No 182 for 2018, the Procurement Regulations (to be issued soon), and 
the IFAD Procurement Guidelines 2010. National systems will apply to all procurement 
except international competitive bidding (ICB) for contracts above an agreed threshold. The 
IFAD guidelines state that ICB procurement will follow the procedures recommended by the 
World Bank. Egyptian national procurement systems can be relied upon to undertake 
procurement below the agreed ICB thresholds. 
Legal Aspects and Procurement Practices: Public procurement in Egypt is regulated by 
2. 
New Public Procurement Law No 182 for 2018 replacing the Tender Law No. 89 adopted in 
1998 (the PPL). The Egyptian Parliament adopted Law 182/2017 to make governmental 
procurement more fair and transparent by subjecting it to the principals of: 
  Open Announcement. 
  Governance. 
  Free Competition. 
  Equal Opportunity. 
 
  Enabling Environment for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
  E-Procurement 
  Equitable Evaluation.  
Innovative Approaches. 
Clearly, Law 182/2018 has improved the competitive nature of governmental 
3. 
procurement in Egypt as follows: 
  The new Public Procurement Law has taken good steps toward aligning the public 
procurement system with international standards. Notable developments include 
solidifying the scope of application of the law by limiting informal exclusions of 
competitive and transparent procurement procedures, enabling the use of e-
procurement, and introducing framework agreements. Furthermore, the new law 
includes provisions on institutional arrangements in procuring entities, adds a code 
of conduct for public officials and employees and private sector participants and 
addresses conflicts of interest in public procurement. 
  The New Law create the Public Procurement Complaint Office that will be in charge 
of dealing with all complaints submitted to it in relation to the violation of any of the 
provisions of this Law or the Executive Regulations; where its decisions shall be 
binding on the parties of the complaint. The contracting authority shall then execute 
the decision within 7 days from receiving it without prejudicing the contractor’s right 
to resort to court. 
  Prohibits resorting to the splitting of contracts in order to circumvent the conditions, 
rules and procedures.  
  The New Law kept the methods of public procurement that existed under the Tender 
Law and supplement them with some new and special mechanisms such as the ‘two-
stage tender’, different procurement methods for private sector initiatives, as well as 
different procurement methods for complex transactions and contracts of 
interrelated and multilateral nature. 
  Obligates the procuring entities to use the Standard Bidding Documents that will be 
issued by the Egyptian Public Authority for Governmental services. 
  Establish the procedures for determining the cost estimate that includes market 
survey and previous similar purchases (these could be from the procuring entity or 
other sister organization). 
Page 240 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
  Establish a standard procedure for evaluating the abnormally low bids. 
  Obligates procuring entities to publish all tender opportunity on the newly 
established Electronic Procurements portal that include bidding documents, 
evaluation reports and the recommendations for awarding. Moreover, the procuring 
entities should publish its Procurement Plans. 
  The New Law recognize the Contracts for consultancy services and other professional 
services, such as audit, training, and certain computerization assignments, etc. The 
Law stipulated that it shall be tendered through limited tendering, two-stage 
tendering or local tendering. The tender shall be evaluated according to the points 
system. The terms of the tender shall include the evaluation criteria and the 
minimum requirements for acceptance. 
  The New Law allows the administrative authority to conduct a prequalification check 
for interested bidders to verify their technical, financial, administrative and human 
resources capabilities. Only prequalified participants will be allowed to bid. 
  Obligates procuring entities, before initiate the procurement process to verify the 
availability of funds allocated to them, provided that the terms of the proposal 
include the fact that the contract is within necessary actual requirements. 
  The Law states that each administrative authority shall have a registry for the 
names, details and ranks of the contractors according to their financial and technical 
capabilities, business reputation, track record, professional licenses and the number 
of their bank accounts. This registry will be updated annually. In the meantime, the 
General Authority for Government Services shall have a registry for those banned 
from dealing with any of the administrative authorities due to their bad track record. 
  The procuring entity shall run an annual evaluation of contractors at the end of each 
fiscal year or at the end of the contract term. The evaluation results shall be 
published on the Public Procurement Portal, including the names of the contractors 
who have violated the terms of the contract and the penalties that have been 
imposed on them. 
  Obligates the procuring entity to receive the contracting place on the dates specified 
in the contract if it is compatible with the agreed specifications and conditions. The 
contractor, in case of failure by the authority may submit a petition to the 
Accounting Officer (the minister or governor) to form an impartial committee to 
study the reasons for inaction. In order to follow up, a copy shall be submitted to 
the general contracting office for complaining. 
Introduces techniques specifically to promote greater opportunities for SMEs in the 
public procurement market, either directly or through subcontracting opportunities. 
Additionally, the law mandates the application and full rollout of e-procurement, an 
SME-friendly tool that facilitates participation of SMEs in public procurement, while 
boosting transparency. 
 
At the same time, more improvements could still be made as regulatory framework suffers 
from a number of weaknesses the most important ones being: 
  Absence of Delegation: Even though delegation of authority is legally permitted 
under the law, there are no guiding principles on delegation. Lack of these guidelines 
in practice has directed all procurement decisions to the highest authority. This has 
caused delays and inefficiencies in the implementation of important programs. 
Development and issuance of guidelines on delegation of authority and approval 
thresholds can provide GOE with more efficient procurement. 
  The use of two-envelope process for the procurement of Goods, Works and Non-
consulting Services. 
  Allow using the point system for the evaluation of Works, Goods and Non-consulting 
services procurements, while it is more appropriate to restrict it to the simple 
Page 241 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
pass/fail system to avoid any subjective evaluation and achieve highest level of 
fairness. 
  There are no rules or written guidance that defines the nature of each procurement 
method and its applicability in different procurement actions. As an example, the 
Law provides for choosing one of the two main procurement methods of Public 
Tender and Public Practices Negotiations through a decree issued by the Accounting 
Officer according to the circumstances and nature of the contract, yet, there is no 
rule or written guidance on how to determine “the circumstances and nature of the 
contract” nor on the criteria to be used to make the final contract award decision in 
the Public Practices Negotiations. This ambiguity can result in loss of efficiency and 
lack of public confidence in the procurement process. 
  There are no clear limits on the nature of communications that can occur when 
bidders are requested to provide additional information during the technical 
evaluation. Permitting broad and unrecorded exchanges of information between the 
bidder and the Evaluation Committee without specific criteria and strict guidelines 
could affect the transparency and fairness of the bid evaluation process. 
  The New Law is silent on the issue of Community-based procurement. In order to 
achieve social and employment goals and a sustainable delivery of services in 
situations which are unattractive to private enterprises, such as small value health 
care contracts, agricultural extension and informal education services, considerations 
need to be given to a selection method that draws on the participation of the 
beneficiaries in the communities. 
B.  Programme Specific Assessment 
4. 
The review of the procurement system in the Ministry of Agriculture and Land 
Reclamation, the lead implementing agency, indicated that the procurement capacity is 
inadequate. Common areas of weakness in procurement arrangements include: (a) the 
need for improvement of procurement practices; (b) weak capacity at all levels; (c) 
Instructions to bidders, qualification, evaluation, award criteria, and contract management 
are not sufficiently clear; (d) the contract conditions can be improved to achieve a more 
equitable balance between employer and contractor/supplier. A major shortcoming that 
leads to awarding contracts to nonperforming contractors/suppliers is not applying a post-
qualification process on the nominated contractor/supplier for award. The overall 
assessment is moderately unsatisfactory. The details of the review are as follows: 
5. 
Procurement planning: The legal framework provides thorough guidance on 
procurement planning, linking the planning process up with the budgeting process, hence 
providing an important first step towards actual integration of procurement planning in the 
budgeting process. According to the legal framework, all procurement shall be within the 
approved budget of the PE.  
At the same time, the procurement planning process suffers from a number of 
6. 
weaknesses the most important ones being:  
a.  The procurement planning was typically limited to a list of contracts and estimated 
budgets. In general, little or no consideration was given to timing, contract 
packaging, procurement methods.  
b.  Although procedures supporting systematic procurement planning have been 
established, data from the interviews indicates that these are far from always being 
complied with. While it has not been possible to assess the percentage of contracts 
which are not part of procurement plans, the low share of procurements conducted 
through open tendering clearly indicates that a large part of procurements is 
undertaken on an ad hoc basis, by direct procurements, thus suggesting a lack of 
procurement planning in the PE and operational units.  
Page 242 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
c.  Despite agreement on an annual budget and improved predictability of 
disbursements, gaps remain in the system. Interviews reiterated that release of 
funds to meet contractual obligations is still irregular. Consequently, payments for 
goods, works, and services are frequently delayed. 
d.  Observations also show that spending units sometimes do not receive funds until the 
end of the fiscal year in May-June. The funds must then be disbursed quickly, which 
strains adherence to procedures. Choices in procurement method are limited 
because of the insufficient time for open tendering. If more restricted procedures are 
not approved (shortage of time being the weak justification), financial resources go 
unused. 
Procedures for pre-qualification: As provided by the Law, the pre-qualification 
7. 
procedure is allowed based on the nature of procurement. In relation to the practice of the 
procuring entities for pre-qualification spelled out in the law, it is limited to registration of 
vendors.  
Preparation of bidding documents: The New Procurement Law indicated that the 
8. 
Egyptian Public Authority for Governmental services will issue the necessary Standard 
Bidding Documents (SBDs) covering procurement of goods, works and services. However, 
such documents are not issued until now. The procuring entity lack capacity in preparation 
of Bidding Documents resulting in poor quality evaluation criteria, general and special 
conditions and technical specifications, which, leads to poor quality procurement of goods, 
works and services. In some cases, Allegation exists that technical specifications are 
tailored for a specific manufacturer which leads to de facto SS. 
9.  Management of bidding process from advertisement to bid opening: In the 
procuring entity, compliance with the mandatory steps were existed as follows:  
a.  Advertisement for open tenders is mandated in at least one daily newspapers of 
wide national circulation and in the Electronic Procurements portal. 
b.  The minimum period provided by the current Executive Regulations for the 
preparation of national open tenders. However, the permissible time (10 days that 
could be shorten to 5 days with the approval of the Accounting Officer) could be 
insufficient for complex assignments. 
c.  Ensure that the place or site where tenders shall be submitted is open and 
accessible and provided with a secured tender box. However, secure tender box 
does not exist. 
d.  Carry out public opining immediately after the closing date and time. 
10.  Bid evaluation and contract award: In many cases, evaluation of bids were carried 
out using criteria not disclosed in the tender documents.  Moreover, the evaluation 
committees in most cases, did not include members with a relevant type of skills, 
knowledge and experience relevant to the procurement requirement.  
11.  Preparation and signing of contract: Based on the recommendation of the 
evaluation committee the contract is signed with the lowest evaluated bidder without 
stating the effectiveness conditions. Unsuccessful bidders are not informed in writing that 
they have not won the contract. 
12.  Contract management during implementation, including dispute resolution 
methods: The information gathered from the assessed procuring entity confirmed that the 
lack of proper contract management and contract administration in place. Although the Law 
requires the public entity to monitor the conformity of the materials supplied by the 
contractor with the published technical specifications, the review highlighted that there is 
no independent authority that fulfils this function.  
Page 243 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
13.  Support and control systems: Egyptian General Authority for Governmental 
Services (GAGS) performs procurement and financial control activities and inspections of 
central and local budget resources. Its Director reports directly to the Minister of Finance. 
However, GAGS is physically and functionally separate from the accounting and reporting 
functions of MOF. The value of its oversight varies. For example, GAGS participates in 
monitors compliance with applicable laws and government procedures, thereby offering 
continuity in procurement activities. However, GAGS’ reports focus on lapses and 
irregularities in individual transactions rather than assessing overall efficiency, systemic 
weaknesses in financial management, management performance, and/or procedures and 
internal controls. Limited to financial and compliance audits, these reports do not make 
recommendations for the improvement of systems or procedures. Moreover, there is a poor 
enforcement and follow up on external audit recommendations. 
14.  Record-keeping: PE recordkeeping practices remain poor, the legal frame-work 
establishes norms for the safekeeping of records and documents related to procurement 
transactions and contract management within financial management units only. The 
findings of the assessment indicate that the PE surveyed did not have complete records. 
Lacked data on areas such as advertisement procedure followed, tender evaluation and 
award criteria applied, public opening or existence of contract completion reports. In 
addition, the assessed procuring entity confirmed that there is inadequate space for record 
keeping as a result of accumulated documents. 
15.  Staffing: The available expertise at PE level does not meet the need for specialised 
procurement knowledge: The overall lack of procurement knowledge remains a major 
weakness to the efficiency of procurement operations. It should be noted that there is an 
urgent need for additional procurement expertise who are possessing the necessary 
competence levels. Massive upgrading of qualifications through training as well as an 
increase in the supply of specialised graduates will be required to fill this gap. 
II.  STAR Procurement Arrangements 
A.  General Considerations 
16.  The responsibility for the implementation of the Programme, and therefore for the 
award and administration of contracts under the Programme, rests with the 
Borrower/MALR. The IFAD, for its part, is required to ensure that the proceeds of any loan 
or grant are used only for the purposes for which the loan or grant was granted. While in 
practice the specific procurement rules and procedures to be followed in the implementation 
of a Programme depend on the circumstances of the particular case, seven (7) principles 
generally guide the Fund’s requirements: 1) Ethics, 2) Accountability, 3) Competition, 4) 
Fairness, 5) Transparency, 6) Efficiency, Effectiveness & Economy and 7) Value for Money. 
17.  Ethics: The guiding principles of ethical behavior are impartiality, independence and 
integrity. No person or entity shall use his/her/its authority, position or office for personal 
gain, which will be defined as soliciting, accepting or otherwise benefiting from anything of 
material value, in any form, either in person or indirectly through close relatives or 
associates, as a result of procurement financed by IFAD. Borrower/Recipient officials 
engaged in procurement activity have a duty to: 
Page 244 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
a.  maintain and enhance the reputation of the Borrower/Recipient country by: 
i.  maintaining the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all professional 
relationships; 
ii.  developing the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
iii.  maximizing the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are 
responsible for the purposes for which these funds and resources were provided 
to the Borrower/Recipient country; and 
iv.  complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
 
 
the financing agreement; 
the laws and regulations of the Borrower/Recipient country; 
  accepted professional ethics; and 
 
contractual obligations; 
b.  declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed by 
others to affect, impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of 
interest). In a situation of this nature, the official concerned should not participate 
in any way in the procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; and 
c.  respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not use 
such information for personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, supplier 
or contractor. Information given in the course of their duties shall be true, fair 
and not designed to mislead. 
18.  Accountability: The Borrower/Recipient is accountable to IFAD for all actions and 
decisions in relation to Programme-funded procurement. This includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Ensuring that the funds are used solely for the purpose for which they were 
provided; and 
b.  Ensuring that procurement is undertaken in accordance with IFAD Guidelines. 
19.  Competition: Full, fair and legitimate competition among eligible suppliers and 
contractors is the foundation on which Programme-funded procurement activities should be 
based. The most common method of seeking competition is through a competitive bidding 
process, and, in this regard, IFAD specifies that all goods, works and services should be 
obtained through an agreed procurement process involving at least three separate suppliers 
or contractors whose business is directly related to the procurement being undertaken. It is 
recognized that it is neither practical nor efficient to advertise internationally for low-value 
contracts for goods, works or services, and the degree to which the principle of competition 
is required for each procurement activity will be outlined in the procurement method 
approved by IFAD within the procurement plan. Borrowers/Recipients will be expected to 
promote genuine competition at every opportunity and maybe required to provide evidence 
of: 
a.  fair and genuine competition in the compilation of shortlists and in the solicitation 
of bids; and 
b.  the effectiveness of competition during the bidding process. 
c.  Single sourcing and direct contracting do not provide the elements of competition 
required by IFAD. Only in exceptional circumstances will these approaches be 
considered and approved in procurement plans agreed with IFAD. 
Page 245 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
20.  Fairness: IFAD’s expectation is that Programme-funded procurement will be open to 
as many eligible bidders from IFAD’s developed and developing Member States as is 
practicable in order to meet the requirements of competition. IFAD expects 
Borrowers/Recipients to ensure that all prospective bidders are: 
a.  managed with a consistent approach and application of laws, regulations and 
requirements in respect of the procurement process; 
b.  offered a level playing field on which to genuinely compete; and 
c.  treated in a fair, impartial and unbiased way, so that principles of impartiality and 
equal opportunity can be demonstrated in all procurement activities. 
21. 
In striving for fairness in its procurement operations, IFAD: 
a.  will not tolerate exclusion of, discrimination, bias or prejudice against, or 
favouritism or inequality towards any potential supplier or contractor, either 
directly or indirectly through manipulation of any part of the procurement 
process, including, but not limited to, the preparation of technical specifications, 
evaluation criteria or bidding requirements. Where any such activity is suspected 
or proven, IFAD reserves the right to take any preventative, corrective or punitive 
action it considers appropriate; and  
b.  will seek to address, in consultation with the Borrower/Recipient, any impositions 
that may deter or impinge on the attainment of fairness within the procurement 
process. 
22.  Transparency: IFAD expects the highest degree of transparency and openness within 
the procurement processes undertaken under its projects. A lack of transparency can be 
perceived as an attempt to withhold information, which in turn may make the fairness and 
integrity of the procurement process suspect. Transparency within procurement relates to 
disclosing the public domain, information for parties involved, interested in or affected by 
the process, including but not limited to information on: 
a.  the availability of potential and existing procurement opportunities; 
b.  where to access relevant data; 
c.  the processes by which the procurement is being undertaken; 
d.  the mechanisms by which contracts will be awarded; 
e.  contract award data; and 
f.  appeal procedures. 
23.  Modes of communication/publication of such information will vary depending on the 
nature of the data but will generally be through existing means of public information (e.g. 
government websites, public notice boards or media) or in the procurement documentation 
relevant to an individual procurement activity (e.g. bid notices and bidding documents). 
Borrowers/Recipients are required at all times to act openly, predictably and in accordance 
with the information provided. 
24.  Efficiency, Effectiveness and Economy: IFAD requires Borrowers/Recipients to 
demonstrate efficiency and economy in undertaking Programme-related procurement, to 
avoid undue implementation delays and to achieve value for money. Procurement must be 
well organized, carried out correctly with regard to quantity, quality and timeliness, and at 
the optimum price, in accordance with the appropriate guidelines, principles and 
regulations. Processes must be proportionate to the procurement activity, so that the 
overall cost of conducting the procurement process is minimized and tailored to the size of 
Page 246 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
the budget for the activity being undertaken, while upholding the guiding principles. 
Efficiencies can be obtained through a combination of methods. For instance, a strategic 
approach can be taken to planning, combining and conducting procurement activities so as 
to minimize loss of time and resources. For this reason, the design of all IFAD-funded 
projects must now include a procurement plan. 
25.  Value for money: Underpinning all of the above is the need to obtain value for 
money for all Programme procurement activities through the optimum combination of 
several factors, including: 
a.  applying sound, internationally recognized procurement principles; 
b.  ensuring that the goods, works or services procured meet the requirements for 
the task and are not over-specified; 
c.  ensuring that the goods, works or services are contracted on the best possible 
terms, taking into account their expected life cycle; and 
d.  ensuring that the provider/supplier of the goods, works or services is qualified, 
legally entitled and competent to execute the contract. 
26.  Best value does not necessarily mean the lowest initial price option, but rather 
represents the best return on investment, taking into consideration the unique and specific 
circumstances of each procurement activity; the balance of time, cost and quality required; 
and the successful overall outcome of the contract in meeting its original objectives. 
27.  Borrower/recipient officials engaged in procurement activity have a duty to: 
a.  Maintain and enhance the reputation of the borrower/recipient country by: 
  Maintaining the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all professional 
relationships; 
  Developing the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
  Maximizing the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are 
responsible for the purposes for which these funds and resources were 
provided to the borrower/recipient country; and 
  Complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
  The financing agreement; 
  The laws and regulations of the borrower/recipient country; 
  Accepted professional ethics; and 
  Contractual obligations. 
b.  Declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed 
by others to affect, impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of 
interest). In a situation of this nature, the official concerned should not 
participate in any way in the procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; 
and 
c.  Respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not 
use such information for personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, 
supplier or contractor. Information given in the course of their duties shall be 
true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
28.  The Programme will contribute to building up the in-house procurement capacity of 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation, instilling best practices and the required 
approach and methodology, and monitoring the timeliness and quality of the process.  IFAD 
plans an intensive training programme at start-up to familiarise STAR staff with IFAD 
Guidelines.  The effectiveness of procurement will be assessed during supervision and 
alternate arrangements put in place if necessary. 
Page 247 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
29.  The Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) will be developed by the lead implementing 
agency to be used for undertaking procurement under this Programme and consistency with 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines should be ensured. Concepts relating to Accountability, 
Competition, Fairness, Transparency, Efficiency, Effectiveness & Economy and Value for 
Money contained in IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and which are central to IFAD’s 
Procurement Philosophy are discussed above. 
30.  The Procurement Process involves the purchasing, acquiring, hiring or obtaining of 
goods, works and services by any contractual means and can be defined in more detail as 
procurement of goods, procurement of works and procurement of services. The 
procurement cycle consists of General Procurement Notice, Tender Document Preparation, 
Pre-Qualification, Advertisement, Receipt of Tenders, Public opening of Tenders, Evaluate of 
Tenders, Award of Contract, Issue of Work Order or Purchase Order and Performance of 
contract. 
31.  Each Annual Procurement Plan will identify procedures which must be implemented by 
the Borrower in order to ensure consistency with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines.  IFAD 
may require that all bidding documents and contracts and other records for procurement of 
goods, works and services financed by the Loans/Grants are: 
a.  Available for full inspection by the Fund of all bid documentation and related 
records; 
b.  Maintained for ten years after the project completion date; and  
c.  IFAD may also require that the Programme cooperate with agents or 
representatives of the Fund carrying out an audit or investigation into procurement 
issues. 
IFAD’s review of and no objection to procurement plans is compulsory under all 
32. 
financing agreements directly supervised by IFAD. STAR is one such agreement. 
33. 
IFAD monitoring and review to ensure that the procurement process is carried out in 
conformity with IFAD procurement Guidelines and with the agreed procurement plan, IFAD 
will review arrangements for procurement of goods, works and services proposed by the 
borrower/recipient, including: 
a.  Contract packaging;  
b.  Applicable procedures and procurement methods;  
c.  Bidding documentation; 
d.  Composition of bid evaluation committees; 
e.  Bid evaluations and award recommendations; and 
f.  Draft contracts and contract amendments. 
34.  The extent to which these review procedures will be applied to each project or 
programme will be contained in the letter to the borrower/recipient and the procurement 
plan. For full details on the review processes, refer to IFAD Procurement Handbook. 
35.  Post-review: All other contracts will be subject to post-review and may be subject to 
procurement audit by the Fund. The Programme staff will maintain accurate records of all 
procurement activities and documents related to the Programme. The procurement files will 
be maintained for review by IFAD supervision missions and independent audits. The 
Programme staff will also consolidate procurement activities into quarterly and annual 
progress reports. 
36.  Mis-procurement: IFAD will not finance expenditures for goods, works or consulting 
services that have not been procured in accordance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and 
the financing agreement. In such cases, IFAD may, in addition, take other remedial action 
under the financing agreement, including cancellation of the amount in question from the 
loan and/or grant account by declaring it ineligible. Even if the contract was awarded 
Page 248 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
following IFAD’s “no objection” statement, the Fund may still declare mis-procurement if it 
concludes that this statement was issued on the basis of incomplete, inaccurate or 
misleading information furnished by the borrower/recipient, or that the terms and 
conditions of the contract had been modified without IFAD’s approval. 
B.  Institutional Arrangements.  
37.  STAR Procurement Activities will be implemented under two institutional arrangement, 
namely the CPMU at Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation and PIU at the Irrigation 
Improvement Sector (IIS) of the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI). At the 
central level, central PMU (CPMU) will be established within Ministry of Agriculture and Land 
Reclamation (MALR).  With regard to procurement management, two procurement officers 
with required qualifications and experience will be recruited from the market. With 
additional TA to strengthen procurement capacity, the institutions can undertake 
implementation, facilitation, and coordination of the Programme with reduced risk.  
38.  At the central level, the CPMU anchored in the MALR will be responsible for 
implementing procurements under Component 1, Sub-Component 2.2 and Component. At 
the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation level, the PIU to be established within the 
IIS will spearhead execution of procurement activities under Sub-component 2.1 related to 
irrigation infrastructure and management. To enhance the procurement capacity at the 
PMU/PIU, the STAR will provide short-term training in IFAD procurement procedures 
(works, goods, and consultants) during Programme implementation. Subsequent regular 
procurement clinics will be held to deepen PMU procurement capacity. 
39.  The STAR CPMU will be responsible to manage and oversee overall Programme-
related procurement including International Competitive Bidding (ICB), National 
Competitive Bidding (NCB) procurements and selection of consultants for larger consultancy 
contracts as well as National Shopping, though it will require extensive support. The 
majority of the procurement activities under STAR will be implemented through the 
application of NCB method; relatively few high-value/specialized procurement packages will 
attract ICB. Appropriate thresholds that can maximize the efficiency of procurement 
implementation but manage the governance risks will be specified in the Letter to the 
Borrower (LTB).  
40.  The two Procurement Officers (POs) will oversee and carry out STAR procurement 
activities (except those enrolled under sub-component 2.1 that will be implemented by IIS) 
in coordination with CPMU members and specialized and technical units of MALR. The POs 
will report to the Programme Director and their main responsibilities are to:  
a.  establish and update procurement procedures for the Programme based on the 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines; 
b.  prepare and update the annual procurement plan (in coordination with relevant 
staff of the CPMU) based on the AWPB; 
c.  ensure the timely and transparent procurement of goods, works and services as 
identified in the procurement plan and in accordance with the applicable rules and 
procedures; 
d.  prepare bidding documents and coordinate the preparation of relevant inputs such 
as TORs, technical specifications and bills of quantities by technical staff or 
consultants;  
Page 249 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
e.  supervise the bidding processes including advertisements, bid opening, bid 
evaluation, negotiation and selection of contractors; prepare bid opening minutes 
and bid evaluation reports;  
f.  draft contracts for signature by authorized Programme representatives and 
contractors; 
g.  manage the procurement monitoring database system; prepare periodic reports 
on the status of procurement for the Programme; 
h.  compile and confidentially keep up-to-date reports, documents and records of all 
procurement activities, ensuring proper documentation, transparency and ease of 
reference; maintain procurement files; 
i.  monitor the administrative implementation of contracts in coordination with the 
Finance Unit; 
j.  constantly review procurement arrangements in relation to the procurement plan 
to ensure consistency with the financing agreement and identify weaknesses, if 
any, and measures that should be undertaken to mitigate the risks posed by any 
weaknesses; 
k.  maintain close liaison with IFAD on all issues pertaining to procurement; 
l.  participate in Programme management meetings and IFAD supervision missions, 
including the preparation of all information required, in particular the procurement 
records for facilitating post-procurement reviews;  
m.  train Programme and implementing partners staff on procurement issues; and  
n.  carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Programme management 
41.  STAR Special Procurement Committee (SPC) will be established by MALR in order to i) 
fast track each step of STAR procurement processes; ii) monitoring on the overall 
procurement processes of the Programme putting in place corrective actions when needed; 
iii) cooperate with STAR in planning procurement processes and in preparing procurement 
documentation in order to assure the right timing of the processes and that tender 
documents are accurately prepared; follow up on the requests of No Objections to avoid 
delays in treatment. 
Works Procurement Arrangements Under Subcomponent 2.1 
42.  Design of works: Design work will be centrally done through the desi unit within 
Irrigation Improvement sector. The IIS will ensure the participating directorates are 
involved in the contracting process for ownership. 
43. 
It is proposed that the IIS will develop a STAR specific prequalified list of bidders for 
use in tendering Works transactions under Subcomponent 2.1. The prequalified list should 
be updated every two years and will require the IFAD’s No Objection prior to being used for 
limited bidding. 
44.  Development of bidding documents: Bidding documents including pre-qualification 
documents will be prepared by the CPMU. The IIS will be provided with completed bidding 
documents for them to insert administrative aspects such as physical address of bid 
delivery and other periphery aspects. The IIS will, however, have to be involved in the 
development of aspects such as specifications/evaluation criteria and would have a right to 
seek clarification or request adjustments if their needs are not taken care of. 
45.  Advertising: Request for pre-qualification advertisement will be placed in the 
newspapers and in the UNDB website by the IIS directing bidders to download the pre-
Page 250 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
qualification documents free of charge from specific website. Once the IIS finalise the pre-
qualification process, the invitation will be sent to the pre-qualified firms directing them on 
how to apply for the tenders.  
46.  Handling of submitted bids: Receipt of completed tenders from bidders will be handled 
by the IIS. Bid opening will also be handled by the IIS in attendance of bidders who choose 
to attend. As part of a quality due diligence review, officials from the CPMU will attend bid 
opening. Bid evaluation and approval will be a responsibility of the IIS (PIU, and contracts 
committees).  
47.  Due diligence reviews, approvals and No Objections: Before the contract is awarded, 
the CPMU will undertake a due diligence review and provide comments to the IIS if they 
don’t concur with the result. These comments should avoid taking procurement decisions or 
forcing IIS to take bidders other than those recommended by evaluation committees; the 
CPMU should provide the type of comments used in No Objections, leaving the IIS to take 
decisions that have legal mandate implications. The CPMU will request IFAD’s No Objection 
once the CPMU is satisfied with the due process.  
48.  Contract administration: Experience under OFIDO shows that the quality of the 
supervision of the Irrigation Improvement Works by the OFIDO NPCU was less than 
satisfactory. The IIS will be fully responsible for the works supervision with support from 
the Ministry of Agriculture and its Directorates at governorate level. 
Goods and Services Procurement Arrangements  
49.  Goods: Goods and supplies such as vehicles, motorcycles and computers that may be 
common to the PMU and across governorates will be procured centrally through the CPMU 
in order to gain the benefits of bulk / quantity purchases. 
50.  Services: Most of the anticipated services will cut across governorates. These services 
will be procured centrally by the CPMU through. Certain services such as the TA for 
development of a water resources strategy and irrigation asset management plan in each 
governorate participating in the Programme that are unique to the implementing partners 
will be procured at the respective partner. 
51.  Service Providers: The Programme will be managed by the CPMU and implemented by 
contracted service providers on performance related contracts. Service providers will 
include: (i) preselected public institutions except IIS/MWRI who will have the status of 
Programme Parties and be required to ensure that procurement actions undertaken by 
them and financed by IFAD or Government be undertaken in compliance with the stipulated 
procedures of IFAD and Government; and (ii) non-preselected civil society or private sector 
entities such as NGOs that will participate in the Programme. Service providers not pre-
selected will be procured on the basis of IFAD procurement guidelines. 
52.  Performance based contracts: For Contracts, MoU and Framework Agreements 
between CPMU and the vendors, it is suggested that performance-based contracts in the 
delivery of hardware and software goods and services will be adopted. Such contracts will 
focus on outputs and outcomes of service provision, with clear milestones, with triggers for 
contract extension linked to achievements. There will be no automatic extensions in time or 
scope. All contracts, MOUs and Framework Agreements will include the payment schedules 
with performance incentives and penalties, monitoring and quality assessment, and value-
for-money assessment. They will also define the key responsibilities of the partners at 
national and field levels, and will be jointly monitored and supervised. This is not dissimilar 
to current government personnel procedures which incorporate performance-based 
assessment. 
Page 251 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
C.  Applicable Procurement Rules and Regulations 
Overriding principles 
As  provided  in  Section  7.05  of  the  General  Conditions,  procurement  of  goods,  works  and 
services shall be carried out in accordance  with the provisions  of the Borrower/Recipient’s 
procurement  regulations,  to  the  extent  such  are  consistent  with  the  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines and by observing the following specific principles:  
  Procurement will be carried out in accordance with Financing Agreement and any duly 
agreed amendments thereto;  
  Procurement will be conducted within the Programme implementation period, except 
as provided under Article 4.10(a)(ii) of IFAD General Conditions;  
  The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated funds 
as per the Financing Agreement;  
  Procurement is to be consistent with the duly approved annual work plan and budget 
(AWP/B) including a procurement plan (for the first time, the procurement plan will 
cover the first 18 months of the Programme implementation period);  
  Procurement is to result in the best value of money and fit for purpose.  
  All goods, works and services procured will be exempt from duties and taxes. 
D.  Procurement Planning 
53.  At the outset of the Programme, the Programme in conjunction with IFAD, shall 
establish a procurement plan covering the first 18 months of the Programme, followed by 
12-month successive plans synchronized with the annual work plans and budget during 
implementation. IFAD’s review of and No objection to procurement plan is compulsory.  
54.  For each contract to be financed by IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement 
methods, estimated cost, prior review requirements and time-frame would be agreed 
between the Programme and IFAD respectively in the Procurement Plan. 
Procurement plan should be divided into goods, works and services and as a minimum, the 
procurement plan must contain the following information: 
i. 
A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period 
or the plan; 
ii. 
The estimated value of each activity; 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity 
The method of review IFAD will undertake for each activity; 
In addition to the minimum information above, it is considered good practice for 
the procurement plan to capture additional information such as: 
  Planned timing of the procurement activities; 
  Procurement by Programme component; 
  Dates for IFAD prior review; 
The procurement plan shall be prepared in excel sheets and each procurement category 
(goods/works/consulting services/non-consulting services) in separate excel sheets as 
follows: - 
For goods, Works and Nom-Consulting Services 
-  Programme title: 
Page 252 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
- 
Financiers: 
-  Period: 
-  Type of procurement: goods/works/services 
-  Code as per AWPB 
-  Component/unit 
-  Procurement tender number 
- 
Item description 
-  Plan vs Actual with two rows: 
  planned  
  actual  
-  Contract type: Lumpsum or exact /BQS 
-  Total amount in EUR 
-  Procurement method 
-  Prior or post review 
-  Preparation of tendering process 
  bid document preparation and submission to IFAD 
 
IFAD No objection  
-  Bidding process 
  Publication/invitation/advertisement 
  Closing/opening 
-  Evaluation process 
  Technical and financial evaluation and submission of report to IFAD  
 
IFAD No Objection to award 
-  Contract 
  Award and notification of award 
  Signing of the contract 
  Contract period 
  Contract completion date 
  Comments  
For services 
-  Programme title: 
- 
Financiers: 
-  Period: 
-  Code AWPB 
-  Component/unit 
-  Procurement tender number 
- 
Item description 
Page 253 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
-  Plan vs Actual with two rows: 
  planned  
  actual  
-  Contract type: Lumpsum or time based 
-  Total amount in EUR 
-  Selection method 
-  Prior or post review 
-  Preparation of tendering process (terms of reference) 
  Preparation date 
 
IFAD No objection  
-  Bidding process/Request for Expression of Interest  
  Dated of invitation 
  Closing/opening 
-  Shortlist  
  Date proposed for submission of shortlist to IFAD 
  Date of IFAD No Objection 
-  Request for Proposal 
  Date prepared and submitted to IFAD 
  Date of IFAD No Objection 
 
Invitation date 
  Date of opening 
-  Evaluation process: 
  Technical evaluation 
 
IFAD No Objection to technical evaluation report 
  Date of opening financial proposals 
  Date of submission of combined evaluation report 
  Date of IFAD No Objection to the report and award 
-  Contract 
  Award and notification of award 
  Signing of the contract 
  Contract period 
  Contract completion date 
  Comments 
E.  Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
55.  Procurement Methods: The methods which are permitted for the procurement of 
works and goods are: a) international competitive bidding (ICB), b) limited international 
bidding (LIB) or restricted tendering, c) national competitive bidding (NCB) or open tender, 
Page 254 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
d) international or national shopping or requests for quotations, e) direct contracting, and f) 
procurement from United Nations agencies. 
56.  The methods which are permitted for the procurement of non-consulting services are: 
a) international competitive bidding (ICB), b) national competitive bidding (NCB) or open 
tender, c) national shopping or requests for quotations, and d) direct contracting.. 
57.  The methods which are permitted for the procurement of consulting services are: a) 
quality and cost-based selection, b) quality-based selection, c) selection under a fixed 
budget, d) selection based on consultant’ qualifications, e) least cost selection, f) single-
source selection, and g) selection of individual consultants. 
58.  For each contract to be financed by IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement 
methods, estimated cost, prior review requirements and time-frame will be agreed between 
the Programme and IFAD respectively in the Procurement Plan. IFAD financed procurement 
of works, goods and consultancy services. While eventually the specific thresholds for 
procurement financed under the Programme will be stipulated in the Letter to the Borrower, 
the recommendations are the following (based on the guidance established by the IFAD 
Procurement Manual): 
59.  Works estimated to cost more than EUR 183,000 equivalent will be procured through 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method either through pre-qualification or post-
qualification procedure using the World Bank’s applicable Standard Bidding Documents 
(SBDs). Works estimated between EUR 45,659 and EUR 182,635 equivalent will be 
procured through the National Competitive Bidding (open tender). While works estimated 
below EUR 45,659 will be procured through National Shopping (request for quotations). 
Direct contracting will have to be identified and approved by IFAD in advance for those 
cases which justify use of such method. 
60.  Goods estimated to cost more than EUR 91,317 equivalent per contract will be 
procured through the International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World 
Bank’s applicable SBDs. Goods estimated to cost between EUR 22,829 and EUR 91,317 
equivalent per contract will be procured through National Competitive Bidding (open 
tender). Goods estimated to cost less than EUR 22,829 equivalent per contract will be 
procured through the Shopping methods (request for quotations). Direct contracting will 
have to be identified and approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of 
such method.  
61.  Consultancy services. Quality and Cost Based Selection will be the standard method 
applied unless otherwise approved. The following thresholds and processes will apply: i) 
International Request for Proposal (RFP)– for contracts with a value of EUR 91,317 
equivalent and above; ii) National Request for Proposal (RFP) – for contracts with a value of 
less than EUR 91,317 equivalent and more than EUR 9,132 equivalent. Contracts with a 
value of EUR 9,132 equivalent or bellow, or procurement of individual consultancy or 
Technical Assistance services, will be based on National Shopping (request for quotation).  
62.  Non-Consultancy services. The following thresholds and processes will apply: i) 
Services estimated to cost more than EUR 91,317 equivalent per contract will be procured 
through the International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method, ii) NCB (open tender) method 
– for contracts with cost between EUR 9,132 and EUR 91,317 equivalent. Contracts with a 
value of EUR 9,132 equivalent or bellow, will be National Shopping (request for quotation 
from predetermined shortlist). 
63.  However, these financial thresholds may be adjusted as appropriate, with prior IFAD 
approval, depending of the nature of the assignment. And the method of procurement to be 
followed will be pre-determined in each approved annual procurement plan. 
Page 255 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
F.  Definition of the applicable Procurement methods for Goods, Works and Non-
consulting Services 
64.  International Competitive Bidding: International competitive bidding (ICB) is 
a procurement method suited to high-value requirements that would be of interest to the 
international business community. The objective of ICB is to provide all eligible prospective 
bidders located and operating both within the Borrower’s/Recipient’s country and abroad 
with timely and adequate notification of the Borrower’s/Recipient’s requirements and an 
equal opportunity to bid for the required goods and works. Where ICB is the identified 
method of procurement within an approved procurement plan, World Bank procedures as 
set forth in their guidelines will apply. The new Procurement Regulations for Investment 
Project Financing (IPF) Borrowers of the World Bank available at: 
https://policies.worldbank.org/sites/ppf3/PPFDocuments/Forms/DispPage.aspx
?docid=4005&ver=current, the competitive bidding is now called “Request for Bids 
(RFB)”. RFB is a competitive method for the solicitation of Bids. It should be used when, 
because of the nature of the Goods, Works, or Non-consulting Services to be provided, the 
Borrower is able to specify detailed requirements to which Bidders respond in offering Bids. 
The minimum period allowed for preparation of Bids/Proposals shall be forty two (42) 
Calendar Days for open international competitive procurement. The Standard Procurement 
Document for Request for Bids is available at: 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/299661509568509693/SPD-Request-for-Bids-
GOODS-1-envelope-OCT-2017.docx  for Goods and at: 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/328641509642865653/SPD-Request-for-Bids-
SMALL-WORKS-1-Env-OCT-2017.docx for works. 
65.  Limited international bidding (LIB) is essentially ICB by direct invitation without 
open advertisement. It may be an appropriate method of procurement where: 
  Contract amounts are small; 
  There is only a limited number of suppliers or contractors; or 
  Other exceptional reasons exist that may justify departure from full ICB procedures. 
66.  Under LIB, borrowers/recipients should seek bids from a list of potential suppliers or 
contractors broad enough to ensure competitive prices. This list should include all suppliers 
and contractors when there are only a limited number. Domestic preferences are not 
applicable in the evaluation of bids under LIB. In all respects other than advertisement and 
preferences, ICB procedures apply to procurement under LIB, including the publication of 
the contract award. 
67.  National Competitive Bidding (NCB) is the competitive bidding procedure normally 
used for public procurement in the country of the Borrower/Recipient, and may be the most 
efficient and economical way of procuring goods or works that, by their nature or scope, are 
unlikely to attract foreign competition. NCB may be the preferred method of procurement 
where foreign bidders are not expected to be interested because: 
  Contract values are small; 
  Works are scattered geographically or spread out over time; 
  Works are labor-intensive; or 
  The goods or works are available locally at prices below those on the international 
market. 
68.  NCB procedures may also be used where the advantages of ICB are clearly 
outweighed by the administrative or financial burden involved.  Advertising for procurement 
under NCB may be limited to the national press of the Borrower’s/Recipient’s government 
or, where possible, a free and open-access website. Bidding documents may be in an 
Page 256 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
official language of the country, and local currency is generally used for the purposes of 
bidding and payment. The procedures are to provide for adequate competition in order to 
ensure reasonable prices, and the methods used in the evaluation of bids and the award of 
contracts are to be objective and made known to all bidders, and are not to be applied 
arbitrarily. The procedures will also include public opening of bids, publication of results of 
evaluation and of the award of contract, and provisions for bidders to protest. In addition, 
bidding documents will provide clear instructions on how bids should be submitted, how 
prices should be offered, and the place and time for submission of bids. Adequate response 
time for preparation and submission of bids will be provided. If eligible foreign firms wish to 
participate under these circumstances, they are to be allowed to do so. 
69.  Shopping is a procurement method that entails comparing price quotations from 
several suppliers or contractors (usually at least three) to ensure competitive prices. It is 
an appropriate method for procuring readily available, off-the-shelf goods or standard 
specification commodities that are small in value, or simple civil works of small value. 
Requests for quotations should indicate the description and quantity of the goods, together 
with desired delivery (or completion) time and place. Quotations may be submitted by mail, 
electronic mail or facsimile. The evaluation of quotations will follow the principles of 
competition. The terms of the accepted offer are to be incorporated in a purchase order or 
brief contract. Under international shopping, the purchaser is to solicit quotations from at 
least three suppliers in two different countries. National shopping may be used where the 
desired goods are ordinarily available from more than one source in the country of the 
Borrower/Recipient at competitive prices. 
70.  Procurement from United Nations agencies. There may be situations in which 
procurement from specialized agencies of the United Nations, acting as suppliers and 
pursuant to their own procedures, may be the most economical and efficient way of 
procuring relatively small quantities of off-the-shelf goods. Use of such agencies as supply 
sources, together with the Programme component and the type of goods or works to be 
procured from such sources, are to be expressly and specifically agreed between the 
Borrower/Recipient and IFAD before proceeding with the application of this method of 
procurement. 
71.  Direct Contracting (for Goods, Works and non-consulting services) consists in 
procuring goods or works without competition (by single or sole-source selection). Due to 
its non-competitive nature, DC may be only permitted in the following exceptional 
circumstances: 
  An existing contract for goods or works awarded in accordance with procedures 
acceptable to IFAD, may be extended for additional goods or works of a similar 
nature to a maximum of 25 per cent (%) of the original contract value, with the 
prior approval of IFAD, provided that no advantage could be obtained by further 
competition and that the prices on the extended contract are reasonable. Provision 
for such an extension, if considered likely in advance, is to be included in the original 
contract; 
  Standardization of vehicles, equipment or spare parts to ensure compatibility with 
existing vehicles, equipment or machinery may justify additional purchases from the 
original supplier. For such purchases to be justified, the original vehicles, equipment 
or machinery should be suitable; the number of new items should generally be less 
than the existing number; the price should be reasonable; and the advantages of 
another make or source of equipment are to have been considered and rejected on 
grounds acceptable to IFAD; 
  The required equipment is proprietary and obtainable only from one source; 
Page 257 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
  The contractor responsible for a process design requires the purchase of critical 
items from a particular supplier as a condition of a performance guarantee; and  
  Purchases from the original supplier may also be justified in exceptional cases and 
emergencies, such as in response to a natural disaster, conflict and post conflict, or 
in countries where there are restrictions to free markets and enterprises. 
72.  Any request for direct contracting from a Borrower/Recipient must be accompanied by 
a detailed justification, which IFAD will examine carefully to ensure that it is satisfied that 
no other alternative selection methods can be used. 
G.  IFAD Prior Review Thresholds 
73. 
following will be subject to prior review by IFAD:  
In accordance with paragraph 80 of the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, the 
  First five contracts for goods and equipment and thereafter, award of any contract 
for goods and equipment estimated to cost EUR 45,659 equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for works and thereafter, award of any contract for works 
estimated to cost EUR 91,317 equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for consultancy services, and thereafter, award to a firm of any 
contract for consultancy services estimated to cost EUR 45,659 equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for non-consultancy services, and thereafter, and thereafter, 
award to a firm of any contract for non-consultancy services estimated to cost EUR 
9,132 equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for individuals, and thereafter, award to an individual of any 
contract for consulting services estimated to cost EUR 4,566 equivalent or more;  
  Award of any contract through direct contracting, single source selection, including 
selection of United Nations’ agencies, irrespective of the amount. Furthermore, for 
consultancy services, all Terms of Reference, Short-listing (if applicable) and draft 
contracts will be subject to IFAD prior review. 
Aforementioned may be modified from time to time as notified by the Fund to the Borrower. 
74.  Register of Contracts: Procurement carried out under the Programme will be 
recorded and registered against the Procurement Plan. In addition, all contracts, with or 
without prior IFAD approval, will be listed in the Register of Contracts maintained by the 
procuring entity with the dates of approval as provided by IFAD. When a contract is 
amended, the amendment will be recorded in the Register of Contracts. If a contract is 
cancelled or declared ineligible for financing by IFAD, this information will be written in the 
Register of Contracts. As this register facilitates the review and approval of payment 
requests on contracts, it is to be updated and submitted to the IFAD country programme 
director on a monthly basis. The sample form to be used and instructions are detailed in 
Annex 6 of IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook. It will also be necessary that the CPMU 
prepare annual statistics disaggregated by type and methods of procurement, for the 
overall procurement transactions carried out for the Programme. 
75.  RECORD KEEPING 
The  IFAD  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural  Development  Financing  require  that 
Borrower/recipients retain documents and records for review by IFAD at any time within a 
period of three (3) years after completion of the bid or contract. The following table shows 
what procurement files, folders or dossiers should contain: 
Document 
(i) A copy of the published advertisement or shortlist (if applicable) * 
(ii)  A  copy  of  the  published  pre-qualification  and  invitation  documents  and  any 
amendments, extensions or clarifications that were requested and issued* 
(iii) A record of tender opening signed by all present 
Preferred format 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Page 258 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
(iv)  A  full  copy  of  each  bid  received  and  evaluated,  plus  clarifications  requested  and 
responses received 
(v) A copy of the evaluation report* 
(vi)  Signed  minutes  of  all  meetings  relating  to  the  procurement,  including  pre-bid  and 
negotiation meetings where these were held 
(vii) A contract award notice* 
(viii) Any letter of tender acceptance to the supplier, contractor or consultant* 
(ix) The signed contract document and contract acceptance* 
(x) Any contract amendments* 
(xi) All contractual correspondence between the procuring entity and a supplier, contractor 
or consultant 
(xii) Post-contract documents relating to the fulfillment of contract obligations, in particular 
photocopies of bank guarantees or payment guarantees 
(xiii) Signed minutes of any meetings related to contract management, including contract 
progress or review meetings 
(xiv)  Signed  delivery  documents  evidencing  delivery  of  supplies  or  signed  completion 
certificates in relation to a contract for services or works under the contract, including any 
contract delivery records 
(xv) A copy of all invoices for works, services or supplies, including work papers verifying 
the accuracy of payments claimed and details of the actual payment authorized 
(xvi)  A  copy  of  cumulative  payment  worksheets/records  evidencing  management  of  all 
payments made 
(xvii) A copy of all submissions to and all decisions of the appropriate approval authority 
related to the procurement, including the approval of the invitation documents, approval of 
the  evaluation  report(s),  contract  award,  approval  of  contract  documents  and  contract 
amendments and any decision to suspend or cancel procurement proceedings 
(xviii) A copy of any claims made by the procuring entity with respect to any warranty, non-
warranty, short supply, damage and other claims upon the provider or upon the procuring 
entity 
(xix) In the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and correspondence in relation to 
the seeking of IFAD’s no-objection 
(xx) any other communications relating to the procurement in questions, including internal 
entity correspondence 
*Ideally, drafts of these published documents and reports should also be retained for completeness and to provide a full pict ure 
of how the published document evolved. It is, however, accepted that where issues of space exist this may not always be possible 
in practice. 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Appendix 1: Procurement Procedures  
A- Goods and Works and Non-consulting Services 
I. 
International Competitive Bidding 
  The procedure for ICB is lengthy to ensure quality of bids and approvals at various 
stages from IFAD, about several steps shall be observed in all cases to safe guard 
against misuse of the funds.  These are: 
1.  Preparation of bid documents:   
a)  Prepare full documentation that is detailed enough for prospective bidders to 
make realistic and accurate bids.  There will be no use of trade names for 
vehicles and equipment, (e.g., Toyota Land Cruiser); rather request bids for 
4x4 LWB, station wagon with 7 to 10 seats, engine size in the range of e.g.  
2.0 to 3.0 litres etc. plus other requirements such as radio, air-condition etc.  
b)  All bidding documents for the procurement of goods, works and services 
would be prepared by the procurement officer with the support of the 
technical expert(s), who would supply specifications, terms of reference, 
Bills of Quantities and evaluation and post-qualification criteria as required. 
c)  All bidding documents and contracts for the procurement of goods, works 
and services financed by IFAD loan and grant would include a provision 
requiring bidders, suppliers, contractors, sub- contractors and consultants to 
permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records or other documents relating 
to the bid submission and contract performance and to have t hem audited 
Page 259 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
by IFAD-appointed auditors and investigators, as appropriate 
d)  Goods and equipment should be grouped into sizeable packages to cater for 
economies of scale, efficient and timely procurement.  All bids will be for 
delivery in Egypt. 
e)  Submit prepared bid documents to IFAD to obtain the no objection. 
f)  Once the no objection is obtained, CPMU may proceed to advertise in one or 
more English-language newspapers or other publications that, together, 
have sufficient circulation outside Egypt to allow effective competition for 
the procurement. Additionally, the CPMU should advertise in the UNDB 
Website. 
g)  The Programme shall also advertise in the dedicated government portals or 
its own website and at least two local dailies of nationwide circulation 
following the format prescribed by IFAD. 
h)  Bidding documents should be available for free download through the 
Programme website or any other reliable website (i.e MALR website). 
i)  All bidders will be given enough time to prepare and present their bids. For 
vehicles and equipment and related items, the bidding period shall be 42 
days at least while for complex bids such as civil works where site 
inspections are necessary, 60 days will be given. 
j)  The Programme should ensure that the tender box where tenders must be 
submitted is open and accessible and that the tender box has two locks, 
with each key to the lock kept by a different officer and that the tender box 
remains locked until the time for tender opening.   
k)  Each tender that is delivered shall be placed unopened in the tender box by 
the person delivering the tender or by the staff of the Programme 
immediately upon receipt of the tender if it is delivered by post. If a tender 
is too large to be placed in the tender box, it shall be received in the manner 
determined by the Programme if no other manner is set out in the tender 
document. 
2.  Bid opening.    
  Once the deadline for receiving bids has passed bids will be opened.   All bidders 
shall be at liberty to attend the opening ceremony in person or through their 
appointed representatives. The bid prices shall be read out lot by lot as stipulated 
in the bidding documents. Tenders submitted later than the specified period shall 
be rejected and returned unopened. 
  A bid opening committee shall be appointed by the Accounting Officer consisting 
of at least three members. The procurement officer or his/her authorized 
designate shall be the Secretary  
 
The terms of the committee shall be as follows: 
a.  Immediately after the deadline for submitting bids, the bid opening 
committee shall open all bids received before that deadline. 
b.  Check that the bids are marked for the correct bid opening. 
c.  Check for any withdrawals and confirm that such withdrawal is authentic. Any 
bid withdrawn in writing shall not be eligible for evaluation or consideration in 
the bid process.  
d.  Check that bid packaging shows no sign of tampering. If there is damage, 
then this must be stated and included in the minutes 
Page 260 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
e.  Those submitting bids or their representatives may attend the opening of 
proposals/bids. All bidders’ representatives present must sign a register, 
detailing their name and the name and address of the company they 
represent. 
f.  The bid opening committee shall assign an identification number to each bid 
and write it on each copy of the bid document. 
g.  As each bid is opened, the following shall be read out loud and recorded in a 
document to be called the bid opening register— 
i. 
The name and address of the person submitting the bid; 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
The currency of the bid and total price, where applicable including any 
modifications or discounts received before the deadline for submitting 
bids.  
The total price of the bid may not be read out where a bid consists of 
numerous items that are quoted separately 
 The total price of the bid shall not be read out where a bid is preceded 
by a technical evaluation and such bid has not met the technical 
evaluation criteria. Where a bidder has failed the technical evaluation, 
the entity shall return the financial proposal unopened. 
If applicable, what has been given as bid security or whether samples 
have been submitted where applicable; 
The number of pages paginated/serialized by each bidder for each bid 
submitted 
vii. 
The number of copies submitted with the original bid 
h.  No bidder shall be disqualified by the procuring entity during opening of bids. 
i.  The Committee shall provide a copy of the bid opening register to a person 
submitting a bid; 
j.  Each member of the bid opening committee shall — 
 
 
(a) Sign each original and copies of bid on one or more pages as determined 
by the bid opening committee; and 
(b)   Initial, in each bid, against the quotation of the price and any 
modifications or discounts, where applicable. 
k.  The bid opening committee shall prepare bid opening minutes which shall set 
out the following: -  
i. 
A record of the procedure followed in opening the bids; and 
ii. 
The   particulars   of   those   persons   submitting bids, or their 
Representatives, who attended the opening of the bids. 
l.  To acknowledge that the minutes are true reflection of the proceedings held, 
each member of the bid opening committee shall— 
i. 
Initial each page of the minutes; 
ii. 
Append his or her signature as well as initial to the final page of the 
Page 261 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
minutes indicating their full name and designation. 
m.  A person who causes the physical loss of bid documents commits an offence. 
n.  The chairperson should close the bid opening meeting, reminding bidders that 
they must not seek to influence the evaluation process and that the 
successful bid will be communicated in due course. 
o.  Where bid openings for more than one procurement process are conducted at 
the same time, they must be conducted consecutively, with one opening 
completed, recorded and bid removed before the next opening commences. 
 
3.  Bid Evaluation.    
  This is the process by which the best evaluated bid is selected for award of contract 
from among all the bids received. Bid evaluation is important and any delay at this 
stage may involve requesting bidders to extend validities or lead to price increases.  
The evaluation committee should carry out the evaluation and quality of goods 
should be evaluated against costs. The lowest bidders should not necessarily be 
selected but the best value for money bid considering Programme needs. Special 
considerations such as standardizing on model of vehicle should be considered at this 
stage.  The evaluation team must use only the criteria provided for in the bid 
documents and no other criteria should be introduced. 
  Evaluation consists of the following stages: 
a)  A preliminary evaluation is undertaken soon after opening bids to ascertain that 
the bid is responsive and conforms to all eligibility and other mandatory 
requirements in the bid documents and that the bid has been submitted in the 
correct format, has been signed by the authorized person, and that the correct 
number of copies, bid security (if required), validity and any required samples 
have been provided.  Any bid that does not meet the requirements is rejected. 
b)  Technical evaluation is then conducted on bids that pass the preliminary 
evaluation for technical conformity. The technical evaluation precedes the 
financial evaluation.  If the bid does not meet the technical requirements, it is not 
responsive and does not proceed to financial evaluation. 
c)  Financial evaluation which considers prices read out at bid opening, corrections 
for arithmetic errors, currency, discounts e.t.c is undertaken. Bids are then 
ranked according to their evaluated price and the successful bid is the lowest 
evaluated price. 
  Bid evaluation shall be done by the Evaluation Committee appointed by the Accounting 
Officer within 7(seven) days after the opening of the bids.    
  Evaluation committee should include members with a relevant type of skills, knowledge 
and experience relevant to the procurement requirement as far as possible, which may 
include:  
a.  Technical skills; 
b.  End-user representatives; 
c.  Procurement and contracting skills; 
d.  Financial management or analysis skills; 
e.  Legal expertise. 
Page 262 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
  The procurement officer shall be the secretary. 
 
The terms of reference for the evaluation committee shall be as follows: - 
a.  Examine all bids received if they conform to all the eligibility and other 
mandatory requirements in the bid documents  
b.  Evaluate and compare all the responsive bids other than bids rejected as non-
responsive. 
c.  Assess the technical and financial aspects of the bids as per criteria in the 
documents as well as undertake the negotiation of the process 
d.  Carry out the evaluation with due diligence if needed. 
e.  No member of the committee shall communicate with the bidder who has 
submitted a bid that is under consideration of the evaluation; 
f.  The evaluation committee shall prepare an evaluation report containing a 
summary of the evaluation and comparison of bids and shall submit the 
report to the person responsible for procurement for his or her review and 
recommendation and submission to the accounting officer for approval. 
g.  The report prepared under paragraph (f) shall include 
i. 
A summary of all bids received and opened 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
The results of the preliminary evaluation, with reasons why any bid 
was rejected; 
details of any minor deviations accepted and the way in which such 
deviations were quantified and taken into account in the evaluation 
and comparison of the bids;  
The scores awarded by each evaluator for each bid as applicable for 
services;  
Avoid using point/Score/merit system for evaluation of works and 
goods procurement. 
A summary of the relative strengths and weaknesses of each bid as 
applicable;  
vii. 
The total score for each bid as applicable for services; 
viii. 
The   evaluated   price   of   each   bid, showing   any discounts, 
corrections or adjustments to the bid price and any conversion to a 
common currency 
ix. 
the ranking of the bids each according to its total evaluated price  
x. 
the results of any confirmation of qualification conducted and 
xi. 
A recommendation to award the bid to the lowest evaluated bidder or 
to the person who submitted the proposal with the highest total score 
and such other recommendation as may be necessary 
h.  The evaluation report shall be signed by each member of the evaluation 
committee 
i.  The committee in writing may request a clarification of a bid from a bidder to 
Page 263 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
assist in evaluation and comparison of bids. The clarification shall not change 
the terms of the bid; 
j.  The evaluation shall be carried out within a maximum of thirty days after 
opening. 
k.  The evaluation committee may, after bid evaluation, but prior to the award of 
the bid, conducts due diligence and present the report in writing to confirm 
and verify the qualifications of the bidder who submitted the lowest evaluated 
responsive bid to be awarded the contract in accordance with this Act. The 
conduct of due diligence may include obtaining confidential references from 
persons with whom the bidder has had prior engagement. 
l.  To acknowledge that the due diligence report is a true reflection of the 
proceedings held, each member who was part of the due diligence by the 
evaluation committee shall— 
i. 
Initial each page of the report; and 
ii. 
Append his or her signature as well as their full name and designation. 
 
4.  Award of Bid 
  The evaluation team will make a report and a recommendation for award to the lowest 
evaluated bidder to the Accounting Officer who will award the bid based on the 
evaluation report. The CPMU will then seek for a no objection from IFAD before awarding 
the bid. 
 
  All bids shall be evaluated by the evaluation committee for the purpose of making 
recommendation to the Accounting Officer through the procurement officer to inform the 
decision of the award of the contract to the successful bidders. 
The successful bid shall be the bid with the lowest evaluated price. 
 
 
5.  Contract formation and performance.    
  Once a no objection has been granted, a contract with the awarded bidder is entered 
into for performance of the contract.  
  The existence of a contract shall be confirmed through the signature of a contract 
document incorporating all agreements between the parties and such contract shall be 
signed by the Accounting Officer and the successful bidder. The Programme shall enter 
into a written contract with the person submitting the successful bid based on the bid 
documents and any clarification that emanate from the procurement proceedings. 
  The written contract shall be entered into within the period specified in the notification. 
 
The bid documents shall be the basis of all procurement contracts and 
shall, constitute at a minimum— 
a)  Contract Agreement Form; 
b)  Notification of Award; 
c)  Bid Form;   
d)  Special Conditions of Contract; 
Page 264 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
e)  General Conditions of Contract; 
f)  Schedule of Requirements;   
g)  Price schedule or bills of quantities submitted by the bidder; 
h)  Technical Specifications. 
 
If the person submitting the successful bid refuses to enter into a written contract in 
writing as required, he or she shall forfeit his or her bid security and the procurement 
process shall proceed with the next lowest evaluated bidder 
  A successful bidder shall submit a performance security equivalent to not more than ten 
per cent of the contract amount before signing of the contract if provided in the bid 
document. In case the contract is not fully or well executed, the performance security 
shall unconditionally be fully seized by the Programme as compensation without 
prejudice to other penalties provided for. The bank or authorized financial institution 
shall also be obliged to pay an additional interest of one percent (1%) for every day of 
payment delay after ten (10) working days   from   the   receipt   of   the   claim   
provided   this requirement is disclosed in the performance security and if it is necessary 
to take the matter to courts, and that the court rules in favour of the procuring entity, 
this interest shall continue to accrue up to the time the courts' decision is executed.  
  The performance security may not generate interest and it shall be determined in 
accordance with the form provided for in the biding document and may be paid in form 
of a bank guarantee, issued by an authorized financial institution. The bid document 
shall provide for, if necessary, other forms of performance security that may be 
requested from the successful bidder. The bank or authorized financial institution shall 
be obliged to give to the Programme all the amount of the performance security upon 
claim by the Programme. 
 
If the contractor is foreign, the guarantee shall be issued by a local bank or authorized 
financial institution issued by a corresponding bank in Egypt recognized the Central Bank 
of Egypt. 
 
6.  Payments.   
  Under no circumstances, will payments for goods and services be realised before receipt 
of the goods or the services have been delivered and physical verification of the receipt 
of vouchers and the actual goods undertaken. 
  The inspection and acceptance shall be done by the Inspection and Acceptance 
Committee appointed by the Accounting Officer to ensure that the correct quantity is 
received and the technical standards have been met. 
  Notwithstanding the appointment of a Contract Manager who will manage the 
procurement subject on a day to day basis, it is the Inspection and Acceptance 
Committee who issue Interim / Progress / Completion / Final Certificates as required and 
who confirm that payment may be made.   
  The appointment letter for the Inspection and Acceptance Committee members should 
make clear the duties of those members and insist that they satisfy themselves 
personally that work has been done in accordance with the contract before authorizing 
payments. 
  The inspection and acceptance committee shall be composed of a chairman and at least 
two other members, including the head of the user component appointed on the 
recommendation of the Procurement officer. 
Page 265 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
  The inspection and acceptance committee shall immediately after the delivery of the 
goods, works or services— 
a)  inspect and where necessary, test the goods received; 
b)  inspect and review the goods, works or services in order to ensure compliance 
with the terms and specifications of the contract;  
c)  Accept or reject, on behalf of the Programme, the delivered goods, works or 
services. 
d)  Ensure that the correct quantity of the goods is received; 
e)  Ensure that the goods, works or services meet the technical standards defined in 
the contract 
f)  Ensure that the goods, works or services have been delivered or completed on 
time, or that any delay has been noted; 
g)  Ensure that all required manuals or documentation has been received; and 
h)  Issue interim or completion certificates or goods received notes, as appropriate 
and in accordance with the contract 
  For complex and specialized procurement contract, the Accounting Officer shall appoint a 
contract implementation team which shall include members from the procurement 
function, and the head of the component, the relevant technical department and a 
consultant where applicable 
  For the purpose of managing complex and specialized procurement contracts the 
contract implementation team shall be responsible for— 
 
a)  Monitoring the performance of the contractor, to ensure that all delivery or 
performance obligations are met or appropriate action taken by the procuring 
entity in the event of obligations not being met; 
b)  ensure that the contractor submits all required documentation as specified in the 
biding documents, the contract and as required by law; 
c)  Ensure that the procuring entity meets all its payment and other obligations on 
time and in accordance with the contract. 
d)  ensure that there is right quality and within the time frame, where required; 
e)  review any contract variation requests and make recommendations to the 
Accounting Officer for considerations and such reviews for variation shall be 
clearly justified by the technical department in writing backed by supporting 
evidence and submitted to the head of the procurement function for processing; 
f)  manage handover or acceptance procedures as prescribed; 
g)  make recommendations for contract termination, where appropriate; 
h)  ensure that the contract is complete, prior to closing the contract file including all 
handover procedures, transfers of title if need be and that the final retention 
payment has been made; 
i)  ensure that all contract administration records are complete, up to date, filed and 
Page 266 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
archived as required; and 
j)  ensure that the contractor acts in accordance with the provisions of the contract 
k)  Ensure discharge of performance guarantee where required. 
  The Programme may co-opt a member of the contract implementation team from 
another procuring entity or outsource 
  Where a supplier/contractor furnished the Programme with a performance security, the 
Security shall be returned to the supplier/contractor within thirty (30) days following the 
final acceptance by the Programme. The thirty (30) days referred to shall include the 
retention period except in cases of procurement for works where the period shall 
commence from the date of practical completion or handover, whichever is earlier. 
  No works, goods or services contract shall be paid for before they are executed or 
delivered and accepted by the Programme except where so specified in the bid 
documents and contract agreement. Such an advance payment shall not be paid before 
the contract is signed. Under exceptional circumstances advance payment may be 
granted and shall not exceed twenty per cent (20 %) of the price of the bid and shall be 
paid upon submission by the supplier/contractor to the Programme of an advance 
payment security equivalent to the advance itself and that security shall be given by a 
reputable bank or any authorized financial institution issued by a corresponding bank in 
Egypt recognized by the Central Bank of Egypt, in case the supplier/contractor is a 
foreigner. 
  Supplier/contractor shall use the advance paid only in activities related to the bid. If the 
supplier/contractor uses the entire advance or part of it in other activities that are 
unrelated to the bid, the advance shall immediately be considered as a debt which shall 
be paid by seizing the entire security or part of it. 
 
II. 
International Competitive Bidding with Prequalification Procedure 
(Recommended for Civil Works activities under Sub-Component 2.1) 
 
In addition to the above-mentioned procedures, Prior issuing the bidding documents 
to the pre-qualified firms the following steps will be taken: 
Development of bidding documents: Bidding documents including pre-qualification 
documents will be prepared by the CPMU. The IIS will be provided with completed bidding 
documents for them to insert administrative aspects such as physical address of bid 
delivery and other periphery aspects. The IIS will, however, have to be involved in the 
development of aspects such as specifications/evaluation criteria and would have a right to 
seek clarification or request adjustments if their needs are not taken care of. 
  Advertising: Request for pre-qualification advertisement will be placed in the 
newspapers and in the UNDB website by the IIS directing bidders to download the 
pre-qualification documents free of charge from specific website. Once the IIS 
finalise the pre-qualification process, the invitation will be sent to the pre-qualified 
firms directing them on how to apply for the tenders. 
 
III.  National Competitive Bidding 
  For National competitive bidding (NCB), the same principles of ICB apply to NCB, 
except that publication of a Specific Procurement Notice in UNDB Website. The 
Programme shall advertise in the dedicated government portals, its own website and 
at least one local dailies of nationwide circulation. 
  National Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) shall be used for undertaking 
procurement under this Programme and consistency with IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines shall be ensured. 
Page 267 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
IV.  National Shopping 
  This method will be applied by obtaining three quotations from various sources. 
Contracts will be awarded on the basis of quotations obtained from 3 qualified 
contractors/vendors/service providers in response to a written invitation (request for 
quotations). 
B- Procurement of Consulting Services 
Principles 
The  procurement  of  consulting  services  under  the  IFAD  will  be  guided  by  the  following 
principles: 
(i) 
The need for high quality services; 
(ii)  The need for economy and efficiency; 
(iii)  The aim to give qualified consultants from Egypt and all other eligible IFAD 
member countries an opportunity to compete in providing services; 
(iv)  The need to encourage the development and use of local consultants; and 
(v)  The importance of transparency in the selection process. 
Definition of Consultants 
The  term  “consultants”  includes  a  wide  variety  of  consulting  firms,  engineering  firms, 
management firms, architectural firms, legal practices, university and research institutions, 
auditors, banks, UN agencies and other multinational agencies, as well as individuals. 
Consultants may associate with each other to complement their respective areas of expertise, 
or  for  other  reasons.    Such  an  association  may  be  for  the long term  (independent  of  any 
particular assignment) or for a specific assignment.  If “association” takes the form of a joint 
venture or of a sub-consultancy, all members of the joint venture shall sign the contract and 
shall be jointly and severally liable for the entire assignment. 
Selection Methods 
Contracts for the procurement of consultancy services may be awarded on the basis of:  
  Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS),  
  Quality Based Selection (QBS),  
  Fixed Budget Selection (FBS),  
  Least Cost Selection (LCS),  
  Consultants' Qualification (CQS), 
 
Individual Consultants' Selection (ICS), and 
  Single Source Selection (SSS). 
Page 268 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Quality- and Cost-based Selection (QCBS) 
The QCBS method involves competition among consulting firms in such a manner that the 
quality of the proposal as well as the estimated cost of services are taken into account, and 
the firm with the highest combined quality and cost score is awarded the contract. 
The selection process involves the following steps: 
  Preparation of Terms of Reference (TOR); 
  Preparation of cost estimate and the budget; 
  Advertising for Expression of Interest (EOI) or Statement of Capability; 
  Preparation of the short list of consultants based on evaluation of EOI; 
  Preparation and issuance of the Request for Proposals (RFP) to the short-listed 
consultants; RFP consists of: (i) Letter of Invitation, (ii) Information to 
Consultants, (iii) the TOR, and (iv) proposed contract. 
  Receipt of proposals; 
  Evaluation of technical proposal (i.e., evaluation of quality); 
  Evaluation of financial proposal (i.e., evaluation of cost of services); 
  Combined quality and cost evaluation; 
  Negotiations and award of the contract to the firm with the highest combined 
quality and cost score. 
Important considerations for implementing each step are discussed briefly below. 
Selection Process 
The  Terms  of  Reference  (TOR)  shall  define  the  objectives  of  the  assignment,  scope  of 
assignment  outlining  services  necessary  to  carry  out  the  assignment,  clearly  state  the 
expected  outputs,  and  shall  include  background  information  which  would  facilitate  the 
preparation of the proposals.  In general, the TOR should clearly state WHAT the client wants 
done, while it is the responsibility of the consultants to show HOW that will be done. 
Cost Estimate:  A realistic cost estimate shall be made to provide the client with reasonable 
estimate of resources needed to carry out the assignment.  Cost estimates shall include cost 
of personnel (foreign and local personnel) broken down into fees and social costs, logistical 
support,  physical 
inputs  (vehicles,  equipment),  and  expenses  such  as  airfares, 
communication, office supplies and production of required reports. 
Advertising:    To  obtain  expressions  of  interest  (EOI)  or  statement  of  capability,  the 
assignment shall be advertised in Member countries and as required internationally (in case 
of  International  REOI)  and  in  local newspapers  of  national  circulation.    Sufficient time  (at 
least  14  days)  should  be  allowed  for  the  preparation  and  submission  of  EOI.    To  enable 
submission  of  comparable  EOIs  from  prospective  consultants,  the  advertisement  should 
specify minimum information to be submitted. This should include: 
  Eligibility criteria “evaluated through pass/fail system” 
  Company profile, including name of the country in which the firm is registered 
“evaluated through point system”; 
  Experience of projects related to the assignment, including brief descriptions of 
most recent relevant assignments (location, client, cost, staff involved) 
“evaluated through point system”; 
  Financial capabilities (for large and complex assignments) “evaluated through 
point system”. 
Page 269 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Short  List  of  Consultants:   The  short list  is  obtained from  evaluation  of  EOIs  submitted in 
response to the advertisement.  The short list shall consist of minimum three firms.  Once 
the  short  list  is  finalized,  Requests  for  Proposals  (RFPs)  are  issued  and  submitted  to  the 
shortlisted consultant.  
Preparation and Issuance of the Request for Proposals (RFP):  the RFP will consist of (i) Letter 
of Invitation, (ii) Information to Consultants, the TOR, and (iv) proposed form of contract. 
The  Information  to  Consultants  should  not  indicate  the  budget  (since  cost  is  a  selection 
criterion), but shall indicate the expected professional time input for key staff. The standard 
RFP shall be used with minimum modifications. 
Receipt  of  Proposals:  Sufficient  time  shall  be  allowed  for  preparation  and  submission  of 
proposals. Depending on the complexity of the assignment, 4–6 weeks shall be allowed. The 
technical  and  financial  proposals  shall  be  submitted  at  the  same  time  but  in  separately 
marked envelopes.  Opening of the proposals shall take place immediately after the closing 
time for submission of proposals.  The technical proposal shall be opened but the financial 
proposals shall remain sealed and deposited in a safe place until the technical proposals have 
been evaluated. 
Evaluation of Proposals:  A two stage evaluation shall take place: firstly, the evaluation of 
technical  quality  and,  secondly,  the  evaluation  of  cost  of  services  and  combination  of  the 
technical  and  financial  scores.    Evaluation  shall  be  by  a  committee  of  relevantly  qualified 
individuals  in the  areas  covered  by the  assignment  (technical,  financial,  social  and  legal).  
The evaluation of technical quality is based on the criteria specified in the RFP, but generally 
covers  the  following:  (i)  consultants’  specific  experience;  (ii)  methodology,  approach  and 
workplan; (iii) proposed key  personnel; (iv) transfer  of knowledge.  The following weights 
are indicative and may be adjusted for specific circumstances.  The proposed weights shall 
be disclosed in the RFP. 
Consultant’s specific experience: 
Methodology, approach and workplan: 
Key personnel: 
Transfer of knowledge: 
Total: 
5 to 10 points 
20 to 50 points 
30 to 60 points 
0 to 10 points 
100 points 
The  RFP  would  normally  include  criteria  for  combining  quality  and  cost  to  obtain  a  single 
combined total score.  For example, Quality and Cost would be combined in proportions 70-
80% for quality of proposal and 30-20% for cost of services. 
Negotiations  and Contract Award:  Negotiations shall be carried out with the firm with the 
highest  combined  technical  and  financial  score.    Objective  of  negotiations  is  to  reach  a 
common understanding about the TOR, the methodology, proposed staffing, client’s inputs, 
and conditions of contract. The consultants shall not be allowed to substitute key staff unless 
justified  by  long  delays  between  submission  of  proposals  and  award  of  contract.    The 
consultants  should  also  not  be  expected  to  reduce  their  unit  costs  since  price has  already 
been  taken  into  account  in  the  selection.  The  contract  shall  be  signed  after  successful 
negotiations.  
Rejection of All Proposals 
All proposals may be rejected if (i) they are non-responsive to the TOR, or (ii) the costs are 
substantially higher than the estimated cost. In the latter case, measures for increasing the 
budget  should  be  explored.    In  any  case,  the  IFAD  “No  Objection”  is  required  before 
proceeding  with  the  rejection  of  the  bidding  and  proceeding  with  an  alternative  course  of 
action. 
Quality-Based Selection (QBS) 
QBS is appropriate for the following types of consulting assignments: 
Page 270 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
  Complex or highly specialized assignments with need for demonstrable 
innovation by the consultants, e.g., country economic studies, urban master 
plan, financial sector reforms; 
  assignments with high downstream impact, e.g., policy studies, management 
studies, engineering design of complex infrastructure;  
  assignments which could be carried out in different ways, such that it is difficult 
to compare proposals (examples include management advice, policy studies) 
For these types of assignments, short-listed consultants shall be asked to submit technical 
proposals  and  the  firm  with  the  highest  technical  proposal  invited  to  submit  a  financial 
proposal and negotiate a contract. 
Selection under Fixed Budget 
For assignments which are simple in nature and can be easily defined, the consultants may 
be selected under a fixed budget.  The RFP should indicate that selection will be based on 
Selection under Fixed Budget.  The process takes the following steps. 
(i)  Short-listed consultants are requested to submit technical and financial proposals. 
(ii)  The technical proposals are evaluated without opening the financial proposals.  The 
technical proposals are ranked on basis of technical score. 
(iii)  All the financial proposals are opened.  The proposals above the budget are 
rejected. 
(iv)  The firm that has submitted the highest ranked technical proposal among those 
below the budget shall be awarded the contract. 
Least-Cost Selection 
This  is  applicable  for  assignment  of  a  standard  or  routine  nature  (e.g.,  audit)  with  well-
established  performance  standards.    A  minimum  qualifying  score  for  the  “quality”  is 
established.  Technical and financial proposals are submitted in two separate envelopes from 
a short list of consultants.  The firm with the lowest price among those scoring above the 
qualifying score shall be awarded the contract. 
Consultants’ Qualification 
This  method  is  applicable  for  small  assignments  for  which  the  need  for  preparing  and 
evaluating competitive proposals is not justified.  The steps in the selection process are: 
(i) 
prepare TOR; 
(ii) 
request expressions of interest and information on consultants’ experience and 
suitability for the assignment;  
(iii)  establish a short list; 
(iv)  select the firm with the most appropriate qualifications; 
(v) 
invite the selected firm to submit a combined technical and financial proposal; and 
(vi)  negotiate a contract. 
Single-Source Selection 
This is selection without competition and is most applicable under the following conditions: 
  Continuation of existing or previous contract awarded on competitive basis 
before; 
  Need for rapid selection, such as in an emergency; 
Page 271 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
  Very small assignments; and 
  When only one firm is qualified to handle the assignment. 
-  The selected firm is asked to submit a technical and financial proposal, and these become 
the basis of negotiations and contract award. 
 
  Individual consultants (IC).  
 
 
IC are employed on assignments for which (a) a team of experts is not required, (b) 
no  additional  outside  (home  office)  professional  support  is  required,  and  (c)  the 
experience  and  qualifications  of  the  individual  are  the  paramount  requirement. 
Advertisement  for  seeking  expressions  of  interest  (EOI)  is  encouraged,  particularly 
when the Borrower does not have knowledge of experienced and qualified individuals 
or of their availability, or the services are complex, or there are potential benefits from 
wider  advertising,  or  if  it  is  mandatory  under  national  law.  All  invitations  for  EOIs 
should specify selection criteria that are solely based on experience and qualifications.  
Individual  consultants  are  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  relevant  experience, 
qualifications, and capability to carry out the assignment. They do not need to submit 
proposals and shall be considered if they meet minimum relevant requirements which 
shall be determined by the Borrower on the basis of the nature and complexity of the 
assignment, and assessed on the basis of academic background and relevant specific 
experience,  and,  as  appropriate,  knowledge  of  local  conditions  such  as  national 
language,  culture,  administrative  systems,  and  government  organization.  The 
selection shall be carried out through the comparison of the relevant overall capacity 
of at least three qualified candidates among those who have expressed interest in the 
assignment or have been approached directly by the Borrower. Individuals selected to 
be employed by the Borrower shall be the most experienced and best qualified, and 
shall be fully capable of carrying out the assignment. The Borrower shall negotiate a 
contract  with  the  selected  individual  consultant  after  reaching  agreement  on 
satisfactory terms and conditions of the contract, including reasonable fees and other 
expenses.  
 
Individual consultants may be selected on a single-source basis with due justification 
in exceptional cases such as:  
a)  tasks that are a continuation of previous work that the consultant has carried 
out and for which the consultant was selected competitively;  
b)  assignments with a total expected duration of less than 3 (three) months;  
c)  urgent situations; and  
d)  when  the  individual  is  the  only  consultant  qualified  for  the  assignment.  The 
Borrower shall submit to IFAD for its review and no objection the TOR of the 
assignment,  a  sufficiently  detailed  justification,  including  the  rationale  for 
single-source selection instead of a competitive selection process, and the basis 
for recommending a particular individual consultant in all such cases. 
Page 272 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Government  officials  and  civil  servants  of  the  Borrower’s 
country  may  only  be  hired  under  consulting  contracts  in  the 
Borrower’s country, either as individuals or as members of the 
team of experts proposed by a consulting firm, provided that 
such  hiring  does  not  conflict  with  any  employment  or  other 
laws or regulations, or policies of the Borrower’s country and 
if  they  (i)  are  on  leave  of  absence  without  pay,  or  have 
resigned  or  retired;  (ii)  are  not being hired  by  the  agency 
they were working for before going on leave of absence 
without pay, resigning, or retiring and (iii) their hiring would 
not create a conflict of interest  
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: International Competitive Bidding (ICB for goods, works or non-consulting services) 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Preparation of the Bidding Documents  
 (BD) using the WB SBDs 
Including Instruction to Bidders, 
 Technical Specifications and contract 
BD review and clearance 
Submission of BD to IFAD after  
Quality Control 
No- Objection 
No 
Revise BD 
Yes 
Advertisement 
Bids Preparation period 
(Minimum 6 weeks) 
Public bid opening 
Bids Evaluation 
CPMU + Tech Divisions of 
MALR 
CPMU 
CPMU 
IFA
D 
MALR/CPMU 
Bidders/companies 
Bid Evaluation Committee  
Bid Evaluation Committee  
Submit Bid Evaluation Report (BER)  
     to IFAD 
MALR/CPMU 
Page 273 of 370 
No- Objection 
No 
Revise 
BER 
IFA
D 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: National Competitive Bidding (NCB for goods, works or non-consulting services) 
Actions 
, 
Preparation of the Bidding Documents  
 (BD) Including Instruction to Bidders  
Technical Specifications and contract 
BD review and clearance 
Submission of BD to IFAD after  
Quality Control 
No- Objection 
No 
Revise BD 
Yes 
Advertisement 
Bids Preparation period 
Public bid opening 
Technical Evaluation 
Page 274 of 370 
Responsibility 
CPMU / Tech Divisions of 
MALR 
MALR/CPMU 
CPMU 
IFAD 
MALR/CPMU 
Bidders/companies 
Bid Evaluation Committee  
Bid Evaluation Committee/ 
Technical Committee  
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: Shopping (for goods; works or non-consulting services) 
Page 275 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Actions 
Responsibility 
 Preparation of the Request for Quotations Document 
(RfQ) 
         Request for at least 3 quotations 
(Give at least 7 calendar days to suppliers) 
CPMU  
CPMU 
Quotations opening 
Evaluation Committee 
Quotations Evaluation 
Award 
Evaluation Committee  
CPMU  
Purchasing Order/Contract 
CPMU- Supplier/ 
Contractor/Service provider 
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: Direct Contracting 
Page 276 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Identification of the single provider/ 
Contractor 
Request for Quotation from the 
single provider  
Submit the selection procedure+ 
quotation to IFAD for No Objection 
CPMU + Tech Divisions  
of MALR 
MALR/ CPMU 
MALR/ CPMU 
No- Objection 
No 
Revise 
documents 
MALR/ CPMU 
Yes 
Contract Negotiations 
Contract signing 
Contract Implementation and 
Management 
MALR/CPMU; Single Supplier/Provider/ 
contractor 
MALR/CPMU; Single Supplier/Provider/ 
contractor 
MALR/CPMU; Single Supplier/Provider/ 
contractor 
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS for Consulting Services) 
Actions 
Preparation of TORs, Request for Proposals (RfP), 
Establishment of a shortlisting following a Request for 
Expressions of Interest (RfEOI) 
Page 277 of 370 
Responsibility 
CPMU + Tech Divisions  
of MALR 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
MALR/CPMU 
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: Least Cost Selection (LCS for Consulting Services) 
Page 278 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Actions 
Preparation of TORs, Request for Proposals (RfP), 
Establishment of a short-list following a Request for 
Expressions of Interest (REOI) 
Responsibility 
CPMU + Tech Divisions  
of MALR 
Submission of Documents to IFAD 
CPMU  
No-Objection 
No 
Revise Docs. 
Yes 
Send RFP to shortlisted consultants 
Proposals Preparation 
Technical Proposals opening 
Technical Evaluation 
CPMU 
Consultants 
Evaluation Committee  
Evaluation Committee 
Submit Tech. Eval Report to IFAD 
MALR/CPMU 
No-Objection 
No 
Revise Tech. 
Eval. Report 
Yes 
Evaluation Committee 
Financial Proposals Opening + Least 
Cost proposal 
Award Proposal 
Evaluation Committee 
Send to IFAD the Combined Eval. Report+  
MALR/CPMU 
Contract Negotiation 
Send to IFAD the Minutes of Negotiations Negotiated 
Contract  
CPMU-Consultant 
CPMU 
MALR/CPMU-Consultant 
Contract Signing 
Contract Implementation and 
Management 
Publication of award results 
CPMU 
MALR/CPMU; Consultant 
Page 279 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: Consultant’s Qualification-based Selection (CQS) 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Preparation of TORs, Establishment of a shortlist following a Request for 
Expressions of Interest (RfEOI) 
CPMU + Tech Divisions  
of MALR 
Evaluation Committee 
Submission of Portfolios and 
shortlist (at least 3 qualified firms) 
to IFAD 
CPMU 
No Objection 
No 
Revise documents 
Yes 
Request for information (experience 
and qualification from at least 3 firms 
CPMU 
Selection of the Best Qualified 
Firm 
Submission of the Evaluation Report 
to IFAD for No Objection 
Request for full technical and financial proposal 
Evaluation Committee 
CPMU 
CPMU 
Preparation and submission of 
proposal 
Consulting firm 
Evaluate propposals 
Evaluation Committee 
CPMU, Consultant 
CPMU 
MALR/CPMU; Consultant 
MALR/CPMU; Consultant 
Contract Negotiations 
Submission of evaluation 
reports and negotiated 
contract to IFAD for No 
Objection 
Contract Signing 
Contract Implementation and  
Management 
Page 280 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: Selection of Individual Consultants (IC) 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Preparation of TORs and 
Cost estimate 
Submit TORs to  IFAD 
for No Objection 
CPMU + Tech Divisions  
of MALR 
CPMU 
No - Objection  No 
Revise 
Documents 
Yes 
Request for CVs from at least 
3 consultants 
Selection of the Best Qualified 
Consultant 
Contract Negotiations 
IFAD No-
Objection 
Contract Signing 
CPMU 
Evaluation Committee 
CPMU 
IFAD 
MALR/CPMU, Consultant 
Contract Implementation and  
Management 
MALR/CPMU; Consultant 
Page 281 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Programme: Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Procedure: Single Source Selection (SSS) 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Preparation of TORs and 
Cost estimate 
CPMU + Tech Divisions  
of MALR 
Identification of the consultant 
Request for Technical and Financial 
Proposal from the Consultant 
Submission of  TORs and  justification 
of SSS to IFAD 
No-Objection 
No 
Revise 
Documents 
Yes 
Contract Negations 
IFAD 
No-Objection 
CPMU 
CPMU 
CPMU 
CPMU, 
Consultant 
IFAD 
Contract Signing 
MALR/CPMU, Consultant 
Contract Implementation 
and Management 
MALR/CPMU, Consultant 
Page 282 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Appendix 2: Measures of Combating Corruption  
To ensure the implementation of IFAD zero tolerance anti-corruption policy, several measures should be 
applied as follows: 
a-  Corruption Awareness   
All projects staff must be aware of their responsibility to prevent corruption. Vendors, including 
private sector, NGOs are made aware of and accept that they are subject to the IFAD Sanction 
Procedures through the instructions on fraud and corruption issued within the Standard Bidding 
Documents.  
Internal Control System 
b- 
Ensure that the implementing Agency has its own internal control system where polices and 
procedures are enforced. Communicate regularly with such unit to ensure its effectiveness. 
c-  Application and Adherence to Standards and Codes of Conduct 
Ensure that the implementing Agencies and PMU have their Standards and Codes of Conduct and 
all staff, vendors are fully aware with such documents and sign declaration forms to confirm their 
compliance. 
d-  Establishing Complaints Mechanism 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Implementing a proper complaint handling mechanism requires a step-by step process, 
ensuring that it is undertaken in time and is of good quality. A proper implementation of a 
complaint mechanism also necessitates applying assigned roles and responsibilities. 
Ensure that the IFAD Anticorruption Policy is translated to Arabic Language and 
communicated to all parties involved in IFAD projects including the project beneficiaries.  
Accessibility: The mechanism should be accessible to all stakeholders, irrespective of where 
they live, of what language they speak and of their level of education or financial capacity. 
Channels to report complaints should allow all potential complainants to report their 
grievances. IFAD Anticorruption Hotline6 and contacts of Local Authorities responsible for 
combating the corruption will be presented in the PMU premises, Agriculture Directorate in all 
participating Governorates and Agricultural Cooperatives in all participating villages. The 
reporting mechanisms should be tailored to the needs of the potential users. 
In line with the principles of transparency and accountability and in order to build trust in the 
mechanism, the complaint handling procedure should be publicised. Beneficiary communities 
need to be fully informed (early in the project) of the existence of the complaints mechanism, 
its purpose, what is a complaint, who can file a complaint and how. Information should be 
provided in the local languages and in a culture sensitive manner. A representative of the 
affected beneficiaries should be able to file a complaint on their behalf. 
Incoming complaints handling should be done with care, in line with processes established, 
in time and should be well recorded in order for the responsible staff to be able to follow up 
appropriately. The process for handling incoming complaints includes i) receiving and 
recording complaints and ii) initial screening of complaints and handling of out-of-scope 
complaints. 
Protecting whistle blowers, whether internal or external. The power inequalities between 
affected and perpetuating parties must be acknowledged when applying effective complaints 
mechanisms. Whistle blowers, whether staff or beneficiaries, must overcome their reluctance 
to make a complaint out of fear of the consequences. Internal procedures must be put in 
place to protect staff members who make disclosures from reprisals as well as to assure 
beneficiaries that they will not be deprived from the aid benefits if they report irregularities. 
e- 
Imposing sanctions  
6 Email: anticorruption@ifad.org  
Phone: +39 0654592888 
Fax: +39 0654597888 
https://www.ifad.org/en/anti-corruption 
Page 283 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
If the Fund determines that IFAD non-staff personnel, non-government recipients, vendors or third 
parties have engaged in prohibited practices, the Fund may impose administrative sanctions on such 
individuals or entities. Sanctions are imposed on the basis of: (i) the findings and evidence presented 
by AUO, including mitigating and exculpatory evidence; and (ii) any evidence or arguments submitted 
by the subject of the investigation in response to the findings presented by AUO. 
Page 284 of 370 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Chapter 10: Environment and Social Management Plan 
Interventions 
All interventions 
Social/ 
Environmental/ 
Climate 
Factors 
All possible risks 
Risk 
Mitigating Measure 
Monitoring  
  Develop  a 
robust  and 
multi-channels 
project 
level  Grievance  Redress 
Mechanism (GRM) 
  Review  of  the 
of 
number 
complaints 
received. 
All interventions 
Social: 
Beneficiary 
Dissatisfaction  and 
Discrimination 
All interventions 
Social: 
Gender  Issues  and 
all forms of Gender 
Violence, 
Based 
including 
sexual 
harassment (due to 
increasing 
the 
of 
mobilisation 
to 
women 
participate 
in 
project  activities; 
trainings, 
attend 
visit, 
exchange 
learning). 
  Review  of  the 
of 
number 
complaints 
addressed,  the 
mechanisms 
used  and  the 
time  it  took  to 
address them. 
  Collecting 
and 
disaggregated 
data 
monitoring, 
and  evaluation 
data.   
  Review number 
of  complaints 
and  negative 
data  compared 
to 
positive 
feedback  and 
time  it  took  to 
them. 
resolve 
Collecting gender-  
disaggregated 
monitoring 
and 
evaluation  data  to 
track  the extent to 
which women have 
to 
been 
and 
participate 
benefit 
from 
project activities.  
able 
to 
prior 
  Maintain 
  Ensure  dissemination  of 
local 
GRM 
the 
communities 
to 
starting project activities.   
solid 
documentation 
the 
received complaints during 
the operation of the project 
and  track  the  level  of 
responsiveness  (provision 
of feedback).   
for 
  Create 
head 
focus 
to 
qualitative 
a 
assessment 
the 
of 
aspirations  of  women  and 
men of various age groups, 
the  most 
especially 
(landless, 
vulnerable 
of 
women 
households, 
youth, 
especially  young  girls), 
group 
through 
discussions, 
solicit 
feedback on the challenges 
being faced by them, their 
views  on  solutions  and 
coping  mechanisms,  as 
well  as  feedback  on  the 
training programs and how 
improved 
they  can  be 
during all project stage. 
Increasing 
local  CDAs 
engagement  to  work  with 
local 
leaders  and  male 
household’s  members  and 
promote 
for 
sensitisation  on  gender 
equality 
against 
and 
gender biases. Community 
and Household level. 
campaign 
 
  Conducting 
gender-
sensitive and  participatory 
consultations 
while 
finalizing and designing the 
sub-project 
various 
activities 
(enterprise 
development  Component 
1.2)  such  as  the  selection 
and 
commodities 
of 
products, 
training 
activities,  and  capacity 
285 
  
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
building  initiatives  related 
to 
IGA/entrepreneurial 
development  for  women. 
These have to include safe 
spaces/ women-only focus 
encourage 
groups 
meaningful 
women’s 
participation 
in 
consultations.   
to 
  Create  female  only  spaces 
receive 
for  women 
trainings and services.   
to 
mainstreaming 
  Gender 
actions 
be 
should 
developed  as  part  of  a 
Gender  Development  Plan 
(GDP)  prepared  by  the 
the 
CDAs  engaged 
implementation. 
in 
1.  Strengthening rural institutions, enterprises and markets 
1.1. 
Strengthening 
marketing 
institutions  
Social:  
  Women,  Youth 
other 
and 
vulnerable 
categories  are 
excluded  from 
capacity 
building 
Farmers 
are 
unable  to  fully 
digital 
utilize 
technologies  in 
marketing 
 
Micro 
1.2. 
enterprises 
development 
Social: 
 
Lack  of  ability 
of 
entrepreneurs 
with 
insufficient 
or 
education 
exposure 
to 
develop a good 
business plan 
  Elite capture 
  Conducting  strong  public 
information  dissemination 
at  different  levels  on  the 
objectives, 
programme 
the 
eligibility 
selection 
for 
capacity building activities 
criteria, 
process 
 
 
 
Investing 
capacity 
in 
building  for  communities 
on digital agriculture 
Investing 
capacity 
in 
building for business plans 
development 
and 
enhancing  entrepreneurial 
skills. 
the 
Implementing 
programme's 
targeting 
strategy to make sure the 
the 
component 
poorest 
landless 
beneficiaries  
reaches 
and 
  Monitoring  the 
for 
indicators 
the  percentage 
of  women  and 
youth 
participating  in 
Marketing 
Associations. 
  Monitoring  the 
use  of  digital 
platforms  (e.g. 
number  of  hits 
or  downloads 
of applications) 
  Conducting 
surveys 
assess 
entrepreneurial 
skills. 
to 
  Monitoring  the 
percentage  of 
poorest 
and 
landless  who 
develop  micro-
enterprises. 
2. Improvement of smallholders productivity and resilience 
2.1.  Investments 
in 
irrigation 
infrastructure 
and management 
Environmental: 
 
  Environmental 
Impact  due  to 
irrigation 
infrastructure 
work 
Social: 
 
Poor 
smallholder 
with 
The  project  will  ensure 
the 
complying 
regarding 
national 
law 
Environmental 
Impact 
Assessments.  The  project 
the 
follow 
will 
Environmental  and  Social 
Management Plan for each 
sub-component  to  ensure 
that  the  interventions  are 
in line with IFAD's policies. 
  Applying 
the 
Grievance 
Redress 
Mechanism  will 
ensure 
that 
communities 
have a channel 
to  voice  any 
complaints 
regarding  any 
negative 
environmental 
or social impact 
286 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
the 
not 
farmers 
benefitting 
from 
programme 
Tension  within 
Water 
Users 
Associations 
(WUAs)  
are 
Farmers 
to 
unwilling 
participate 
in 
the programme 
are 
Farmers 
not  aware  of 
the 
cost 
recovery policy 
Farmers 
are 
unwilling to use 
their 
land  as 
demonstration 
plots. 
 
of the project's 
interventions. 
The  monitoring 
and  evaluation 
officer  in  the 
Project 
Management 
Unit  will  report 
negative 
any 
impacts 
or 
complaints.  
Targeting 
indicators  will 
be  reviewed  to 
ensure 
reaching 
the poorest. 
  Surveys  shall 
be  conducted 
assess 
to 
farmers' 
and 
WUAs' 
satisfaction. 
out 
 
 
  Canal  selection  shall  be 
based on canals that need 
rehabilitation  and  feeding 
the  highest  number  of 
(as 
villages 
poorest 
defined 
the 
by 
governorates).  
The programme will set up 
WUAs using a participatory 
design the builds credibility 
among farmers and allows 
them  to  participate  in  the 
improvement 
design  of 
plans. 
Participatory 
approach 
shall  be  taken  through 
making 
fully 
responsible  for  the  water 
management.  WUAs  shall 
operate,  maintain, 
and 
rehabilitate 
improve  the  water 
management 
infrastructure. 
  WUAs  should  be 
WUAs 
 
and 
fully 
the  cost  of 
aware  of 
improvement 
the 
terms of the cost recovery 
prior  to  the  improvement 
Farmers 
place. 
taking 
could  be  linked  to  credits 
making  them  responsible 
for  the  financing  from  the 
beginning.  
Incentives shall be given to 
farmers who are willing to 
participate 
through 
receiving 
demonstration 
credit which could be set to 
cover 50% of cost and only 
to  be  repaid  based  on 
actual 
cost 
pumping 
savings 
 
2.2. 
crop 
practices 
Improved 
farming 
Social:  
  Women,  Youth 
other 
and 
vulnerable 
categories  are 
excluded  from 
capacity 
building 
Farmers 
are 
unable  to  fully 
utilize 
digital 
technologies  in 
extension 
are 
Farmers 
unwilling to use 
land  as 
their 
 
 
 
criteria, 
process 
  Conducting  strong  public 
information  dissemination 
at  different  levels  on  the 
objectives, 
programme 
the 
eligibility 
selection 
for 
capacity building activities 
Investing 
capacity 
in 
building  for  communities 
on digital agriculture 
Incentives shall be given to 
farmers who are willing to 
participate 
through 
demonstration 
receiving 
credit which could be set to 
cover 50% of cost and only 
 
  Monitoring  the 
indicators 
for 
the  percentage 
of  women  and 
youth 
participating  in 
Marketing 
Associations. 
  Monitoring  the 
use  of  digital 
platforms  (e.g. 
number  of  hits 
or  downloads 
of applications) 
  Surveys  shall 
be  conducted 
assess 
to 
287 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
farmers' 
satisfaction 
Periodic 
evaluation 
through 
surveys for the 
Young 
Professionals 
Programme 
 
 
are 
to 
demonstration 
plots. 
Farmers 
unwilling 
share 
agricultural 
machinery 
Young  people 
are  not  willing 
to  take  part  in 
the 
Young 
Professional 
Programme  for 
on 
farm 
extension 
 
to  be  repaid  based  on 
actual increase in profit. 
Investing  in  training  for 
sharing 
on 
farmers 
agricultural awareness and 
increasing  awareness  on 
the  cost  efficiency  of 
machinery sharing  
 
programme 
provide 
  The 
shall 
subsistence 
allowances  to  the 
young  professionals 
and 
their 
build 
capacities  in  order 
to  encourage  future 
private  extensions 
services 
288 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annexes 
289 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annex 1: Terms of reference of Key staff 
Key staff and the NPCU 
Technical specialist (STAR NPCU) 
Rural finance related responsibilities 
  To have a clear understanding of STAR’s priorities, objectives and strategy and 
a clear focus towards their achievement. 
  To promote access to finance to STAR’s beneficiaries and the rural poor in 
general. 
  To coordinate the implementation of the financial subcomponent. 
  To liaise with Credit Wholesalers (CWs) and Commercial Banks (CBs) to prepare 
them for the call for proposals and see how credit lines can be channelled to 
beneficiaries directly by ABE and other banks, apart from ADP and MSMEDA.  
  To prepare and launch a call for proposals for Credit Wholesalers (CW) and 
Commercial Banks (CB) to receive credit lines for on-lending to MFIs, Credit 
Cooperatives (CCs) and NGOs, which in turn will offer the specified loan 
products to STAR beneficiaries. 
  To participate in the committee for selecting the Cooperating Financial 
Institution (CFI) that will receive credit lines for on-lending to MFIs, Credit 
Cooperatives (CCs) and NGOs, which in turn will offer the specified loan 
products to STAR beneficiaries.  
  To monitor the performance of the elected CFIs and propose disbursement of 
tranches accordingly. 
  To assist CFIs to identify capacity-building needs and design relevant plans 
(starting with the CFIs themselves going to the on-lending institutions down to 
the beneficiaries), and possibly support with project resources in the form of a 
loan. 
  To lead the hiring process of the EFREs 
  To monitor the performance of the EFREs, setup six-monthly KPIs, coordinate 
with them for the achievement of set goals. 
  To liaise with the CBE, the EMFF and international partners, to investigate for 
mutually beneficial synergies. 
  To liaise with CGC for the eventual setup of a credit guarantee to alleviate 
collateral and/or own participation requirements. 
  To liaise with MSMEDA, JICA and all other stakeholders who examine the 
development of the micro-insurance sector. 
  To liaise with micro-insurance providers to explore the possibilities to setup 
specific products for rural smallholders and farmers, 
  To liaise with banks for the development of savings products for the 
beneficiaries. 
  To liaise with appropriate stockholders for mainstreaming the use of moveable 
assets as collateral for the project’s beneficiaries. 
  To resolve any glitches in the operation of the credit lines or any other part of 
the financing subcomponent at central level. 
  To prepare short bi-annual progress reports and action plans and contribute in 
drafting project reports. 
290 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Draft ToRs for Gender and Social Inclusion Manager at NPCU:  
Minimum requirements:  
  Be familiar with gender, youth and nutrition mainstreaming policies of 
the institutions including any national policies, policies of ministries, 
implementing institutions. 
  Have experience in implementing development project related to gender, 
youth, nutrition in rural development sector. 
  Serve as a channel of communications between STAR project and others 
working on cross cutting issues (gender, youth, nutrition) in 
government, implementing agencies, research centres, NGOs and other 
development projects of relevance for the assignment.  
In  reference  to  the  cross  cutting  issues,  the  Gender  and  Social  Development 
Specialist, shall perform the following functions: 
  Overall coordinate all the gender, youth and nutrition related activities of 
the project, including trainings and supervision of the work of the PSU 
gender and social development experts; 
  Work to sensitize all project and partners that project outcomes should be 
achieved with respect for the principle of gender equity and women’s 
empowerment; 
 
Identify any capacity gap from project implementers that limit achievements 
of gender/ youth related objectives and propose practical solutions to 
address the gap.  
  Review basic project implementation processes and outputs to provide 
feedback and suggestions when needed on how to achieve best possible 
project outcomes with respect to gender equity, women’s empowerment, 
youth mainstreaming and nutrition mainstreaming. The basic processes to 
which the specialist should provide inputs are: (i) Preparation of the Annual 
Work Plan and Budget; (ii) Design and implementation of project M&E 
system; (iii) Project Progress Reports; (iv) Project Supervision Reports.  
  Review project plans and budgets to ensure that adequate attention is paid 
(and resources allocated) to support practical and strategic support to 
women, youth and vulnerable groups as in line with project design 
document and percentage of outreach by categories is respected.  
  Work with the M&E Officer to ensure that the M&E, logframe is gender 
sensitive and reflective of the real time situation. Address any gaps in the 
supervision reports for further follow up. Furthermore, work with M&E unit 
to ensure that lessons learned and success stories of women and youth are 
fully captured and reflected in relevant reports sections (i.e. Knowledge 
Management). 
  Ensure that there are adequate communication materials on cross cutting 
issues, particularly for events organized at community level related to 
gender awareness and nutrition awareness and education; review existing 
291 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
training materials and evaluate whether additional information shall be 
included for specific sectors/issues. Ensure that the materials the project 
develops are gender sensitive in their language and image, considering 
literacy level of target groups. Specific attention will be given to digital 
trainings for women.  
  Be available for support in related trainings/workshops preparation and 
follow up, particularly at the beginning of the project and in relation to 
mobilization strategy, identification and selection of target groups.  
  Be responsible for the overall supervision, in collaboration with M&E Officer 
of impact studies. 
  Work in close collaboration with the Entrepreneurial Opportunities 
development / Value Chain Specialist: The main task will be to identify on 
the basis of analisis (participatory methodologies) the opportunities that the 
project will offer along the value chain for non-farm actors, especially 
women, youth and other disadvantaged categories (a menu of options will 
be identified and it will guide activities related to common interest around 
income generating groups of women and youth which will be reviewed by 
the gender and social development specialist).  
292 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Post title:  
Financial Coordinator 
Organisation:  STAR NPCU within MALR 
Location:                Cairo, Egypt 
Name of Project: 
STAR 
Duration:  
One-year renewable 
Type of contract: 
short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
MALR has established a Central Project Management Unit (NPCU) to coordinate the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Projects in Egypt.  
The Project Financial Management Unit 
The  NPCU  has  a  financial  management  function  responsible  for  financial  and 
accounting matters of IFAD-funded Projects which it manages. The Financial Manager 
has key responsibility for the financial management function and reports to the NPCU 
Director. The Financial Manager is assisted by an accountant and accounts assistant 
at the NPCU. 
Job Description 
  The  Financial  Manager  is  responsible  for  the  financial  and  administrative 
management  of  the  projgramme  including  Accounting,  Budgeting,  Financial 
Reporting,  Internal  Controls,  Auditing  Arrangements,  Flow  of  Funds  and  the 
efficient management of Project resources in accordance with the requirements 
of IFAD.  He/she will report directly to the NPCU Director and will work in close 
collaboration with his or her counterparts at MALR. 
  Operating within a computerized environment, the Financial Manager will perform 
the following duties: 
o  Develop behavioural ways of working within the finance team that promotes 
value addition, continuous professional improvement and a culture of cost 
effectiveness by all managers. 
o  Take a leading role on financial aspects of preparation and consolidation of 
the Annual Workplan and Budget. 
o  Ensure timely uploading of the AWPB to the accounting system. 
o  Master IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, 
procurement guidelines and handbook, IFAD Handbook for Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects, the Financing Agreement 
(FA) and the Letter to the Borrower (LTB). 
o  Work closely with the accounting system developer on custoimzing and 
maintaining an efficient accounting system and reliable internal control 
procedures and guidelines for financial reporting and recordkeeping. 
o  Ensure compliance with all legal and statutory reporting requirement in 
country. 
o  Ensure that administrative and financial directives and guideliness are 
reflected in all Project financial activities. 
o  Ensure that all financial accounts are managed with respect to disbursement 
and replenishment in accordance with the approved procedures stipulated 
by the financiers.  
293 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
o  Take prompt and definite action on non-compliance with procedure and 
practices. Verify all withdrawal applications for submission to IFAD, and 
ensure the availability of funds for all planned activities. Manage the 
Projects bank accounts, approve and co-sign all payments. 
o  Facilitate timely receipt of Government counterpart funds in the MoF 
treasury single account system with allocation thereof to the Project budget. 
o  Prepare and provide annual financial reports which are compliant with the 
IFAD Handbook For Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-Financed 
Projects and the Project’s Financial Manual. 
o  Prepare financial reports as outline in the Project Implementation Manual 
and as may be requested from IFAD, MoF or MALR from time to time. 
o  Act as focal point for all related Project financial correpondances.  
o  Prepare terms of reference for the annual statutory audit in line with the 
guidelines as outlined in the Project Implementation Manual and obtain IFAD 
no-objection. 
o  Request procurment of statutory audit services well in advance of the audit 
start-date. 
o  Coordinate and supervise statutory audit arrangements. 
o  Act as focal point for the Central Auditing Organisation audit review. 
o  Consider outcomes of both the statutory audit and Central Auditing 
Organistation audits with regards to control weaknesses / other 
observations and implement recommendations. 
o  Develop and maintain a system of financial control over all expenditure 
incurred by the Project and its implementing agents. 
o  Review and assess the internal control environment within implementing 
agencies and propose improvements if required to ensure that monthly 
reporting to the NPCU is accurate and complete. 
o  Manage funds flows to the local currency accounts to ensure sufficient funds 
are available for Project cashflow needs. 
o  Monitor the level of advances/funds to implementing agencies to ensure 
both that there are sufficient funds to implement the Project activities and 
that the level of advances/fund are adequate and there are no idle funds. 
o  Monitor compliance with the Project Financing Agreements. 
o  Monitor compliance with the IFAD Letter to the Borrower. 
o  Approve all reconciliations including bank and advance reconciliations. 
o  Supervise and coordinate the work of staff placed under his/her direct 
authority as well as supervising the work of the financial management staff 
at the GPCUs. 
o  Undertake annual performance reviews of staff at the NPCU and develop 
skills development plans as required. 
o  Review and regularly update the financial section of the Project 
Implementation Manual 
o  Take responsibility for the implementation of IFAD mission 
recommendiations related to financial matters. 
o  Act as key contact with the Ministry of Finance controller assigned to the 
NPCU for the purposes of ensuring timely reconciliation of the Projects 
accounting system with payments made via the treasury single account. 
o  Liaise with Ministry of Finance on matters pertaining to required 
customisations to the TSA ledger for the Project / accounting for Projects 
294 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
transactions in the Treasury Ledger and other issues which impact the NPCU 
ability to account for transactions via the Government Payment System. 
o  Undertake any other activities assigned by the Project Director. 
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification. A Master’s Degree is 
Qualifications and Experience 
preferable. 
  A minimum of 15 years professional experience with at least 10 years 
experience in financial management preferably in management position.  
  Experience on donor financed Projects is required. 
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of 
accounting practices, finance and investment.  Familiarity and experience in use 
of accounting software is a must. 
  Candidates with previous experience in IFI-funded Projects in Egypt will be 
given preference.   
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written. 
  Prior experience working with government of Egypt regulations and procedures 
– specifically Minister of Finance / Central Bank of Egypt / Egyptian Financial 
Regulatory Authority. 
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Office.   
  The ability to lead and to work as part of a team. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector 
companies, civil society organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex 
assignments efficiently and effectively in a high demanding working 
environment. 
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
295 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Terms of reference: NPCU Senior Accountant 
(can amend TORs for recruitment of GPCU accountants)  
Post title:  
Senior Accountant  
Organisation:  STAR NPCU within MALR 
Location:                Cairo, Egypt 
Name of Project: 
STAR 
Duration:  
One-year renewable 
Type of contract: 
short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
MALR has established a Central Project Management Unit (NPCU) to coordinate the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Projects in Egypt.  
The Project Financial Management Unit 
The  NPCU  has  a  financial  management  function  responsible  for  financial  and 
accounting matters of IFAD-funded Projects which it manages. The NPCU accountant 
plays  a  key  role  in  financial  management  and  reports  directly  to  the  Financial 
Manager. The NPCU accountant has close contact with counterparts at a Governorate 
level for the purposes of centralized accounting of all Project activities. 
Job Description 
  Assist the Financial Manager with overall financial management activities of the 
Project. 
  Support preparation of consolidated Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB). 
  Review monthly transactions of the GPCUs. 
  Review monthly reports received from implementing agencies and record related 
transactions  in  the  accounting  system,  using  appropriate  cost  categories 
/components /sources of finance. 
  Work alongside the Financial Manager to ensure timely and accurate submission 
of withdrawal applications to IFAD; 
  Assist  the  Financial  Manager  in  Preparation  and  submission  of  all  financial 
statements,  budgets,  financial  Projections,  cash  flow  forecasts  and  all  other 
Projects reports as requested by the Project, IFAD and the Ministry of Finance. 
  Prepare    specific  budgetary  documentation,  according  to  Egyptian    legislation, 
issue  payment  requests  and  obtain  the  necessary  approvals  for  finalizing 
payments to the suppliers/contractors; 
  Review and validate Payment requests  against approved AWPB and supporting 
documents; 
  Submit payment vouchers to the MALR internal auditor / MoF Controller for the 
purposes of review and approval before submission to the MoF accounting unit 
for processing. 
  Operate  and  maintain  the  financial  management  software  system  related  to 
accounting and financial management by ensuring that all financial transactions 
are entered into the system; accurately on a regular basis;  
  Ensure  that  all  CPCU's  financial  transactions  (hard  and  sot  copies)  are  filled 
properly and on daily basis and easily accessible; 
296 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Monitor  actual  expenditure  and  disbursements  against  allocations  for  each 
category; 
  Ensure smooth and timely transfer of approved payments for eligible expenditure 
to Contractors in compliance with FM Manual and Legal Agreement (collaborate 
with MoF accounting unit who is responsible for processing payments). 
  Maintain  the  master  contract  register  for  all  contracts  issued  at  central  and 
governorate level. 
  Maintain and update the fixed assets register for the entire Project; 
  Maintain and update advance registers and ensure timely clearances; 
  Prepare on monthly bank reconciliations. 
  Follow up and maintain an up to date records on in-kind contributions; 
  Occasional field visit to Governorates to support GPCU accountants if needed. 
  Perform other duties, of financial nature which pertains to the implementation of 
the Project, as may be requested by the Project Director and Financial Manager. 
Qualifications and Experience  
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification.  
  A minimum of 10 years professional experience with at least 5 years experience 
in accounting and financial management.  
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of 
accounting practices, finance and investment.  Familiarity and experience in use 
of accounting software is a must. 
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written 
  Prior experience working with donor-funded Projects.  
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Office.   
  Ability to work in team and multi-tasking. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector 
companies, civil society organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex 
assignments efficiently and effectively in a high demanding working 
environment.  
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
297 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Terms of reference: NPCU Accountant 
(can amend TORs for recruitment of GPCU accountants)  
Post title:  
Accountant  
Organisation:  STAR NPCU within MALR 
Location:                Cairo, Egypt 
Name of Project: 
STAR 
Duration:  
One-year renewable 
Type of contract: 
short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
MALR has established a Central Project Management Unit (NPCU) to coordinate the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Projects in Egypt.  
The Project Financial Management Unit 
The  NPCU  has  a  financial  management  function  responsible  for  financial  and 
accounting matters of IFAD-funded Projects which it manages. The NPCU accountant 
plays  a  key  role  in  financial  management  and  reports  directly  to  the  Financial 
Manager.  
Job Description 
  Assist the NPCU Senior  accountant with financial management activities  of the 
Project. 
  Support preparation of consolidated Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB). 
  Review monthly transactions of the GPCUs. 
  Review monthly reports received from implementing agencies and record related 
transactions  in  the  accounting  system,  using  appropriate  cost  categories 
/components /sources of finance. 
  Work  alongside the  Senior  Accountant  and  Financial  Manager  to  ensure timely 
and accurate submission of withdrawal applications to IFAD; 
  Review and validate Payment requests  against approved AWPB and supporting 
documents; 
  Submit payment vouchers to the MALR internal auditor / MoF Controller for the 
purposes of review and approval before submission to the MoF accounting unit 
for processing. 
  Operate  and  maintain  the  financial  management  software  system  related  to 
accounting and financial management by ensuring that all financial transactions 
are entered into the system; accurately on a regular basis;  
  Ensure  that  all  NPCU  financial  transactions  (hard  and  sot  copies)  are  filled 
properly and on daily basis and easily accessible; 
  Monitor  actual  expenditure  and  disbursements  against  allocations  for  each 
category; 
  Ensure smooth and timely transfer of approved payments for eligible expenditure 
to Contractors in compliance with FM Manual and Legal Agreement (collaborate 
with MoF accounting unit who is responsible for processing payments). 
  Maintain  the  master  contract  register  for  all  contracts  issued  at  central  and 
governorate level. 
298 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Maintain and update the fixed assets register for the entire Project; 
  Maintain and update advance registers and ensure timely clearances; 
  Prepare monthly bank reconciliations. 
  Follow up and maintain an up to date records on in-kind contributions; 
  Perform other duties, of financial nature which pertains to the implementation of 
the  Project,  as  may  be  requested  by  the  Senior  Accountant  and  Financial 
Manager. 
Qualifications and Experience  
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification.  
  A minimum of 5 years professional experience with at least 3 years experience 
in accounting and financial management.  
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of 
accounting practices, finance and investment.  Familiarity and experience in use 
of accounting software is a must. 
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written 
  Prior experience working with donor-funded Projects.  
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Office.   
  Ability to work in team and multi-tasking. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector 
companies, civil society organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex 
assignments efficiently and effectively in a high demanding working 
environment.  
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance 
299 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Terms of reference: NPCU Procurement Specialists 
Terms of Reference  
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt 
IFAD Funded Project 
POSITION: NPCU Procurement Officer 
1.  Background 
The Upper Egypt region includes about 38% of Egypt’s population and 67% of its poor, 
with 56% of the population unable to meet their basic needs, compared to 19% in the 
Nile Delta. High level of land fragmentation is a major cause of poverty with 77% of 
total land in Upper Egypt owned by extra smallholders (less than 1 feddan) and 
smallholder farmers (between 1-3 feddan). The pressure on agricultural land is expected 
to increase with the projected growth of the population from 95 million to 150 million 
by 2050. Smallholder farmers experience limited access to market and income 
generation due to low surplus, limited returns due to low prices, high production and 
transaction costs and low bargaining power. 
Livelihood risks related to climate change and uncertain future Nile water flows. The 
program areas are affected by heat waves, restricted access to irrigation (at the end of 
the mesqas), high post-harvest losses, pest and diseases, and in some areas high levels 
of water salinity aggravated by the excessive use of fertilizer). Such incidences are 
expected to become more prevalent as the mean annual temperature in the country is 
expected to rise by 1.8 to 5.2°C by the end of the century. Inefficient irrigation water 
use is very common and the mean efficiency of field irrigation systems is estimated at 
50%. Most farmers use surface irrigation systems instead of modern water-efficient 
irrigation techniques. Nile flows in Egypt are highly sensitive to climate change and 
water use in up-stream countries, with new hydroelectric projects underway. There is no 
consensus on whether the overall Nile flow will increase or decrease. However, 
significant increasing inter-year variability in flows is predicted due to inter-year 
variability in precipitation in upstream countries. As a result of climate change, by 
2040, wheat yields are expected to decline by 12 per cent, vegetables by 28 per cent, 
maize by 47 per cent and rice by 26 to 47 per cent. 
Limited presence of effective marketing institutions. The limited presence of effective 
marketing institutions has constrained the marketing potential of smallholder farmers’ 
produce. Most smallholders sell their produce individually through village-based 
middlemen who broker deals between these producers and merchants for a commission. 
A limited number of smallholders sell their produce individually to merchants at the 
governorate and district levels who are often connected to retailers and other 
agribusinesses in larger cities. These smallholder farmers are price-takers and have the 
weakest position amongst other actors in the value chain. Consequently, farmers often 
receive only 10-35 % of the retail price of commodities. In order to overcome this 
challenge development initiatives (IFAD-PRIME, WFP, USAID, UNIDO) have 
supported market committees/associations (MA) under the umbrella of Community 
Development Associations (CDA). However, there is limited evidence of graduation of 
these MAs as independent platforms. 
IFAD has long engagement with the government in supporting smallholders in 
addressing their production and marketing constraints in Upper Egypt. The IFAD 
300 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
supported PRIME project (completion in 2020) has resulted in several success stories 
related to marketing and increasing productivity in the STAR programme area. PRIME 
has capacitated 126 marketing associations (FA) linked 50% of them (4,000 members) 
directly to buyers through contract farming linkages. These linkages increased the net 
income of the farmers by at least 15%. The IFAD supported OFIDO project has 
rehabilitated irrigation for 20,000 feddans by replacing numerous uncontrolled small 
lifting diesel pumps, located at multiple points along the branch canals, with single-lift 
electrically-powered collective pumping stations and earth open canals were replaced 
by low pressure buried pipelines distributing directly water to farmer plots through 
outlet hydrant valves. STAR will build on lessons learned and integrate and consolidate 
the achievements of these projects where relevant and expand the outreach of the 
benefits to other poverty pockets. IFAD is using its convening capacity to support the 
government in leveraging and coordinating partnerships with other developing agencies 
contributing to STAR to make it a comprehensive programme, supporting the 
government's strategy for investing in the development of the rural sector in Upper 
Egypt. 
The Development Objective of the programme is to improve the income and resilience 
of families of smallholder farmers and landless poor through better marketing linkages, 
sustainable agricultural intensification, and small rural businesses. Improve the income, 
food security and resilience of smallholder farmers' livelihoods through climate-smart 
agriculture, better marketing linkages and diversified sources of income at household 
level building on women and youth potential 
The  activities  of  the  Programme  are  organised  in  two  mutually  interdependent 
components: 
  Component 1: Strengthening Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Markets. 
  Component 2: Improvement of Smallholders Productivity and Resilience. 
2.  Objective 
The  objective  of  the  assignment  is  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  processing  of 
procurement  tasks  under  STAR  and  to  ensure  smooth  and  quality  implementation  of 
procurement processes for all Programme related activities. 
3.  Specific Tasks of Procurement Officer 
The  Procurement  Officer  will  be  part  of  the  Programme  Team  working  on  the 
implementation of the Programme’s activities. Under the supervision and coordination 
of the Programme Manager, she/he would  be responsible  for the specific procurement 
activities needed for Programme implementation. The Procurement Officer will provide 
leadership and guidance to all NPCU and  implementing partners staff on procurement 
issues for goods, services and construction contracts. Specific responsibilities include but 
are not limited to the following: 
  Review and provide more detail, where required, on the procurement section of 
 
the draft PIM;  
In  collaboration  with  other  members  of  the  NPCU/PIU,  and  implementing 
partners, and based on the AWPB update the rolling 18-month procurement plan 
for  works,  goods  and  services  required  by  the  Programme  in  accordance  with 
IFAD PP Template and submit same for approval by the GOE and IFAD; 
301 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Ensure the timely and transparent procurement of goods, works and services as 
identified in the procurement plan and in accordance with the applicable rules and 
procedures; 
  Prepare bidding documents and coordinate the preparation of relevant inputs such 
as  TORs,  technical  specifications  and  bills  of  quantities  by  technical  staff  or 
consultants; 
  Lead the orientation events  for all STAR Governorate PSUs and implementing 
agencies  on  the  principles  and  application  of  procurement  procedures  and 
guidelines for STAR and use of the PIM guidelines; 
  Prepare  tender  notices  and  advertisements 
international papers and websites as required; 
in  appropriate  national  and 
  Participate  in  relevant  evaluation  committee  meetings  and  assist  with  the 
preparation of the committee reports; 
  Review and advise on bid evaluation reports prepared by the IIS/PIU and other 
implementing agencies and make necessary follow-up; 
  Notification of results of bids to all successful and unsuccessful bidders; 
  Draft contracts for signature by Accounting Officers and Vendors;  
  Manage the procurement monitoring database system; prepare periodic reports on 
the status of procurement for the Programme; 
  Design,  implement a database of providers and ensure the update, and develop 
management statistics that will allow IFAD to measure the level of Programme 
performance in terms of procurement; 
  Handle all procurement-related correspondence with pertinent authorities; 
  Compile  and  confidentially  keep  up-to-date  procurement  files  containing  high 
quality  and  readily  available  information,  ensuring  proper  documentation, 
transparency and ease of reference; 
  Monitor the administrative implementation of contracts in coordination with the 
Finance Unit. Ensure a sound contract administration of international contracts, 
including  handling  of  contractual  claims,  arbitrations  and  termination  of 
contracts; 
  Report in writing to the Programme Manager on unethical behaviour, potential or 
actual  violation  of  contractual  terms  by  contractors  and  service  providers  and 
propose the appropriate remedial actions in accordance with the Contract General 
and Special Conditions; 
  Maintain the contract register and regularly update the same with monitoring data 
on progress of all contracts; 
  Constantly review procurement arrangements in relation to the procurement plan 
to ensure consistency  with the  financing agreement and  identify weaknesses, if 
any, and measures that should be undertaken to mitigate the risks posed by any 
weaknesses; 
  Train Programme and implementing partners staff on procurement issues; 
  Maintain close liaison with IFAD on all issues pertaining to procurement; 
  Participate in Programme management meetings and IFAD supervision missions, 
including  the  preparation  of  all  information  required,  in  particular  the 
procurement records for facilitating post-procurement reviews; and  
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Programme Management. 
4.  Qualifications and Experience 
302 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
The Procurement Officer will have the following qualifications and experience: 
  A minimum of first degree in engineering or administration or law or any other 
relevant field. A post graduate qualification will be an added advantage; 
  Minimum Ten (10) years relevant working experience, of which Seven (7) years’ 
experience is in procurement management at Government/donor funded projects;  
  A comprehensive knowledge of IFAD Procurement Guidelines and the National 
Public Procurement Regulations; 
  Familiarity with the World Bank Procurement Guidelines and Templates as well 
as  experience  in  working  within  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Land 
Reclamation  and  Ministry  of  Water  Resources  and  Irrigation  will  be  an  added 
advantage; 
  Experience in training, capacity building and setting up procurement systems in 
a new organisation will be a distinct advantage; 
  Computer literacy and competence, Microsoft Word, Excel, Access, Power Point;  
  Proven ability to work and interact with people from diverse, professional, social 
and cultural backgrounds;  
  Fluency in written and spoken English and Arabic languages; 
  Excellent analytical skills and report writing. 
5.  Other Requirements 
  Strong management skills, particularly ability to provide strategic direction and 
technical supervision,  
  Excellent communication skills and ease in interpersonal relationships; 
  Reliable  and  responsible  personality  and  capacity  to  work  under  demanding 
professional circumstances and in an international environment; 
  Excellent coordination and negotiation skills; 
  Excellent planning, organisation and recordkeeping skills; 
  Experience in dealing with senior business executives and government officials; 
  Good team player while being independent and able to work autonomously. 
6.  References 
Verifiable  references  and  membership  of  professional  organization(s).  Previous  work 
experience in Donors funded projects. 
7.  Performance criteria 
The performance of the Procurement Officer will be evaluated bi-annually. The criteria 
used to measure his/her performance will be: 
  Timely processing of procurement requisitions; 
  Ability to meet deadlines in terms of procurement; 
  Compliance with procurement procedures foreseen in the Programme, measured 
by  the  number  of  rejected  submissions  for  prior  examination  and  post-review 
audit findings (technical and financial);  
  Delivery of tendered supplies and services. 
303 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
8.  Work Station  
The  position  will  be  based  at  the  Central  Programme  Coordination  Unit  office  with 
frequent travel to the three Programme governorates. 
9.  Duration  
Two-year contract, with six months’ probation period, renewable based on agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
304 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Key staff in the GPCU 
Social and community mobilisation specialist (GPCU):  
  Conduct and organize gender and youth workshops at governorate (PSU 
specialist) and village level (CDA specialist) for all the project staff as well 
as for institutions and local leaders to create awareness on the importance 
to have women and youth as part of the economic development of the 
cluster; 
  Conduct an assessment of the implementers capacity in relation to cross 
cutting issues and organize workshops and capacity building trainings 
(gender, youth, nutrition) for interested staff and other relevant partners 
based on gaps identified (PSU specialists); 
  Organize specific separate sessions for women and youth during the 
mobilisation process (CDAs specialists, following guidance from PSU 
specialist). 
  Ensure that the project implementation teams (at all levels) are sensitized 
to gender and diversity issues that they should expect and explore in their 
interaction with the community through regular trainings and sensitization 
programmes (PSU and CDAs specialists); 
 
Interacting with women in communities to gain better understanding of 
women’s’ and youth perceptions and guiding implementers in approaches to 
better integrating women and youth into project activities as well as having 
them in leadership positions (CDAs specialist guided by PSU specialist); 
  Organize women’s leadership trainings and keep track of monitoring women 
in leadership positions (CDAs specialists); 
  Reviewing (regularly) participation of women and youth in STAR activities 
and decision making processes and making recommendation to improve 
processes. (PSU specialists). 
  Collect data (quantitative and qualitative) on women and youth participation 
to ensure a proper M&E data collection is sex and age disaggregated (first 
data collection CDAs specialist and consolidation done by PSU specialist). 
  Collect success stories on women and youth empowerment to be included in 
the different project reports (PSU specialists with support of CDA 
specialists).  
Job description of Financial services specialists (GPCU) 
There will be thee FSS reporting to the STAR Technical specialist and coordinating 
among them. 
Role and Responsibilities 
  To have a clear understanding of STAR’s financing priorities, objectives and 
strategy and a clear focus towards their achievement. 
  To promote financial inclusion in the rural areas. 
305 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  To secure the seamless operation of the credit lines and make sure they are 
servicing beneficiary needs. 
  To act as brokers between beneficiaries, financial institutions and CWs. 
  To participate in cluster meetings and understand the dynamics, opportunities 
and setbacks beneficiaries are facing, and propose solutions relevant to 
accessing financial resources. 
  To identify beneficiary financing needs and map them against the several 
offerings of the financial sector. 
  To disseminate information on prevalent interest rates and other terms of 
available credit products, to the beneficiaries (dilute information asymmetries). 
  To support clusters in presenting business plans to CFI and monitor their 
repayment schedules. 
  To regularly liaise with CFIss and monitor their progress towards the 
achievement of project’s intended objectives. 
  To stimulate competition among CFIs to the benefit of the beneficiaries. 
  To negotiate with PFIs better terms for the beneficiaries. 
  To resolve any issues arising between the beneficiaries and the financial sector 
at local level and report any irregularities to other FSS and the technical 
specialist . 
  To present success stories and good practices to relevant stakeholders. 
  To instil principles of responsible financing among the target group. 
  To identify capacity development needs of beneficiaries on entrepreneurship 
and responsible financing, and package relevant training propositions.  
  To identify the resources to finance capacity development needs (project 
resources being the last resort). 
  To negotiate with CFIs to include part of the beneficiary training on 
entrepreneurship and responsible financing in their pre-sales budget. 
  To promote a mandatory savings culture among the beneficiaries (using savings 
accounts once they are available at central level). To bundle this training 
material with the rest of the training clusters received from the project. 
  To ensure that CWss and CFIss communicate properly that credit lines are 
financed by IFAD. 
  To prepare short bi-annual progress reports and action plans and contribute in 
drafting project reports. 
Profile  
The incumbent should be a young dynamic rural finance expert with good 
experience in advocacy work, with strong written and verbal communication skills 
in Arabic (and English). The candidate should have reasonable work experience the 
area of microfinance and an understanding of MFI operations. Experience of 
working with multiple stakeholders in civil society and the government at different 
levels is a plus. 
Selection Criteria 
The candidate should have good communication and presentation skills, and 5 
years of demonstrated experience in development, including microfinance, in the 
region and a track-record of achievement in developing and implementing 
marketing driven approaches to address access to finance.  
Term  
This is intended as a 6-year term position with an initial contract of one year. 
306 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Salary  
Salary level will be established according to candidate’s experience and as per 
industry standards. 
Location:  
The incumbent will be based at the relevant governorate. 
Working hours:  
The position is a full time position with annual leave rights. 
Hiring process 
Applicants should submit an application letter, with an expression of interest, up-to 
date CV, references related to recent experience, details of salary history and 
salary expectations, and certified copies of relevant certificates in a closed envelop, 
within 21 days after the first publication of the relevant notice. 
The hiring process should start together with the selection process of CFIs and 
should be concluded within 60 days at the latest. 
307 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annex 2: Logframe 
Annex 2: Logframe 
Results Hierarchy 
C.I 
Name 
Indicators 
Unit 
Outreach 
1. 
  Number of persons receiving 
Persons 
services promoted or 
supported by the programme 
7 
-  Men 
-  Women 
-  Youth 
1.a  Corresponding number of 
households reached 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
HH 
1.b  Estimated number of HH 
Persons 
members 
Percentage reduction in the 
number of rural households 
living below the poverty line 
in the Programme supported 
Governorates 
Men 
Women 
% 
Goal: contribute to 
improved living 
standards of 
smallholder 
farmers and poor 
and vulnerable 
women and youth 
in the rural areas in 
upper Egypt 
Base-
line 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions  
Frequency 
Annual 
Responsibilit
y 
NPCU M&E unit 
and GPCU M&E 
focal points 
Political stability 
Marco-economic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the 
region 
Mid-
Term 
160,000  320,000  Programme 
End 
Target 
Source 
reports 
99,200  198,400   
60,800  121,600   
65,600  131,200   
80,000  160,000   
400,000  800,000   
200,000  400,000 
200,000  400,000 
10% 
20% 
CAPMAS/ 
Baseline and 
completion 
surveys 
Baseline, 
MTR and 
completion 
NPCU M&E unit 
7 Includes only direct beneficiaries as per the ORMS guidelines. However, the project will indirectly benefit 80,000 HHs (about 400,000 individuals) 
308 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Percentage increase in 
average HH income as a 
result of services provided by 
the programme  
% 
0 
30% 
50%  Baseline and 
NPCU M&E unit 
Baseline, 
MTR and 
completion 
2.2.1 Number of new jobs created 
Number 
0 
4000 
Development 
Objective:  
to improve the 
income and 
resilience of 
smallholder and 
landless families 
through better 
marketing linkages, 
sustainable and 
climate change 
adapted 
agricultural 
intensification, 
small rural 
businesses and 
inclusive policies 
Outcome 1  
Increased 
marketing of 
produce and profits 
to smallholder 
farmers  
Output 1.1 
Marketing 
institutions 
strengthened 
2.2.5 Percentage of rural producers’ 
organizations reporting 
increase in sales 
% 
20% 
50% 
2.1.3 Number of Rural producers’’ 
organizations supported 
No. 
0 
580 
1160 
2.1.4 Number of supported 
households that are members 
of a farmers’ organization  
Output 1.2 
microenterprises 
developed 
2.1.1 Number rural enterprises 
accessing business 
development services  
No. 
Men 
Women 
youth 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
75,000  150,000  M&E Data 
46,500  93,000 
28,500  57,000 
30,750  61,500 
800 
1,650  M&E Data 
Component 
reports 
Component 
reports 
309 
completion 
surveys 
12,555  Baseline, 
mid-term 
and 
Completion 
survey, 
Annual 
outcome 
surveys 
Baseline, 
midterm 
and 
Completion 
survey/ 
Annual 
outcome 
surveys   
M&E Data 
Component 
reports 
NPCU M&E unit 
Baseline, 
MTR and 
completion 
MTR and 
completion 
NPCU M&E unit Positive 
framework 
conditions for 
investment into 
agriculture and 
rural institutions 
Quarterly  GPCU M&E 
focal points  
Quarterly  GPCU M&E 
focal points  
Quarterly  GPCU M&E 
focal points  
Community 
leaders  are  willing 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
2.1.2 Number of persons trained in 
income-generating activities 
or business management 
Persons 
Men 
Women 
youth 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20,000  40,000  M&E Data 
5,000 
10,000 
15,000  30,000 
10,000  20,000 
and 
Training 
reports 
1.2.4 Percentage of households 
% 
0% 
30%  60% 
Outcome 2 
Improved resilience 
of smallholder crop 
producers  
reporting an increase in 
production 
1.2.3 Percentage of households 
% 
0% 
20%  60% 
reporting reduced water 
shortage vis-à-vis production 
needs 
Baseline, 
mid-term 
and 
Completion 
survey/ 
Annual 
outcome 
survey 
Baseline, 
mid-term 
and 
Completion 
survey/ 
Annual 
outcome 
survey 
1.1.2 Number of hectares of 
Ha 
0 
6,000 
12,600  M&E Data 
Annually 
Quarterly  GPCU M&E 
focal points  
to included women 
and 
in 
youth 
programme 
activities 
NPCU M&E unit Sufficient 
MTR and 
completion 
implementation 
capacity to 
develop 
infrastructure in 
Upper Egypt 
Substantial 
improvements in 
climate resilient 
production as 
foundations of 
growth. 
Output 2.1 
Improved irrigation 
infrastructure and 
management 
farmland under water-related 
infrastructure 
constructed/rehabilitated  
Output 2.2 
Improved crop 
farming practices 
3.1.1 Number of groups supported 
to sustainably manage 
natural resources and climate 
related risks 
1.1.4 Number of persons trained in 
production practices and/or 
technologies 
1.1.3 Number of rural producers 
accessing production inputs 
No 
0 
190 
320 
Component 
reports 
M&E Data 
Component 
reports 
No. 
Men 
Women 
Youth 
No. 
Men 
Women 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
and 
Training 
reports 
25,000  50,000  M&E Data 
15,500  31,000 
19,000 
9,500 
10,250  20,500 
25,000  50,000  M&E Data 
15,500  31,000 
19,000 
9,500 
Component 
reports 
310 
MTR and 
completion 
NPCU M&E unit 
GPCU M&E 
focal points  
Annually 
GPCU M&E 
focal points  
Quarterly  GPCU M&E 
focal points  
Annually 
GPCU M&E 
focal points  
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
and/or technological 
packages 
Number of policy-relevant 
knowledge products 
completed 
Policy 
1 
Output 3.1  
Engagement in 
Policy dialogue and 
knowledge 
management  
Youth 
0 
10,250  20,500 
No. 
0 
2 
5 
Knowledge 
products  
Annually 
NPCU KM and 
ICT specialist 
311 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annex 3: Background note on Markets and Value Chains 
Export markets 
Government strategic crops (wheat (subject to market), sugar cane (fixed), maize, rice, 
sorghum, and later Lentils and beans (potential) 
https://map-expo.com/maps-black-stallion-increasing-agricultural-exports-2017/ 
Egypt is the fifth largest producer of tomatoes worldwide, according to FAO statistics. 
Yet in 2010 and 2011 despite the huge volume of tomato production, a considerable 
amount of tomato was imported from neighbouring countries. The result was a huge rise 
in tomato prices causing panic among consumers who consider the red fruit a cheap yet 
essential component of Egyptian foods especially among the poor.  
For smallholder farmers to benefit from marketing opportunities, farming must necessarily be 
seen as a business – one that is fully integrated into markets and value chains and responds to 
market incentives and signals. The target governorates enjoy excellent un-tapped marketing 
opportunities for the local, regional, and export markets of raw crops for fresh markets/exports 
and processing. The long-term advantages would enable smallholder farmers, through proper 
arrangements with other value chain actors e.g. exporters and processors, to penetrate and 
compete effectively in the lucrative local and export markets in the European Markets (EU), Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC), Russia, Far-East and Gulf Cooperation Council (CIS) markets. The 
target governorates have significant advantages and open market windows for a large number 
of fresh vegetables, fresh fruits, herbs and spices, frozen vegetables and dried vegetables. 
Target governorates enjoy several microclimates and optimum weather conditions for 
agriculture production for local, regional and export markets.  
Overview of the Agricultural Sector 
The agriculture sector is considered one of the key sectors of the Egyptian national economy. It 
provides livelihoods for around 55% of the population and direct employment to almost 30% of 
the labor force. During fiscal year 2017/2018, the agricultural sector share of GDP amounted to 
11.5%. In addition, industries related to agriculture such as processing and marketing and input 
supplies account for 20% of GDP8, 9, 10.  
In  2016,  the total  cultivated  area  was  almost  9.1 million feddans,  while  the  total  cropped  area 
accounted  to  approximately  16.1  million  feddans.  Around  6.2  million  feddans  of  the  cultivated 
area are located in the old lands, while 3 million feddans are in the new lands11, 12, 13.  
The agricultural land in Egypt is mostly characterized by small landholdings, particularly in the 
old  lands.  A  large  portion  of  farmers  can  be  also  landless.  Land  is  generally  cultivated  by  its 
owners, tenants and/or sharecroppers; while casual labourers are also hired during peak periods. 
According  to  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Land  Reclamation  Census  of  2009/2010,  almost 
59.4% of landholders possess an area of one feddan or less. This accordingly implies high land 
fragmentation, which in turn lead to limited capacity of mass production, higher costs of farming 
8 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December. 
9 Ministry of Planning, Follow up and Administrative Reform. Retrieved from http://www.eip.gov.eg/IDSC/DMS/View.aspx?id=624. 
27 June 2019. 
10 The Central Authority for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS). (2018). Statistical Yearbook. Issue no. 109. Retrieved 
from http://www.capmas.gov.eg/Pages/StaticPages.aspx?page_id=5034. 25 June 2019.  
11 Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR). Retrieved from http://www.eip.gov.eg/IDSC/DMS/View.aspx?id=3524. 
27 June 2019.  
12 MALR. Retrieved from http://www.eip.gov.eg/IDSC/DMS/View.aspx?id=619. 27 June 2019. 
13 The Central Authority for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS). (2018).  Statistical Yearbook. Issue no. 109. Retrieved 
from http://www.capmas.gov.eg/Pages/StaticPages.aspx?page_id=5034. 25 June 2019.  
312 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
in terms of time and of hire costs for equipment and lower economies of scale and yields. Farmers 
with small and dispersed landholdings in turn tend to face higher levels of poverty 14, 15.  
In this regard, rural households would remain poor unless they would have one or more of the 
following options: cultivate enough of their area in high value crops such as vegetables and fruit 
trees; have an effective marketing mechanism that would allow benefiting from the prices these 
crops fetch on the market; increase their income from livestock products, milk and milk products 
and/or poultry and eggs; supplement their income with other on or off-farm activities; or have 
access to other resources, such as pensions, salaries, remittances, or micro/small 
enterprises16.  
Local Production, Import and Export Markets of Agricultural Commodities/ Supply-
Demand Gap 
The  main  summer  crops  in  Egypt  include  maize,  rice,  vegetables,  sorghum,  sugar  cane  and 
cotton.  On  the  other  hand,  winter  crops  consist  of  wheat,  clover,  vegetables,  sugar  beet  and 
barley17. The table below depicts the top agricultural commodities production (in tons) in Egypt 
from  2015  to  2017.  As  noted,  the  top  five  commodities  are  sugar  cane,  sugar  beet,  wheat, 
tomatoes and maize.  
Top Agricultural Commodities Production in Egypt (in Tons) 
Item 
Sugar cane 
Sugar beet 
Wheat 
Tomatoes 
Maize 
Rice, paddy 
Potatoes 
Oranges 
Onions, dry 
Watermelons 
Grapes 
Dates 
Mangoes, mangosteens, guavas 
Eggplants (aubergines) 
Bananas 
Melons, other (inc.cantaloupes) 
Tangerines, 
satsumas 
mandarins, 
clementines, 
2017 
15,260,597 
12,106,661 
8,800,000 
7,297,108 
7,100,000 
6,380,000 
4,325,478 
3,013,758 
2,379,035 
1,709,964 
1,703,394 
1,590,414 
1,351,316 
1,307,793 
1,228,458 
1,102,599 
2016 
15,557,508 
11,209,160 
9,342,538 
7,320,714 
7,817,640 
5,308,873 
4,113,441 
2,939,084 
2,458,618 
1,646,020 
1,691,194 
1,549,260 
1,305,134 
1,300,265 
1,214,077 
1,066,817 
2015 
15,903,336 
11,982,946 
9,607,736 
7,737,827 
7,803,183 
4,817,964 
4,955,445 
3,351,307 
3,049,607 
1,510,032 
1,686,706 
1,684,917 
1,214,242 
1,200,971 
1,314,177 
1,026,877 
1,038,753 
1,021,231 
983,821 
Source: FAOSTAT. June 2019. 
Although wheat and maize are among the top five commodities produced in Egypt, their national 
production does not cover the current local demand and imported amounts continue to increase 
each  year.  In  the  case  of  wheat for  example  almost  50%  of total  consumption  is met through 
imported amounts18. The following table describes the self-sufficiency levels for some agricultural 
commodities. 
14 The Central Authority for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS). (2018).  Statistical Yearbook. Issue no. 109. Retrieved 
from http://www.capmas.gov.eg/Pages/StaticPages.aspx?page_id=5034. 25 June 2019.  
15 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report. Working 
Paper 3: Rural Poverty, Gender and the Target Group. 
16 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report. Working 
Paper 3: Rural Poverty, Gender and the Target Group. 
17 The Central Authority for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS). (2018).  Statistical Yearbook. Issue no. 109. Retrieved 
from http://www.capmas.gov.eg/Pages/StaticPages.aspx?page_id=5034. 25 June 2019.  
18  IFAD.  (2014).  Sustainable  Agriculture  Investments  and  Livelihoods  Project  (SAIL).  Design  Completion  Report.  Appendix  1: 
Country and rural context background. 
313 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Regarding horticulture production, Egypt  covers a wide range of products, including herbs and 
medicinal  plants,  due  to  favourable  agro-climatic  conditions  and  off-seasonal  production 
capabilities. Egypt also  enjoys a  significant comparative  advantage in  the export  of high value 
horticulture products due to the physical proximity to important markets such as the Gulf and EU 
countries. Horticulture accounts for 36% of the value of all crops produced. Horticultural crops 
are produced in sufficient quantities. Hence, they cover domestic demand and also provide some 
surplus for export.  
As for vegetables, they are grown in about 1.3 million feddans. It is worth noting that smallholder 
farmers  are  responsible  for  producing  almost  90%  of  the  vegetables  supply  for  the  domestic 
market19. However, when it comes to the contribution of smallholder farmers share in the total 
Egyptian  vegetables  and  fruit  exports,  it  is  estimated  to  be  less  than  one  third  of  the  total 
exports20.   
The following  table  specifies  Egypt's  production  ranking  on  the  global level.  As  seen, in  2017, 
Egypt was ranked first in the production of dates, second in the production of figs and third in the 
production of eggplants and artichokes. It is also ranked among the top ten producers for other 
agricultural commodities such as melons, strawberries and tomatoes. As will be noted later, many 
of  these  commodities  also  put  Egypt  among  the  top  exporters  to  several  European  and  U.S. 
markets, among others.  
Egypt's Production Ranking (2017) 
clementines, 
mandarins, 
Product 
Dates 
Figs 
Eggplants (aubergines) 
Artichokes 
Melons, other (inc. cantaloupes) 
Strawberries 
Tomatoes 
Onions, dry 
Tangerines, 
satsumas 
Peas, green 
Olives 
Green Beans 
Garlic 
Oranges 
Broad beans, horse beans, dry 
Sugar beet 
Watermelons 
Mangoes, mangosteens, guavas 
Chillies and peppers, green 
Peaches and nectarines 
Anise, badian, fennel, coriander 
Flax Fibre and Two 
Ranking 
1st 
2nd 
3rd 
3rd 
4th 
4th 
5th 
5th 
5th 
5th 
6th 
6th 
6th 
7th 
7th 
8th 
8th 
9th 
8th 
8th 
8th 
8th 
Quantity (tons) 
1,590,414 
177,135 
1,307,793 
185, 695 
1,102,599 
407,240 
7,297,108 
2,379,035 
1,038,753 
189,539 
927,595 
283,520 
274,668 
3,013,758 
112,871 
12,106,661 
1,709,964 
1,351,316 
623,221 
360,723 
26,882 
8,123 
Source: FAOSTAT. June 2019. 
Egypt is a major importer of several agricultural commodities, including cereals, wheat, edible oil 
and sugar as it does not have the capacity to be self-sufficient in these commodities as previously 
19 IFAD. (2014). Sustainable Agriculture Investments and Livelihoods Project (SAIL). Design Completion 
Report. Appendix 1: Country and rural context background. 
20  IFAD.  (2011).  Promotion  of  Rural  Incomes  through  Market  Enhancement  (PRIME)  Project.  Final 
Project Design Report. Main Report. 
314 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
indicated21. Regarding the value of Egypt's imports from agricultural commodities, they amounted 
to  83.8  billion  EGP  in  fiscal  year  2017/2018  compared  to  almost  66  billion  EGP  in  fiscal  year 
2016/201722.  
The  following  table  highlights  the  main  agricultural  commodities  that  Egypt  imports.  In  2016, 
Egypt top imported commodities (in tons) included wheat, maize, sugar and beans. Egypt is also 
considered the top importer of dry broad beans and horse beans as well as the second and fourth 
major importer of wheat and maize oil respectively, as depicted in the subsequent table. 
Top Agricultural Commodities, Import Quantity in Egypt (2016) 
Item 
Wheat 
Maize 
Soybeans 
Sugar Raw Centrifugal 
Broad beans, horse beans, dry 
Sugar refined 
Oil, sunflower 
Oil, palm 
Oil, soybean 
Apples 
Potatoes 
Lentils 
Source: FAOSTAT. June 2019. 
Quantity (tons) 
8,731,431 
5,932,617 
933,912 
842,356 
549,167 
419,132 
294,591 
271,353 
252,590 
230,030 
164,039 
110,019 
Egypt's Ranking, Imported Agricultural Commodities (2016) 
Imported Agricultural Commodities 
Broad beans, horse beans, dry 
Wheat 
Oil, maize 
Maize 
Lentils 
Apples 
Oil, soybean 
Ranking 
1st  
2nd 
4th 
6th 
7th  
9th 
9th 
Quantity (tons) 
549,167 
8,731,431 
50,932 
5,932,617 
110,019 
230,030 
252,590 
Source: FAOSTAT. June 2019. 
As seen, Egypt is a major producer of a number of agricultural commodities. This has put Egypt 
among the top exporter of some commodities on the global level as well. Regarding the value of 
Egypt's  exports from  agricultural  commodities  during fiscal  year  2017/2018,  they  amounted  to 
51.7 billion EGP up from 43.4 billion EGP during fiscal year 2016/201723.  
As per the below tables, Egypt's top exports in 2016 (in tons) included oranges, beet pulp, dry 
onions, potatoes, refined sugar and molasses. As for its ranking, Egypt is considered the third 
top exporter of many commodities including beet pulp, maize bran and oranges and the fourth 
top exporter of flax fibre and tow and dry onions.  
Top Agricultural Commodities, Export Quantity in Egypt (2016) 
Item 
Oranges 
Beet pulp 
Quantity (tons) 
748,711 
473,367 
21 The Central Authority for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS). (2018). Statistical Yearbook. 
Issue no. 109. Retrieved from http://www.capmas.gov.eg/Pages/StaticPages.aspx?page_id=5034. 25 June 
2019.  
22  The  Central  Authority  for  Public  Mobilization  and  Statistics  (CAPMAS).  Retrieved  from 
http://www.eip.gov.eg/IDSC/DMS/View.aspx?id=4714. 27 June 2019.  
23 CAPMAS. Retrieved from http://www.eip.gov.eg/IDSC/DMS/View.aspx?id=1474. 27 June 2019.  
315 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Onions, dry 
Potatoes 
Sugar refined 
Molasses 
Flour, wheat 
Bran, maize 
Grapes 
Tomatoes 
Olives preserved 
Rice - total (Rice milled equivalent) 
Vegetables, frozen 
Potatoes, frozen 
Maize 
Tangerines, mandarins, clementines, satsumas 
Oil, soybean 
Source: FAOSTAT. June 2019. 
457,328 
407,974 
377,205 
354,439 
198,415 
93,068 
86,235 
62,617 
60,983 
49,273 
49,138 
38,876 
38,241 
37,679 
37,094 
Egypt's Ranking, Exported Agricultural Commodities (2016) 
Exported Agricultural Commodities 
Beet pulp 
Bran, maize 
Gooseberries 
Hay (unspecified) 
Oil, citronella 
Oranges 
Flax fibre and tow 
Onions, dry 
Artichokes 
Bambara beans 
Molasses 
Olives preserved 
Anise, badian, fennel, coriander 
Beans, green 
Flax fibre raw 
Pyrethrum, dried 
Alfalfa meal and pellets 
Dates 
Olives 
Potatoes 
Strawberries 
Broad beans, horse beans, dry 
Currants 
Garlic 
Sweet potatoes 
Source: FAOSTAT. June 2019. 
Ranking 
3rd  
3rd  
3rd  
3rd  
3rd  
3rd  
4th  
4th  
5th  
5th  
5th  
5th  
6th  
7th 
7th 
7th 
8th 
8th 
8th 
8th 
8th 
9th 
9th 
9th 
9th 
Quantity (tons) 
473,367 
93,068 
179 
548 
19 
748,711 
5,833 
457,328 
2,291 
140 
354,439 
60,983 
18,643 
24,963 
60 
74 
35,717 
34,561 
456 
407,974 
16,474 
15,706 
429 
11,420 
18,941 
The Different Markets Available and their Characteristics  
Regarding  the  distribution  and  selling  of  the  agricultural  commodities  and  products,  there  are 
different types of markets available and they vary according to several factors including: location, 
farm  size,  type  of  tenure  and  cultivated  crop.  The  following  provides  an  overview  of  the  main 
markets available and their principal features:  
  Very  small  scale  retail  sales  for  perishable  agricultural  commodities  such  as  vegetables, 
fruits, milk produce, eggs and poultry at proximate local markets. This is mainly the case of 
very smallholders, whether tenants or owners with less than 1 feddan. They would generally 
sell their products directly to the consumers in weekly or bi-weekly markets. This mechanism 
316 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
provides  small  but  regular  cash  amounts,  which  enables  the  household  to  purchase  other 
basic commodities. It is also viewed as a fundamental survival strategy. 
  Small scale sales for grain and other non-perishable crops in local markets. This is generally 
the case of very smallholders and smallholders who aim to sell their surplus of grains or in 
need of cash. Quantities are usually sold in small amounts to local traders who would resell 
either retail or to larger traders. 
  Sales to traders of standing crops, where smallholders sell different types of crops (such as 
wheat, sorghum, maize, sugarcane, sugar beet, fruits and vegetables) to the traders either 
at  harvesting  time  or in  advance. This mechanism  guarantees  a  fixed  price income to  the 
farmers  based  on  contractual  arrangements,  yet,  the  agreed  price  may  be  lower  than  the 
expected or actual market price at the time of harvest.  
  Sale to traders of harvested crops. This is generally the case of slightly larger producers of 
field  and fruit  crops.  Producers  may  sell to  different traders,  based  on  the  best  price  they 
would receive and they usually do not establish long-term deals with single traders. 
  Sale at auctions, which is a mechanism used by small to medium holders/producers, mostly 
for fruits and vegetables. There are major auction sites, such as Al Obour on  the eastern 
outskirts of Cairo, as well as auctions in smaller towns or in the producing areas themselves. 
This mechanism is primarily used for the national market. It is also used for some exports, 
mainly to other Arab countries, rather than European markets where quality requirements are 
much stricter. Large retailers and processors are the main buyers at these auctions. 
  Sales of the strategic crops to the Government. Strategic crops are mainly wheat, maize and 
sugar cane. The government annually sets floor prices for purchasing these crops. Farmers 
prefer to sell to the government because the floor prices can be set above the world prices. 
However, the farmers are not guaranteed sales as the Government may stop purchases if it 
reached sufficient supplies or if funds are not enough. In turn, traders would buy these goods 
on the open market usually at lower prices.  
  Contract sales with large national and international companies, for local processing and for 
export.  In  the  case  of  small  and  medium  holders/producers,  intermediaries  are  the  actual 
purchasers and act as agents for the companies. They generally agree with the processors 
or exporters to supply certain quantities and make subsidiary agreements with the farmers to 
provide certain quantities. Prices are generally set at the time of cultivating. 
It is important to note that wholesalers have particular importance in the food processing value 
chain since that the processors and the distributors generally do not have access to remote rural 
areas in the Delta and Upper Egypt.  
With  regard  to  the  retail  stores,  the  traditional  small  grocery  stores  are  the  most  common 
purchasing venues for low to middle income shoppers. Hypermarkets and supermarkets are still 
limited compared to the size of the market24, 25.  
The Agricultural Sector and Food Processing Sector Value Chains: The Main Constraints  
There  are  a  number  of  constraints  and  inefficiencies  affecting  the  agricultural  sector  and food 
processing sector value chains. The following depicts some of these elements:  
  With regard to agricultural production, the previously indicated fragmented landholding limits 
the possibility of setting quality control mechanism and restricts the potential of engaging in 
contract farming. 
  Extension services provided to the farmers are weak. It is worth noting that extension services 
are  mainly  provided  through  government  extension  services.  The  majority  of  the  staff 
employed  do  not  have  the  technical  capacities  and  are  poorly  informed.  They  are  also 
24 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report. Working 
Paper 3: Rural Poverty, Gender and the Target Group. 
25 Said, R. & Mamdouh. A. (2018). Services Contribution to Value Chains: A Case Study of the Egyptian Food Processing Sector. 
Working Paper 198. Egyptian Center for Economics Studies (ECES). 
317 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
inefficiently organized and not well paid. These lead to poor quality of services provided to 
the  farmers.  Nevertheless,  government  extension  services  have  the  advantage  of  being 
spread all over Egypt. 
  Access to Finance is particularly challenging in the agriculture sector. It is estimated that the 
agricultural  sector  acquires  a very  small  share  of total  bank  credit,  amounting to  only  1%. 
Access to finance is also hindered by informality in land ownership. In addition, the distortions 
that  are  present  in  the  rural  finance  market  cause  the  banks  to  be  reluctant  in  financing 
agriculture activities. It is worth noting that the Agriculture Bank of Egypt (ABE) provides credit 
to  the  agricultural  sector  at  low  interest  rate.  Consequently,  ABE  became  a main financial 
institution  providing  credit  to  the  agricultural  sector,  especially  that  non-bank  financial 
institutions are still not well developed. However, untargeted low interest rate and frequent 
government debt forgiveness had negative impacts on the Bank’s performance. The Bank's 
recent restructuring is expected to enhance its capacity and performance. Still, it is necessary 
to further encourage commercial banks to finance agricultural activities as well promote other 
non-banking financial mechanisms26, 27. 
 
  The  supply  chain  management  faces  a  number  of  deficiencies.  Poor  infrastructure  and 
logistics are considered major constraints, where the lack of adequate roads, transportation, 
storage and warehousing highly impede the distribution process. 
Ineffective pre and post-harvest practices negatively affect the quality and consistency of the 
agricultural commodities supplied to the food processing industry and raise the waste rate of 
agricultural products. A well-known example is the case of tomatoes, where it is estimated 
that up to 60% of total tomato production is lost due to deficiencies in post-harvest practices, 
transportation, handling, packaging and cold storage. 
  The  food  processing  sector  is  dominated  by  microenterprises  which  are  estimated  to  be 
around 94% of the total enterprises in the food and beverage sector. The value chain in this 
regard suffers from poor quality in the handling of the inputs used, the manual processing of 
food and the primitive packaging and shelving. Hence, there is deficiency in service provision 
in support of the food processing sector. This leads to raising the production cost and drive 
the large food processing companies to be vertically integrated, where they would have their 
own  production  land  and  carry  out  the  transportation  and  logistics  services  in-house, 
including  cold  storage  facilities.  In  addition,  the  large  number  of  intermediaries  prevents 
distributors from  benefiting from  the  economies  of  scale  and  hence  raises  the  price  of  the 
final product 28. 
  Poor  marketing  capacities  at  the  post-harvest  level  represent  a  major  constraint.  Several 
factors influence the marketing capacities: 
- 
Local  markets  in  the  rural  areas  are  underdeveloped  and  the  marketing  infrastructure 
(transport, storage and packing facilities) is poor as previously mentioned. This results in 
higher  rate  of  losses  and  waste,  which  in  turn  affect  the  marketing  of  agricultural 
commodities. 
-  Producers  are  not  well  organized  into  associations  or cooperatives. This  restricts their 
bargaining power and their capacity to benefit from the economies of scale and markets. 
-  Weak marketing skills, limited marketing information for smallholders (in terms of prices 
and  volumes  as  well  as  quality  standards),  inefficient  marketing  channels  and  power 
26 Said, R. & Mamdouh. A. (2018). Services Contribution to Value Chains: A Case Study of the Egyptian Food Processing Sector. 
Working Paper 198. Egyptian Center for Economics Studies (ECES). 
27 World Bank. (2014). Egypt - Principle Bank for Development and Agriculture Credit (PBDAC) Restructuring Program. 
Retrieved from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/754571468247461535/Egypt-Principal-Bank-for-Development-and-
Agriculture-Credit-PBDAC-Restructuring-Program.  
28 Said, R. & Mamdouh. A. (2018). Services Contribution to Value Chains: A Case Study of the Egyptian Food Processing Sector. 
Working Paper 198. Egyptian Center for Economics Studies (ECES). 
318 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
asymmetries  between  smallholder  farmers  and  other  value  chain  actors  lead  to  poor 
marketing capacities29,30. 
29  IFAD.  (2014).  Sustainable  Agriculture  Investments  and  Livelihoods  Project  (SAIL).  Design  Completion  Report.  Appendix  1: 
Country and rural context background. 
30 IFAD. (2011). Promotion Of Rural Incomes Through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report, 
Working Paper 4: Marketing Support Component. 
319 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annex 4: Community Based Organisation in the STAR area  
Community-Based Organizations 
There are several types of community-based organizations in Egypt that provide the local 
communities with different services and support. These organizations have been supported by 
a number of IFAD projects as they are considered good channels that would help rural 
households and smallholder farmers. The following sections depict these organizations and 
highlight their main characteristics, strengths, future potentials as well as the challenges and 
limitations that they face.  
Agricultural Cooperatives 
The Agricultural Cooperatives are recognized organizations that mostly pertain to the rural 
community. They were established by the Egyptian government mainly to supply the farmers 
with the necessary agricultural inputs and purchase their crops as well as generally be of 
support to them. As per their current mandate, the Agricultural Cooperatives are defined as 
social and economic units with the objective of improving agriculture, providing 
recommendations for the crop choices and rotations and contributing to the rural development 
of the area in which they work31, 32. 
Agricultural Cooperatives are formed under the Agricultural Cooperation Law and supervised by 
the Central Administration for Agricultural Cooperatives, a specific unit in the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR). They exist throughout Egypt nearly in every village, 
and have a membership of more than five million farmers, including tenants as well as 
landowners. Their work is highly interrelated as they are considered the link between MALR 
and the famers and landowners. The role of the Cooperatives include: distributing inputs such 
as fertilizers; ensuring that farmers plant the government set quotas of particular crops, such as 
cotton and wheat; and acting on behalf of the government in the process of marketing of 
strategic crops. They are considered of great importance to the farmers due to the huge 
increase in the prices of inputs and their ability to procure such inputs in wholesale for their 
members at more favorable prices. They generally have some basic physical and administrative 
infrastructure, including staff, and they keep stocks of inputs, which they sell at lower price than 
the market price. They are the first point of reference for all agricultural staff and house the 
village level extension officers. They are also considered a source for data on landholdings and 
other basic information needed for the selection of command areas33, 34. 
The main strengths areas of the Agricultural Cooperatives include the following: their 
widespread presence as they exist across the country; they have a large base of membership 
since almost all farmers register with the cooperatives; they are well known in the villages and 
highly embedded in the agricultural community; they have the capacity to distribute agricultural 
inputs to the large number of small farmers; and they have a mechanism for organizing and 
providing support to the smallholders.  
There are other areas where the cooperatives can potentially support. These include: linking 
the farmers with markets; channelling financial services to small farmers and enabling them to 
have access to finance; organizing farmers and providing them with extension services and 
training. They have considerable potential as bases for the Farmers Marketing as well. They 
can become catalysts for reducing production costs through group purchasing and marketing to 
reach the necessary quantity to engage with the market in a more competitive manner. In 
addition, they can engage in economic activities such as packing, cooling, and processing 
which would further increase the small farmers marketing competitiveness.  
31 The Agricultural Cooperation Law no. 122 of 1980. 
32 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report. 
Working Paper 4: Marketing Support Component. 
33 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
34 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report. 
Working Paper 4: Marketing Support Component. 
320 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Nevertheless, there are a number of limitations that would impede their role. Cooperatives have 
limited capacity to develop market links on their own and require technical assistance to enable 
them to do so and to raise their capacity in this regard. They would also require technical 
assistance and strengthening to develop a more demand-driven approach and to engage in 
new activities.  
Another important matter to take into account is that present government policy allows 
cooperatives to be managed by elected members and also encourages them to be business 
oriented in support of their members. However, the cooperatives staff are mostly civil servants. 
Moreover, local departments of agriculture consider the cooperative staff are their subordinates 
and are consequently requested to act according to the instructions. Cooperatives are hence 
viewed as organizations controlled by the government and in turn most members/farmers are 
not convinced that the cooperatives are voluntary organizations representing their interest. This 
would hence require major efforts and support to change the perceptions from both cooperative 
staff and members/farmers35, 36, 37.  
It is important to highlight that  the Agricultural Cooperatives have further potential as bases for 
Marketing Associations/ Committees, where they can engage in collective marketing as well as 
for some Water User Organizations (WUOs), such as the Marwa Committees and the Water 
Users Groups (WUGs), where they can assist in the operation and maintenance of irrigation 
infrastructure. These marketing and water organizations have been supported by some recent 
IFAD projects and were embedded in the Agricultural Cooperatives in some cases 38, 39, 40.  
Marketing Associations formation procedures are as follows:  (1) holding a meeting between the 
farmers and the director of cooperatives to make an internal manual for the association; (2) the 
association presents a request to the Ministry of Agriculture through its supervision zone to 
finalize the registration procedures; (3) opening the bank account. 
WUGs formation procedures are as follows:  (1) holding a preparatory meeting at the level of 
mesqa; (2) holding a general assembly in the presence of irrigation engineer (under the Ministry 
of Irrigation) of the village; (3) the irrigation engineer invites the members to attend (50% + 1 
member); (4) preparing and sending records to the management of irrigation; (5) selecting the 
members; (6) carrying out elections and identifying the members and the chairman; (7) carrying 
out an internal committee of the WUG; (8) registering the WUG in the Ministry of Irrigation; (9) 
opening the bank account41. 
Community Development Associations (CDAs) 
Community Development Associations (CDAs) are considered Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs) under the relevant legislation for non-profit organizations. They are 
registered with the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS), governed by Law no. 84 of 2002. MoSS 
hence has records for all registered NGOs/CDAs. It is also important to note that microcredit 
provided by non-bank financiers is regulated by the Microfinance Law no. 141 of 2014 and 
supervised by  the Egyptian Financial Supervisory Authority (EFSA). The Microfinance Law 
accordingly specifies the legal and administrative procedures that condition the work of financial 
intermediaries such as NGOs and CDAs in microfinance. 42,43  
35 FAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December. 
36 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Project Design Report, Main Report. 
37  IFAD.  (2011).  Promotion  of  Rural  Incomes  through  Market  Enhancement  (PRIME)  Project.  Final  Project  Design 
Report. Working Paper 4: Marketing Support Component. 
38 FAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December. 
39 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Project Design Report, Main Report. 
40  IFAD.  (2015).  Sustainable  Agriculture  Investments  and  Livelihoods  Project  (SAIL).  Project  Implementation  Manual 
(PIM). 
41  IFAD.  (2015).  Sustainable  Agriculture  Investments  and  Livelihoods  Project  (SAIL).  Project  Implementation  Manual 
(PIM). 
42 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of Evaluation. 
Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
43 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
321 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
CDAs exist in many villages and their mandate can vary from charity and social services (such 
as kindergartens, orphanages, medical clinics, etc...) to development, but their coverage is 
usually limited to a village or a neighborhood. CDAs can also provide economic services as 
they can play a vital role in offering microloans to end beneficiaries in the rural community.  
Overall membership of CDAs is relatively small, ranging between 50 and 400, indicating a 
limited level of interest on the part of villagers. However, individuals have access to the CDA 
services without being members. Although CDAs are often weak, many of them are real 
community based organisations, relying mainly on the initiative of community members who 
have a commitment to improving conditions in their villages. Many CDAs are also largely 
dependent on funding from MoSS and some are often supported by small donor grants and by 
larger NGOs. CDAs are also employed as microfinance intermediaries44, 45,.  
Several CDAs as well as NGOs are supported by the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development Agency (MSMEDA). MSMEDA is a national entity that is concerned with the 
development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and entrepreneurship in Egypt. 
It offers funds to these enterprises either directly or through banks as mediators to finance their 
projects. The Agency has a strong network with local level CDAs as well as NGOs46, 47.  
CDAs are also the most common type of community organizations that was widely targeted by 
IFAD projects. They have been a principal channel for microfinance outreach in the projects, 
where most beneficiaries find the loan process to be easy and the loan requirements to be 
acceptable. In that respect, they have been considered a good mechanism of support to rural 
communities. IFAD also used this mechanism to reach rural women and help them with 
productive investments. The majority of loans under this scheme have been for the purchase of 
livestock, which is considered a popular investment for poor people and particularly for the 
landless48, 49, 50. 
The main strengths areas of the CDAs include the following: they are considered a good 
mechanism for multi-purpose activities at the community level and  for the provision of social 
sector services in rural communities; they can provide a supportive role in assisting rural 
households to undertake a wide range of activities at suitable loan requirements; they have the 
capacity to revolve funds; and they possess a reasonable degree of flexibility and are close to 
members of the community. Moreover, CDAs have good outreach to women especially poor 
women through social and charitable activities. They hence provide a good mechanism for 
inclusion of women.  
CDAs have further potential for serving as a vehicle for the empowerment of the poorest and 
most vulnerable as well as encourage their growth in the enterprise sector.  
On the other hand, CDAs face a number of weaknesses and challenges. These comprise: their 
limited capacity to raise funds through their own sources and enterprises; their reliance on 
external assistance for technical and managerial skill development; and their limited geographic 
and capacity outreach. Moreover, CDAs performance is uneven and they are generally 
dominated by a few active members. Their sustainability also depends upon their financing from 
donors and partially by Government. In that respect, CDAs require both technical and financial 
44 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of Evaluation. 
Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
45 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
46 Micro, Small  and  Medium  Enterprises Development  Agency (MSMEDA).  http://www.msmeda.org.eg/AboutUs.html. 
Retrieved 21 May 2019. 
47 MSMEDA.  http://www.msmeda.org.eg/partners_local.html. Retrieved 21 May 2019. 
48 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of Evaluation. 
Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
49 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
50 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report 
Working Paper 3: Rural Poverty, Gender And The Target Group. 
322 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
support as well as monitoring capacity development with regard to enhancing their capacities 
and sustainability51, 52, 53. 
Another  major concern is the restrictive legal and regulatory environment for NGOs/CDAs. This 
is due to the fact that NGOs/CDAs are restricted from accepting deposits to raise capital and 
grant loans. Upon approval from MoSS, NGOs/CDAs can access grants and loans from 
development partners. It is important to note that in order for the development organizations, 
including IFAD to be able to expand the number of non-conventional institutions that provide 
financial services, the legal and regulatory environment according to which NGOs/CDAs 
operate need to be more flexible54, 55, 56. 
In addition, management board membership of CDAs has to be cleared with the State Security 
Services as well as with MoSS, thus giving a perception to the community members that these 
organizations are government institutions. Still, they are considered the main recognised NGO 
community level institutions acceptable to the government and in turn they are primary 
candidates for working with projects57.  
CDAs formation procedures are as follows: (1) selecting the headquarter of the association; (2) 
presenting a request to the nearest local council to register the CDA; (3) forming a General 
Assembly for its members; (4) starting the nomination; (5) electing the CDA board; (6) 
registering the CDA; (7) opening the bank account58. 
Water Users Organizations (WUOs) 
Water Users Organizations (WUOs) are community-level organizations that are established to 
support the management of irrigation water and the operation and maintenance of canals. 
WUOs are specialized entities of water users that can be assigned to manage, operate and 
maintain, at their expense, parts of the irrigation and drainage system with full participatory 
independence in this respect. At the lowest level, Water Users Associations (WUAs) are formed 
at the mesqa level in the Old lands to be responsible for operation and maintenance of pumping 
stations (pumping water from the branch canal into the mesqa and to organize water scheduling 
from the mesqa into the marwas (quaternary canals) and from there to farmers fields. These 
WUOs are then represented, together with other water users (municipalities and industry) into 
Branch Canal Water Users Organizations (BCWUAs) and Water Boards that can express their 
demands with greater voice and interact with the authorities for the allocation and timely supply 
of water. IFAD have established WUOs at various levels, including WUAs, BCWUAs as well as 
Marwa Committees through a number of projects. 
Law 213 for the year 1994 (modification of Law 12 for the year 1984) provides the legal base for 
formation of the WUAs in the improved irrigation projects in the old lands at the mesqa level 
and in the new lands. Article 71 of that law recognized and legalized WUAs as specialized 
associations performing functions related to water management. Through this legislation, the 
aim was to work towards optimum utilization of available water through an integrated 
participatory system that engages farmers in management decisions over water in their 
hydraulic boundary, leading to more efficient use of water. Other types of WUOs have been 
also established above the mesqa level by Ministerial Decrees, on a pilot basis, such as Water 
Boards and BCWUAs, using different concepts and approaches. BCWUAs and Water Boards 
51 FAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December. 
52 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Project Design Report, Main Report. 
53 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report 
Working Paper 3: Rural Poverty, Gender And The Target Group. 
54 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of Evaluation. 
Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
55 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
56 
Law. 
Not-for-Profit 
Center 
http://www.icnl.org/research/monitor/egypt.html. Retrieved 19 May 2019. 
57 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design Report 
Working Paper 3: Rural Poverty, Gender And The Target Group. 
58  IFAD.  (2015).  Sustainable  Agriculture  Investments  and  Livelihoods  Project  (SAIL).  Project  Implementation  Manual 
(PIM). 
International 
Freedom 
Monitor: 
Egypt. 
Civic 
The 
for 
323 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
are regulated by the Ministerial Decree 263 for the year 1997 and the Ministerial Decree 33 for 
the year 2001 respectively.  
WUOs have a number of strength areas, such as: promoting the collective approach among 
farmers sharing the same canals; facilitating more efficient management of water resources; 
contributing to the operation and maintenance and cost recovery of irrigation water systems; 
and developing a more effective coordination system among the relevant stakeholders in the 
different water management functions 59, 60,61.  
However, most of these WUOs are either not operating or functioning as intended due to a 
number of constraints including the limited legal status, poor access to finance and poor 
institutionalization. Their sustainability is subsequently a main concern. Regarding the legal 
status, It is important to note that even though WUAs are legally recognized, they are not well 
embedded within the local administration framework. As for the other WUOs, their decrees 
similarly do not provide a strong level of embeddedness in the system. Other limitations include 
the fact that Law 213/1994 does not support further scaling up of the WUOs as it mainly 
provides a legal status to the WUAs at the mesqa level only as previously discussed. As for the 
poor access to finance, WUOs have limited capacities to set fees, collect the necessary funds 
for operation and maintenance or to open a bank account. Moreover, they operation and hence 
their sustainability depend on their financing from donor funded projects. They are also highly 
reliant on external assistance for technical support62, 63. 
Another main complexity facing the successful development of WUOs at the different canal 
levels is the poor coordination between the concerned ministries. Both MALR and the Ministry 
of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) play a major role in Egypt’s irrigated sector. MWRI is 
responsible for irrigation water conveyance system and irrigation improvements from mesqa 
level (tertiary canals) and above, covering branch, main and principal canals, while MALR on 
the other hand is responsible for on-farm irrigation and all services for agricultural production 
and on-farm irrigation improvements at marwas level (quaternary canals). These responsibilities 
are carried out through several departments and agencies at central and governorate level. 
Traditionally the relationship between these two organizations was one of the institutional 
challenges resulting in moderate coordination. However, there is now a conviction in both 
ministries that they need to coordinate and synchronize their efforts at both policy and 
operational levels in order to realize maximum benefits from the scarce water resources. 
Hence, there has been recent higher policy commitment to collaboration on irrigation 
improvement64. 
Farmers Marketing Associations (FMAs)/ Marketing Associations (MAs)  
Farmers Marketing Associations (FMAs)/ Marketing Associations (MAs) have been promoted 
mainly in the context of donor-funded projects or by NGOs, which are concerned mainly with 
providing their members with the services they need to better market their products, particularly 
in linking them in contract farming arrangements with exporters.  
FMAs/MAs follow the Agricultural Cooperation Law no. 122 of 1980. They form themselves into 
groups, usually clustered around a single activity or a special interest. While some do play an 
advocacy role, they are mainly concerned with providing their members with the services they 
need. They market the products of numerous agricultural producers and in turn the farmers 
benefit through selling large volumes at a high price. Additionally, they can obtain needed 
supplies at wholesale/discounted rates, and better negotiate with traders for the sale of their 
products65.  
59 FAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December. 
60 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Project Design Report, Main Report. 
61 MWRI (2005). National Water Resources Plan (NWRP) 2017. 
62 FAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December. 
63 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Project Design Report, Main Report. 
64 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
65 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
324 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
The main strengths areas of the FMAs/MAs are as follows: they are voluntary organizations in 
which only interested farmers participate; they are commodity specific and focused; they can be 
a good mechanism for linking the farmers with markets. Their role would in turn support small 
farmers to realize economies of scale, reduce transactions cost and enhance their bargaining 
power. FMAs/MAs can also have further potential to enable the farmers to have access to 
financial services.  
On the other hand, FMAs/MAs face several challenges. Very few FMAs/MAs exist at the 
moment due to insufficient technical and financial resources and capacities to support their 
activities. They also have limited capacity to forge market links on their own and require 
technical assistance to enable them to do so. FMAs/MAs also have poor capacity with regard to 
opening bank accounts and having access to finance. In addition, FMAs/MAs do not possess a 
legal base. In turn, the lack of a legal status limit the effectiveness and operation of  the 
associations. That is in addition to insufficient technical and financial capacities. These factors 
in addition to their poor level of institutionalization hinder their operation and sustainability66. 
There are other limitations that obstruct the successful operation of FMAs/MAs. For such, 
small-scale farmers generally have limited competitive capacities and products quality. This 
would in turn undermine FMAs/MAs abilities to connect to high-end markets. Moreover, the 
limited marketing facilities and weak linkages between farmers and value chains is a major 
obstruction. 
In addition to the above, the private sector may prefer to deal with a few large farmers instead 
of  the FMAs/MAs due to their higher level of competiveness and standardized product quality. 
Another external factors that hinders the capacities of FMAs/MAs are the market price 
fluctuations and rising agriculture input prices. These factors may also have an effect on 
contractual arrangements67, 68. 
As previously explained, Marketing Associations formation procedures are as follows:  (1) 
holding a meeting between the farmers and the director of cooperatives to make an internal 
manual for the association; (2) the association presents a request to the Ministry of Agriculture 
through its supervision zone to finalize the registration procedures; (3) opening the bank 
account69. 
Producer Associations 
Producers are not well organized into associations or cooperatives. Nevertheless, the 
government has given considerable importance to establishing small producer organizations in 
its new Agriculture Strategy. 
The absence of Producer Associations limits their bargaining power and their ability to capture 
the benefits of economies of scale and markets. Hence, IFAD highlighted in one of its recent 
projects the need to: strengthen producer associations to better market smallholder production; 
enhance access to market information; enact and enforce laws and regulations that concern 
product standards; and develop the extension role of the private sector. This would in turn 
promote the development of Producer Associations and raise their capacities in the market70.  
Informal Youth and Women Groups 
As observed in a number of IFAD projects, youth and women groups were supported through 
funds and technical support provided by NGOs/CDAs.  
66 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of 
Evaluation. Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
67 FAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December. 
68 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Project Design Report, Main Report. 
69 IFAD. (2015). Sustainable Agriculture Investments and Livelihoods Project (SAILPIM). 
70 IFAD. (2014). Sustainable Agriculture Investments and Livelihoods Design completion report.  Main report and 
appendices. 
325 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annex 5: Profile of potential Service Providers 
Service Providers 
The  following  sections  present  a  number  of  services  providers,  which  include  private  and 
government  agencies  as  well  as  Non-Governmental  Organizations  (NGOs)  and  the  main 
activities and services that they offer in the area of agribusiness and agricultural practices.  
Blue Moon 
Blue Moon is a private Egyptian company that provides a number of services across a wide range 
of  management  systems  and  product  areas  to  the  fresh  produce  supply  chain.  The  company 
works  in  standards  of good  agricultural  practices.  It  provides  capacity  building  services, 
compliance consultancy, monitoring services and assurance solutions to conform to food safety 
and sustainable standards across the fruit and vegetable sector.  
The company also offers project management of funded socio-economic development projects 
in  the  fruits  and  vegetables  sector.  It  manages  projects  that  works  in  collaboration  with  the 
agricultural cooperatives and associations to comply with agricultural best practices. 
One of the company's objectives is to enable small growers to gain access to the fairtrade market. 
It  aims  at  supporting  the  small  producer  organizations  to  gain  access  to premium  prices  and 
providing trading services that facilitate the marketing procedures for the producers71.  
It is worth noting that Blue Moon received GlobalGAP training and can provide public training. 
The company has been used by a number of donors supporting the agribusiness sector and its 
capacity is well established72. 
Bashaer  
Bashaer  is  an  agribusiness  marketing  platform  that  aims  at  directly  linking  the  small  farmers’ 
communities, the cooperatives and the agribusiness Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and 
NGOs to the market buyers and input suppliers in the different value chains, including horticulture, 
fish and dairy.  
The  company  offers  a  number  of  services  through  its  platform.  Its  online  marketing  network 
publishes and seeks to match buyers and sellers for different types of deals, input supplies and 
contract farming. The platform also provides updated market prices and information as well as 
digital extension services fruit, vegetables, medicinal and aromatic plants. that can be accessed 
through the web as well as through the mobile. 
Bashaer launched “Agrirowad”, which is an agribusiness SMEs and Startups incubator. The main 
objective of Agrirowad is to address the gaps in Egypt’s agribusiness value chains and leverage 
their related SMEs opportunities73. 
ACDI/VOCA 
71 www.bluemoon-eg.com/ 
72 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design 
Report. Working Paper 4: Marketing Support Component. 
73 http://bashaier.net/landing/english.html 
326 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
ACDI/VOCA  develops  and  adapts  tools  to  support  smallholder  farmers  and  agribusinesses. 
These  tools  include  access  to improved  seeds,  new  planting  and  harvesting technologies  and 
post-harvest handling techniques. It aims to promote effective technical approaches that develop 
institutions  in  agriculture,  enterprise  development,  finance,  and  food  security.   Its  technical 
practices are in the areas of catalyzing investment, climate-smart agriculture, empowerment and 
resilience, institutional strengthening and market systems. ACDI/VOCA is particularly known for 
its capacity to strengthen organizations and expand markets for smallholder farmers. 
In  Egypt,  ACDI/VOCA  implemented  the Advanced  Marketing  and  Agribusiness  Logistics 
(AMAL) project. The project provides technical assistance to the farmers. It focuses on integrating 
smallholder  farmers  into  Egypt’s  export  market  to  improve  livelihoods  in  Upper  Egypt74. 
ACDI/VOCA participated in previous donor funded projects in Egypt. It has a successful record 
and has good potential as a training service provider. It expressed its willingness and ensured 
that it has the capacity to offer services on demand and through a competitive process75. 
PlaNet Finance 
PlaNet Finance implements projects that focus on financial inclusion, entrepreneurship, financial 
education and the organization of value chains. Its main objectives include improving people’s 
access to education, health, food security, housing, drinking water, sanitation, clean energy and 
the financing  of  entrepreneurial  projects76. PlaNet Finance  worked  with  previous  donor funded 
projects  in  Egypt.  It  ensured  its  capacity  and  willingness  to  provide  services  on  demand  and 
through a competitive process 77. 
Nile Angel Investors 
Nile  Angels  is  the  first  network  in  Upper  Egypt  that  focuses  on  angel  investment.  It  aims  at 
investing  in  local  start-ups  and  supporting  entrepreneurs.  It  concentrates  on  developing  an 
investment community that would improve the capacity of the investors in entering new markets 
and investing in innovative start-ups. Nile Angels provides startups with consulting and mentoring 
services  as  well  as  access  to  knowledge  and  networking  opportunities.  It  works  as  a  catalyst 
between investors and entrepreneurs where angel investors participate in supporting  
Upper Egypt's entrepreneurs. 
Regarding  the  mentoring  services,  Nile  Angels  provides  technical  and  business  mentoring  for 
startups through trainings and workshops. The main partner of Nile Angel Investors is the German 
Corporation for International Cooperation (GIZ)78. 
The Coptic Evangelical Organization for Social Services (CEOSS) 
CEOSS  is  an  Egyptian  development  organization  that  is  committed  to  social  and  cultural 
development.  CEOSS  implements  a  Marketing  Agricultural  Products  Program  that  aims  at 
supporting  the  economic  potentials  of  farmers,  particularly  the  smallholders.  The  program 
focuses  on  developing  agricultural  development  opportunities  for  marketing  and  export  of 
agricultural products; and promoting the role of associations, agricultural agencies and relevant 
stakeholders in the area of agricultural marketing. 
The program seeks to increase income of small farmers by providing technical support as well as 
services  to  the  farmers  through  partnership  with  the  private  sector.  These  services  include: 
managing  marketing  process  of  agricultural  products,  providing  production  requirements, 
74 https://www.acdivoca.org/about/vision-mission/; https://www.acdivoca.org/practices/ 
75 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design 
Report. Working Paper 4: Marketing Support Component. 
76 https://arab.org/directory/planet-finance-egypt/ 
77 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design 
Report. Working Paper 4: Marketing Support Component. 
78 http://www.nileangels.com/en 
327 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
managing refrigerated transportation services and promoting marketing opportunities that would 
further  support  the  farmers  to  sell  their  agricultural  products  for  higher  value79.  CEOSS  has 
projects in the Governorates of Minya, Beni Suef and Qalyoubeya.   
CARE 
CARE  is  an  organization  that  focuses  mainly  on  development  programs  in  Upper  Egypt  to 
improve  livelihoods  on  a  sustainable  basis.  CARE  has  an  Agriculture  and  Natural  Resources 
Management Program that works on enhancing access to natural resources and services in rural 
communities  as  well  as  on  supporting  the  socio-economic  conditions  of  smallholder  farmers 
through  enhancing  their  productivity  and  creating  economic  opportunities,  with  particular 
emphasis on empowering women. 
Through the program, CARE supports the small farmers in adopting best practices, increasing 
their resilience to climate change and in enabling them to have better access to global markets 
and  more  effective  water  management.  The  program  also  works  on  building  the  capacities  of 
smallholder farmers, developing agriculture services to meet the farmer’s needs in various value 
chains, enhancing the conditions of the agribusinesses and cooperatives, creating employment 
opportunities, with particular focus on female-headed households, and creating linkages between 
farmers and larger markets. It collaborates with different ministries and stakeholders, including 
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), and promotes partnerships with the private sector  to support 
the development of the agriculture sector. 
A  successful  project  that  CARE  implemented  was  the  development  of  Milk  Collection 
Communities (MCCs) that adopts the value chain approach. CARE created a model for inclusive 
value chains with Danone Ecosystem. The project worked on empowering the rural community 
through dairy value chain. The project involved all relevant stakeholders including milk collectors, 
MCCs, traders, wholesalers and agricultural cooperatives. 
CARE  has  also  been  supporting  the  farmers  capacities  to  adopt  better  farming  practices  that 
would  increase  their  productivity.  Activities  include  providing  technical  trainings  in  various 
governorates on different types of crops. 
CARE  has  been  also  supporting  local  governance  mechanisms  through  improving  the 
institutional capacities  of  cooperatives  and  Community  Development Associations  (CDAs)  and 
providing technical trainings. It also provided training to agriculture extension workers in light of 
enhancing access to agriculture extension services80. 
It is worth noting that CARE has participated in several donor funded projects and has a strong 
willingness and capacity to provide services on demand and through a competitive process. 81 
Horticultural Export Improvement Association (HEIA)  
HEIA is an industry-driven association supporting the Egyptian horticultural community, including 
producers,  exporters  and  suppliers.  It  aims  at  increasing  exports  of  fresh  produce  through 
improving  quality  production,  marketing  capacities,  providing  training,  policy  advocacy  and 
management assistance. 
It  focuses  on  providing  the  horticultural  sector  with  the  necessary  technical,  technological, 
marketing  and  exporting  information  and  production  inputs  to  comply  with  the  international 
standards. 
79 http://en.ceoss-eg.org/marketing-of-agricultural-products-2/ 
80 https://care.org.eg/agriculture-and-natural-resources/ 
81 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (PRIME) Project. Final Project Design 
Report. Working Paper 4: Marketing Support Component. 
328 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
A  well  acknowledged  service  provided  by  HEIA  is  the  Cold  Storing  Services  in  Upper  Egypt, 
through  the  new  terminal  at  Luxor.  This  service  supports  the  promotion  of  horticultural  crops 
exports by charter flights in Upper Egypt. HEIA also has a liaison office in Luxor to help promote 
Egyptian exports in Upper Egypt. It supported the establishment of the perishables cold-storage 
terminal at Cairo airport as well.  
HEIA also provides training services to farmers, with special focus on small farmers to ensure 
better  compliance  of  the  agricultural  operations  with  the  export  requirements  and  the  Good 
Agricultural Practices Standards82. 
Union of Producers and Exporters of Horticultural Crops (UPEHC) 
UPEHC provides marketing and technical services to members and non-member producers. It 
also  provides  all  certificates  and  guarantees  of  quality  and  safety  required  by  the  importer  in 
accordance with international standards. 
The Union offers training courses and seminars for farmers and producers in all governorates. 
These trainings provide information and guidance on new and better agricultural practices to help 
them improve their agricultural efficiency and in turn increase their production.  
UPEHC  also  provides  technical  assistance  and  guidance  along  the  different  agriculture 
production stages and to prepare and mobilize products for export83. 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency (MSMEDA) 
MSMEDA is a national entity that is concerned with the development of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and entrepreneurship and responsible for MSMEs projects in 
Egypt. It supports CDAs as well as NGOs through offering funds to these enterprises either 
directly or through banks as mediators to finance their projects. The Agency has a strong 
network with local level CDAs as well as NGOs.  
In addition to the financial services that MSMEDA offers, it provides marketing and technical 
support services. One of the Agency's pillars also focuses on human development and the main 
activities under this pillar include providing technical training, development of general 
knowledge skills, and entrepreneurship training84, 85.  
The Agricultural Research Centre (ARC) 
ARC is one of the largest research organizations in the Middle East dedicated to research and 
development of agricultural sciences. ARC is the principal organization responsible for 
technology generation and transfer for agriculture growth and development. It focuses its 
research on the development of new varieties, improved agronomic practices, livestock 
development and better food processing techniques. ARC’s major responsibilities include 
conducting applied and basic research to generate a continuous flow of technologies that help 
increase productivity and reduce production costs and transferring new technologies to the 
farming community through extension service86, 87.  
University of Sohag, Faculty of Agriculture 
82 http://heiaegypt.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/HEIA-Presentation-English.pdf 
83 http://www.upehc.org/UPEHC_Goals.aspx 
84 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency (MSMEDA). http://www.msmeda.org.eg/AboutUs.html. 
Retrieved 21 May 2019. 
85 MSMEDA.  http://www.msmeda.org.eg/partners_local.html. Retrieved 21 May 2019. 
86 ARC. http://www.arc.sci.eg/AboutARC.aspx?TabId=&NavId=&lang=en. Retrieved 23 May 2019.  
87 IFAD. (2017). Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE). Final Project Design Report. August. 
329 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
The Faculty of Agriculture in the University of Sohag has a Training and Extension Unit. The unit 
aims  to  provide  training  services  and  programs  to  target  groups  and  agencies  working  in  the 
agriculture  sector  and  related fields.  It  also  coordinates  and  cooperates  with  research  centres 
and governmental and non-governmental organizations that work in the fields of agricultural and 
rural development88. 
University of Assiut, Faculty of Agriculture 
The  Faculty  of  Agriculture  in  the  University  of  Assiut  has  an  Agricultural  Extension  and  Rural 
Development  Centre.  Its main  objective is  to  contribute  to  increasing  agricultural  production in 
Assiut Governorate and neighbouring governorates. The centre provides extension education for 
farmers on modern technological methods. It also offers technical advisory services for soil, water 
and vegetation matters89. 
University of Minya, Faculty of Agriculture  
The  Faculty  of  Agriculture  in  the  University  of  Assiut  has  activities  that  focus  on  community 
participation and environmental development. It participates in training campaigns in cooperation 
with  the  Agriculture  Directorate  and  Agricultural  Administration  in  Minyia  Governorate  and 
conducts seminars and workshops that would support the farmers' needs. The faculty also aims 
at increasing the capacity for community participation in agricultural literacy90. 
88 http://www.sohag-univ.edu.eg/facagr_en/ 
89 http://www.aun.edu.eg/faculty_agriculture/ 
90 https://www.minia.edu.eg/agr/EHome.aspx 
330 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annex 6: Background note on rural finance sector 
Overview of the Rural Financial Sector 
Financial inclusion is a concept that has recently attracted major attention among Egypt’s policy 
makers and the Central Bank (CBE). Financial inclusion is a critical enabler for poverty reduction and 
inclusive growth. Access to transaction accounts opens up a pathway to broader financial inclusion, 
whereby people and firms can make financial transactions more efficiently and safely, access funds 
(whether payments, credit, savings, or other), invest in the future, and cope with economic shocks. 
Access to transaction accounts also enables participation in the digital economy, and is a critical 
building block for digital development. According to the World Bank, Egypt has the potential to bring 
a large number of people into the formal financial sector (more than 44 million adults)91. 
The CBE participates in several regional and global initiatives to improve financial inclusion. At an 
international level, CBE is a member of the international Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) since 
2013, in an effort to exchange technical and practical experiences among member states in the field 
of financial inclusion between 95 developing countries. In 2017, Egypt was chosen, along with China 
and Mexico, as a model country for the Financial Inclusion Global Initiative (FIGI)92. FIGI is a three-
year initiative supporting access to financial services to the unbanked and underbanked; and 
developing policy recommendations in digital finance. At a regional level, CBE directs banks to 
participate in the activities of the Arab Financial Inclusion Week by approaching remote areas, clubs, 
and universities and present their products.  
Financial Inclusion data93 place the Arab Republic of Egypt in the low end of neighboring MENA 
countries. The small financial penetration is attributed to the presence of a sizable informal sector 
and the high poverty and unemployment rates. Additionally, Egypt is broadly a cash based economy, 
with cash transactions dominating most of its activities. The banking system consists of 40 banks 
categorized as commercial, non-commercial public and private sector.  ATM services are offered at 
all bank branches as well as many point-of-sale locations. In practice, the vast majority of these 
banks operate as commercial banks, although there are a few specialized banks (i.e. agriculture and 
real estate). The National Bank of Egypt, Bank Misr and Banque Du Caire are large public-sector 
banks which control 40% of the banking sector. All banks in Egypt are subject to supervision by the 
CBE; however the Arab International Bank, Nasr Social Bank and the National Investment Bank are 
exempted due to special provisions in law and treaty. 
91 FIGI initiative for Egypt. 
92 The Financial Inclusion Global Initiative (FIGI) is a three-year program implemented in partnership by the 
World Bank Group (WBG), the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure (CPMI), and the 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) to 
support and accelerate the implementation of country-led reform actions to meet national financial inclusion 
targets, and ultimately the global ‘Universal Financial Access 2020’ goal. 
93 FINDEX 2014.2017 see Annex 1 
331 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
SOURCE: FINDEX, CBE MONTHLY STATISTICAL BULLETING 5/19, INFOGRAPHIC ALEXBANK EDITED. 
Figure 6: Financial Inclusion map Egypt 
There is a noticeable 
improvement in account 
penetration in the past few 
years; not only among urban 
but also among rural 
population, (rural account 
penetration in 2014 was 
10.5% and 29.3% in 2017). A 
similarly significant increase 
is perceived in informal credit 
and digital payments 
(informal credit increased 
from 34.1% to 49.1% 
between 2014 and 2017, 
while digital payments from 
7.9% to 22.8% in the same 
period. Noteworthy is also the substantial divide between formal and informal savings and credit 
(formal credit 8.8% compared to 49.1% total credit and 6.2% formal savings compared to 30.6%total 
savings), indicating inadequate bankability and poor savings culture. To corroborate these findings, a 
relevant perception survey94suggests that respondents consider as main reasons for not having an 
account a) the absence of adequate financial resources (inability to save); b) they do not see the 
need to have an account; c) if needed, they would use another family member’s account.  
SOURCE: ANNEX 1 
The noticeable improvements in account penetration and digital payments are largely the result of 
the GoE’s and CBE’s continuous efforts to improve financial inclusion in the country. In fact, the 
National Council for Payments was established in 2017, chaired by the President himself, with the 
aim to stimulate the use of electronic payments, and develop a national payments system. The CBE 
approved a new version of the regulations for “Mobile Payment Services Regulations” that boosted 
penetration by 110% in a year. The GoE has signed n MoU with Visa, to enable digital payment of 
government subsidies. Similarly, the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology and 
MasterCard signed an MoU aiming to extend financial services to 54 million Egyptians. 
Despite efforts, the crucial challenge facing rural MSMEs and smallholders in promoting their 
investment plans remains access to financing. In Egypt, only 6% of rural MSMEs have access to bank 
loans, compared to 18% of large firms. Other important constraints include cumbersome regulations 
94 Conducted under FINDEX – see Annex 1 for details. 
332 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
and administrative procedures, corruption, market distortions, and most importantly inadequate 
skills required by micro-enterprises to grow and of micro-entrepreneurs themselves.95 In Egypt, firms 
are considered micro when they employ less than ten employees, SMEs when they employ between 
ten and two hundred employees, and large above that96. In 2018, micro enterprises constituted 
approximately 91% of all firms, small and medium ones around 8% of the total and large firms less 
than 1%97. This figure establishes the predominance of micro enterprises in the country’s private 
sector. Namely, MSMEs contribute to nearly 80% of the GDP and generate nearly 75% of total 
employment. 
The GoE acknowledged the importance of MSMEs and supported their growth with a number of 
initiatives facilitating access to finance, including: directives for on lending MSMEs; lines of credit 
from international financial institutions; hundreds of millions of dollars in donor funds into 
institutions tasked with supporting microfinance and bank lending to MSMEs; and most recently, 
technical assistance and funding to support digitally enabled financial services. The section bellow 
investigates options available for rural MSME’s (including smallholders) for accessing finance. 
Supply for Credit for rural MSME’s and smallholders 
Figure 7: Microfinance map of Egypt (number of outlets per governorate) 
Microfinance Providers under the Law 141 of 2014 
The main source of credit in rural areas are banks, MFIs 
and NGOs that operate under the MFI Law of 2014. There 
are 38 banks operating in Egypt with more than 4,000 
branches covering most of the inhabited areas. Yet, in 
rural areas, the bank par excellence is the Agricultural 
Bank of Egypt, together with the 9 banks, proponents of 
microfinance activities (CIB-Commercial International 
Bank, Faisal Islamic Bank of Egypt, Banque du Caire, NBE-
National Bank of Egypt, Banque Misr, The United Bank, 
AlexBank and QNB). While all the banks are regulated by 
the CBE, all MFIs (including the 9 mentioned banks) are 
reporting to the Financial Regulatory Authority (FRA)98. 
Figure 7: Microfinance map of Egypt (number of outlets per 
governorate)maps the density of points of presence of all 
institutions offering micro-financial services that are 
reporting to the FRA.  
The MFI Law of 2014 defines micro-financial activity as every financing activity for production or 
commerce up to a maximum of 100,000 EGP. According to the Law MFIs cannot exceed turnover of 
1miillion EGP per year and are not allowed to collect deposits. The Law also provides an enabling 
legal environment, ensures institutional efficiency and financial sustainability of the NBFIs and 
protects the client’s rights. Pursuant to the Law, the Egyptian Micro Finance Federation (EMFF) was 
95 MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM SIZED ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT IN EGYPT, JORDAN, 
MOROCCO & TUNISIA STRUCTURE, OBSTACLES AND POLICIES. EMNES Studies December 2017. 
96 CBE definition. 
97 CBE 2018 
98 The FRA is supervising and regulating non-banking financial markets and instruments, including the Capital 
Market, the Exchange, all activities related to Insurance Services, Mortgage Finance, Financial Leasing, 
Factoring and Securitization. 
333 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
established to support all institutions operating under the Micro Finance Law (and are de jure 
members of the EMFF) with institutional capacity and training.  
Apart from the 10 banks, the Micro Finance ecosystem (which is essentially serving rural and 
agricultural micro-investors), comprises 10 MFI companies (Reefy, Tanmeyah, Tassahil, Vitas, Aman, 
Sanda, Fawry, First Microfinance Foundation, Tamweely and the MSME Development Agency - 
MSMEDA) and 901 NGOs which operate as credit cooperatives (without the savings component) 
offering micro-loans to their members. As NGOs are not permitted to accept deposits, they have to 
borrow from wholesalers (such as MSMEDA) for on lending. Given their large number and wide 
geographic coverage, NGOs are the most common point for the smallholder and the micro-
entrepreneur to reach financing means for micro-investments. NGOs account for the largest share of 
the total MFI client base (twice than this of MFI companies and 6 times this of MFI banks). Yet, In 
terms of active portfolio, banks,-MFI companies and NGOs all share the market quasi-equally. The 
average ticket size for the banks is match larger than this of other players at around 18.000 EGP. For 
the MFI companies the average loan size is around 6,300 EGP and for the NGOs 3,500 EGP. 
The MFI Law sets three categories for NGOs as per their portfolio size. Category A, are NGOs with 
portfolio of EGP 50 million or more; Category B, are NGOs with a portfolio between EGP 10 million to 
50 million; and Category C, NGOs with a portfolio smaller than EGP 10 million. Category C, NGOs are 
surpassing category A and B by almost five times in number, yet the size of their total portfolio is 
almost ten times smaller than this of Category A. Category A NGOs are also serving almost ten times 
the number of clients than Category B or C. The EMFF is trying to capacitate Category B and C NGOs 
to graduate to a higher level, which will allow them to expand their client base and portfolio size.  
Table 2: The MFI ecosystem in numbers 
SOURCE: EMFF DATA 
Agricultural Credit Cooperatives 
Another source of financing for rural farmers are the Agricultural Cooperatives that operate under 
the Law 122/1982 as credit NGOs. There are more than 5,000 Agricultural Cooperatives for credit 
(accounting for 85% of the total number of coops – other focusing on land reclamation etc.). They 
operate under the auspices of the MinAgri at village level (5029); district level (139); governorate 
level (92) and national level (14). They can borrow from ADP or MSMEDA for on-lending to their 
members. 
The Agricultural Bank of Egypt (ABE) 
The Agricultural Bank of Egypt is one of the largest banks of Egypt but also of the Arab world and the 
Middle East. It has more than 1210 branches and a village bank and a deposit portfolio of 50 billion 
EGP. ABE’s client base exceeds 3 million customers while its client database exceeds 10 million. ABE 
covers 30% of the active population. 50% of its portfolio is rural (30% agri) and 80% is directed to 
334 
EMFF membersNumberTotal Portfolio (million EGP)Active Clients (thousands)Avg. loan sizeBanks9               6,940              383                18,120  MFI Companies9               6,078              961                6,325    NGOs901           6,571              1,890             3,477    Cat A14                  5,300                    1,530                  3,464        Cat B18                  643                        197                     3,264        Cat C869               628                        163                     3,853        Total919           19,589            3,234            6,057     
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
smallholders with an average loan size between 25,000 to 50,000 EGP. Animal production projects 
receive 25% of portfolio, 20% for mechanization projects, 25% consumer loans.  
Until 2016, the bank was reporting to MinAgric as a public bank. Since 2016 onwards ABE is 
restructuring with the assistance from the. RABO bank, Zanat bank and Ernst and Young and 
demonstrates 15% growth rate since. ABE transforms to become a full service rural development 
bank. ABE’s PAR before restructuring was more than 20%, but is currently gradually reducing to 12%. 
Most loans offered by ABE do not require collateral and the offered interest rate varies from 12% for 
crops to 20% for livestock. ABE also offers livestock and crop insurance but does not cover 
widespread calamities. Among ABE’s assets is E-CARD, a company with a capital of 31 billion EGP, 
700 employees and 22 branches offering inputs and machinery (including irrigation) at prices 
subsidized by the GoE. The bank was traditionally in deficit as the MnAgri was directing subsidies 
through ABE’s finance
The CBE’s Initiative to Support MSMEs (President’s Initiative). 
In January 2016, President Al-Sisi launched an initiative to finance MSME’s worth EGP 200 billion. 
The CBE embraced this initiative and accelerated the implementation by requesting banks operating 
in the Egyptian market, to direct a mandatory 20% of their total loan portfolio towards MSME’s, 
within four years from the date of launching the initiative. Additionally, each bank should establish 
specialized units for providing the financial services to these enterprises. Since the launch of the 
initiative, a total of more than 90 billion EGP was injected to finance MSMEs with interest rates 
varying from 5% for all sectors, to 7% for equipment and machinery and 12% for working capital. 
Through this window ABE was allowed to finance agricultural cooperatives, IDB (Industrial Bank of 
Egypt) to finance fruits and vegetables collection centers, and all other banks to finance modern 
irrigation projects. Many banks that do not have (or cannot establish) a network to reach MSMEs 
and/or the relevant credit risk assessment mechanism, partner with MFI companies or agriculture 
credit cooperatives. Banks lend the required 20% to the micro-financiers who in turn on-lend to 
MSMEs. Banque du Caire established a longer-term partnership with MFIs, whereby they act as 
micro-branches of the bank, thus extending the bank’s network. Other banks are embedding similar 
approaches in their expansion strategies and target the micro-retail market, forging cooperation 
with MFIs or cooperatives. Suez Canal Bank (for instance) has recently established of a specialized 
335 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
department to finance MSME projects with a portfolio of EGP 1 billion, in collaboration with 
MSMEDA. 
Wholesale financing 
Article II. 
ADP 
Agricultural Development Program (ADP) is a revolving fund aimed to improve productivity and 
yields, to raise the level of self-sufficiency and to expand crop exports for increasing income and job 
opportunities in the agricultural sector. It has national coverage and operates under the MinAgri. It 
started in 1993 with funds from the EU Food Sector Development Program (a credit line that would 
provide soft loans to livestock and dairy investments); and was scaled up in 1996 with funds from 
the Multi Sector Support Program  to support poultry, aquaculture, horticulture, on farm irrigation, 
drainage and farm machinery; and in 2004 with funds from the Financial and Investment Sector 
Cooperation project. 
In 2009, the MinAgri grouped together all three revolving credit lines under one national umbrella 
(the ADP), in order to streamline their operation. In 2012, the MinAgri solicited additional funds for 
the revolving credit line and IFAD responded positively with USD 70 million from RPIME (later 
reduced to USD 32.7 million with a current utilization rate of 86%). The Support to SMEs project 
(SuSME) contributed an additional EUR 22.5 million loan from AFD and EUR 1.9 million grant from 
EU. In 2016, IFAD committed another EUR 9.13 million for the SAIL project, which reportedly faces 
bottlenecks due to inability of the target group to meet collateral requirements in the target areas. 
ADP received another two credit lines from the MinAgri: a) EGP 100 million for buffalo fattening and 
EGP 50 million for the veterinary services project. 
ADP is a wholesaler offering credit to the 12 ‘Participating Banks’ (PBs) for on-lending to 
beneficiaries under stipulated eligibility and selection criteria. ADP is assisted by the Agent Bank (the 
Commercial International Bank – CIB - that was selected on a competitive basis) for monitoring its 
portfolio. The PBs are responsible for credit risk assessment of the investment proposals and for the 
repayment of the loans. ADP is submitting selected proposal to the Board of Trustees via the 
Technical Committee (TC) for approval. CIB has developed a management information system to 
monitor this whole process.  
ADP’s total portfolio amounts to EGP 2.6 billion. It has approved loans amounting to a total of EGP 
7.8 billion for 264,000 beneficiaries. ADP has revolved its resources more than 7 times already. ADP’s 
operating cost is low (0.02% per annum) and its operation profitable. It has 0 default rate and PAR 
smaller than 1%.  Its only downside are the delays of the selection process due to its cumbersome 
procedure (3-4 months).  
The larger amount of loans are offered to agricultural companies (52%) , while the rest is equi-
distributed between Credit Cooperatives (24%) and Individuals (24%). The largest amount of loans 
are directed towards livestock and dairy production (44%), followed by horticulture (29%) and 
poultry (10%). Geographically the largest part of credit goes to Middle-Egypt (41%), followed by 
Middle Delta Region (24%) and Upper Egypt (17%). 
336 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Figure 8: ADP’s Portfolio per Sector and geographic area 
SOURCE: ADP 
ADP loans are provided for individuals up to EGP 1.5M with the maximum exposure of EGP3M; and 
for registered sole proprietors, Associations, Companies, Cooperatives, Business Associations and 
NGOs up to EGP8.0M with the maximum exposure of EGP 16M. Average ADP loans size is EGP 
30.000. The ADP loans are short-term (up to one year); medium-term (from 2 to 3 years) with one 
year grace period; and long-term (from 4 to 5 years) with up to 2 years grace period. The ADP 
interest rates charged to the final beneficiary are set below the prevailing commercial bank rates 
and are preferential, computed on a simple basis, and subject to the monthly review by the Board of 
Trustees. ADP interest rates are fixed for the lifetime of the loan. The current ADP applied interest 
rates 7 %, 8% and 9% respectively for short, medium and long-term loans. Most of ADP loans fall into 
the short-term category (65%), followed by medium-term (20%) and long-term (15%). 
337 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
The PBs receive their compensation (3.5%) from interest collected from the clients. No further 
deductions whatsoever on the interest, penalty interest or the additional interest on rescheduled 
loans, or of the principal due to the fund. A penalty interest rate charged at commercial loan interest 
rate is applied if the loan has not been used by the borrower for the intended purpose or where 
there are any delays by the client or the PB. Additional interest of 2% may be approved by BOT for 
rescheduling the payment periods for outstanding loans (once in the lifetime of the loan) with a 
maximum of two years beyond the remaining period of the original loan as previously approved by 
the BOT to be promptly credited to ARDF Fund accounts 
The repayment schedule has the following pattern: a) loan principal and interest are paid 
semiannually to the lending PB; b) the effective dates of repayment are determined by the 
repayment schedule prepared by CIB; c) short-term loans may be repaid semi-annually or in a single 
amount in a maximum period of 12 months; d) medium-term loans are repaid in a maximum period 
of 36 months; in semi-annual instalments starting not later than 12 months after the loan effective 
date; e) ong-term loans are repaid in a maximum of 60 months, in semi-annual instalments starting 
not later than 24 months after the effective date of the loan.  
Article III.  MSMEDA 
The MSME Development Agency was established in April 2017 by the Decree 947 of the Prime 
Minister. With the decree 2370 of 2018 - an amendment decision by the Prime Minister - MSMEDA 
came under the direct supervision of the Prime Minister MSMEDA. MSMEDA is a successor body of 
the Social Fund for Development (SFD), which was set up in 1991 to channel aid to people that 
would be affected by the GoE’s market-oriented reforms. SFD raised USD 800 million in capital, 60% 
in grants, the remainder in concessionary loans. Donors included the World Bank, the EU, Arab aid 
agencies, bilateral aid organizations and lately IFAD. Some of the funds are allocated by donors for 
specific infrastructure schemes, but most were addressed to SMES. 
MSMEDA today offers a wide range of services, including policy and strategy development, 
legislative and regulatory overview, monitoring and evaluation of sector performance as well as 
development, implementation and coordination of programs aiming at improving MSMEs, including 
direct provision of financial and non-financial services. Apart from the Cairo headquarters, MSMEDA 
has an office at each governorate with more than 20 staff members at each branch. It is a heavy 
vehicle with significant operating cost and institutional complexities. 
MSMEDA’s is operating as a wholesaler and retailer of credit for MSME’s with a nationwide 
coverage. It provides its financial services directly through its regional offices and through a large 
network of intermediary agencies. MSMEDA partners with 15 commercial banks, 7 MFI companies 
and about 400 microfinance institutions (mainly Category B and C NGOs and credit cooperatives). 
Around 90% of the MSMEDA funds are on-lent through these mentioned financial institutions and 
338 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
10% is direct lending. MSMEDA’s total outstanding portfolio is EGP 18 billion with 3.2 million active 
borrowers, putting the average size of loans to 5.600 EGP. Agriculture including trade represents 
about 17% of MSMEDA’s portfolio. Portfolio quality involves arrears but no defaults. Direct lending is 
also offered with amounts ranging from EGP 10,000 to EGP 3 million for commercial and service 
projects, agricultural production projects, livestock, poultry and fisheries, real estate projects and 
logistics and transport (taxi and microbus) related activities. MESMEDA’s direct lending cumulative 
portfolio has reached EGP 1.1 billion, while its outstanding portfolio is EGP 160 million with around 
6,000 clients.  
MSMEDA’s target is to reach a portfolio of EGP 30 billion by 2021 with 5 million active borrowers. 
MSMEDA estimates the actual unmet demand to be much higher at EGP 60 billion and 11 million 
active borrowers. It also points out that a demand side impediment is that prospective clients have 
difficulty to meet documentation requirements (licenses etc.) and most importantly they lack 
capacity to structure mature project proposals. To assist on improving the quality of demand for 
credit MSMEDA organizes outreach programs at local level and short training courses addressed to 
NGOs (training for trainers) and the micro private sector. Training curricula include: How to start 
your business; Action plan for any project; Business idea development; Sales; Human resources and 
labor; Production cost, investment and financing; Legal and licensing requirements. 
MSMEDA offers EGP 300,000 to 1 million loan to the intermediary NGOs (higher to banks and MFIs) 
with a bi-annual installment payment schedule, 8 months grace period and 9.5% interest rate. It sets 
a quota per NGO according to its size and population coverage. The NGOs on-lend to individuals and 
micro-enterprises either formal legal entities (60%) or informal (40%). The size of loans vary from 
EGP 1,000 to 10,000 from NGO’s and can go as high EGP 1 million from banks or EGP 10 million for 
renewable energy projects. Interest rates vary from 12% to 16% and collateral requirements are met 
through pre-signed checks and/or communal guarantees. Demand for agribusiness credit is mainly 
for input purchases, followed by land rehabilitation/cultivation, poultry, livestock. 
CBEs Strategy to promote smallholder agriculture 
CBE identified that agricultural development (or lack thereof) adversely affects inflation, trade deficit 
and employment. In fact (according to CBE data), CBE’s  agri-basket consisting of 11 commodities 
and crops increase by 40% in price between 2006 and 2016. In addition, the largest percentage of 
agricultural inputs come from imports along with a variety of foods. CBE, therefore came developed 
a clear strategy for unlocking the agriculture sector’s potential and relieve the macro-economy from 
the inflationary and deficitary pushes it receives from this sector. 
CBE’s strategy for the agricultural sector tackles a number of challenges at different levels of the 
value chain, with a wide range of integrated initiatives. The strategy aims at reducing the trade 
339 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
balance gap and increase entrepreneurship and financial inclusion (agriculture contributes only 5.5% 
to the President’s initiative) and is set around four pillars: 
A)  Improve access to finance. It will do so through the structural improvement of ABE to 
become a full service rural development bank; some targeted interventions like incentivized 
funding specific to agricultural sector to help enhance the local banks’ input towards this 
sector; to finance specific and identified gaps in value chain development (CBE is currently 
working on consolidating local and international studies on value chain mapping to identify 
the high potential value chains and relevant funding gaps); to leverage funding through 
credit guarantees (CBE owns 20% of CGC and intends to streamline existing guarantees and 
direct them towards the agri-sector).  
B)  Support agribusiness development. That would include developing sustainable and profitable 
anchor leading companies in the agricultural sector that will fill sector gaps, complement 
local and international efforts and pull smallholder farmers higher to the value chain 
through trade activities; consolidate efforts of local government and the Council of 
Minister’s Committee for SMEs  (a Prime Minister’s decision has put CBE as the head of the 
committee which supports SME development including agriculture) to identify the main 
obstacles of the agricultural export cycle and propose solutions; establish 9 fruit and 
vegetables collection centers – IDB has already financed the first center in Beheira and has 
signed the protocol for another 8. The aim of the centers is to cut out the middlemen, 
control prices and prevent monopolistic practices and reduce losses. 
C)  Develop relevant capacity. Under the SuSME project the Egyptian Banking Institute (EBI) and 
AFD signed an agreement for a EUR 1.8 million grant to enhance capacity of bankers, CGC 
and NGOs through training and technical assistance in product development, credit rating, 
risk management, credit guarantees; the Nilepreneurs initiative for Value Chain 
Development Excellence is a national initiative sponsored and financed by the CBE and 
implemented by the Nile University, which seeks to support entrepreneurship, innovation 
and enhancement of the local production. 
D)  Capitalize on technology and innovation. CBE aims at building a virtual market place for acri-
products in cooperation with ABE and Mastercard. An independent company will be formed 
to own and operate the platform. The strawberry and livestock value chains are currently 
being thoroughly studied as pilots for the platform. Launch data is being planned for last 
quarter 2019. CBE also intends to develop and agricultural investment map, showing 
available resources per governorate (natural, human, infrastructure), that will be used as an 
investment guide for investments in agriculture. Similarly, a fertilizer/seeds and soil 
matching map will be a knowledge repository for farmers. CBE intends to put incentives for 
the development of virtual cooperatives that will alleviate geographic barriers to offered 
services. Finally, CBE intends to replicate the Nilepreneurs initiative and establish agri-labs in 
universities in cooperation with governmental entities. 
CBE seeks financial support for targeted interventions, technical assistance, and international 
expertise. 
Other services 
Article IV. 
Insurance 
FRA has endeavored to activate the role of the insurance sector and increase its contribution to GDP 
by updating relevant legislation. In 2018 the contribution of the insurance sector to GDP reached 
0.91%. The total insurance premiums amounted EGP 30 billion and compensations reached EGP 15.4 
340 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
billion. There are 37 insurance companies operating in the sector most of which offer health, life and 
other types of policies. It is only the ABE, Suez Canal Bank and a few others who offer agriculture 
specific products. They offer limited crop and livestock insurance products that do not cover 
widespread calamities and cost about 2% a year. FRA is promoting electronic transformation of the 
insurance sector and has allowed 60 % of the insurance companies to issue insurance policies in 
electronic form. Insurance sector is growing at a more than 20% rate a year for the past few years. 
Micro-insurance is newer in Egypt and is governed by the resolution No. 902 of 2016 that defined 
the conditions for issuing and distributing micro-insurance products. This resolution was a milestone 
for the development of this industry, which can, since then, take more substantive action to offer 
products for low-income market segments. There is already at least one micro-insurance company 
and a lot of activity for encouraging more. Yet products are limited to life and health and agriculture 
specific offerings are very limited. GIZ, JICA and other bilateral aid organizations contribute to the 
development of micro-insurance. 
Some hindrances for the development of this industry include: lack of data for clients, limited 
number of actuaries and a large number of unqualified intermediaries, lack of relevant products, lack 
of awareness regarding the importance of insurance etc. 
Article V. 
Leasing 
In 2018, FRA launched a draft law that combines financial leasing and factoring activities and was 
approved both by the parliament and the Cabinet of Ministers. The new Law is expected to enhance 
financial inclusion and ensure access to non-banking financing tools to segments of society that 
currently do not benefit from a number of financial services. The said Law allows companies, 
associations and NGOs licensed to practice microfinance activities to provide financial leasing 
services. It is too early to expect any effects on the market that will slowly  
Article VI. 
Secured transactions 
Movable assets are usually not accepted as collateral by financial institutions, due to the inadequate 
legal and regulatory framework that does not guarantee recovery in case of default. Movable assets, 
which usually account for the largest part of the capital stock of MSMEs, become therefore dead 
capital. 
The Moveable Security Law 115 was passed already in 2015 and regulates the securitization of 
movable assets. Under the Movables Security Law a variety of movables, whether existing or future 
physical assets or moral rights can be used as collateral. This includes receivables and credit notes, 
bank deposits or accounts, equipment, tools, stock, trees, agriculture produce, farm animals, birds, 
and metals, as well as intellectual property rights. The FRA is registering electronically movable 
collaterals to notify parties about the existence of an existing security interest in movable property 
and to establish the priority of creditors with regard to third parties. Its application is not however 
widespread.99 
Article VII.  The Credit Guarantee Company (CGC) 
The Credit Guarantee Co SAE (CGC) is a private joint stock company with banks presenting more 
than 90% of its shareholders. It has 2 subsidiaries and operates across Egypt. CGC started operation 
in 1991 with the clear mission of strengthening the competency of the MSMEs through the 
99 Reforming secured transactions, IFLR. 2017 
341 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
application of effective guarantee products capable of encouraging the financial institutions (banks 
and NBFIs) to respond to the financial needs of this sector. CGC was able to reach a Cumulative 
Guarantee Issued Amount of EGP 19 billion by 2016 and served more than 27,000 SME clients and 
more than a million micro-clients. 
CBE who owns 20% of CGC has setup an EGP 2 billion trust fund for MSMEs that offers portfolio 
guarantees and leverages 17 times the guarantee amount in loans. CGC’s outstanding guarantee 
leveraged portfolio is EGP 12.8 billion, 27% of which is directed to the agricultural sector. CGC and 
the MInAgri received a ΕUR 9 million grant from the ΕU for agricultural SMEs. The outstanding 
guarantee leveraged portfolio has reached EGP 400 million to date. 
The CGC and the Egyptian EMFF have signed a cooperation protocol under the sponsorship of the 
CBE and the FRA with the aim of qualifying 25 NGOs from category C to B. 
Article VIII.  The Credit bureau 
The Egyptian Credit Bureau S.A.E. provides information to credit providers including banks, NBFIs, 
and goods and service suppliers on the creditworthiness of businesses and individuals. It maintains a 
database of credit information for SMEs and consumers and enables authorized users (I-Score 
members) to access I-Score database to carry out creditworthiness checks on consumers. The 
company was founded in 2005 and is based in Cairo. 
Information Asymmetries 
Figure 9: Commercial Interest rate trend 
15
11.5
12
20
20
19
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
SOURCE: CBE 
While the commercial interest rate currently fluctuates around 19 to 20% on commercial loans, 
there are many variations on the offered rates by the banks and the NBFIs. Moreover, there is a 
wide range of financing options for different farming activities. Credit terms and collateral 
requirements vary across the board, as already described in previous sections. Farmers are not well 
aware of the many possibilities and how to use them according to their needs. Additionally, banks 
and NBFIs are not well informed on each other’s offerings thus creating an environment of sub 
perfect competition. The information asymmetries established skewed perceptions on the 
affordability and accessibility of credit among rural micro-entrepreneurs. 
Another factor affecting perceptions is the limited capacity of NGO’s to serve quickly the needs of 
their clientele. As most of them are Category C they have very limited resources to revolve and are 
more often than not unable to meet increasing credit requirements. Farmers often opt to get non-
preferential credit from MFIs at 25% to 30% interest rate to bypass long waiting lists of NGO’s that 
would offer interest rates of 12% to 16%.  
342 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Perceptions are not well grounded on collateral requirements either. Despite an array of options to 
access credit with soft guarantees, farmers often express concerns that finance is restricted because 
of their inability to display collateral. There are obviously cases where lack of collateral is hindering 
access to finance, which become exaggerated by word of mouth. 
Demand for Credit - Market Potential 
Despite the fact that all stakeholders agree that financing needs of the MSMEs are not met, there is 
no clear understanding or quantification of these needs. Credit wholesalers estimate that they 
would need 5 times the amount of their current portfolio to meet potential demand. Yet they 
acknowledge that this demand would first need to be nurtured to become actual. Nevertheless, 
respondents of perception studies, identify access to finance as one of the main impediments for 
their development. 
CBE is making efforts to study the metrics and composition of the demand side for credit, but to date 
relevant strategies are only based on speculations. The CBE has assigned the EBI to prepare the 
National Strategy for Financial Education. The CBE and the FRA have signed an agreement to 
enhance cooperation between the two sides to support financial inclusion in Egypt. A study is being 
conducted to measure the level of financial inclusion to identify the supply and demand on financial 
services and to improve the availability of such services. The results of the study will be the base for 
the preparation of future plans to enhance the financial inclusion of all segments of the society and 
to adopt the necessary reform policies in cooperation with the parties concerned. 
In terms of credit usage, the gender distribution of MFI clientele is heavily leaning towards women, 
who account for 66.54% of the total number of active clients. On portfolio size, the distribution is 
more equitable (men 50.54% and women 49.46% of the total MFI portfolio). This leads to the 
conclusion that women are seeking (or are offered) smaller credit amounts than men. 
Past Experience and Lessons 
Past IFAD projects in Egypt were occasionally plagued with low absorption rates of their revolving 
facilities. A thorough analysis of impediments faced in the past revealed the following: 
PRIME assigned equal capital support to MSMEDA and ADP, yet it requested unequal amounts of 
own contribution from ADP (10 times). ADP could not respond positively to this flaw. As a result, 
implementation started with a delay of four years. 
SAIL supported projects for youth who could not meet collateral requirements (reportedly to be 15-
20%) and therefore absorption rates were low. PIU did not confirm however this assumption with 
the rural financial sector. ABE for instance offers loans with minimal collateral requirements. PIU did 
not envisage to collaborate with CGC to overcome this issue. 
The size of loans offered was rather small for the needs of the beneficiaries. Both beneficiaries and 
credit wholesalers concur that targeting assumes that micro-investors served by the NGOs, belong to 
the low end of poverty. This is however not the case. Category C NGO’s serve already a clientele that 
is economically active. To catch the lower segments projects should adopt a more engaged approach 
involving social mobilization and handholding. Projects should be able to review and revise credit 
size envelops at regular intervals. 
Past projects did not investigate the possibility to use existing or develop new insurance products 
(micro-insurance, crop and livestock insurance). MSMEDA is currently working with AfDB on the 
possibilities to develop indexed crop insurance (indexed to temperature) to cover risks related to the 
343 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
production of tomato and potato. Similarly, JICA in cooperation with FRA are working on identifying 
new micro-insurance products and services to support the micro-entrepreneurs. 
Farmers complain that aggregators often delay payments for goods as much as 100 days. This 
creates a cash flow constraint for the smallholder who does not have a mechanism to anticipate 
such delays and often opts to accept much lower prices paid in cash on delivery instead of waiting 
for a higher price with a delayed payment. This is of course is a cash flow issue as much as a 
mentality issue. Projects should envisage methods to instruct farmers on how to develop buffer 
mechanisms through savings and financial institutions to offer overdraft accounts that would allow 
farmers to mitigate for delayed payments and enjoy higher prices. 
Credit wholesalers need to streamline their operation and adopt self-financed development 
strategies that will secure their longer-term sustainability. Credit wholesalers have been receiving 
substantial amounts for revolving credit lines to channel to the financial sector for the development 
of MSMEs. Some have become less effective in specific areas. They have been receiving grants for 
their development for many years. It is probably the time for international cooperation agencies to 
see how these organizations can become self-sustainable and adopt strategies that will allow them 
to constantly improve their operations, products and services. Instead of relying for their 
development activities simply on grant money, they should be compelled to incorporate their self-
development cost into their operating expenses. The international community could provide 
technical assistance but not in the form of a grant. Credit wholesalers should become the agents for 
the development of the NBFI sector instead for just being revolving fund managers.  
ABE will not borrow from credit wholesalers because ADP is taking too long to approve loans (3-4 
months) and has had bad experiences working with MSMEDA. 
Commercial banks favor industrial, service and commercial investments compared to agricultural 
because they are not well aware on how to assess the risk involved. Agro-enterprises, in turn, are 
not able to provide traditional guarantees to obtain the necessary funding. In collaboration with CGC 
projects could envisage credit guarantee facilities that would entice the banks to look closer into the 
agribusiness sector and leverage private sector funding. 
344 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
SWOT Analysis 
345 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annex 1: Table of Select Financial Inclusion Indicators 2014, 2017 
Source: World Bank FINDEX database 2014 
346 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Source: World Bank FINDEX database 2017 
347 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
348 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Annex 7: STAR Institutional Framework 
Key Ministries 
1.  Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) is the government agency 
responsible for formulating and implementing agricultural sector policies for promoting 
and upgrading Egyptian agriculture and implementing relevant programs and projects in 
the country. It is in charge of land reclamation and agricultural, fisheries and livestock 
development. MALR has jurisdiction for providing a variety of agricultural services and 
regulate and supervise the activities of public and private entities involved in production 
and processing of agricultural products. The responsibilities of MALR for services and 
regulation are carried out at the Governorate level through the Governorates Directorate 
of Agriculture (GDA) and Governorate Directorate of Veterinary Services (GDVS), which 
are administratively responsible to the Governor but technically responsible to MALR.  
MALR also has the responsibilities of overseeing irrigation and water management at 
farm level and on farm improvements. MALR has been an important partner for IFAD 
that has in the past assumed the responsibility for project oversight and providing 
strategic guidance and facilitation in the implementation of strategic policy decisions100, 
101. There are several institutions that are affiliated to MALR, such as the Agricultural 
Bank of Egypt (ABE) and the Agriculture Research Centre (ARC)102. 
2.  Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) 
The Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI) is the principal government body 
that is responsible for managing the water resources of Egypt so as to guarantee 
adequate supplies for municipal, agricultural, industrial, navigational and power 
generation use. MWRI has sole responsibility for planning and execution of regulations 
and policies as well as for the development, distribution and management of water 
resources in all the Egyptian districts. It is responsible for regulation, distribution and 
quality management of water resources of which the agricultural sector is the greatest 
recipient. It is committed to ensure reaching the highest benefits from the existing 
limited water resources in terms of the provision of water.  
MWRI authorizes water use and manages water supply, irrigation and drainage systems 
and associated pumping stations. These responsibilities are carried out through several 
departments and agencies103, 104. The development and operation and maintenance of 
water infrastructure is largely funded by the Government and carried out by MWRI. 
MWRI is also responsible for irrigation improvements from mesqa level (tertiary canals) 
and above, covering branch, main and principal canals as well as the River Nile, while 
MALR on the other hand is responsible for on-farm irrigation improvements including 
100 IFAD. (2017). Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE). Final Project Design Report. August. 
101 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
102 Further details about these institutions are provided in the following section. 
103 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
104 MWRI. Ministry's Responsibilities. https://www.mwri.gov.eg/index.php/ministry/ministry-14. Retrieved 21 May 2019. 
349 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
marwas (quaternary canals) and other on-farm improvements. These responsibilities are 
carried out through several departments and agencies at central and governorate level.  
MWRI is also responsible for irrigation extension and for promoting participatory 
irrigation management (PIM) and has a fully-fledged Irrigation Advisory Service (IAS) at 
the central level with General Directorates throughout the country. In an effort to 
decentralize and coordinate activities, all MWRI departments and agencies are now 
operating under Integrated Water Management Districts (IWMDs) in each Governorate, 
headed by an undersecretary of MWRI at the Governorate level. In addition, as part of 
the ongoing reform programs and under the rising call to rationalize the use of water, 
better cooperation and coordination between MWRI and MALR is increasingly taking 
place at central and governorate level105. It is worth noting the importance of 
collaboration between MWRI and MALR that has been challenging as will be later 
depicted in the Organizations Matrix (Annex 1).  
3.  Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS) 
The Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS) aims to provide social protection, integrated care 
and economic empowerment to the citizens who are in need. It also seeks to develop its 
services throughout the country and calls for coordination of efforts with the private 
sector and civil society to invest in joint work for the development of citizens and 
society. MoSS is responsible for the development of the social safety net for the citizens 
by supporting and assisting poor families, and through providing the necessary care to 
low-income households , raising their standard of living, improving the quality of services 
provided to them, and encouraging the civil society to participate in achieving real 
development for the society106, 107. 
It is important to note that Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)/ Community 
Development Associations (CDAs) are registered with the Ministry of Social Solidarity 
(MoSS), governed by Law no. 84 of 2002/2004??. This law restricts them from accepting 
deposits to raise capital and grant loans. Upon approval from MoSS, NGOs can access 
grants and loans from development partners. It is important to note that in order for the 
development organization, including IFAD to be able to expand the number of non-
conventional institutions that provide financial services, the legal and regulatory 
environment according to which NGOs operate need to be less restrictive108.  
4.  Ministry of Local Development (MoLD) 
The Ministry for Local Development (MoLD) is the government institution appointed to 
carry out development projects across all Egyptian governorates in order to raise the 
social and economic standards of living of the citizens. The Ministry's development 
program is based on three main aspects, namely: empowerment of local authorities, 
development of human resources and community development. MoLD is a central body 
that is involved in rural development. It coordinates the various efforts with all the 
different institutions, ministries and organizations that work in the field 
of developing local communities and local administration units in all governorates. It also 
105 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
106 MoSS. Vision of the Ministry. http://www.moss.gov.eg/ar-eg/Pages/vision-mission.aspx. Retrieved 19 May 2019. 
107 MoSS. Objectives and Policies of the Ministry. http://www.moss.gov.eg/ar-eg/Pages/strategic-plan.aspx. Retrieved 19 May 2019. 
108 The International Center for Not-for-Profit Law. Civic Freedom Monitor: Egypt. http://www.icnl.org/research/monitor/egypt.html. Retrieved 19 May 2019. 
350 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
cooperates with the governorates to develop the necessary projects to improve the level 
of services in a number of areas (such as: drinking water, sanitation, electricity, roads, 
schools, health units, etc.)109 
5.  Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation (MIIC) 
The Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation (MIIC) is responsible for 
integrating and harmonizing available funds to contribute to national development and 
for fostering private investments and private sector engagement through promoting a 
more conducive environment for investment and entrepreneurship. It is also responsible 
for mobilizing Official Development Assistance (ODA) in order to complement the 
national efforts and support the national priorities and needs. It works on managing and 
strengthening Egypt’s cooperation with other countries as well as regional and 
international financial institutions to receive loans and grants that would support the 
country in its socio-economic plan objectives. The Ministry is also responsible for 
advising on the State's external borrowing by negotiating terms to reduce impact on 
foreign reserves and diversifying funding to effectively manage financial resources and 
follows-up matters of usage and repayment with the relevant counterparts benefiting 
from loans and grants.110 MIIC is the government representative in respect of IFAD 
financing. It leads the financing negotiations and the ratification process and it is the 
focal point with IFAD in all matters concerned with amendments to the financing 
agreement111. 
6.  Ministry of Finance (MoF) 
The Ministry of Finance (MoF) is responsible for planning, preparing and managing the 
Government budget and public debt. Its responsibilities include the preparation of 
legislation, planning revenues and expenditures, managing and supervising the 
budgetary spending process and preparing a framework for economic policy and 
development in order to achieve the country’s socio-economic development goals. The 
Ministry works on developing the necessary policies on domestic and international 
finance and on monitoring the macroeconomic, macro-fiscal and financial developments 
in the country in order to provide necessary policy advice on a wide range of economic 
matters112. The Ministry of Finance is the entity which budgets for project expenditures 
and employs counterpart fund contributions of the government towards project 
implementation113.  
7.  Ministry of Environment 
The Ministry of Environment with its executive agency, EEAA, is the government entity 
responsible for the definition of environmental policies and the setting of environmental 
priorities, as well as designing, actively supporting and implementing initiatives within 
the context of sustainable development. It has the role of monitoring the pollution levels 
and setting the environmental standards that would contribute to improving the quality 
109 MoLD. About the Ministry. http://www.mld.gov.eg/en/p/3/about-us/. Retrieved 20 May 2019. 
110 MIIC. (2017). Annual Report 2017. Investment in Development.  
111 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
112 MoF. Functions. http://www.mof.gov.eg/English/About%20MOF/Pages/MinistryGoals.aspx. Retrieved 19 May 2019. 
113 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
351 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
of the environment. This is carried out with a focus on the reduction of pollution and the 
conservation of the country’s natural resources through environmental management114. 
In particular,  EEAA is responsible for the establishment of necessary norms and 
standards to assure compliance with the permissible limits of pollutants and to ensure 
that these norms and standards are followed. It also carries out monitoring and follow-
up of the compliance to norms and conditions to be followed by agencies and 
establishments and undertakes the necessary procedures against violators. EEAA also 
sets of principles and measures for environmental impact assessment of projects, and 
follows-up implementation of the international and regional conventions related to the 
environment115. 
8.  Ministry of Youth and Sports 
The Ministry of Youth and Sports is the government entity responsible for enhancing the 
quality of life of Egyptian youth and supporting the development of their skills and 
abilities. The Ministry's mission includes: launching a national policy for youth and sport 
in which all segments of the society take part; providing decent work opportunities for 
the young people through small and medium enterprises; and adopting youth initiatives 
and expanding community partnership with civil society organizations116. 
9.  Other Key Institutions and Organizations 
10.  Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency (MSMEDA) 
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency (MSMEDA) is a national 
entity that is concerned with the development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) and entrepreneurship and responsible for MSMEs projects in Egypt. It offers 
funds to these enterprises either directly or through banks as mediators to finance their 
projects. The Agency was established by the Prime Minister decree 947/2017. The 
Agency replaced the Social Fund for Development (SFD), which was established in 1991. 
It aims at supporting the government efforts in implementing community development 
programs and labor-intensive projects, creating employment opportunities, providing a 
more enabling environment for micro and small enterprises, and promoting 
entrepreneurship, which would in turn contribute to improving the living standards of 
citizens and reducing poverty rates117. In 2018, MSMEDA provided loans amounting to 
a total of 5.4 billion EGP to around 251 thousand micro and small projects. It is 
estimated that these projects provided 407 thousand job opportunities118.  
The Agency has been following a geographic poverty targeting approach and has a 
strong network of implementing agencies at local levels: namely the governorates, 
NGOs, CDAs, and banks. MSMEDA is supported by both national and international 
development partners. The national partners include banks (such as: the National Bank 
of Egypt (NBE), Bank Misr, Agricultural Bank of Egypt (ABE)), leasing companies, NGOs  
114 Ministry of Environment. Environmental Policies and Objectives. http://www.eeaa.gov.eg/en-
us/aboutus/aboutministry/policies.aspx. Retrieved 19 May 2019.  
115 Ministry of Environment. EEAA Mission. http://www.eeaa.gov.eg/en-us/aboutus/aboutagency/mission.aspx. Retrieved 19 
May 2019. 
116 Ministry of Youth and Sports. http://www.emys.gov.eg/The-message. Retrieved 10 June 2019.  
117 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency (MSMEDA). http://www.msmeda.org.eg/AboutUs.html. Retrieved 
21 May 2019. 
118 MSMEDA. (2018). Achievements Report of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency 2018. 
352 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
and ministries119. The international partners include the World Bank Group, OPEC Fund 
for International Development, Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), United Nations organizations such as the 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), the International Labor Organization 
(ILO) and IFAD120.   
11.  Agricultural Bank of Egypt (ABE) 
The Agricultural Bank of Egypt (ABE) is the former Principal Bank for  Development and 
Agriculture Credit (PBDAC).  ABE aims to provide the necessary funding for various types 
of  agricultural  and  rural  development  activities.  The  Bank  underwent  a  comprehensive 
institutional reform, which is regarded as the cornerstone of achieving major institutional 
changes  to  the  organizational  structure,  internal  policies  and  operations,  in  efforts  to 
improve  the  Bank's  accountability,  efficiency  and  sustainability.  It  is  worth  noting  that 
PBDAC  institutional  challenges  affected  its  performance  throughout  previous  IFAD's 
projects. The poor performance was as a result of the high default rates and the absence 
of a reliable system for credit monitoring and follow-ups of overdue loans121. 
12.  Agriculture Development Program (ADP)  
The Agriculture Development Program (ADP) has been established under MALR to 
provide financial services to rural areas and the agriculture sector through special 
directed credit lines. It is of a revolving nature and provides financing to SMEs through 
commercial banks. ADP has been lending funds to the Commercial International Bank 
(CIB), which acts as fund manager for on-lending to 12 selected participating financial 
institutions. During previous IFAD projects, ADP has provided credit mainly to the SMEs. 
However, the limited management capacity of ADP is highlighted as an important 
challenge for implementation122. 
13.  Agricultural Research Centre (ARC) 
The Agricultural Research Centre (ARC) is one of the largest research organizations in 
the Middle East dedicated to research and development of agricultural sciences. Under 
MALR, ARC is the principal organization responsible for technology generation and 
transfer for agriculture growth and development. It focuses its research on the 
development of new varieties, improved agronomic practices, livestock development and 
better food processing techniques. ARC’s major responsibilities include conducting 
applied and basic research to generate a continuous flow of technologies that help 
increase productivity and reduce production costs and transferring new technologies to 
the farming community through an effective extension service. Its achievements include 
new high yielding and early maturing varieties of crops such as wheat, maize, and rice; 
improved agronomic and livestock management practices; and better food processing 
119 MSMEDA.  http://www.msmeda.org.eg/partners_local.html. Retrieved 21 May 2019. 
120 MSMEDA.  http://www.msmeda.org.eg/partners_global.html. Retrieved 21 May 2019. 
121 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of Evaluation. 
Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
122 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of Evaluation. 
Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
353 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
techniques. Research has been dedicated to solving problems within the overarching 
goal of maximizing the economic returns per unit of land and water123, 124.  
14.  National Council for Women (NCW)  
The National Council for Women (NCW) is a government body that focuses on enhancing 
the socioeconomic conditions of Egyptian women and supporting women's participation 
in the development of their local communities and the society. The council addresses 
women's economic empowerment; raising the standard of living of poor and 
marginalized women; and promoting the principle of gender equality and the integration 
of a gender perspective into all policies. Its mission is to have an effective partnership 
and role in formulating policies and programs related to women's advancement and the 
sustainability of their development, as well as defining their active roles and participation 
in their society at all levels125. 
15.  Community-based Organizations  
There are several types of community-based/local organizations that provide the local 
communities with different types of services and that have been supported by IFAD 
projects. These include the following:  
  Agricultural Cooperatives 
The Agricultural Cooperatives are recognized organizations that mostly pertain to the 
local community. They were established by the Egyptian government mainly to supply 
the farmers with the necessary agricultural inputs and purchase their crops as well as 
generally be of support to them. As per their current mandate, the Agricultural 
Cooperatives are defined as social and economic units with the objective of improving 
agriculture, providing recommendations for the crop choices and rotations and 
contributing to the rural development of the area in which they work126. 
Agricultural Cooperatives are formed under the Cooperative Law and supervised by the 
Central Administration for Agricultural Cooperatives, a specific unit in MALR. They exist 
throughout Egypt, with nearly one in every administrative village, and have a 
membership of over five million farmers, including tenants as well as landowners. Their 
work is highly interrelated as they are considered the link between the Ministry and the 
famers and landowners. They distribute inputs such as fertilizers, ensure that farmers 
plant the government set quotas of particular crops, such as cotton and wheat; and act 
on behalf of government in the process of marketing of strategic crops. They are 
considered of great importance to the farmers due to the huge increase in the price of 
inputs and their ability to procure inputs in bulk for their members at more favorable 
prices. They invariably have some kind of building infrastructure and keep stocks of 
inputs, which they sell at lower price than the market price. They are the first point of 
reference for all agricultural staff and house the village level extension officers. They are 
123 ARC. http://www.arc.sci.eg/AboutARC.aspx?TabId=&NavId=&lang=en. Retrieved 23 May 2019.  
124 IFAD. (2017). Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE). Final Project Design Report. August. 
125 National Council for Women. Council Action Plan. http://ncw.gov.eg/ar/%D8%AE%D8%B7%D8%A9-
%D8%B9%D9%85%D9%84-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D8%AC%D9%84%D8%B3/. Retrieved 10 June 2019.  
126 The Agricultural Cooperatives Law. 
354 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
considered a source for data on landholdings and other basic information needed for the 
selection of command areas127. 
16.  Community Development Associations (CDAs) 
Community Development Associations (CDAs) are considered NGOs under the relevant 
legislation for non-profit organizations. They are governed by Law 84 of 2002/2004?? 
and are registered with and supervised by the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS). They 
currently operate under the supervision of  the Egyptian Financial Supervisory Authority 
(EFSA), according to the microfinance law no. 141 of 2014??. CDAs exist in many 
villages and their mandate can vary from charity and social services (such as 
kindergartens, orphanages, medical clinics) to development, but their coverage is usually 
limited to a village or a neighborhood. CDAs can also provide economic services as they 
can play a vital role in offer microloans to end beneficiaries in the rural community.  
Overall membership of CDAs is relatively small, ranging between 50 and 400. However 
individuals have access to the CDA services without being members. Many CDAs are 
largely dependent on funding from MoSS and also on wealthy individuals of the 
community. Some are often supported by small donor grants and by larger NGOs. CDAs 
are also employed as microfinance intermediaries. They are the most common type of 
community organizations which was widely targeted by IFAD projects. They have been 
the principal channel for microfinance outreach in the projects, where most beneficiaries 
find the loan process to be easy and the loan requirements to be acceptable. 
Nevertheless, CDAs require further assistance with regard to enhancing their technical 
and capacities and sustainability. Moreover, it is important to note that the microcredit 
law poses restrictions on CDAs128, 129.  
17.  Water Users Organizations (WUOs) 
Water Users Organizations (WUOs) are community-level organizations that are 
established to support the management of irrigation water and the operation and 
maintenance of canals. WUOs are specialized entities of water users that can be 
assigned to manage, operate and maintain, at their expense, parts of the irrigation and 
drainage system with full participatory independence in this respect. At the lowest level, 
Water Users Associations (WUAs) are formed at the mesqa level in the Old lands to be 
responsible for operation and maintenance of pumping stations (pumping water from the 
branch canal into the mesqa and to organize water scheduling from the mesqa into the 
marwas (quaternary canals) and from there to farmers fields. These WUOs are then 
represented, together with other water users (municipalities and industry) into Branch 
Canal Water Users Organizations (BCWUAs) and Water Boards that can express their 
demands with greater voice and interact with the authorities for the allocation and timely 
supply of water. IFAD have established WUOs at various levels, including WUAs, 
BCWUAs as well as Marwa Committees through a number of projects. 
Law 213 for the year 1994 (modification of Law 12 for the year 1984) provides the legal 
base for formation of the WUAs in the improved irrigation projects in the old lands at the 
mesqa level and in the new lands. Article 71 of that law recognized and legalized WUAs 
as specialized associations performing functions related to water management. Through 
127 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
128 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of Evaluation. Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
129 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
355 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
this legislation, the aim was to work towards optimum utilization of available water 
through an integrated participatory system that engages farmers in management 
decisions over water in their hydraulic boundary, leading to more efficient use of 
water130.  
Other types of WUOs have been also established above the mesqa level by Ministerial 
Decrees, on a pilot basis, such as Water Boards and BCWUAs**********, using 
different concepts and approaches. BCWUAs and Water Boards are regulated by the 
Ministerial Decree 263 for the year 1997 and the Ministerial Decree 33 for the year 2001 
respectively (Sources). These organizations show potential in coordinating local water 
management, in resolving water use conflicts, in planning for irrigation and drainage 
improvement and in enhancing service delivery efficiency. Most of these WUOs, however, 
are not functioning as intended because of the poor legal base131, 132.  
18.  Farmers Marketing Associations (FMAs)/ Marketing Associations (MAs)  
Farmers Marketing Associations (FMAs)/ Marketing Associations (MAs) have been 
promoted mainly in the context of donor-funded projects or by NGOs, which are 
concerned mainly with providing their members with the services they need to better 
market their products, particularly in linking them in contract farming arrangements with 
exporters.  
FMAs/MAs form themselves into groups, usually clustered around a single activity, or a 
special interest. While some do play an advocacy role, they are mainly concerned with 
providing their members with the services they need. They market the products of 
numerous agricultural producers and in turn the farmers benefit through selling large 
volumes at a high price. Additionally, they can garner the necessary economies of scale 
to obtain needed supplies at bulk discount rates, and better negotiate with traders for 
the sale of their produce133. Based on the findings of a number of IFAD project, 
FMAs/MAs do not possess a legal base. In turn, the lack of a legal status limit the 
effectiveness and operation of  the associations. That is in addition to insufficient 
technical and financial capacities134.  
19.  Legal Framework and Major Strategies and Policies for Rural and 
Agricultural development 
According to Article 79 of Egypt's Constitution of 2014, food security is a key policy goal 
for Egypt. The article specifies that "Each citizen has the right to healthy, sufficient 
amounts of food and clean water. The state shall provide food resources to all citizens. It 
also ensures food sovereignty in a sustainable manner..." 135   
In addition, Article 29 of the Constitution highlights that the State commits to agriculture 
and rural development. It indicates that: "Agriculture is a basic component of the 
national economy… It [the State] works on developing the countryside, raising the 
130 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
131 IFAD. (2013). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Supervision Report. 
132 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
133 IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project in the Old lands. Project Design Report, Working paper 7. 
134 IFAD. (2017). Arab Republic of Egypt Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Independent Office of Evaluation. 
Report No. 4526-EG. September.  
135 International IDEA (Trans.). (2018). Egypt's Constitution of 2014. 
356 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
standard of living of its inhabitants and protecting it from agricultural risks, and works on 
developing agricultural and animal production, and encouraging industries based 
thereon. The state commits to providing the requirements of agricultural and animal 
production and buying basic agricultural crops at appropriate prices to achieve a profit 
margin for farmers in agreement with agricultural unions, syndicates and agricultural 
associations. The state also commits to the allocation of a percentage of reclaimed lands 
to small farmers and youth graduates..." 136   
In this context, the main strategies and policies that are related to agriculture and rural 
development emphasize the establishment and promotion of the physical base of 
agricultural activities in both old and new lands to respond to the growing and changing 
population and export food needs. It also focuses on: maximizing productive efficiency 
from the limited resources available specially water; providing expansion to redistribute 
population; establishing new rural settlements in the new reclaimed lands; and 
developing capacities of rural communities137. 
20.  Sustainable Development Strategy 2030 (SDS)  
The Sustainable Development Strategy (SDS), Egypt Vision 2030, presents Egypt's 
overall development strategy until 2030. It has followed the sustainable development 
principles as a general framework for improving livelihood and welfare. The strategy is 
based on three dimensions: economic, social and environmental. In addition, the SDS 
stresses on inclusive sustainable development and balanced regional development; 
emphasizing the full participation in development, ensuring its yields accrue to all 
parties. The strategy considers equal opportunities for all, closing development gaps, 
and efficient use of resources to ensure the rights of future generations. It aims at 
aligning the national development objectives with those of the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Sustainable Development Strategy for 
Africa 2063 138, 139. 
For the agricultural sector, the SDS places emphasis on agricultural development. It 
aims to reduce income disparities between rural and urban populations from 31% to 
10% by 2030. Additionally, it highlights major development initiatives that are underway 
to modernize agriculture and achieve inclusive rural development. Within the economic 
dimension, the SDS sets the strategic objectives for agricultural development. It targets 
agricultural modernization to realize large gains in terms of employment, productivity 
and sustainable resource management. The strategy adopts both Vertical development, 
which focuses on improving water management and enhancing irrigation systems in the 
old lands to raise their productivity; and Horizontal expansion, which aims to reclaim 
new agricultural land in eastern and western desert regions. That is in addition to 
focusing on the rationalization and enhancement of water use efficiency, the 
rehabilitation of the irrigation and drainage canals and networks and the strengthening 
of the institutional and legislative frameworks of the water resources management 
through the promotion of a more integrated management approach.  
136 International IDEA (Trans.). (2018). Egypt's Constitution of 2014. 
137 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
138 Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform. (2016). Sustainable Development Strategy: Egypt’s Vision 2030. 
139 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
357 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
In addition to increasing the size and productivity of agricultural land, the SDS targets 
the promotion of the agri-business environment through creating strategically located 
storage facilities, developing agro-industrial hubs, and overcoming agricultural supply 
chain inefficiencies. The aim is to create a network of collection centers and centralized 
hubs to store various types of crops. Finally, the SDS promotes legislative reforms and 
the expansion of agricultural research spending to support production and resource 
management140.   
 On the other hand, the rural financial services policy which is under the economic 
dimension of the SDS, and as part of the monetary policy reform emphasizes the 
importance of increasing the effectiveness of financial intermediaries and achieving 
financial inclusion through supporting the private sector and SMEs and enhancing the 
rural banking system141.  
21.  Sustainable Agricultural Development Strategy 2030 (SADS) 
The Sustainable Agricultural Development Strategy 2030 (SADS) is a strategic planning 
approach that is aligned with the SDS and that sets ways and means to support the 
development of the agricultural sector in Egypt. The need to incorporate socioeconomic 
issues, in particular those related to the improvement of farmers and rural household 
livelihoods, is high among the SADS priorities. The Government has hence formulated 
the strategy in recognition of the fact that transformation of the agriculture sector is key 
for economic growth and development142.  
SADS was developed to address the challenges that face the agricultural sector through 
a holistic approach. The main aspects of the strategy are: the sustainable use of 
agricultural resources; improving productivity; enhancing the competitiveness of 
agricultural products in local and foreign markets; and achieving higher rates of food 
security. With regard to the sustainable use of agricultural resources, SADS targets the 
enhancement of water management to reduce the losses in water conveyance and field 
irrigation that can be utilized in new lands reclamation. Improving agricultural 
productivity is targeted through the promotion of crops with a resistance to drought, 
salinity and pests, while also planting crops with early maturing periods. Moreover, 
greater attention is allocated to improving traditional agricultural practices among 
farmers.  
As for enhancing the competitiveness of agricultural products, SADS aims to improve 
market chain linkages, tackle the problem of pre-harvest and post-harvest losses, apply 
modern techniques to analyze marketing risks and develop risk mitigation measures, 
which will lead to increased competitiveness in local and foreign markets. The 
enhancement of agricultural productivity and competitiveness will also serve to enhance 
food security. As outlined in SADS, the Government focuses on attaining partial self-
sufficiency for strategic agricultural products such as wheat. Furthermore, SADS targets 
promoting investment in the agricultural sector143.  
140 Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform. (2016). Sustainable Development Strategy: Egypt’s Vision 2030. 
141 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
142 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
143 Arab Republic of Egypt. (2009). Sustainable Agriculture Development Strategy Towards 2030. 
358 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
The strategy also identifies other aspects including the promotion of the private sector, 
better involvement of rural women in the development process, and reforms that make 
agricultural institutions more responsive to the needs of farmers. It identifies the need to 
strengthen producer associations to better market small farmer production and to make 
market information more freely available; enact and enforce laws and regulations that 
concern product standards and develop the extension role of the private sector144. 
SADS 2030 also links rural development to the improvement of credit facilitation services 
through village-level banks145.  
22.  Microfinance Policies  
The Government has developed strategies and laws to promote and strengthen the 
microfinance sector, regulate its activities and expand its outreach to enhance financial 
inclusion. These are namely the National Strategy for Microfinance (2005-2009) and the 
Microfinance Law no. 141 of 2014. 
The National Strategy for Microfinance (2005-2009) was developed with the aim of 
improving financial inclusion and diversifying the range of microfinance services 
accessible to the poor. The strategy identifies the primary areas for intervention at the 
micro, meso and macro levels for the provision of a variety of services to underserved 
market segments, including women, youth, start-ups and the rural poor. It emphasizes 
the role of non-conventional financial institutions, such as banks, NGOs, Cooperatives 
and credit-only financial institutions, as well as the adoption of a multi-tiered financial 
system to facilitate access to microfinance.  
With regard to the Microfinance Law no. 141 of 2014, it aims to regulate microfinance 
activities in Egypt and allows new stakeholders, including the private sector, to be 
actively involved in this field. Under the supervision of Egyptian Financial Supervisory 
Authority (EFSA), the law specifies the legal and administrative procedures that condition 
the work of financial intermediaries such as NGOs and CDAs in microfinance146. 
23.  Water and Irrigation Water Policies   
Water conservation and increasing efficiency in agricultural are major objectives to the 
Government. Given that the amount of arable land available in Egypt is almost fixed, 
with limited capacity to expand it, the strategy has focused on the sustainable use of 
existing agricultural land, reclaiming desert areas and increasing productivity through 
improved irrigation and cultivation methods. The two principal sector development 
policies addressing water and irrigation in Egypt are the National Water Resources Plan 
for Egypt 2017-2037 (NWRP 2017-2037) and the National Strategy for Development and 
Management of Water Resources 2050. 
NWRP 2017-2037 aims at improving overall water use efficiency in agriculture, 
improving water allocation and distribution of Nile water, preventing or reducing 
emissions and treatment of wastewater147.  
144 IFAD. (2011). Promotion of Rural Incomes through Market Enhancement (Prime) Project. Final Project Design Report, Vol. I. 
Main Report and Working papers. 
145 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
146 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
147 IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December.  
359 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Similarly, the NWRP 2017 (replaced by NWRP 2017-2037?) seeks to limit water use 
through demand management measures, water supply optimization and reduction of 
water pollution levels. The measures followed include horizontal expansion programs, 
where the government aims to increase the reclaimed land areas, improvement of the 
irrigation and drainage systems and setting a more equitable water allocation and 
distribution system. The Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) is a main 
approach in the NWRP that aims at promoting the participation of all relevant 
stakeholders in the different water management functions. The plan thus emphasizes the 
importance of having an institutional setup that includes Water Users Organizations 
(WUOs), in addition to developing a more effective coordination system among relevant 
stakeholders148.  
As for the National Strategy for Development and Management of Water Resources 
2050, its main objectives are water resources development, better rationalization of 
water use, development and rehabilitation of the water resource systems, limiting 
pollution levels, adapting to climate change and promoting the IWRM mechanism. The 
national strategy also stresses on the importance of the participation of all users and 
particularly specifies the need for having a cooperation mechanism with the WUOs, 
agricultural cooperatives and the private sector149.  
148 MWRI (2005). National Water Resources Plan (NWRP) 2017. 
149 MWRI. (2010). Summary of the Strategy for Development and Management of Water Resources in Egypt until 2050. Cairo. 
360 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Organizations Matrix, Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) Analysis 
The following matrix depicts the main strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of the relevant institutions and organizations.  
of 
Ministry 
Agriculture 
and 
Land  Reclamation 
(MALR) 
Strengths  
 
 
 
behalf 
advocacy 
Comprehensive Department structure. 
Large and extensive field presence. 
Stronger policy commitment to on-farm 
irrigation 
improvement,  and  higher 
water use efficiency. 
Considerable experience of working with 
IFAD financed projects.   
Policy 
on 
smallholders.  
Further  potential  to  intensify  present 
agricultural production. 
Further 
smallholder 
production.  
Potential 
to  assist  smallholders 
increasing production on new lands.  
Potential  for  expansion  of  agricultural 
areas based on water savings in the old 
lands. 
orient 
the 
commercial 
to 
towards 
potential 
of 
in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weaknesses  
 
 
Limited cadre of competent officers. 
Limited  staff  incentives  and  operational 
support and budgets and overstaffing.  
Limited  capacity  to  assist  the  small 
farmers.  
Limited 
supported 
comprehensive institutional reform.  
Limited  view  of  social  development 
aims. 
Inability to influence PBDAC conditions. 
Reluctance  of  Ministry  to  work  with 
NGOs and CDAs.  
Limited coordination with MWRI150. 
efforts 
for  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Opportunities  
 
forged 
and 
towards 
which 
linkages 
extension 
A  well-developed  agriculture 
2030 
strategy 
(SADS), 
fully 
recognizes  the  critical  issues 
in  agriculture  and  on-farm 
irrigation. 
Stronger 
between 
research. 
Extension 
Systems  Research 
approach. 
Scope  for  Micro  and  Small 
(MSE) 
Enterprise 
development, especially agro-
processing and services. 
Recent  drive  to  coordination 
with MWRI. 
Farming 
(FSR) 
of 
 
 
 
 
Threats 
 
Agriculture  prices  are  highly 
variable.  
  Market 
conditions 
for 
agricultural  commodities  are 
not stable.   
Reluctance  of 
change 
techniques. 
Limited  water  resources  and 
rising water scarcity,  
to 
farming 
traditional 
farmers 
 
 
Ministry  of  Water 
Resources 
and 
Irrigation (MWRI) 
  High level policy commitment to modernize 
  Highly  centralized  departments  and 
the irrigation sector.  
agencies. 
  Experience  with  participatory 
irrigation 
management and formation of WUOs.  
  Highly qualified technical staff. 
  Willingness  to  experiment  with  innovative 
schemes  for  improved  and  efficient  water 
management.  
  Limited integration of responsibilities with 
other stakeholders at the district level; 
  Limited  coordination  of  activities  at  local 
level  between  various  departments  and 
affiliated agencies.  
  Water  law  under  review  by  the 
Peoples’  Assembly  to  transfer 
irrigation  management  to  water 
users at branch level.   
  Recent  drive  to  coordination  by 
MALR 
harmonization 
between extension and irrigation 
services department. 
and 
  Limited  water  availability 
to 
expand to new areas.  
  High  energy  costs  for  pumping 
water.  
  Limited  capacity  of  the  private 
sector to  engage  in  modernizing 
the system.  
150 Both MALR and MWRI play a major role in Egypt’s irrigated agricultural sector. MWRI is responsible for the irrigation water conveyance system up to the farm gate, 
while MALR is responsible for the on-farm irrigation and all services for agricultural production. Traditionally the relationship between these two organizations was one of 
institutional rivalry resulting in moderate coordination. However, there is now a conviction in both ministries that they need to coordinate and synchronize their actions at 
both policy and operational levels in order to realize maximum benefits from the scarce water resources. Hence, there has been recent higher policy commitment to 
collaboration with MALR on irrigation improvement (Source: IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Project Design Document, Working 
paper 7). 
361 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Reluctance  of field  level staff to  work  in  a 
participatory  framework  with  farmers  and 
MALR extension staff.  
  The use of inappropriate technical choices 
in modernizing the irrigation system.  
 
Limited capacity to organize water user 
associations 
Limited 
coordination with MALR. 
effectively. 
  Strong 
donor 
water 
irrigation, 
improvement  and 
reform in the water sector.  
support 
for 
use 
institutional 
  Potential 
the 
extension 
continuous flow concept to other 
governorates. 
of 
Ministry  of  Social 
Solidarity (Moss) 
  Good  outreach 
to  poorer  citizens 
  Limited  coordination  of  efforts  with  the 
   
throughout the country. 
private sector and civil society. 
Ministry  of  Local 
Development 
(MoLD) 
Ministry 
Investment 
International 
Cooperation (MIIC) 
of 
and 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry 
Environment 
of 
  Database  available  for  the  poor  families 
covered by the social safety net as well as 
for the registered NGOs/CDAs. 
  Further  potential 
to  empowering 
local 
   
authorities 
  Further  potential  to  supporting  community 
development.  
  Strong 
policy 
commitment 
toward 
integrating  and  harmonizing  available 
Official  Development  Assistance  (ODA) 
funds to complement the national efforts. 
  Strong  commitment 
to  private  sector 
engagement,  promoting  investment  and 
entrepreneurship and supporting SMEs.  
  Capacity  to foster private investment.  
   
 
for 
improving 
Strong  policy  commitment  and  political 
will 
environmental 
conditions and climate change.   
Potential capacity to coordinate with the 
different  ministries  and  authorities  on 
cross-cutting environmental matters.  
 
  Limited coordination with other concerned 
ministries  in supporting  entrepreneurship 
and SMEs.  
   
  Limited  enforcement  of  environmental 
policies and regulations.  
  Limited  budget  and  capacities  and  high 
technical  and 
for 
reliance  on  ODA 
financial assistance.  
   
   
   
  Climate  finance  has  safeguard 
requirements 
would 
encourage  government,  private 
concerned 
sector 
to  mainstream 
stakeholders 
environmental concerns.  
that 
and 
   
   
   
   
strategy 
  Absence  of  a clear  vision  and 
unified 
for 
environmental  and  climate 
change matters.  
  Absence  of  an 
integrated 
environmental  assessment  for 
the different sectors.  
Ministry  of  Youth 
and Sports 
   
   
   
   
362 
  Limited  coordination  between 
concerned  ministries 
and 
stakeholders on environmental 
and climate change matters. 
  New  microfinance  law  expected 
to 
to  enhance  accessibility 
microfinance 
the 
involvement of the private sector. 
due 
to 
  Extended 
donors 
and 
government  support  and  trust 
and  availability  of  adequate 
resources. 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Micro,  Small  and 
Medium 
Enterprises 
Development 
Agency (MSMEDA) 
  A  clear  poverty  reduction,  employment 
generation  and  gender  mainstreaming 
strategy. 
  Poor record of working an integral part of a 
project  team  and  integrate  lending  with 
other project components.  
  Lending  policy  ensures  more  effective 
  Absence  of  a  comprehensive  strategy  for 
loan granting and repayment.  
provision to rural areas.  
  Rapid  growth  in  organizational  size  and 
risks 
its 
demand 
bureaucratization and delivery delays. 
  Limited  focus  in  working  with  non-bank 
services 
for 
microfinance institutions.  
  Limited  relations  with  technical  agencies 
(MALR  and  MIWR).  However,  experience 
is building up. 
  Increasingly conservative in its approach to 
lending to the poor and a growing aversion 
to risk and lending to the IFAD target group 
in rural areas and the agriculture sector.  
  Limited  willingness 
to 
lend 
to  new 
organizations.  
  Implementation  of  good  practices 
in 
microfinance and MSE lending.  
  Permanent  organization  including  section 
for small business startups and promotion.  
  Established  network  and  offices  in  all 
governorates with qualified staff.  
  Good outreach to poorer villages. 
  Balanced emphasis on credit and capacity 
building for Mircofinance institutions (MFIs) 
and final borrowers.  
  Familiarity  and  partnership  with local  level 
organizations, NGOS and CDAs.  
  Partnership with commercial banks.  
  Comparative  advantage  in  working  with 
non-bank financial institutions.  
  Strong  system  of  financial  management 
and audit.  
  Considerable  experience  of  working  with 
IFAD 
rural 
development  sectors  through  partnership 
with IFAD in different projects.  
the  agricultural  and 
in 
  New 
law 
affects 
of 
the 
implementation 
financial 
activities  due  to  the  difficulties 
encountered  in  obtaining  new 
licenses. 
Agricultural  Bank 
of Egypt (ABE) 
  Extensive network of branches and village 
banks  with  a  mandate to  provide financial 
services to rural areas.  
  Extended experience in rural businesses.  
  Innovative  approaches 
for  delivery  of 
  Poor history  of  adaptation  of lending  terms 
to poor rural borrowers.  
  Limited  orientation  of  staff  to  deal  with 
microfinance clients.   
  Reluctance  to  take  further  risks  in  the 
financial services to farmers.  
microfinance sector at the moment.  
  Government  pressure  mounting 
in 
rural  poverty 
to  address 
through credit.  
  Restructuring  of  ABE 
to 
improve  efficiency  and  sustainability  of 
services. 
is  expected 
  Senior  management  is  keen  to  meet  the 
smallholders need for microfinance.  
  Current  policies  and  procedures  do  not 
support farmers in new lands.  
  The plans for making the bank commercially 
viable  are  likely  to  make  its  lending  more 
conservative.  
363 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Senior management interested in providing 
agriculture value chain finance.  
  Capacity  to  provide  dedicated  financial 
  Low  utilization  of  available  funds  (The 
services to the agriculture sector.  
utilization rate of ARDF is only 53%).  
the 
  ADP  encourages  banks'  engagement  in 
rural  finance    and  strong  management 
use 
through 
arrangements 
of  
commercial 
(Commercial 
banks 
Investment Bank (CIB)).  
  Established  operating 
links  with  11 
affiliated commercial  banks,  which in  turn, 
provide both individual and collective loans 
directly or through Agriculture Cooperatives 
and selected associations.  
  Limited  leveraging  of  commercial  bank 
resources for the agriculture sector.  
  Loan 
applications 
are 
repeatedly 
scrutinized.  
  Increasing 
the 
centralization 
appointment  of  the  Minister  of  agriculture 
as the Chairman of the Board of Trustees.  
with 
  Provision for investment income to provide 
for  research  and 
technical  assistance 
development for the agriculture sector.  
  Good national agriculture research  
   
   
   
  Exist across the country and all farmers are 
required to register with the cooperatives.  
  Capacity to  distribute  agricultural  inputs to 
  Limited capacity to develop market links on 
their own and require technical assistance 
to enable them to do so.  
the large number of small farmers.  
  Available  mechanism  for  organizing  and 
providing support to the smallholder farmer.  
  Capacity  to  link  farmers  with  markets  and 
enable them to access financial services.  
  Good  performance 
financed projects.  
in  several 
IFAD 
  Further  potential  to  be  used  to  channel 
financial services to small farmers.  
  Further  potential  to  be  used  to  organize 
farmers for extension services and training.  
  Good  mechanism 
for  multi-purpose 
activities  at  the  community  level  and    for 
Agriculture 
Development 
Program (ADP)  
Agricultural 
Research  Center 
(ARC) 
National  Council 
for Women (NCW) 
Agricultural 
Cooperatives 
Community 
Development 
Associations 
(CDAs) 
  Future  potential  of  raising  the 
participating 
of 
capacity 
commercial banks to understand 
agriculture value chain finance.  
  Low commercial bank appetite to 
provide  funds  to  the  smallholder 
farmer.  
  Leverage 
funds 
for 
IFAD 
attracting the risk  appetite  of the 
commercial sector for agriculture 
lending. 
   
   
   
   
to  organize 
  Potential 
through 
Cooperatives. 
the 
farmers 
Agriculture 
  Potential 
for  enabling  small 
farmers  to  realize  economies  of 
scale,  reduce  transactions  cost 
and  enhance  their  bargaining 
power.  
  The private sector may prefer to 
deal  with  a  few  large  farmers 
and 
the  smallholder 
farmers. 
ignore 
  Generally  dominated  by  a 
few  active 
members.  
  The  new  law  on  rural  finance 
provides 
an 
them 
opportunity  to  register  as  profit 
with 
  Restrictive  legal  and  regulatory 
environment for NGOs/CDAs. 
364 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
provision  of  social  sector  services  in  new 
communities.  
  Supportive role in assisting rural  
  households  to  undertake  a  wide  range  of 
activities.  
  Possess a reasonable degree of flexibility 
and are close to members of community. 
  Capacity to revolve funds.  
  Good outreach to women especially poor 
women  through  social  and  charitable 
activities.  They  hence  provide  a  good 
mechanism for inclusion of women.  
  Good  mechanism  of  support 
to  rural 
in  several  IFAD  financed 
communities 
projects.  
Users 
Water 
Organizations 
(WUOs) 
  Further potential for serving as a vehicle for 
the empowerment of the poorest and most 
vulnerable.  
  Further potential to encourage their growth 
in the enterprise sector.  
   Capacity 
to  promote 
the  collective 
approach among farmers sharing the same 
canals. 
  Capacity 
facilitate  more  efficient 
to 
resources  and 
management  of  water 
contribute 
and 
operation 
the 
maintenance and cost recovery of irrigation 
water systems. 
to 
  Further  potential  for  Marwa  Committees 
and  the  Water  Users  Groups  (WUGs), 
which  are  embedded  in  the  agricultural 
cooperatives. 
Farmer  Marketing 
Associations 
(FMAs) 
  Voluntary  organization 
in  which  only 
interested farmers participate.  
  Commodity specific and focused.  
  Limited capacity to raise funds through their 
own sources and enterprises.  
  Limited 
geographic 
outreach 
and 
capacity. 
  Require technical support and monitoring 
capacity development. 
oriented companies for provision 
of financial services.  
  Sustainability 
their 
depends 
financing  from  donors  and  partially  by 
Government. 
upon 
  Reliance  on  external  assistance 
technical 
development.  
and 
managerial 
for 
skill 
  Number  of  operating WUOs is limited due 
to  the  limited  legal  status,  poor  access  to 
finance  and  poor  institutionalization.  Their 
sustainability 
is  subsequently  a  main 
concern. 
  Even though WUAs are legally recognized, 
they are not well embedded within the local 
administration framework. 
  Limited  capacities  to  set  fees,  collect  the 
for  operation  and 
necessary 
maintenance or to open a bank account. 
funds 
  Sustainability 
depends 
upon 
their 
financing from donor funded projects. 
  Reliance  on  external  assistance 
for 
technical skill development. 
  Very few FMAs exist at the moment due to 
financial 
insufficient 
and 
resources to support activities.  
technical 
  Higher  policy  commitment 
to 
the 
collaboration 
concerned ministries on irrigation 
improvement. 
between 
  Law  213/1994  does  not  support 
further scaling up of the WUOs as 
it mainly provides a legal status to 
the  WUAs  at  the  mesqa  level 
only. 
  Coordination 
complexities 
concerned 
the 
between 
ministries affect the development 
of WUOs. 
  Rising  water  shortage,  poor 
allocation  and  distribution  of 
water at farm level would lead to 
more  conflicts  among  the  water 
users. 
  Existing regulation enables them 
to  organize  and  work  within  the 
existing policy framework.  
  No  law  to  support  contractual 
relationship  between  the  private 
sector and the markets.  
365 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Capacity  to  link  farmers  with  markets  and 
enable them to access financial services.  
  Capacity to support small farmers to realize 
economies  of  scale,  reduce  transactions 
cost and enhance their bargaining power.  
  Further potential for Marketing Committees 
within existing Agricultural Cooperatives. 
  Poor  access  to  finance  and  poor  level  of 
their 
hinder 
institutionalization 
sustainability. 
  Limited  capacity  to  forge  market  links  on 
their own and require technical assistance 
to enable them to do so. 
  Private sector may prefer to deal 
with  a  few  large  farmers  and 
disregard the FMAs.  
capacities 
quality, 
  Small-scale farmers have limited 
and 
which 
to 
competitive 
products 
undermine  FMAs  abilities 
connect to high-end markets. 
  Limited  marketing  facilities  and 
weak  linkages  between  farmers 
and value chains.  
Sources: 
 
 
IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. December. 
IFAD. (2009). On-Farm Irrigation Development Project In The Oldlands. Project Design Report, Main Report. 
  Market  price 
fluctuations  and 
rising agriculture input prices.  
366 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Complementary Development Partner Initiatives/Partnership Potential 
Agency  
Project/Programme   Location  
Status  
AfDB  
Use  of 
renewable 
energy  for  pumping 
irrigation  
Governorates  of  Minia 
and Matrouh  
On-going, 
closing in 2019 
Pipeline  
FARM Level Irrigation 
Project  
Governorate of Beheira  
EU and Italian 
MFAIC  
The European Union- 
Joint 
Rural 
Development 
Programme  
Governorates  of  Minia, 
Fayoum and Matrouh  
On-going, 
closing in 2022  
Egypt – New lands  
On-going, 
closing in 2019  
Matrouh Governorate  
On-going, 
closing in 2019  
Fayoum Governorate  
On-going, 
closing in 2019  
FAO  
Support  sustainable 
water  management 
irrigation 
and 
modernization 
for 
newly 
reclaimed 
areas.  
Water harvesting and 
Agriculture 
Good 
Practices 
for 
Improved  Livelihood 
and 
Increased  and 
Sustained Production 
in  Matrouh  Rain-fed 
Agricultural areas.  
Agricultural 
Good 
Practices  (GAPs)  for 
sustainable 
improvement 
of 
quality and quantity of 
horticultural 
production  of  small-
scale 
in 
Fayoum  
farmers 
use 
Complementarity/ 
Synergy Potential  
The  AFDB  assessment  on 
the 
renewable 
of 
energies  in  agriculture  and 
the 
its  work 
sustainability 
natural 
resources  will  feed  into  the 
interventions 
designed 
under  the  IFAD  program, 
and  allow  potential  co-
financing  of 
sustainable 
solutions.  
around 
of 
relevant 
Potential 
to  OFIDO 
for 
Very 
Project. 
WB/AFDB/KFW/IFAD/AFD 
to  intensify  engagement  in 
policy  dialogue,  especially 
to 
with 
respect 
modernization 
irrigation 
systems in old lands.  
The  Programme  supports 
the  adoption  of  climate 
change  mitigation 
and 
adaptation practices through 
proper 
usage 
water 
activities and the adoption of 
Good  Agricultural  Practices 
is  closely 
(GAPs)  which 
supporting 
IFAD 
interventions in Minia.  
The  Programme investment 
for  Irrigation  infrastructures 
and  efficiency 
improved 
assists  and  supports  IFAD 
investment 
irrigation 
in 
infrastructure.  
sharing 
on 
and/or 
of  Water 
Knowledge 
rehabilitation 
construction 
harvesting schemes.  
Knowledge 
on 
sharing 
irrigation  modernization  for 
newly reclaimed areas.  
Knowledge sharing on water 
harvesting interventions that 
will 
the 
facilitate 
implementation  of  the  new 
in 
IFAD 
Matrouh.  
funded  project 
Knowledge sharing on Good 
Agricultural 
Practices 
(GAPs)  that  will  contribute 
significantly 
the 
implementation  of  similar 
activities under SAIL project.  
to 
367 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
AFD  
GCF  
GEF  
Supporting 
agricultural  SMES  in 
order to promote rural 
employment.  
Modernizing 
plot 
irrigation  in  the  Nile 
Delta  
Enhancing  Climate 
Change Adaptation in 
the  North  Coast  and 
Nile Delta Regions in 
Egypt.  
Sustainable 
of 
Management 
Kharga  Oasis  Agro-
Ecosystems 
the 
Egyptian  Western 
Desert.  
in 
Egypt  
On-going, 
closing in 2019  
Knowledge sharing on credit 
facilities 
agricultural 
industries.  
for 
Kafr 
Governorate  
El-Shiek 
On-going, 
closing in 2018  
relevant 
Very 
Project.  
to  OFIDO 
Northern 
Governorates  
Coast 
Approved 
for 
funding  with  7 
years 
implementation 
period  
New Valley  
On-going, 
closing in 2018  
GIZ  
Water  Management 
Reform Programme  
Governorates  of  Kafr  el 
Sheikh and Beheira.  
On-going, 
closing in 2018 
Promotion  of  access 
to  financial  services 
for small and medium 
enterprises.  
Egypt  
On-going, 
closing in 2021  
UNICEF  
Nutrition  Stakeholder 
and  Action  Mapping 
Report  
Egypt  
2017  
to  adapt 
Providing  coastal  defence 
and 
structures 
soft 
coastal 
integrated 
management 
to 
coastal  flooding  from  sea 
level  rise  and 
increased 
frequency  of  storms.  This 
will  reduce  the  vulnerability 
infrastructure, 
of  coastal 
protecting 
surrounding 
villages, agricultural.  
The  Programme  supports 
food 
sustainable 
the 
that 
production  systems 
help 
and 
maintain 
progressively  improve  land 
and  soil  quality  and  agro-
biodiversity  in  oasis  agro-
ecosystems  of  the Egyptian 
Western  Desert  which  will 
be  a platform for  any future 
IFAD 
the 
intervention 
same area.  
The  existing  partnership 
with  GiZ  on  agricultural 
marketing  support  will  be 
strengthened. 
Complementarities 
with 
marketing  initiatives  being 
financed 
the 
cooperation 
German 
Communities 
agency. 
supported 
IFAD-
financed programs will learn 
from  and  access  marketing 
standard-setting 
and 
activities 
GIZ-
under 
financed programs.  
through 
through 
in 
cooperation 
Potential 
between  IFAD  and  GIZ  in 
implementing  SAIL  project 
to 
activities  with  respect 
FFSs 
currently 
is 
negotiated.  
to 
respect 
Knowledge 
sharing  and 
Potential  for  IFAD/GIZ  to 
intensify  engagement 
in 
policy  dialogue,  especially 
financial 
with 
services offered to SMEs by 
non-bank 
financial 
institutions.  
to 
Recognising 
address 
issue  with 
greater urgency, the Ministry 
of  Health  and  Population 
(MoHP)  with  UNICEF  have 
Nutrition 
a 
developed 
Agenda 
Action 
for 
framework document (2017) 
to  serve  as  a  road  map  to 
nutrition 
the 
address 
the  need 
this 
368 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
USAID  
WFP  
World Bank  
Feed 
Future 
the 
Egypt  Food  Security 
Agribusiness 
and 
Support 
is 
USAID/Egypt’s  core 
agriculture 
activity, 
supported by the U.S. 
government’s  Feed 
the  Future  initiative. 
a  market-
Using 
driven 
approach, 
USAID  is  increasing 
agriculture-related 
incomes  of  14,000 
farmers 
through 
strengthening 
sustainable  fruit  and 
vegetable 
value 
chains  for  domestic 
and export markets.  
Feed 
Future 
the 
Egypt  Food  Security 
Agribusiness 
and 
Support 
is 
USAID/Egypt’s  core 
activity, 
agriculture 
supports 
and 
value 
agricultural 
chain development in 
Upper Egypt.  
Scale 
and 
up 
complement activities 
on  nutrition  sensitive 
activities in the target 
areas  
The  WB  portfolio  in 
Egypt 
includes  20 
active  projects  of 
which  six  directly  or 
indirectly  impact  on 
the  agricultural/rural 
sectors: 
is 
closely  coordinating 
its  interventions  with 
the WB.  
IFAD 
Governorates of Beheira 
and Luxor  
On-going, 
closing in 2020  
challenges  that  the  country 
faces.  
Knowledge sharing on post-
harvest 
and 
marketing  that  will  support 
the  implementation  of  SAIL 
and PRIME.  
processes 
Upper 
Egypt 
governorates  of  Beni-
Suef,  Menia,  Assiut, 
Sohag,  Qena,  Luxor, 
and Aswan.  
Alignment  with  USAID 
intervention 
Upper  Egypt 
through STAR.  
National  
On-going  
Integrated 
Second 
and 
Sanitation 
Sewerage 
Project 
(approved  June  2011, 
USD  300  million): 
In 
Sharkeya, 
Menoufia, 
Assiut, 
Sohag 
and 
Governorates,  providing 
to 
increased  access 
improved  sanitation  and 
sewerage services.  
Sustainable 
Rural 
Sanitation 
Services 
for  Results 
Program 
Project  ($550  mn,  July 
2015):  To  strengthen 
institutions  and  policies 
increasing  access 
for 
rural 
improving 
and 
sanitation services in the 
Governorates 
of 
Beheira,  Dakahliya,  and 
Sharkiya  
Development 
Local 
Program-for-Results 
Project  ($500  mn,  Sep 
2016):  To  improve  the 
environment 
business 
sector 
private 
for 
development 
and 
strengthen 
local 
government  capacity  for 
All 
highlighted 
projects 
on-going.  
the 
are 
the 
IFAD country team in  touch 
with  WB  country 
team 
specifically  about  aligning 
Local 
STAR  with 
Development  Program-for-
Results  Project  ($500  mn, 
Sep  2016),  that  focuses  on 
Sohag 
Qena 
and 
in  Upper 
governorates 
Egypt. 
Potential  for  WB/IFAD  to 
intensify  engagement 
in 
policy  dialogue,  especially 
with respect to microfinance.  
WB supports for sanitation is 
relevant given the problems 
of rural sanitation, especially 
in the Nile Delta.  
for 
investment 
WB 
local 
infrastructure  assists  and 
supports IFAD investment in 
irrigation infrastructure.  
WB  support  for  agriculture 
now under preparation.  
369 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt (STAR) 
Project Implementation Manual(PIM) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
quality infrastructure and 
service delivery in select 
governorates  in  Upper 
Egypt.  
is 
Strengthening 
Social 
Safety Net Project ($400 
mn,  April  2015):  The 
Takaful  and  Karama 
being 
program 
developed  as  a  national 
targeted  social  safety 
net 
program 
aimed  at  protecting  the 
poor 
income 
support.  
through 
(SSN) 
Inclusive Regulations for 
Microfinance 
Project 
($4.5 mn, July 2014). To 
the 
strengthen 
regulatory 
and 
institutional 
framework 
of 
the  microfinance 
sector. 
access 
Promoting Innovation for 
Financial 
Inclusive 
Access  Project 
($300 
mn,  April  2014):  To 
to 
expand 
finance  for  micro  and 
small  enterprises  using 
innovative 
financing 
mechanisms,  with  a 
special  focus  on  youth 
and  women,  as  well  as 
underserved regions.  
Governorates of Beheira 
and Kafr el Sheikh  
KFW  
Water 
Integrated 
Resource 
Management (IWRM)  
On-going, 
closing in 2018  
relevant 
Very 
Project.  
to  OFIDO 
Source: IFAD. (2018). Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2019-2024. 
December. 
370 
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/2
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Low
Medium There have been political stability over the past five years.
2. Macroeconomic
Medium
Medium
3. Sector strategies and policies
Medium
Medium
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Medium
Low
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Medium
Medium
6. Financial management
High
Medium
According to the latest IMF report on Egypt’s
macroeconomic outlook, the picture remains favorable,
supported by strong policy implementation. Robust growth
and a narrowing of the current account deficit reflect a
rebound in tourism and strong remittances, while
unemployment has declined to its lowest level since 2011.
However, Egypt debt is causing some risks. Moody’s last
review for Egypt have highlighted the high debt burden,
low debt affordability and very large annual financing
needs. In spite of this, IFAD has received a request from
the GoE to borrow in IFAD 11.
The government is implementing its nation-wide
programme which is called the sustainable development
strategy (Egypt 2030). However, the governance
strategies and policies have weaknesses. The programme
will work on policy dialogue to inform policy/decision
makers in addressing some of the sector related policy
gaps. Together with FAO, IFAD will contribute to the
revision of the Agriculture Development Strategy due in
2020.
IFAD and GoE have experience with similar
projects/programmes. STAR will be implemented in a
relatively smaller area (3 contiguous governorates). Joint
village implementation plans will be developed
participatory by different implementation partners
responsible for different components. This will harmonize
actions and mitigate the risk. CFIs will be selected by the
credit wholesaler from a shortlist already prepared by
STAR based on assessment of the suitability of the CFIs
in the programme area.
The programme will be implemented in 3 governorates
building on the lessons learned from previous project and
recommendations by CPE and COSOP. There is lack of
coordination between key institutions serving the
agricultural sector in particular, MALR and Min. of
Irrigation and Water Resources. Based on recent
experience gained through OFIDO, there is an opportunity
for the programme to coordinate between different
institutions and stakeholders through the innovation
platforms to have an established basis for continuous
dialogue and coordination.
Specific anti-corruption, good governance measures
beside audit arrangements to be incorporated into project
design. Strong linkages between financial and M&E
reports can play an important mitigating factor.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/2
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
7. Procurement
Medium
Low
8. Stakeholders
Low
Low
The central management unit will be capacitated with a
dedicated procurement team and technical support will be
provided by IFAD to overcome any bottlenecks in the
procurement procedures and accelerate the procurement
process
9. Environment and social
Medium
Medium
Extreme weather events mainly heat waves can have an
impact on agriculture productivity. The programme will
have mitigation measures in place as highlighted under
the SECAP review note section (see annex 5)
Overall
Medium
Medium
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
STAR’s exit strategy is built on i) the improved capacity of MALR to continue the 
1. 
implementation of relevant parts of STAR on programmatic basis; ii) the successful 
engagement of financial institutions to support the pro-poor business opportunities 
unlocked through STAR interventions; iii) strengthened community level institutions and 
human capacities iv) successful linkages of community level institutions to external 
resources; and v) increasing the presence of a network of technical service providers to 
continue strengthening STAR’s achievements. 
Improved capacity of MALR: IFAD support during the first six years will enable 
2. 
STAR to reach 160 or around 20% of the 850 villages in the programme area. STAR’s 
implementation is designed according to a programmatic approach to capacitate the 
government to gradually increase the outreach of the STAR benefits to the other villages 
in the governorates after the six years by launching new STAR phases. To following 
aspects in STAR design will support MALR capacity building,  
●  establish a separate NPCU for IFAD projects in Cairo;  
●  Competitively recruit full time technical staff in the NPCU from the open job 
market 
●  develop a dedicated STAR GPCU within the directorate of agriculture in each 
governorate;  
●  deploy full time seconded staff in the GPCUs 
●  establish clearly documented, unambiguous and streamlined technical 
guidelines and administrative systems to continue the implementation of the 
STAR interventions in subsequent phases; and  
●  operate a “programme support” initiative within the NPCU and GPCUs 
whereby the government will depute young officers from different 
departments to these Units for 6 to 12 months on a rotational basis for 
orientation and hands-on experience of STAR implementation  
The NPCU and the GPCUs will be led by Directors seconded by the MALR resulting 
3. 
in the full government involvement and ownership of the technical achievements and 
progress of these STAR implementation units. Simultaneously, the engagement of the 
seconded staff with the technical experts recruited from the open market will help the 
seconded staff to upgrade their skills, orientation and approach to STAR implementation 
and will develop their ability to lead the implementation of star activities in future 
phases. The establishment of clearly documented and streamlined technical and 
administrative procedures in the implementation units will assist the newcomers to these 
units to readily orient themselves, settle down and deliver according to the expectations 
from their positions.  
Successful engagement of financial institutions to support the pro poor 
4. 
business opportunities unlocked by STAR  
5. 
A range of financial institutions will partner with STAR to provide financial support 
the pro-poor business opportunities that are unlocked through STAR interventions. When 
these business ventures are successful the financial institutions will automatically 
become financing partners for supporting the future growth and development of these 
business initiatives. Thus, the successful engagement of the financial institutions will 
develop the pathway for STAR to make a smooth exit. Further, from the beginning the 
financial institutions will finance the STAR supported business initiatives using a 
combination of IFAD loans and other resources leveraged by the IFAD loans. 
Consequently, from the onset, the financial institutions will develop their interest and 
engagement in the STAR supported pro poor business initiatives driven by commercial 
interests and not merely to fulfil development objectives fuelled by the access to IFAD 
loan funds. The success of the pro-poor businesses in the STAR clusters will motivate the 
financial institutions to tap this latent business segment even outside the STAR 
supported villages. Consequently, the financial institutions will automatically engage 
themselves in the scaling up of the STAR supported pro poor business models in other 
clusters and other governorates in the future as a part of a programmatic approach. 
6. 
Strengthening community level institutions and human capacities 
STAR will strengthen community level institutions, mainly CDAs (including 
7. 
sometimes cooperatives where relevant) by  
focusing on their institutional development;  
i. 
ii.  enabling their financial sustainability; and  
iii.  developing their technical capacity to ensure that they can continue providing 
services to target households even after STAR.  
Institutional development of the CDAs: This will involve strengthening the 
8. 
governance and management roles in the CDAs and ensuring transparent financial 
management practices within them. STAR will also develop the pro-poor orientation of 
the CDAs and enhance their focus on increasing their membership to include at least 
60% members from very poor and poor categories, women and youth. Clear protocols 
for consultative decision-making and conflict resolutions will be established. These inputs 
will provide a strong platform for pro-poor focus and institutional continuity of the CDA’s 
even after STAR. 
Additionally, STAR will strengthen the CDAs to ensure transparent management 
9. 
and accounting of the income earned directly or indirectly by the CDAs from STAR 
supported businesses. STAR will support the CDAs to develop necessary foundation 
documents, members rules and regulations and framework for activities and resource 
generation. Where relevant, STAR will support the registration of these institutions and 
the opening of their bank accounts. Capacity building and training will be supported 
focusing on governance, management and leadership aspects, project management 
areas, book keeping and financial management areas and a range of other technical 
areas to develop the human capacities necessary for their transparent and robust 
management.  
Financial sustainability of the CDA: The financial sustainability of CDAs will enable 
10. 
them to continue nurturing and guiding the STAR supported activities in the villages and 
will set the stage for STAR to make a smooth exit. STAR will assist the CDAs to develop 
their financial sustainability plans which will outline how they can meet the future costs 
of their developmental services to the target households even after STAR. Broadly, the 
CDA’s will be encouraged to meet these costs through three streams of financial flows,  
●  earning commissions on the volume of business brokered by the CDAs 
between the marketing actors and the supported PMAs: This will build on 
current practices followed in many CDAs which collect a small fee for helping 
the marketing associations supported by them to develop sales contracts with 
buyers. STAR will facilitate the development of transparent norms for the 
CDAs for the collection and utilisation of such financial revenue;  
●  earning slender financial margins by intermediating and credit support from 
financial institutions to the target households (detail in the next section);  
●  serving as village level apexes of savings groups developed at the village 
level, with the mandate to invest this capital in revenue generating activities. 
STAR will promote savings culture within all institutional levels, particularly in 
the income generation enterprise groups developed in the villages. 
Experiences with such savings in many countries show that that the volume of 
savings by these smaller groups can sometime grow to a stage when they 
exceed the capacity of the group to utilize this capital fully. In this situation 
the surplus savings funds can be utilised by a village apex, which can be a 
CDA, to invest in profitable businesses with transparent profit sharing 
mechanisms agreed between the CDA and the savings group; and  
●  collecting fees for training, technical assistance and capacity building inputs to 
PMAs and individual households. 
11. 
Linking community level institutions to external resources 
STAR will link the CDAs to three categories of external resources in order to build 
12. 
their capacity to continue providing village level services after STAR; These categories 
are  
linkages to financial institutions;  
linkages to marketing and production development actors; and  
i. 
ii. 
iii.  linkages to technical service providers.  
Linkages to financial institutions: The strong engagement of the CDA’s with 
13. 
financial institutions will enable STAR to make a smooth exit. CDAs will be linked to 
financial institutions in both capacities, i.e. facilitating credit from banks and MFIs to 
target households as well as serving as financial intermediaries that borrow from the 
financial institutions and lend to the target households. In both scenarios, the CDAs will 
develop a strong understanding of the financial products, eligibility criteria and training 
needs of target households to access credit. This knowledge will enable the CDAs to 
continue guiding the target households to successfully maintain their relationships with 
financial institutions even after STAR.  
Further, when engaged as an intermediary to supply credit to the target 
14. 
households, the CDAs can earn slender margins to contribute to their financial 
sustainability and meet the cost of their delivering their services to the target 
households.  
15. 
Linkages to marketing and production development actors: Strong 
connection of the CDA’s to marketing and production development actors will facilitate 
STAR to make a smooth exit. During STAR implementation the CDAs will be at the centre 
stage of business plan development, negotiations and the contractual arrangements to 
solidify partnerships between the marketing actors and PMAs. These marketing actors 
will compris both export oriented agribusinesses as well as actors catering to the 
domestic market such as processors, wholesellers and retail marketing chains. Similarly, 
the CDA’s will be play a central role in developing production focused partnerships 
between PMAs and production support actors such as quality input suppliers, suppliers of 
machinery services and advisory services (private sector, agriculture universities and 
research centres) for supporting production improvement by PMAs. The involvement of 
the CDAs in developing marketing and production support linkages to the target 
households will develop their capacity to continue with these functions even after the 
first six years and will enable STAR to make a smooth exit.  
Linkages with technical service providers: STAR will link the CDAs to 
16. 
technical service providers which are active in delivering technical support related to 
institutional, community and business development areas. The technical service 
providers will be drawn from private consultancy firms, government agencies as well as 
large NGOs active in the area. STAR will capacitate the CDAs to establish direct lines of 
communication with these service providers. This will empower the CDAs to engage 
these service providers even after STAR completion based on requirement. 
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/1
 Gender transformational
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$16,570,000
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$16,570,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
 No social inclusion themes
Egypt
Sustainable Transformation for Agricultural Resilience in Upper Egypt
Project Design Report
Annex 12: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS
Mission Dates:
15 June- 5 July 2019
Document Date:
21/04/2020
Project No.
2000002202
Report No.
5141-EG
Loan ID
2000003239
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 11: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS (if applicable) 
This annex should present the list of activities to be financed by the FIPS, along with a justification for the 
requests of the funds based on lessons learnt from supervision of ongoing projects on implementation challenges 
(e.g. start-up delays, disbursement delays, project management recurrent issues), describing how this project will 
overcome the challenges or replicate good practices. 
