Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date:  7-Aug 2017 
2000001280 
Project No. 
4596-EG 
Report No: 
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.
  Country and rural development context 
B.
  Rationale 
II.  Project description 
A.
Project area and target group 
B.
  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.
  Outcomes/Components 
D.
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
III.  Project implementation 
A.
Approach 
B.
  Organizational framework 
C.
  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
D.
E.
Financial management, procurement and governance 
Supervision 
F.
  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.
B.
Project costs 
Project financing 
C.
  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.
  Sustainability 
List of Tables 
Table 1. Estimated Population in the Project Area 
Table 2. Project Risk Profile and Mitigation Measures 
Table 3. Budget by Component (USD 000) 
Table 4. Budget by Financier 
Table 5. Budget by Category 
Table 6. Project Beneficiaries of PRIDE Project 
i 
iii 
iii 
iv 
v 
vi 
viii 
1 
1 
4 
7 
7 
9 
10 
16 
19 
19 
21 
23 
25 
27 
27 
28 
28 
29 
30 
32 
9 
28 
29 
29 
30 
30 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendices 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Country and rural context background 
Detailed project description 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 1: 
Appendix 2: 
Appendix 3: 
Appendix 4: 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Appendix 7: 
Appendix 8: 
Appendix 9: 
Appendix 10: 
Appendix 11: 
Appendix 12:   Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 13: 
Project cost and financing 
Procurement 
Contents of the Project Life File 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Draft project implementation manual 
35 
41 
53 
55 
67 
79 
87 
99 
107 
127 
137 
141 
143 
ii 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
US$1.0 
= 
= 
Egyptian Pound 
LE 18 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iii 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Behaviour Change Campaign 
Desert Research Centre 
Egyptian Countr7side Development Company 
Egypt Demographic and Health Survey 
Egyptian Pound 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
Financial Year 
Gross Domestic Product 
Gender Inequality Index 
Geographic Information System 
Government of Egypt 
International Competitive Bidding  
Iodine deficiency disorders 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
Letter to the Borrower 
Monitoring & Evaluation 
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation 
AWPB 
BCC  
CAPMAS  Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics 
DRC  
ECDC 
EDHS 
EGP  
EIRR 
EPADP  Egyptian Public Authority for Drainage Projects  
ESMF 
FAO  
FY 
GDP  
GII 
GIS   
GOE  
ICB   
IDD   
IFAD  
LTB   
M&E  
MALR 
MDDW  Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women 
MIIC  
MWRI 
NCB  
NEET 
NNI   
NPC  
NPV  
PBAS 
PMU  
PRIDE 
RIMS 
SDG  
SDRCM  Sustainable Development Resource Centre for Matrouh  
SECAP  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures  
TGR  
TIPs   
Ministry of Investment & International Cooperation 
Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation 
National Competitive Bidding  
Neither in Education Employment or Training 
National Nutrition Institute 
National Project Coordinator 
Net Present Value  
Performance Based Allocation System 
Project Management Unit 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments 
Results& Impact Management System 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Total Goiter Rate 
Trials for Improved Practice 
iv 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Map of the project area 
v 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Executive Summary1 
Introduction 
The current project aptly titled Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) has been 
designed keeping in mind key Government of Egypt and IFAD priorities. The Sustainable 
Development Strategy (SDS) of the Government of Egypt is designed to transform its economy into a 
dynamic one with the capacity to reduce poverty, create productive employment opportunities, and 
maintain social and political stability. The vision recognises that focused and strategic investments are 
needed for areas that have been left behind. IFAD's proposed investment covering all vulnerable rural 
communities in Matrouh is aligned with the SDS. The approach developed under PRIDE is also 
aligned with IFAD's corporate priorities, especially its focus on building climate resilience in rural 
disadvantaged communities and integrating nutrition-sensitive activities in projects. The PRIDE 
project will assist the Government in enhancing the productive potential of agriculture in desert areas 
and places a strong focus on crops and livestock appropriate for these harsh environments. The 
project will also assist with the development of the 1.5 million feddan flagship programme through 
developing effective strategies for assistance of the youth and small-farmer groups. The project builds 
on IFAD’s previous experience in assisting emerging communities on new reclaimed lands. The 
project also builds on experience of other donors in the region, in particular the World Bank's 
previously funded intervention. Finally, the project implementation arrangements respond to the 
recent IFAD country program evaluation. 
Project Description 
The development goal of the project will be to reduce poverty and enhance food and nutrition security 
in rural areas through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods. The project will assist 
approximately 216,000 people (36,000 HHs) to build resilience to climate conditions, improve 
nutritional and socio-economic profiles and improve productive capacities. The current project will be 
implemented across the Matrouh Governorate, thereby covering all rural vulnerable communities in 
the region: along the coastal areas, in the Siwa Oasis and in the newly reclaimed lands in El Moghra. 
The project will be implemented in the Matrouh Governorate and will include specific interventions for 
the coastal areas from Dabaa to El Salloum, selected activities in the Siwa Oasis and El Moghra in 
the Al Alamein District where the Egyptian Countryside Development Company (ECDC) or El Reef El 
Masry has allocated 60,000 feddan to youth and smallholders companies (as part of the 1.5 million 
feddan initiative). 
The PRIDE Project will consist of two main components, which will include (i); Climate Resilient Livelihoods 
(ii) and Integrated Nutrition-Sensitive Investments. The Climate Resilient Livelihoods component will consist 
of four subcomponents; (i) Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management; (ii) Enhancing Connectivity; 
(iii) Livestock and Rangeland Development and (iv) Crop Production. The second component will consist 
of three sub-components: (i) Water for Health (ii) Empowerment of Women for Nutritional Change (iii) 
Social Infrastructure. 
Project Approach 
The PRIDE project will be implemented over a seven-year period and will adopt a community–driven 
development approach. The project will cover rural communities facing vulnerabilities across the 
1 Mission composition: The mission worked under the overall guidance of Mr Abdelkarim Sma, Officer in Charge of 
Egypt, Kaushik Barua (Programme Officer Egypt) and Ms. Howaida al Hawary (IFAD Country Programme Officer). The 
consultant’s team consisted of Ms. Maliha H. Hussein (Mission Leader and Agriculture Economist), Ms Shazreh 
Hussain, Poverty, Gender and Targeting Specialist, Mr Ali Lansari (Agronomist), Mr Mohamed Abdul-Latif 
(Procurement Specialist), Mr. Aziz Al-Athwari, (Financial Specialist) and Ms Agnese Tonnina (Economic and Financial 
Analyst). Mr David Colbert, (Environment and Climate Change Specialist) and Mr Nigatu Regassa (under the guidance 
of Marian Odenigbo, IFAD Nutrition Specialist) worked from their home stations on specific aspects of the design. Ms 
Isabella Mazarella, Programme Assistant in Rome and Mostafa Aly, Country Programme Assistant provided the 
mission logistical support 
vi 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Matrouh Governorate. The approach with the tribal communities in the coastal areas will build on the 
participatory approach initiated in the Matrouh Governorate by the World Bank in its first investment in 
the area, which is still used by the Desert Research Centre in interacting with the 43 local 
communities in the area. In the newly reclaimed areas of El Moghra, the project will work with the 
youth and smallholder groups who are organized in small formal companies. The project will capitalize 
on the opportunity to adopt a private sector led approach by facilitating linkages between the large 
investors and the smallholder youth companies in El Moghra. The implementation approach of the 
project will be demand driven to ensure that project investments are valued and sustained by the 
beneficiaries. However, a direct targeting approach will be adopted to ensure that the most vulnerable 
segments of society are not left behind. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) will be the lead agency responsible for the 
implementation of the project. The project will have a Project Steering Committee (PSC) at the 
National Level. A Central Project Management Unit will be established in Cairo at the MALR and will 
assume the overall responsibility for the implementation of the project on the ground. This PMU will 
provide the basis for establishing a consolidated approach to programme management for the country 
programme in the future. The Central PMU will supervise project activities being implemented by DRC 
in the coastal areas and Siwa, which will be implemented by DRC with support from an NGO for the 
women’s activities and government line agencies. The Central PMU will be directly involved in the 
implementation of the project activities in the newly reclaimed lands in El Moghra with support from 
ECDC through inviting proposals from agriculture research and extension agencies, line agencies, the 
private sector and other service providers. The PMU will provide quality assurance and monitoring 
and evaluation and supervision for all project activities. 
Project Costs and Financing 
The overall budget of the project is estimated to be USD 81.599 million. IFAD will provide a loan of 
USD 61.871 million and a grant of USD one million. The Government will provide USD 13.957 million 
or 17% of the total for co-investing in feeder roads as well as in kind contribution for the use of its staff 
and facilities, and taxes and duties foregone. The beneficiaries will provide USD 4.77 million as their 
in-kind contribution for labour in selected project activities such as 20% of the cost of cisterns, 
reservoirs, sanitation facilities, rangeland development, etc. 
The cost of Component 1: Climate Resilient Livelihoods will be expected to cost USD 42.535 mn. 
Component II: Integrated Nutrition Investments will be expected to cost USD 31.520 mn. The cost of 
project management will be 7.544 mn. Of the total allocation from IFAD sources, USD 57.098 million 
will be spent on programmes of which DRC will be implementing programmes valued at USD 36.84 
million in the rain-fed areas, an NGO will be implementing programmes valued at USD 7.9 mn (14%) 
while the central PMU will be implementing programmes worth USD 12.35 million (22%) on the newly 
reclaimed lands. 
Project Benefits 
The project is expected to reduce water deficit in the area by at least 20% or by 825,000 cubic meters, 
increase area under agriculture production by 19,000 feddan from the development and rehabilitation 
of old and new wadis, provide 250 kilometres of rural roads, a comprehensive feasibility study for the 
Siwa Oasis, increase in livestock productivity, support the families in newly reclaimed lands to initiate 
crops and production activities adapted to desert environments, improve quality of diets for vulnerable 
households, increase in sanitation facilities access to schools and health facilities. 
Net Present Value (NPV) and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR). The net present value of the 
Project is positive and amounts to USD 51 million. The economic internal rate of return is estimated at 
20% over a 20 years period. Incorporating the benefits from access to education and health facilities 
will substantially increase the returns from the investments. 
vii 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Logical Framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Goal: Reduce poverty and enhance 
food and nutrition security in rural areas 
through remunerative, sustainable and 
resilient livelihoods. 
Development Objective: Assist 
approximately 216.000 people (36,000 
HHs) to build resilience to climate 
conditions, improve nutritional and 
socio-economic profiles and improve 
productive capacities.  
Name 
  % 
of 
population 
the 
international poverty line of the rural 
households in the Governorate.2 
below 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
49.8%  
45% 
35% 
   
  %  of  HHs  reporting  increased  food 
security  as  measured  by  Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES) 
0% 
  %  of  HHs  that  have  increased  their 
asset ownership3*  
  No.  of  HH 
receiving  services 
the 
promoted  or  supported  by 
project. 
  %  of  HHs  reporting  adoption  of 
sustainable  and 
environmentally 
climate-resilient activities*  
0%ca  
  %  of  HHs  reporting  improved  meal 
frequency  
0% 
0 
30% 
60% 
10% 
30%  
15,000 
36,000 
10% 
30% 
0% 
30% 
60% 
Component 1: Climate Resilient 
Livelihoods: Water Harvesting, 
Watershed Management, Enhancing 
connectivity, Livestock and Rangeland 
development, Crop Productivity. 
Outcomes: Increased economic 
  Reduction  in  the  water  deficit  in 
Matrouh Governorate.  
4 million m3 is the deficit 
in domestic water needs 
in the project area 
  %  of  HHs 
reporting  significant 
reduction in time and cost on water * 
3.6 million m3  
3.2 million m3 
0% 
10% 
30% 
Frequency 
MTR and 
completion 
MTR and 
completion 
Responsibility 
PMU M&E unit 
PMU M&E unit 
  Political stability 
  Marco-economic 
conditions 
stable or improve. 
remain 
  No  major 
political 
shocks in the region 
MTR and 
completion 
M&E officer 
MTR and 
completion 
MTR and 
completion 
M&E officer 
M&E officer 
MTR and 
completion 
M&E officer 
Annually 
M&E officer 
Component officer 
MTR and 
completion 
M&E officer 
  Climatic  changes  are 
in 
line  with  current 
predictions  in  terms  of 
the level of rainfall and 
global warming. 
National/ regional 
statistical services 
(CAPMAS) 
Baseline, mid-term 
and Completion food 
survey 
Mid-term and 
Completion survey 
(updated RIMS 
survey) 
Baseline, mid-term 
and Completion 
survey  
Baseline, mid-term 
and Completion 
survey (Component 
11 of IFAD-MPAT) 
Baseline, mid-term 
and Completion 
survey (Food 
survey/dietary intake 
methodology as 
validated by FAO) 
Project M&E Data  
Component reports 
DRC analyses 
Baseline, mid-term 
and Completion 
survey 
(adapted from IFAD-
WEAI methodology) 
2 CAPMAS Report 2016. 
3 An income survey was recommended in place of asset measurement during the IFAD QE review. However, assessment of incomes in rural areas are cumbersome, due to multiple income 
streams, social pressures and norms with regard to self-reporting incomes, difficulties in determining incomes due to self-consumption.  
viii 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
10% 
30% 
Baseline, mid-term 
and Completion 
survey 
Frequency 
MTR and 
completion 
Responsibility 
M&E officer 
Component officers 
mobility and changes in economic 
status due to increased production, 
income, consumption and food diversity; 
Outputs  
Component 2: Integrated Nutrition-
Sensitive Investments: Domestic 
water supply, nutrition packages, social 
infrastructure 
Outcomes: Improved access to social 
sector services. 
Outputs 
Name 
  %  of  HHs  reporting  an  increase  in 
crop/ livestock production* 
  %  of  HHs  adopting  community 
rangeland  and  breed  improvement 
practices 
  Number  of  reservoirs  (capacity  of 
irrigated  agriculture 
rehabilitated  by 
300  m3) 
constructed  or 
project  
for 
  Number  of  feddans  of  land  brought 
under 
community 
improved 
rangeland  practices  (equivalent  to 
RIMS  indicator  land  brought  under 
climate resilient management)* 
  Number  of  feddans  of  valley  beds 
rehabilitated  or  developed  (wadi)  by 
project* 
  Km  of  feeder  roads  constructed  by 
project* 
  Feddan  of  new  land  cultivated  in 
Moghra. 
  %  of  HHs  reporting  good  dietary 
diversity (≥5 food groups out of 12).  
   % of women reporting good dietary 
diversity ((≥5 food groups out of 10) 
   %  of  children  under  five  with  good 
diet  diversity  score  (≥4food  groups 
out of 7).  
  Number  of  cisterns  (capacity  of  120 
for  homesteads  constructed/ 
m3) 
rehabilitated by project 
  Number  of  reservoirs  (150  m3)  for 
constructed/ 
homesteads 
rehabilitated by project 
0% 
0% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0% 
0 
0 
10% 
30% 
Mid-term and 
Completion survey 
MTR and 
completion 
M&E officer 
Component officers 
190 
500 
M&E Data 
Component reports 
Annually 
M&E officer 
Component officer 
30,000 
90,000 
684 feddan 
(36km*19/km) 
1900 feddan 
(100km*19/ km) 
250 km 
250 km 
24,000 feddan 
42,840 feddan 
10% increase 
30% increase 
Annually 
ECDC & M&E Officer 
MTR and 
completion 
M&E officer 
M&E Data from 
ECDC  
Baseline, midterm 
and Completion 
survey (MDDW/ 
dietary diversity 
methodology 
validated by FAO) 
2400 
6000 
M&E Data 
Component reports 
Annually 
M&E officer 
Component officer 
200 
500 
  DRC 
has 
built 
sufficient 
implementation 
capacity 
  ECDC  master  plan  for 
El  Moghra  developed 
by  PY1 
identify 
(to 
roads)  
  Coordination  between 
line 
ministries 
(Agriculture,  Education 
and Health) ensured. 
  Coordination  between 
MALR 
and  ECDC 
ensured for El Moghra 
and new lands 
  Community 
leaders 
are  willing  to  included 
women  and  youth  in 
project activities,  
ix 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Name 
  Number  of  women  provided  with 
targeted  support  to  improve  their 
nutrition (nutrition packages) 
  Number  of  schools  constructed  by 
project 
  Number  of  health  units/  mobile 
clinics 
health 
constructed/rehabilitated by project 
  #  of  schools 
receiving  nutrition 
message 
Baseline 
0 
Mid-Term 
1600 
End Target 
4000  
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
0  
0  
0 
18 
8 
12 
18 
8 
18 
   
*Up to 15 indicators including a few optional RIMS indicators. In addition to these, RIMS mandatory indicators must be added. **The distribution of indicators is illustrative 
***Intermediate targets for the Goal and Outputs are optional. 
x 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.
  Country and rural development context 
Economic Overview: The total population of Egypt was estimated at 92.8 million in 2016. The 
1.
country is the largest Arab country by population and has the second largest economy in the Arab 
world. Since 2011, the country has experienced political upheaval and societal unrest that spread 
across the region and highlighted the unmet aspirations of the population regarding lack of political 
inclusion and economic opportunities. The subsequent developments in the country have adversely 
affected the Egyptian economy and people's livelihoods. The internal turmoil has been exacerbated 
by the instability in the region and has led to a sharp decline in revenue from tourism and reduction in 
remittance income due to the return of Egyptian labour working in the regional countries. The rising 
energy crisis has also taken a toll and threatens the economic growth rate in the country. However, 
several measures have been undertaken by the Government to alleviate the energy crisis such as 
import of liquefied gas, investment in renewable energy and energy conserving technologies. 
Economic growth in the past three decades has been moderate and uneven, and insufficient to 
reduce poverty or absorb the rapidly growing supply of labour. Unemployment remains high, 
particularly for women and youth. Egypt is rated as a lower middle-income country with a GDP per 
capita estimated to be around US$ 2,724 in 2016.4 The economy is gradually improving with annual 
rates of GDP growth reaching 4 percent in 2015/16, up from an average of only 2 percent during the 
period 2010/11-2013/14.5 
2.
Currency Devaluation and Inflation: There has been a consistent attempt by the Central 
Bank of Egypt to set the exchange rate of the Egyptian Pound at levels which reflect the demand and 
supply, and close the gap in the black market rate which is a key supplier of foreign exchange. The 
last several rounds of major devaluations took place in March 2016 and November 2016. In the first 
round, the Central Bank of Egypt devalued the EGP by 12.6 percent to EGP 8.8 to the dollar and in 
the second one it has brought the rate down by 74% against the dollar to around EGP 15.35-15.75 to 
the dollar. The current rate in the free-floating exchange rate regime is around EGP 18 to the USD. 
The devaluation was designed to attract fresh capital into the country and end a hard currency 
shortage that has plagued the economy for years. Rising fuel prices have had a detrimental impact 
and led to an increase in inflation. To mitigate the impact of the rising inflation due to the devaluation, 
the Government increased its food subsidy allocation by 20 percent per beneficiary in May 2016.6 
However, consumer prices in Egypt rose 31.5 percent year-on-year in April 2017.7 The Egyptian 
Pound forecasts are expected to remain more or less stable for the next few years and depreciating 
by only around 5% or so on an annual basis.8 
Agriculture: Agriculture is a key sector in the Egyptian economy, providing livelihoods for 55 
3.
per cent of the population and directly employing about 23 per cent of the labour force.9 Although the 
sector’s contribution to GDP has fallen over time, it still accounts for about 13 per cent of GDP and 20 
per cent of total exports and foreign exchange earnings. Agriculture-related industries such as 
processing and marketing and input supplies account for a further 20 per cent of GDP. Agriculture is 
important for growth and poverty reduction as a rise in farm income can drive demand for the large, 
employment-intensive rural non-farm sector. The area of agricultural land in Egypt is confined to the 
Nile Valley and the delta, with a few oases and some arable land in Sinai. The total cultivated area is 
7.2 million feddans, representing only 3 percent of the total land area in the country. The entire crop 
area is irrigated, except for some rain-fed areas along the Mediterranean coast. Due to its growing 
population and limitation in cultivated area, Egypt cannot meet its food requirements and is the world’s 
4https://tradingeconomics.com/egypt/gdp-per-capita 
5 http://www.indexmundi.com/egypt/gdp_real_growth_rate.html 
6 FAO Country Report. August 2016.http://www.fao.org/giews/countrybrief/country.jsp?code=EGY 
7 http://www.tradingeconomics.com/egypt/inflation-cpi 
8 http://www.tradingeconomics.com/egypt/currency/forecast 
9 FAO Statistics. 2014  
1 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
largest wheat importer. Cereal import requirements in the 2016/17 marketing year (July/June) were 
forecast at around 20.1 million tons with wheat imports estimated at 11.5 million tons.10 To meet the 
food requirements, the Government has set the reclamation of new land for agriculture as one of its 
highest priorities. 
  Weak farmer organizations and marketing infrastructure: Smallholders generally lack the 
4.
mechanisms for integration with markets due to land fragmentation, limited produce and lack of 
effective organizations. The agriculture cooperatives in the country have been used as an 
administrative mechanism to distribute seeds and fertilizers rather than to assist farmers to reduce 
their transactions costs through collective input supply or marketing. The individualist nature of 
Egyptian farmers has also served to inhibit collaboration among them. The problems of marketing 
agriculture produce are exacerbated by the high degree of variability in prices of agricultural 
commodities and limited market information. There is also lack of post-harvest, processing and 
marketing facilities and low levels of agricultural industrialization. The high degree of perishability of 
horticulture and dairy produce leads to rapid quality deterioration, a consequent reduction in prices 
and reduction in farmer incomes. However, along with these constraints there are also opportunities. 
Contract farming is becoming more commonplace because of the “supermarket revolution”. In some 
contract farming arrangements, the private sector provides most of the agronomic information in place 
of extension agents and also assists in enhancing access to markets. The Government’s experiment 
of creating Youth and Smallholder companies on the newly reclaimed lands is one measure to help 
deal with the issue of land fragmentation, increase agriculture production and encourage collective 
enterprise. 
5.
  Water Scarcity: The country has little or no rainfall except in a narrow band along the northern 
coast. Egypt has an arid climate with an annual average rainfall ranging from 60 to 190 mm along the 
Mediterranean coast to 25 to 60 mm in the Nile delta, and less than 25 mm in Upper Egypt and its 
adjacent areas. Scarcity of water is a key constraint to agricultural growth. The Nile River is the main 
and almost exclusive source of surface water for Egypt. Based on a 1929 agreement, Egypt currently 
maintains its historic right to three-quarters of the Nile’s water or about 55.5 billion cubic meters of its 
total flow of roughly 84 billion cubic meters. Per capita fresh water availability is expected to decline 
from 711.0 m3 in 2008 to 550 m3 in 2030.11 The country is experiencing severe water poverty which is 
likely to worsen due to population growth and climate change combining to raise the risks of 
inadequate water supplies and conflict over the available supplies – and further pressure is expected 
from the increased demand of Nile resources by other members of the Nile Basin Commission.  
6.
Sensitivity of agriculture to climate change: Analysts estimate that the expected rise in 
temperature will lead to up to 20 per cent decrease in productivity for some major crops (wheat, barley 
and maize) by 2050. It will reduce the production of livestock and affect the productive potential of 
many agricultural zones in the country. The marginal agricultural areas will be negatively affected and 
desertification will increase. High temperatures will increase evaporation and water consumption and 
put a further strain on the acute water scarcity in the country. A rise in sea levels will have a negative 
effect on coastal areas, tourism and agricultural land in the Nile Delta region.12 Enhanced resilience to 
climate change will hence have close resonance with responding to water scarcity, increasing land 
productivity and livelihood diversification. Adaptation measures on the supply-side include ways to 
improve irrigation techniques and know-how, increased use of water harvesting and watershed 
management in the north coastal zone where there is some rainfall, introduction of drought and 
salinity tolerant cultivars, introduction of renewable energy alternatives, as well as improving 
production, post-harvest and marketing facilities.13 
10 FAO Country Report. August 2016. http://www.fao.org/giews/countrybrief/country.jsp?code=EGY 
11 According to Sustainable Agricultural Development Strategy Towards 2030 (SADS, 2009 
12 Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency, 2014. 
13 FAO, 2014. 
2 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Poverty: The Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) maintains that 
7.
Egypt’s poverty rate14 increased over the year 2012/2013, reaching 26.3 percent compared with 25.2 
percent in 2010/2011 and nearly 25 percent live just above the poverty line.15 Some 11.9 percent of 
Egypt’s population is in extreme multi-Dimensional Poverty.16 In addition, many of the households 
along the poverty line are highly vulnerable and susceptible to falling back into poverty as a result of a 
host of factors. Data also shows that there has been an increase in inequality, with the Gini-coefficient 
rising from 28.7 to 31 between 2005 and 2010.17 While more recent data is not available, it is believed 
that inequality is still on the rise. Unemployment continues to be an overriding concern, especially for 
youth and women with many of the Egyptians working in the Middle East region returning home 
because of growing regional instability. Several studies have tried to estimate poverty by Governorate. 
Due to the difficulty of conducting surveys among the widely scattered population in some 
Governorates like Matrouh, these studies appear not to reflect the actual situation on the ground and 
tend to underestimate the poverty and illiteracy rates. Using the percentage of female illiteracy as a 
proxy indicator of poverty shows a gender illiteracy rate of 36.3% in the Governorate18 and is ranked 
at 24 out of the 27 Governorates in the country. 
Malnutrition: Despite Egypt’s significant progress in reducing infant and child mortality in the 
8.
last decades, high levels of child malnutrition still persist across the country. Egypt is one of the 20 
countries in the world with the highest number of children suffering from chronic malnutrition. Child 
malnutrition was deteriorating even at times when Egypt experienced rapid economic growth and, it is 
expected that the malnutrition status of children will continue to deteriorate if necessary measures are 
not put in place rapidly.19 It is estimated that 22% of children under the age of five are stunted, 13% 
are low birth weight or underweight, and 10% are wasted.20 National averages, however, obscure vast 
regional differences in under-nutrition prevalence. In recognition of its nutritional challenges, Egypt 
has developed a 10-year Food and Nutrition Policy and Strategy (2007 – 2017). 
9.
Gender inequality: The Constitution of Egypt guarantees equal treatment of all citizens. 
However, this has not translated into equality of status, assets or opportunities for women. Their 
marginalization and exclusion from social, economic and political life has led to lower access to 
education, health, employment and productive resources making them more vulnerable to poverty, 
food security, ill-health and violence than men. Egypt ranks low on international indicators of gender 
equity. It had a Gender Inequality Index (GII)21 value of 0.60 and a rank of 129 of 142 countries in 
2014.22 Although indicators relating to women have improved over the years, they still remain large 
differences between men and women in literacy and schooling, the labour force and unemployment 
rates, wage differentials and political participation. It is assessed that the deeply entrenched, cultural 
values, and social class as well as the urban/rural location are factors that affect the situation of 
Egyptian women, but it is the cultural tradition that most strongly affects their lives. In some areas the 
situation of women is even worse such as in the tribal structure of Bedouin societies found in the 
deserts of the country where the traditional norms are still prevalent like in the Matrouh Governorate. 
Government Policy and Strategy 
  Sustainable Development Strategy (Vision 2030): The strategy launched in March 2016 
10.
spans over the three dimensions of sustainable development, namely; economic, social and 
environmental dimensions, and outlines the broader principles which will guide Egypt in pursuing its 
developmental goals. The strategy envisages focused and strategic investments to areas that have 
14 The extreme poverty limit is an annual EGP 3,570 (US$ 518) per person, which means approximately EGP 312 per 
month per person, or EGP 10 (approximately US$ 1.5) per day per person). 
15 Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS). Arab Republic of Egypt, 2012. 
16 World Food Programme, The Status of Poverty and Food Security in Egypt: Analysis and Policy Recommendations 
(2013). 
17 Economic growth, inequality and poverty: social mobility in Egypt between 2005 and 2008, 2009, World Bank, 2010. 
18 Based on the results of a survey of income, expenditure and consumption in 2015. CAPMAS 2016. Page 578. 
19 UNICEF. https://www.unicef.org/egypt/immunisation_7133.html 
20 http://ebrary.ifpri.org/utils/getfile/collection/p15738coll2/id/129926/filename/130137.pdf 
21 The Gender Inequality Index (GII) reflects gender-based inequalities in three dimensions – reproductive health, 
empowerment, and economic activity. 
22 http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2014/rankings/ World Economic Forum. 
3 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
been left behind. The first two milestones of the political roadmap adopted in July 2013 – the 
ratification of the new Constitution in January 2014 and presidential elections in May 2014 – have 
been completed. This has returned Egypt to political stability, providing the government with the 
opportunity to tackle anew the country’s economic constraints and to launch far-reaching structural 
reforms.23 The Government has demonstrated strong resolve to deal with the issues of economic 
development and growth and is committed to pursuing policies for rural growth and poverty alleviation. 
Egypt’s Vision 2030 outlines a well-structured programme to restore macroeconomic imbalances, 
address social inclusion priorities, and achieve sustainable and diversified growth. The sustainable 
development plan and budget for FY 2016/2017 are primarily focused on achieving inclusive 
economic growth, enhancing social justice, and increasing employment rates, particularly among 
young people. 
  Sustainable Development Goals: For Egypt, inclusive and sustainable development is a core 
11.
constitutional value and objective. The Constitution of Egypt covers economic, social, and 
environmental dimensions, as well as many of the 17 SDGs in its different articles, presented as 
national goals, binding all sectors and levels of government, and calling upon different stakeholders to 
participate in the developmental process towards achieving them. The Government of Egypt has 
expressed its full commitment to achieving the SDGs. The Ministry of International Cooperation has 
been entrusted as the National Coordinator of the committee. Key priorities for the Government has 
been poverty eradication, addressing inequalities, gender mainstreaming and boosting sustainable 
economic growth, through decent job creation, sustainable infrastructure, access to adequate and 
affordable housing, quality health and education, as well as, expanding the use of renewable energy. 
Women and youth are particularly being targeted under the strategy.24 The Central Agency for Public 
Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) has been tasked with publishing a new study every February 
to measure the government’s progress in implementing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
  The Flag Ship 1.5 million Land Reclamation Programme: Egypt has one of the world’s 
12.
lowest per capita holding of agricultural land. It is annually decreasing as population growth rate 
greatly exceeds that of the expansion of agricultural land. A corner stone of Government policy is land 
reclamation aimed at expanding Egypt’s farmland by 20%. The flagship project aims to expand 
Egypt's prospective agricultural land from eight million to 9.5 million feddans or (630,000 hectares). 
The Government has placed special emphasis on developing areas with the potential for land 
reclamation and has identified 10 potential sites in a three-phase programme. In the first phase, El 
Moghra, Toshka and the Frafra oasis will be developed. The project aims to reduce the food gap and 
increase the populated area through the creation of new urban communities The main objective of this 
project is to create an integrated society in the reclaimed lands in Moghra, support economic diversity, 
the provision of productive and decent job opportunities, and ensuring the participation of all 
Governorates in achieving inclusive and sustainable growth. A private company named the Egyptian 
Countryside Development Company (ECDC) or Reef El Masry has been formed with equity 
participation from the Ministries of Finance, Agriculture and Housing to facilitate the acquisition and 
allocation of land. The Government is allocating the land to investors, youth and smallholders on 
payment with partial development in some sites. 
B.
  Rationale 
  The priorities of the Government of Egypt and the IFAD strategic corporate objectives both 
13.
converge in the proposed project. The Government is committed to supporting those areas that have 
lagged behind in meeting key sustainable development goals, in developing new lands in order to 
enhance agriculture production and provide sustainable employment opportunities to the small 
holders and youth. The current project will focus on addressing some key strategic objectives that 
IFAD has made a commitment to such as strengthening the environmental sustainability and climate 
23 Egypt’s Five Year Macro-Economic Framework and Strategy. FY14/15 to FY 18/19. Egypt Economic Development 
Conference. Sharm El Sheikh. March 2015. Government of Egypt. 
24. Sahar Nasr. Minister of International Cooperation Arab Republic of Egypt. National Review. Sustainable 
Development Goals. July 2016. http://moic.gov.eg/MopRep/MIC/English.pdf_915201625622PM.pdf 
4 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
resilience of poor rural households, increase their productive capacities and mainstream nutrition in its 
portfolio of projects. These priorities are urgent for the selected project area given its high poverty 
status, poor nutritional profile of the children and low socio-economic profile of women. 
  The current project presents the opportunity to support rural communities facing vulnerabilities 
14.
in terms of nutrition and climate change across the Matrouh Governorate. By covering the entire 
governorate, the project will bring focused attention to one of the poorest regions in the country. The 
project will support two types of livelihoods; the rain-fed areas of the coastal zone of Matrouh and the 
desert areas irrigated by underground water in the newly reclaimed lands in El Moghra. The project 
will assist the neglected Bedouin rural communities to break the cycle of natural resource degradation 
and poverty in a fragile natural environment by building their resilience to a harsh climate and 
providing an integrated package of investments that will help the households to improve their 
productive potential and socio-economic profile. The area has potential for enhanced horticulture crop 
and livestock production with investments in water harvesting, watershed management, improved 
agriculture management practices and introduction of crops and techniques suitable for desert areas. 
The project will also provide an integrated package of support to the young and the emerging farming 
communities in El Moghra. 
  The Governorate of Matrouh is one of the largest in terms of area, yet it is among the poorest in 
15.
Egypt as evidenced by a range of socio-economic indicators. The settlement of the nomadic herders 
in an area that has between 50 to 150 millimetres of rainfall and is chronically water deficit has put 
increasing pressure on the land, water and vegetative resources. The Governorate of Matrouh is one 
of the few areas in Egypt where rain-fed agriculture is practised. Along with the two main horticulture 
crops of figs and olives, some farmers are beginning to experiment with selected field crops. The 
project can help farmers with watershed development to capture the rainwater and assist with 
supplementary irrigation to increase the sustainability of rain-fed agriculture in areas, which are 
susceptible to climate change and assist in improved crop management to overcome the drought 
effect.  
  Most of the rural population is dependent on the dwindling natural resource base with few 
16.
opportunities for off-farm employment. While livestock represents the main source of income, there 
has been a rapid decline in numbers due to the degradation of the rangelands and limited water for 
fodder production. Since the settlement of the population and its transformation into a sedentary 
community, the livestock holding capacity has been significantly reduced from about one million 
animals to around 500,0004 due to lack of feed resources. Assistance to these communities is 
essential to assist the Government with its plans to restrict rural out-migration by making livelihoods 
more productive and sustainable. The project will also refine and scale up the approach adopted in 
community based rangeland development and community based breed improvement programmes 
based on the lessons learnt from IFAD’s experience in similar environments in Asia and Africa. 
  The current project provides an opportunity to test an integrated approach to nutrition 
17.
mainstreaming, as proposed in IFAD’s Nutrition Action Plan. There is a strong focus in the current 
project on a comprehensive package for women with respect to improving their access to better diets, 
water, sanitation, health and education facilities. IFAD has a strong commitment to ‘inclusive and 
sustainable rural transformation“ so that extreme poverty is eliminated and every rural family lives in 
dignity. For IFAD, nutrition is a key focus area and its Nutrition Action Plan is designed to promote the 
equality and empowerment of women in ways that help them improve nutrition for themselves, their 
children and their families. These commitments require an integrated approach to investing in literacy, 
education and sanitation as improving nutrition requires cross-sectoral investments. There is a high 
incidence of diarrhoea in children under five in Matrouh reported at 19.5% percent. Poor households 
are unable to afford proper sanitation facilities, with particularly dire health consequences for women 
who can only leave the house early morning to go to the fields with limited access at other times of the 
day.  
  The project will also invest in educational facilities in these scattered settlements for which 
18.
Government has been unable to develop and implement a cost-effective school model. There is 
5 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
strong evidence that improving women’s literacy levels has potentially large social benefits, such as 
increase in women’s empowerment, increased life expectancy, reduction in early marriages, reduced 
child mortality and improved children’s health.25 While gender equity in schooling is a basic human 
right and does not have to be justified by reference to wider benefits for economic growth or 
development, nevertheless, girls’ education has some powerful multiplier properties and there is a 
strong association between maternal education, child survival and reduction in fertility rates.26 These 
generate additional quantifiable benefits in terms of reduction in health expenditures, increased 
productive investment and reduction in poverty levels. Enrolling in school also delays marriage age 
and reduces the prospects of adolescent fertility in a country where girls get married young. Maternal 
education has the potential to act as a powerful catalyst for progress in child health and nutrition, 
thereby reducing the risk of child mortality.27  
  The project area also includes the Siwa Oasis which has centuries old date-palm and olive 
19.
groves and has been recently recognized as a Global Agriculture Site. The farming systems in the 
Oasis are under a threat due to the significant increase in soil and water salinity exacerbated by 
unregulated digging of shallow wells, over-irrigation, poor drainage, lack of water quality monitoring 
and encroachment of the desert. The Government has not fully investigated the technical options for 
sustainable agriculture in desert oases and has invested limited resources in dealing with the specific 
problems faced by the people of this oasis. Many of the oases in the New Valley Governorates are 
also undergoing a similar crisis, which will only be exacerbated if a comprehensive solution is not 
found. The project will assist in properly studying the irrigation and drainage issues in Siwa and 
develop a comprehensive feasibility and engineering plan for a sustainable solution. The model for 
Siwa could also serve as a prototype for scaling up the implementation of the technical options 
available in other oases in the country.  
  The project will also include news land in El Moghra in the El Alamein District in Matrouh 
20.
Governorate. The Egyptian Countryside Development Company (ECDC) or the El Reef el Masry has 
earmarked the land for 252 groups of youth and smallholders along with the large investors. The 
project will work with the youth groups, each of which has been allocated a parcel of 230 feddans. Of 
these groups, 140 have been selected and land allocated to them. It is expected that they will move to 
the new settlements within the next two months while the others will be identified and contracts signed 
as soon as possible. There is high demand for these lands due to its accessibility and cost ,which is 
lower than that in other new developments. The area has been supplied with water from shallow 
wells, which have been dug at a depth of 170 to 200 metres. Given the level of salinity in the water of 
between 2000 to 8000 ppm, the new settlers will require special assistance in planting and 
management of crops which are saline tolerant such as Jojoba, pomegranate, olives and selected 
fodder crops. These groups will need technical assistance and training to adapt their farming practices 
to desert environments. The newly settled families will also be assisted with the social and marketing 
infrastructure that is missing from these areas. Government will be supported to provide social 
services to these communities. The project will use IFAD’s previous experience on reclaiming new 
lands in helping these emerging communities.  
  Agriculture development in Al-Moghra can help demonstrate how working back from the market 
21.
can help build a powerful model where growth is driven by high demand for high value crops. The 
project has the opportunity of working closely with the private sector and scaling up the private sector 
led model already in evidence in the area under which smallholders are provided key production 
inputs (seedlings, sand dune encroachment structures, drip irrigation equipment, solar panels, etc.) 
and smallholder production is aggregated for the market. Large companies provide opportunities for 
equity partnerships and contractual farming arrangements for upstream market linkages that connect 
the small farmer to the domestic and foreign markets. IFAD assistance can help to defray some of the 
initial capital requirements of transforming the desert to productive agriculture lands and in reducing 
25 UNESCO (2006), EFA Global Monitoring Report 2006: Literacy for Life.  
26 Watkins, Kevin. April 2012. When learning saves lives: education and child mortality. Education for All Global 
Monitoring Report. 
27 Cohen, 2008; Lewis and Lockheed, 2008; Singh-Manoux et al., 2008. 
6 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
the initial capital costs of the youth groups by providing a package of goods and services. The same 
model can be used to guide the development in other new lands. 
IFAD has a comparative advantage due to its approach of empowering local communities with 
22.
a special focus on women and the youth to achieve sustainable development that is best suited for 
this area. IFAD will build and scale up the experience of the World Bank in the Matrouh Resource 
Management Project that was implemented in the Governorate more than 14 years ago. The project 
will also scale up the well-tested traditional technology used for the development of cisterns, 
reservoirs and valley beds. The project will incorporate the innovation introduced in watershed 
management by the Italian Cooperation in designing dikes, which capture the fertile silt for expanding 
the area under cultivation in the valleys. The project will also introduce a range of new technologies 
for improved management of the information systems for water quality monitoring, electronic tablets 
for inducing behaviour change and information dissemination for women through innovative use of 
technology.  
  The project expects to work closely with the International Centre for Bio-Saline Agriculture 
23.
(ICBA), which has signed an agreement with ECDC to provide technical services for evaluating the 
land resources of Moghra and provide advice on appropriate salt tolerant crops and efficient water 
use. IFAD is also in discussions with the African Development Bank to assess how it can collaborate 
with the Bank's initiative to eliminate extreme poverty, reduce hunger and malnutrition. In the project 
area, IFAD is exploring how it can use the lessons from the Bank’s study on the feasibility of investing 
in Renewable Energy (RE) to pump groundwater in the reclaimed lands and ease the burden on the 
declining fossil fuel sources in Egypt. IFAD is exploring parallel financing opportunities with the Bank 
for investments in solar energy for youth groups in El Moghra. IFAD has also discussed the potential 
for using the experience of some of the UN organizations such as WHO and UNICEF and using their 
experience in developing its nutrition and women’s empowerment programmes 
II.  Project description 
A.
  Project area and target group 
  The current project will be implemented in the Matrouh Governorate along the coastal areas, in 
24.
the Siwa Oasis and in the newly reclaimed lands in El Moghra. The Governorate of Matrouh is among 
the two largest Governorates of Egypt with a total area of 166,000 square Kilometres, which 
represents 16% of the total area of the country. It extends over 450 kilometre along the Mediterranean 
coast from Alexandria in the East to the Libya borders, in the West. Agriculture in Matrouh 
Governorate is essentially a livestock-tree crop system with cropped barley grown as livestock feed. 
Less than 20% of the land is arable with over 120,000 feddans of orchards and over 150,000 feddans 
of barley, depending on rainfall. About 43 percent of the area is dense to medium rangeland and 
about 38 percent is very sparse rangeland. The main source of income in the coastal areas comes 
from livestock, figs and olives. While some of the coastal areas in Matrouh attract a large number of 
tourists, this is confined to a few months in the year and has not impacted the rural households 
significantly. 
25.
  Four agro-ecological zones are distinguished in the coastal areas of the Governorate (i) a 
narrow coastal strip, about 5 km inland, which has good alluvial soils and horticulture is the main 
farming activity, with livestock and barley; (ii) a mixed production strip, 5-15 km inland, of lower rainfall 
and soil quality, and a mixed small ruminants-barley farming system prevails with orchards grown in 
the wadis; (iii) a rangeland strip, 15-50 km inland, of semi-nomadic population, largely used for small 
ruminants grazing, with scattered barley cultivation in land depressions; and (iv) an open-range area 
lies beyond 50-km inland, where a nomadic population are living on animal production, mainly camels. 
Tourist villages provide seasonal work for some of the young men in the area.28 The coastal areas 
suffer tremendously from soil erosion and water run-off due to rains, topography and close distance to 
28 Project Appraisal Document   the  Second Matrouh Resource Management Project. World Bank. Water, 
Environment, Social and Rural Department Middle East And North Africa Region. February 6, 2003  
7 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
the Mediterranean Sea. With regards to vegetation, the settlement of the Bedouin nomads has 
contributed to overgrazing and degradation of the vegetative resources leading to desertification and 
loss of biodiversity. 
  The Siwa Oasis in the Matrouh Governorate has a unique and rich history, geographic 
26.
attributes and a distinct cultural identity. Its fame lies primarily in its ancient role as the home to the 
oracle of Ammon. It lies between the Qattara Depression and sea of sand in the Western Desert. It is 
one of Egypt's most isolated settlements. Agriculture is the main activity of modern Siwa, particularly 
the cultivation of dates and olives. It is known as Egypt’s most fertile oasis and is famous for its olive 
trees and its 700,000 date palms. Handicrafts like basketry are also of regional importance. Until a 
tarmac road was built to the Mediterranean coast in the 1980s, Siwa’s only links with the outside world 
were by arduous camel tracks through the desert. These were used to export dates and olives, bring 
trade goods, or carry pilgrims on the route which linked the Maghreb to Cairo and hence to Mecca. 
The area has recently received the Khalifa International Award for Date Palm and Agricultural 
Innovation (KIADPAI) and the Oasis has been awarded the Globally Important Agricultural Heritage 
Site (GIAHS) certification by FAO in October 2016 because it has preserved the environmental and 
heritage ecosystem in the cultivation of dates. Eco-tourism has in recent decades become a vital 
source of income. Much attention has been given to creating hotels that use local materials, use of 
natural therapy and display local styles and capitalize on the serene ecology of the environment and 
its protected status.  
  The target group of the PRIDE project will be the population of the Governorate of Matrouh 
27.
which is estimated to be around 450,000 people or 60,000 households29 of which 41,589 households 
are considered as rural, with an average household size of 6 persons in the rural areas of the 
Governorate. A more detailed analysis of the target groups is given in Appendix 2. An indication of the 
poverty and deprivation in this area, relative to other governorates, is provided by the following 
statistics from the Egypt Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS), despite the urban bias in the 
sample size for Matrouh (70 per cent urban to 30 percent rural). Matrouh has 37.9 per cent of its 
population living in the lowest wealth quintile, only in Sohag and Minya the proportion is higher. It has 
the highest rate of illiteracy among women (43.9%), the highest TFR of all governorates at 4.8, and 
the third highest percentage of teenage pregnancy. It has the lowest percentage of mothers receiving 
ante-natal checkups at 59.9 percent – 10 percent below the governorate with the second lowest 
percentage. 30 
  The coastal population of Matrouh is composed of six main tribes which can be further divided 
28.
into sub-tribes. There are about 43 sub-tribes in the project area. The sub-tribe or the 'qabila' is the 
functional tribe of most importance in dealing with the government. It is a blood-related group, and the 
reference most commonly used by individuals for defining their tribal identity. Each sub-tribe is further 
divided into clans. The sub-tribe has well established and recognized rights over its cultivated area, 
watersheds and rangelands and any new land brought under cultivation is managed based on this 
well-established system of use and proprietary rights. The Siwa Oasis is inhabited by some 30,000 
people with a rich cultural heritage and belong to the very distinct Berber community with a unique 
culture and a distinct language spoken by the Berber called Siwa “Amazingh”. Table 1 below, gives 
the location of the population in each of the District. 
29 Statistical Yearbook. Central Agency for Public Mobilisatin and Statistics (CAMPAS). Ref No: 71-01111-2015. Arab 
Republic of Egypt. September 2015. 
30 Ministry of Health and Population (2015), Egypt Demographic Health Survey, 2014 
8 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Table 1. Estimated Population in the Project Area 
Districts 
Marsa Matrouh 
El Dabaa 
El Negila 
Barrani 
El Saloum 
Siwa 
El Moghra in El Amien 
Total Rural People  HHs 
 56,185  
 9,364  
 48,723  
 8,121  
 25,705  
 4,284  
 46,896  
 7,816  
 17,990  
 2,998  
 28,329  
 4,722  
 21,420  
 4,284  
Total 
 245,248    41,589  
Source: CAPMAS 2016 and ECDC for El-Moghra 
  The hierarchical and patriarchal tribal structure of the Bedouin, the very distinct customs of the 
29.
Berber people in Siwa and the isolated location of the Governorate puts women at a much greater 
disadvantage compared with many other part of the country. There is limited access to basic social 
sector services like domestic water supply, sanitation, health, education, electricity or transport. 
Women are virtually confined to the homestead with few opportunities for productive employment. The 
strict codes which women have to observe limit their access to resources, limit their mobility and 
access to health and education services. Young men with limited choices are involved in the 
agriculture sector where they are under-employed. Those with opportunities generally like to move 
into the trade and transport sectors. The local tourism industry in the coastal area has been growing 
but can offer employment for only two-to three months in the year. The result is very limited 
opportunities for productive employment for young men and women.  
30.
In El Alamein, the project will work with the 252 groups of youth and smallholders who have 
been allocated land in the new lands of El Moghra. It is expected that around 4,284 households will be 
given this land in groups of between 10 and 23 with an average membership of 17 members in each 
group. These groups consist of individuals who have come together to form companies and qualify for 
the open ballot for receiving the land parcels. The land will be allocated to the smallholder companies 
on a provisional basis on payment of 15% of the total cost of EGP 18,000. The ownership of the land 
will be formally transferred to the groups on condition that they develop 60% of the land and pay their 
instalments within eight years.31 The groups consist of young men and women32 with high aspirations 
to be independent and initiate their own farming enterprises. They have a mix of experience in the 
farming and the service sectors. They are likely to need additional capital, technical skills and 
production and marketing support and access to social sector services to make their new venture a 
success and gradually shift their families with them. The Project will also engage with the households 
who settled in these areas several years ago on their own initiative and assist them in expanding their 
farming operations and more importantly in linking with the smallholders for expanding production. 
B.
  Development objective and impact indicators 
  The development goal of the project will be to reduce poverty and enhance food and nutrition 
31.
security in rural areas through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods. The development 
objectives of the project will be to build the resilience of poor rural households to the harsh climate 
conditions in the Matrouh Governorate by improving their productive capacities, assist communities to 
enhance the productive potential of the newly reclaimed lands and assist women and children from 
poor households to improve their nutritional and socio-economic profile. The attaining of these 
objectives is central to Egypt in meeting its Sustainable Development Goals. 
  The project is expected to increase the number of people experiencing economic mobility with 
32.
changes in both income and consumption, food diversity and improvement in the quality of diets; (ii) 
31 A grace period of two years is allowed before the payment of the land cost becomes due in instalments. 
32 It is estimated that the groups comprise of about 20% women members. 
9 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Increase the number of people with greater resilience and (iii) increase the number of people with 
gains in agriculture and non-agriculture products. 
C.
  Outcomes/Components 
Outcomes 
  The project outcomes will include the following; (i) economic mobility and changes in economic 
33.
status including production, income, consumption and improved food diversity; (ii) adoption of new 
and improved inputs, technologies or practices. The project log-frame gives a more detailed list of 
indicators at the outcome, output and impact level. Appendix 4 elaborates the project in more detail. 
Components 
  The Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) Project will consist of two main 
34.
components which will include (i); Climate Resilient Livelihoods (ii) and Integrated Nutrition-sensitive 
Investments. 
  The allocation of resources and facilities under the various components such as roads, schools 
35.
and health facilities will be apportioned between rain-fed Matrouh and the new lands in El Moghra on 
the basis of the needs and demands in the area as agreed in the Annual Work Plan and Budget by 
the Project Steering Committee. An initial allocation of resources between the two has been 
specifically earmarked and indicated in the budget based on the projected needs. Investments in Siwa 
will focus on the Siwa drainage study, investments in social infrastructure, livelihood packages for 
women and dissemination of the tried and tested technologies by DRC through strengthening of its 
research infrastructure. 
Component 1: Climate Resilient Livelihoods (USD 42.535 mn, IFAD USD 32.023 mn) 
  The Climate Resilient Livelihoods component will consist of four sub-components; (i) Water for 
36.
Agriculture and Watershed Management; (ii) Enhancing Connectivity; (iii) Livestock and Rangeland 
Development and (ii) Crop Production. 
 i.
Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management (USD 17.066 mn, IFAD USD  
15.427 mn) 
  Studies have shown that application of supplementary irrigation can appreciably increase crop 
37.
productivity in these rain-fed areas and presents an important measure for adaptation to climate 
change33. The project will invest in 500 water reservoirs with a capacity of 300m3. These reservoirs 
are critical for providing supplementary irrigation in an area where the rainfall pattern is very uncertain. 
Some enterprising households have demonstrated how strategically placed reservoirs can help to 
capture additional water for supplementary irrigation. It is expected that 500 households will benefit 
from supplementary irrigation for inter cropping and vegetable production either along the wadis or on 
farmers' fields which are well placed for the purpose. The project will also assist in the water 
harvesting and watershed management in the wadis. Under this subcomponent, the project will 
undertake watershed development on 100 kms of new and old valley beds or wadis to bring around 
1900 feddans under improved watershed management. Watershed management activities will 
capitalise on the experience of the Desert Research Centre which has enhanced its technical capacity 
for watershed management in the wadis through the construction of various types of check dams with 
masonry structures for water and silt retention and prevention of soil erosion which have helped to 
use the water more efficiently to plant mainly figs and olives for increased food security and incomes 
in the coastal belt. The project will also provide support in the plantation of olives, figs and some of the 
other crop species that have been successfully tested by DRC such as almonds, watermelons, 
zizyphus, caper, etc. 
33 Samiha A. H et al. Management of Climate Induced Drought and Water Scarcity city in Egypt. Pp 27-46. Rain Fed 
Areas in Egypt: Obstacles and Opportunities. May 2016.  
10 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
  The project will provide a limited amount of matching grants to youth groups to defray the initial 
38.
capital cost of developing the new lands until full production34, which can be substantial. While ECDC 
is making arrangements to enable the smallholders to access agriculture credit through the formal 
banking system, it is not yet clear how quickly or easily this will be accessible to them. The private 
sector is also expected to play a role in the provision of some inputs especially drip irrigation systems 
and saplings and recover the cost from future production. However, these efforts will need to be 
supplemented by the project. The costs that will need to be defrayed will typically include the 
development of the on-farm water management system including the installation of drip irrigation 
systems, the erecting of fences around the land perimeter to protect against sand dune 
encroachment, purchase of key inputs like saplings, fertilisers, etc. 
39.
  The matching grants will be provided only to the youth and small-groups based on the following 
selection criterion; (i) The grants will be allocated on first come first serve basis to those with a signed 
contract with ECDC; (ii) the groups have developed and submitted a production plan to ECDC; (iii) 
groups will have to demonstrate that they have a well-defined financing plan that could include their 
own funds, loans and forward contracting with private sector; (iv) Only those groups will be eligible 
who have started farming on the ground and expect to bring 60% of the land under cultivation; (v) the 
matching grants will be prioritized based on the number of shareholders within a group; (v) Equitability 
of shareholding will be given priority and groups where one member has more than 30% of the land 
will not qualify for the matching grant and (vi a maximum of USD 5000 will be provided per 
shareholder in a group. 
  SIWA Drainage Study: IFAD has undertaken several reviews of the irrigation and drainage 
40.
issues in Siwa over the last six months and has also examined the previous studies on the subject. 
The rising levels of salinity and water logging pose a serious threat to agriculture in the Oasis. There 
is a range of options that were examined and discussed with the key stakeholders such as the 
Egyptian Public Authority for Drainage Projects (EPADP), the Chairman of the Groundwater Sector 
(GWS) and other officials of the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI). The issue is 
extremely complex and needs further in-depth study to ensure that the solutions proposed are long-
term and sustainable. Similar issues are beginning to emerge in the other oases in the New Valley 
Governorate such as Kharga and Frafra. 
  While there is a high demand to implement an immediate solution to the problems in Siwa, the 
41.
project will finance a comprehensive analysis of the Siwa Oasis with a detailed feasibility study, 
engineering design and costed plans. The feasibility study will also include an environmental and 
social assessment. IFAD will finance the study under the PRIDE project and select an international 
firm on a competitive basis for the purpose. The MWRI and MALR will both be involved in the 
preparation of the study and the results will help in identifying the technical options, the institutional 
and policy changes regarding digging of new wells and the on-farm water management practices 
required. The study will be used for key policy dialogue with the Government and will be used as a 
prototype for Oases development in Egypt especially in the New Valley Governorate. ECDC will also 
be consulted for the use of the surplus drainage water for new land development envisaged as part of 
the 1.5 million feddan in Siwa in the next phase of the mega Government project. The project and 
IFAD will ensure that key donors (AfDB, World Bank, Italian agency, European Commission among 
others who have been contacted by the design team) will be part of the review committee for the 
study. The implementation arrangements of the recommended actions will be based on the results of 
the study, with the study contributing to developing a prototype for oasis development. 
 ii.
Enhancing Connectivity (USD 14.822 mn, IFAD USD 7.626 mn) 
  Egypt has one of the lowest road network concentrations in the region35 with the Matrouh 
42.
Governorate among the lowest areas of concentration within the country. The project will invest in the 
34 Some salt tolerant fodder species can be grown as annual crops and give relatively quick returns. However, the 
typical crops currently being grown such as Jojoba and pomegranates can take between 3 to 5 years for full maturity.  
35 Misr National Transport Study (MINTS). The Comprehensive Study on The Master Plan for Nationwide Transport 
System in the Arab Republic of Egypt. Technical Report No 1. JICA. March 2012. 
11 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
construction of 250 kilometers of feeder roads with IFAD financing covering 60 percent of total 
investment cost. The rest will be covered by GoE counterpart funding. The identification of the roads 
will be undertaken in close participation with local communities with the assistance of DRC. The 
Master Plan prepared for the Moghra settlement by Reef El Masry will be the basis for the 
identification of roads allocated for Matrouh. The Department of roads and bridges in the Matrouh 
Governorate will prepare the design, BOQs, technical specifications and supervise the process. The 
roads will follow the road design standard given in the Egyptian Code for the Work of Urban and Rural 
Roads. 
iii.
Livestock & Rangeland Development (USD 3.104 mn, IFAD USD 2.615 mn) 
  The main source of income for the smallholders in the Matrouh Governorate is livestock that 
43.
are grazed on extensive rangelands. The rangelands have been depleted due to low production 
capacity, prolonged low rainfall and over-grazing. The project will work together with local 
communities to develop plans for community rangeland development. The project will finance the 
plans which meet a certain criteria that assesses the willingness of the farmers to commit their own 
resources, potential impact, innovation and sustainability. The models that will be used could include 
individual, group and community actions through support for alley production, forage seed production 
and protection of depleted rangelands through a system of rotational grazing measures. DRC has 
rangeland management expertise and will use its previous experience to outline a step-by-step 
approach in the project implementation manual. Each selected community will sign a Terms of 
Partnership with DRC under which the responsibility of the community and DRC will be clearly 
identified. The community actions will include a clear articulation of the plan including participating 
households, area to be closed for free grazing, area to be planted and monitored for regeneration of 
indigenous species, area to be prepared for plantation and a joint community agreement on 
supervision and monitoring of the rangeland plans and progress. DRC will provide technical 
assistance, seeds of palatable plant species and other inputs subject to certain milestones being met 
at each stage of the implementation of the community plans. 
  The project will also strengthen the farmer capacity to enhance the productivity of the small 
44.
ruminant herds of sheep and goats through breed improvement and training on improved 
management and feeding practices. The project will provide 120 rams and feed for them during the 
project period. DRC will implement a breed improvement plan in close collaboration with the 
smallholder farmers and private breeders. The breed improvement plan will also entail the signature 
of a Terms of Partnership under which DRC will provide improved rams to selected communities 
which agree to abide by the terms and conditions of partnership. The communities will oversee the 
agreement while individual farmers will implement the programme. The farmers will rent the rams from 
DRC and ensure their circulation within the smallholder farmer if they do not have enough flocks for 
breeding. The rams will be provided to participating communities and households just before the start 
of the mating season in May and returned at the end of each season. Each ram is expected to serve 
33 ewes in each season. The payment for the use of the ram will be in the form of an off-spring from 
the improved Barqi or Damascus breed. The combination of the improved project rams and those with 
the farming communities are expected to cover the entire small ruminant population over the seven-
year project period. DRC will make a proper breed plan and include it in the PIM at the start of the 
programme and develop suitable mechanisms to monitor and track progress. The Project will also 
provide mobile veterinary services through DRC, which has shown the capacity for much wider 
outreach to the hinterlands. 
45.
  The project will also assist the small-farmers in El-Moghra to establish livestock activities 
through technical assistance, training and support. Investment in aquaculture has proved to be a 
viable investment given the need to build sedimentation ponds to settle the excess iron in some of the 
wells in Moghra. Farmers have found that these ponds can provide an important source of income 
through fish farming and sale to the adjoining areas of Al Alamein. Some of the private sector farmers 
and companies which are currently located in Moghra have invested in appropriate livestock. 
Technical assistance will be provided to the farming communities to explore some viable livestock 
production activities. 
12 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
iv. Crop Production (USD 7.543 mn and IFAD USD 6.356 mn) 
  The horticulture production and marketing sub-component will work with smallholders to 
46.
improve the productivity of the figs and olives in the coastal areas. Under this component, the project 
will provide training on orchard management including soil tillage and soil fertility management, water 
management, integrated pest management, pruning and harvesting. The training will be given to both 
men and women along with tool kits for harvesting and pruning. The training approach will include 
demonstrations on farmer fields as well as field visits and exchange visits. DRC will be supported in 
disseminating the technologies it has developed to the farmers and in undertaking a stronger role in 
applied research of relevance to the smallholders in desert environments. The capacity of DRC and 
the agriculture department to monitor soil, water and leaf analysis will be strengthened by providing 
them with improved technology and equipment and use this to guide smallholder farmers. 
  The project will also assist the newly settled youth and small farmer groups in Moghra with 
47.
technical advice on sustainable agriculture practices based on an evaluation of soil and water analysis 
in the area. Studies undertaken in the area by the Desert Research Centre show that the geological 
conditions of the oasis are very varied and the availability of water and the concentration of salt 
differs, based on the location within the area. Salinity levels range from 2000 to 8000 ppm. The 
project will provide technical assistance and training to farmers in El Moghra for species and varieties 
suitable under saline and water stress conditions such as jojoba, olives, pomegranate, selected 
fodder varieties, etc., The project will contribute to the creation of a bio saline centre for services to 
the new farmers in El Moghra area. The project will provide specialised technical assistance through 
providing support to organizations like ICBA, DRC, ARC, etc. ICBA is planning to establish a 
specialized platform for research and development of saline environments and has signed a MOU 
with ECDC. The MALR will be supported in disseminating the technologies that they have developed 
on their various research stations to the farmers and in undertaking a stronger role in applied research 
of relevance to the smallholders in desert environments. 
48.
  Technical assistance and research support will be provided to all investors in El Moghra who 
request it to ensure the sustainability of the farming practices in the area. This type of investment is 
considered a public good and will focus more on determining the water and soil quality, aquifer 
recharge levels, suitability of planting different types of crops given the salt and mineral content of the 
water. Thus, those agencies which submit proposals for research and pilot testing of certain crop 
varieties or monitor water and soil quality will be expected to disseminate the findings of the research 
to all farming companies, groups and individuals in the area. Specific provision will be made in the 
proposals to identify the dissemination strategies. 
49.
  A Central PMU within MALR will invite proposals for the new lands from agencies such as DRC, 
ARC, ICBA and any other NGO or private sector partner for assistance to the farmers in the area. The 
selection of the proposals will be based on the following criteria; (i) utilising the scarce water 
resources efficiently; (iv) utilising saline water innovatively for the production of saline tolerant crop 
and livestock enterprises; (iii) disseminate and up-scale tested crop and livestock production 
technologies for desert environment, (iv) providing technical advice through well documented 
research for desert environments and saline agriculture; (v) water and soil quality monitoring and 
recommendations on viable options for sustainability of the farming systems; (vi) Generating 
employment for the youth; (vii) introducing high value added services along the value chain such as 
input supply and output marketing such as sorting, grading, processing; (viii) building the skills and 
capacity of youth and smallholder farmers to provide skills for new land development. 
Component 2: Integrated Nutrition-Sensitive Investments (USD 31.52 mn, IFAD USD 25.076) 
  Given the socio-economic profile of the population in the Matrouh Governorate, particularly the 
50.
situation of women and children, this component will promote the equality and empowerment of 
women in ways that help them improve nutrition for themselves, their children and their families by 
providing a comprehensive package which includes access to domestic water and sanitation, Moringa 
trees around the homestead that improves nutrition and access to basic social sector and income 
13 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
generating opportunities for women. This component will consist of three sub-components: (i) Water 
for Health (ii) Empowerment of Women for Nutritional Change (iii) Social Infrastructure. 
i.  Water for Health (USD 14.76 mn, IFAD USD 11.96 mn) 
  There is acute water shortage in the Governorate estimated to be around 56% of the domestic 
51.
needs of the area. The domestic water supply sub-component will increase the availability of domestic 
water by providing 6000 cisterns (120 m3) and 700 reservoirs (150 m3) at the homesteads for the 
harvesting of rainwater. The project will also support the rehabilitation of 100 Roman Cisterns 
(between 500 to 1000 m3) that are used for drinking for both humans and livestock. This will promote 
women and children’s health and nutrition status and result in saving of women’s time and labour as 
they are primarily responsible for fetching water. While women’s mobility is generally restricted, 
households do not inhibit women when it comes to fetching water. Women-headed households, in 
particular, often walk long distances for water. The interventions in water supply will contribute to 
availability and access to safe drinking water. 
52.
  The community is well versed in the construction of these cisterns and reservoirs, as well as the 
rehabilitation of Roman cisterns. DRC has well- established capacity to implement the activities in this 
subcomponent and have successfully managed and supervised it for different projects in the past. 
  The project will also install desalinization plants in Al Moghra. In locating these plants, the 
53.
project will coordinate with ECDC and locate them based on its Master Plan and locate them in close 
proximity to areas with the highest concentration of new settlers who have initiated farming activities 
and are on the ground. 
ii.  Women’s Empowerment for Nutritional Change (USD 7.631 mn  
and IFAD USD 6.478 mn) 
  This subcomponent will seek to raise the nutritional status of households, particularly women 
54.
and children through integrating a number of interventions that will increase access to nutritious food 
and increase awareness for improved choices in nutrition. Electronic tablets will be used as an 
engaging platform for disseminating carefully researched, high quality behaviour change material and 
increase in literacy as an empowering tool. The nutrition and livelihood packages will provide access 
to protein rich foods through support for pigeon towers, poultry, goat packages and handicraft support 
for 3000 women. The project will introduce the Moringa tree also known in Egypt as the Tree of Life 
due its high content of essential vitamins and minerals to 5000 households. 
  These packages will increase household consumption of protein rich diets and make a modest, 
55.
yet significant, contribution to women’s incomes in a desert environment in which women’s livelihood 
opportunities are highly restricted. In areas such as Siwa, where women are involved in a range of 
handicraft activities such as basket weaving, clay ovens, silver jewellery, date-honey production, cloth 
weaving, etc., 400 women will be supported to increase their purchasing power and enable them to 
secure better nutrition, healthcare and education opportunities for themselves and their children. 
Literacy classes will be provided to 2000 young girls/women. Secondary evidence provides a wealth 
of information on the impact of literacy as a tool for empowerment, increased life expectancy, reduced 
child mortality and improved children’s health.36 Literacy with health-nutrition components allows 
women to improve their futures and the future of their families. A specialized NGO will be hired 
to develop and implement many of the activities of this component and a behaviour change strategy 
based on research relevant for Matrouh (See Appendix 5). 
  The mission shared its approach with WHO and UNICEF and they endorsed the integrated 
56.
approach to nutrition-sensitive investments being adopted by the project and WHO offered to provide 
technical oversight to the project for the nutrition activities based on their experience in the country. 
WHO offered to sign a Memorandum of Understanding for the purpose, if required. This arrangement 
will not have any cost implications for the project. 
36 UNESCO (2006), EFA Global Monitoring Report 2006: Literacy for Life.  
14 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
iii.  Social Infrastructure (USD 9.129 mn, IFAD USD 6.289 mn) 
  This subcomponent will contribute to increasing access to health and education, particularly for 
57.
women and children. While these activities are not part of IFAD’s normal package of investments, 
without them, the overall impact and sustainability of the project investments will be restricted due to 
the extremely vulnerable situation of women and girls in the area. These investments are expected to 
have a high value added on their own and provide a strong entry point for engaging the forgotten 
women of these tribal communities. These facilities will have women staff in all key positions such as 
teachers, doctors, nurses, etc. 
  The location of these facilities will be coordinated with the responsible line agencies of the 
58.
Government in Matrouh, the Central PMU, DRC and also accord with the Master plan of ECDC for 
investments in Moghra.  
  The practice of open defecation is widespread leading to the danger of deadly faecal-oral 
59.
diseases, and compromising the health, dignity, and very often safety of women and girls. Poor 
households are unable to afford latrines, with particularly dire health consequences for women. 
Therefore, a key intervention of the project will be the provision of 3000 latrines to promote hygiene 
and sanitation in the communities. 
60.
Lack of access to health is another key constraint for women in these remote areas. 
Households are often at distances of 30-50 km from health units and a combination of poverty and 
restrictive cultural norms, severely limits access of women and children to even basic medical 
services. The project will build 3 health units and provide five mobile health units which will be 
managed by the health department with operating support from the project. One of the mobile units 
will be designated for Moghra and provide emergency health services to the new farmers who will be 
relocating to the area. In time, one of health units will be permanently located in Moghra once a 
sufficient number of people have settled in the area. 
  There was a strong demand from the community for access to community-based elementary 
61.
schools in close proximity to their villages in both Siwa and along the coast. The project will also 
invest in the education of children, particularly girls. Many girls are deprived of even a primary 
education due to the distance from schools and cultural norms, which do not allow them to be taught 
by male teachers provided by the Government. The project will build 15 multi-grade schools and staff 
them with women teachers by providing adequate incentives. It will also build 3 high-schools as there 
is a paucity of high schools in the area. The Education department in the Governorate of Matrouh has 
committed to taking over these facilities and operating them upon completion of construction. This 
intervention has the opportunity of promoting nutrition outcomes through the integration of nutrition 
education, messaging and promotion of WASH activities. 
  Employment of youth: The project will provide young men training in the construction of 
62.
cisterns, reservoirs, pruning of olives, date palms and figs, production of saplings and nursery 
management, watershed management and rangeland development. The project will assist DRC in 
recruiting young men to work on its research farms and in the implementation of project activities as 
apprentices. Those candidates who do well will be provided with kits and tools to enable them to 
generate an income through provision of services to the community. Similarly, the project will also 
explore opportunities for training youth for provision of the range of vocational skills required by 
investors and small holders on the newly reclaimed lands such as electricians, plumbers, pruners, 
harvesters, carpenters, construction workers, etc. The project can use its resources to sponsor 
training for the youth. The implementation of this intervention will explore possible integration of 
nutrition awareness and messages during capacity building.  
  Technological innovations that will be included in the project will include (i) the use of electronic 
63.
tablets for the dissemination of messages for women for behaviour change; (ii) MIS system which will 
be tablet based and will record a GIS referenced monitoring and evaluation system for greater 
transparency, accountability and accuracy; (iii) An android based system for tracking water and soil 
15 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
quality and following the trends in different location to provide technical advice to farmers on farming 
practices; (iv) introduction of a range of solar and energy saving technologies on the new lands.  
64.
  The electronic tablets will be instrumental in transmitting nutrition messages including healthy 
eating, feeding practices, proper hygiene practices, nutritious diet preparation, the importance of safe 
drinking water and preventive healthcare measures like maintenance of personal hygiene, and other 
related nutrition-health based information. These apps can also be used in the women literacy 
program for promoting health eating. 
D.
  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
  The lessons from the experience of IFAD’s on-going and completed projects as well as its 
65.
experience from its grant funded projects and the findings from the most recent Country Programme 
Evaluation (CPE) undertaken in 2016 by the Office of Evaluations have been considered in the 
current design. These lessons guide the implementation arrangements, targeting, components, 
opportunities for policy dialogue and knowledge management. Appendix 3 describes the lessons 
learnt and Appendix 12 outlines the adherence to relevant IFAD policies. 
  Some of the important lessons that emerge from this analysis include the following; (i) Project 
66.
Management arrangements within the MALR need to be strengthened as a lean PMU is economical 
but has trade-offs in terms of effectiveness; (ii) Use of existing institutions and implementation 
arrangements enhances the sustainability of project interventions and can expedite start-up; (iii) 
Greater efficiency and effectiveness can be realized through focusing projects in a concentrated area 
and not spread them over a large geographic area; (iv) Greater support and funding is required for 
funding and support to capacity building; (v) Dedicated resources and staff for women’s participation 
ensures the likelihood of their inclusion in project activities; (vi) A multi-pronged strategy to address 
the exclusion of women is required through facilitating access to basic rural services, infrastructure 
and improved rural water supply; (vii) Special strategy is required to include youth in a participatory 
manner in project activities; (viii) Sanitation and waste treatment has been insufficiently addressed in 
IFAD projects; (ix) Concentrated delivery of an integrated package of support is required to make 
projects effective in the new lands; (x) Greater investment in rural institutions should be the key 
starting point for all project activities and should provide the anchor for all investments; (xi) Greater 
focus on linking farmers with markets through the private sector. 
  The current design has also incorporated some of the key lessons from the Implementation 
67.
Completion Report (ICR)37 of the World Bank financed Matrouh Resource Management Project. The 
ICR rated the overall performance of the project as satisfactory and noted the positive impact of the 
project on water resource management, crop and livestock productivity as well as communal 
rangeland management. The ICR noted that the project was significantly delayed in getting off the 
ground and that its rural finance component was a failure. The lessons that it identified from its 
experience include the following; (i) multi-sectoral/multi-disciplinary approach in natural resource 
management and poverty alleviation projects is more likely to lead to achievement of objectives than 
the single-sector projects of the past and requires the use of multi-disciplinary teams; (ii) participatory 
project implementation requires flexible budgeting that is not constrained by predetermined outputs, 
but relies on a truly demand-driven identification of activities, in order for the participatory planning 
and implementation approach to be fully responsive to beneficiary demands; (iii) Given the time 
required for community-level discussion and negotiation to agree on beneficiary priorities, full-time 
dedicated and skilled staff should be assigned to interface with communities and support their process 
of organization; (iv) Rural credit programs, particularly in remote areas, require innovative 
mechanisms that adapt to constraints such as collateral, religious views to interest rate payment and 
need for credit delivery at lowest levels38; (v) Targeting the poorest segments of the society can be a 
challenging process where communities have strong traditional structures, and requires time, clear 
monitoring mechanisms and strong engagement with the tribal organization; (vi) Community 
37 Implementation Completion Report (IDA-25040). Matruh Resource Management Project. June 3, 2003. World Bank.  
38 The Projects rural finance component was declared a failure and eventually cancelled. 
16 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
rangeland management may be a more suitable approach than activities targeting individual farmers, 
but requires more initial time to be invested in negotiation and conflict resolution. 
68.
  Adherence to IFAD Policies: IFAD’s fifth Strategic Framework covers the period 2016-2025. It 
serves as an overarching policy guideline to provide direction to IFAD’s work, and as a key instrument 
for consolidating IFAD’s development effectiveness. The current project is well aligned to meeting its 
overall goal and with its five principles of engagement namely that IFAD-supported programmes will 
consistently aim to target and benefit the largest number of poor rural people possible, empower them 
socially and economically, and promote gender equality. IFAD will place a premium on innovation, 
learning and scaling up of successes and, in the process, leverage effective and efficient partnerships 
where comparative advantages are exploited for greater impact. The PRIDE tries to incorporate these 
key principles of engagement. 
IFAD’s poverty targeting and gender sensitive design and implementation guidelines updated in 
69.
January 2013 were also completed for the Project. Women and youth are given a central role in the 
project design and dedicated staff, specific targets and separate budget line items have been 
allocated for them. IFAD’s climate change strategy39 recognizes that the speed and intensity of 
climate change are outpacing the ability of poor rural people and societies to cope. The current project 
takes cognisance of the fact that poor rural people are in the front line of climate change impacts; the 
ecosystems and biodiversity on which they rely are increasingly being degraded. The project 
incorporates IFAD’s assessment that climate-related risks, and potential opportunities, can be 
addressed more systematically within its projects and policy advice. The current design is in full 
accord with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy, which places strong 
emphasis on further developing and strengthening the linkages of smallholder farmers with the private 
sector. The model of development in El Moghra follows a private sector led approach in which large 
companies with external links to both domestic and export markets assist the smallholders in 
aggregating production to meet market demand through contract farming arrangements. 
  Environmental and Social Category: The proposed project is classified as Category B under 
70.
IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP), as a small-scale, rural 
development project with no potentially significant adverse social or environmental impacts. Any 
adverse project impacts will be minor and site-specific in nature and can readily be remedied by 
appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. Such measures will be identified on a 
case-by-case basis during project implementation employing the project’s Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will describe the potential environmental and social 
impacts and risks of various project interventions and prescribe the preventive actions and mitigation 
measures, as well as their anticipated costs, to be incorporated into the design of sub-projects and 
activities. Moreover, the potential social and environmental benefits of the project’s interventions, in 
terms of alleviating poverty and enhancing food security, conserving fragile natural resources and 
building resilience to climate change impacts in project areas, more than outweigh any potential 
adverse impacts resulting from them. These benefits will be directly derived from the project’s 
investments in infrastructure for water harvesting and wadi management, efficient use of scarce water 
especially in Moghra, monitoring water and soil quality for ensuring sustainable crop choices, 
promotion of rangeland restoration, improving breeds for emphasis on livestock productivity, good 
agricultural practices for figs, olives and other key crops, support for improved nutrition and alternative 
livelihoods for women and children, and expanded access to social services for households in the 
project areas. The project will ensure that its interventions comply with IFAD’s Natural Resources 
Management, Climate Change and Land Policies and relevant SECAP Guidance Statements, as well 
as with the relevant laws and policies of the Government of Egypt. 
  As an extra safety measure, an Environmental and Social Management Framework will be 
71.
developed- to examine the potential risks and impacts of the subprojects (wadi development, rural 
roads, water reservoirs etc.). An ESMF annotated outline is given in Annex 4. The project will also 
39 Climate Change Strategy. IFAD, May 2010. 
17 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
recruit an environmental specialist/ climate change specialist who will oversee the implementation of 
the ESMF. A special budget for technical assistance for the ESFM has been identified on an annual 
basis to enable on-going assessment in collaboration with IFAD's Environment and Climate Division. 
Overall, DRC staff (and relevant staff from the central PMU) will be provided capacity building efforts 
on safeguards issues (already a specialisation in the DRC team). Environmental and social audits as 
part of environmental/ social/ climate assessments will be undertaken during the project life. More in-
depth assessments will be conducted during the Mid-Term Review and Project Completion. 
  Climate Risk Category: The proposed project areas are expected to experience risks of 
72.
adverse impacts of climate change in the coming decades, ranging from sea level rise along the 
Mediterranean coast to decreasing and more erratic precipitation with increasing temperatures over 
the areas. These climate change impacts will make the already harsh conditions for humans, animals 
and agriculture in the project areas even more harsh, putting additional stress on the water-stressed 
natural resource base and the human and animal populations that depend on it. Egypt’s Third 
National Communication under the UNFCCC (2016) recognized the vulnerability of the agricultural 
sector to climate change and identified a number of major negative impacts anticipated in the coming 
decades: (i) expected rise in temperature and changes in seasonal patterns of precipitation resulting 
in decreasing productivity of crops and livestock, as well as changes in environmental agricultural 
zones; (ii) adverse impacts on marginal agricultural areas and increasing desertification rates; (iii) 
higher temperatures increasing water evaporation and water consumption; (iv) socio-economic 
impacts such as increasing migration of labour from marginal and coastal areas; and (v) expected sea 
level rise resulting in negative effects on coastal areas, tourism and agricultural lands. 
73.
  The proposed project’s Climate Risk Classification is Moderate according to IFAD’s SECAP 
climate risk classifications. The project’s interventions will not be expected to increase the vulnerability 
of target populations and resources to climate hazards. On the contrary, the project will actually 
strengthen resilience to climate change impacts in the project areas. Because of the desert and oasis 
locations of its project areas, the project recognizes that its interventions are vulnerable to climate-
related hazards. Climate trends in recent decades and future climate scenarios for the Matrouh 
Governorate indicate the vulnerability of the project’s wadi management, horticulture and rangeland 
activities to climate hazards such as extreme droughts, flash floods, etc. Expected decreases in 
precipitation and shortening of growing seasons in the rainfed areas of Matrouh will threaten the 
cultivation of both tree crops and cereals, and increases in temperature in the Siwa oasis will 
jeopardize date palm production. 
  Many of the project’s interventions already represent climate adaptation measures, e.g. water 
74.
harvesting and wadi water and soil retention infrastructure, restoration and management of 
rangelands with native fodder species, promotion of good agricultural practices and research on 
drought-resistant and salt-tolerant varieties for crop production particularly in El Moghra with its high 
levels of salinity. In addition, the project will install basic climate monitoring stations in a number of the 
project districts to enable the DRC to monitor temperature and precipitation and share such 
information with the local population. The project will also investigate incorporation of additional 
actions, consistent with measures identified in Egypt’s National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate 
Change and Disaster Risk Reduction (2011) and its Third National Communication under the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2016). 
  SECAP Considerations in the Project Design: The proposed project has fully integrated 
75.
relevant SECAP considerations into its project design, among them addressing the vulnerability and 
adaptation priorities for rural people, promoting sustainable use of natural resources, emphasizing the 
participation of and benefits to women and youth, and promoting sound agricultural processes. The 
project’s design also includes development of an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to ensure site-specific review of potential environmental and social impacts/risks (including 
those to cultural heritage) of sub-projects (wadi development, rural roads, water reservoirs, etc.) and 
identification of appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures to address them (including 
managing “chance finds” of cultural significance). The ESMF will also specify public disclosure 
18 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
requirements for project activities and sub-projects and establish (or build on existing) local grievance 
mechanisms for addressing, in a timely and fair manner, potential conflicts/concerns raised by project-
affected people. A SECAP Review note is given in Annex 1 and an annotated Table of contents for the 
ESMF is in Annex 4. 
  The project’s emphasis on social and environmental benefits, as well as climate adaptation 
76.
measures to build climate resilience, is reflected in both project components. The first component’s 
investments in water harvesting, wadi development, efficient water use, rural roads, support for 
livestock and rangeland development, breed improvement, crop production and use of salt tolerant 
varieties and research on better adaptation of agriculture to local conditions, will result in social 
benefits in terms of increased farm incomes and improved food security. The component’s 
environmental benefits and climate adaptation measures are reflected as well, in terms of improved 
water resources management, enhanced rangeland conservation and good on-farm agricultural 
practices (including water-use efficiency and integrated pest and crop management). The second 
component’s investments in domestic water supply, improved nutrition and health, diversification of 
livelihoods for women, and provision of basic social infrastructure (schools, health units and latrines) 
and employment training for youth will primarily result in social benefits by enhancing the overall 
health and well-being of families in project areas. 
III. Project implementation 
A.
  Approach 
77.
  Community Driven Development: The PRIDE project will be implemented over a seven-year 
period and will adopt a community–driven development approach. This approach will be implemented 
throughout the project area with slight modifications. The approach with the tribal communities in the 
coastal areas will build on the participatory approach initiated in the Matrouh Governorate by the 
World Bank in its first investment in the area, which is still used by the Desert Research Centre in 
interacting with the 43 local communities in the area. This approach will organize communities on the 
basis of their tribal affiliations given the strong allegiance to tribal identity. A Mandoub, who is the head 
of each extended family and represents it. The project will build on this approach with due safeguards 
in place to ensure equity and targeting of the IFAD target group in the distribution of project 
investments. 
  Participatory Approach: Taking into account the differences among stakeholders in the 
78.
various project areas, the project will initiate stakeholder consultations to ensure equitable 
participation by communities in all aspects of planning, design and implementation of project activities 
and sub-projects. The implementing agencies and service providers implementing project activities 
will carefully document continuous and meaningful stakeholder consultation throughout project 
implementation. DRC, the NGO and those implementing the project activities in EL Moghra will all be 
required to consult with communities and in particular the vulnerable sections of the communities 
especially women and youth. 
  Private Sector led Approach: In the newly reclaimed areas of El Moghra, the project will work 
79.
with the youth and smallholder groups who are organized in small formal companies. The project will 
capitalize on the opportunity to adopt a private sector led approach by facilitating linkages between 
the large investors and the smallholder youth companies in El Moghra. The large investors see an 
opportunity to partner with the youth companies to enhance their production and meet the high export 
demand for crops grown in the area such as Jojoba and pomegranates. Partnership with the youth 
companies enables them to aggregate production and capture a larger share of the market. The youth 
companies can benefit significantly from the symbiotic relationship with the large investors to realize 
economies of scale, learn from their experience, negotiate contractual farming arrangements and link 
them with markets. This model could provide key lessons for the development of farming on new 
lands in other areas of the country as well. 
19 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
  Demand Driven Approach: The implementation approach of the project will be demand driven 
80.
to ensure that project investments are valued and sustained by the beneficiaries. Terms of partnership 
will be specified for participation in each area of intervention including physical infrastructure, cisterns, 
reservoirs, drip irrigation systems on new lands, sand dune encroachment fences, roads, training and 
demonstrations, community rangeland plans and breed improvement, livelihood and nutrition 
packages and social sector services. These terms will specify the role and responsibility of each 
implementing partner, beneficiaries and Government line agencies for those investments like schools, 
health units and mobile health and veterinary services which are the mandate of Government. The 
monitoring and reporting responsibilities of each partner will also be specified.  
  Geographical Targeting: The project will be implemented in the rural areas of the six districts 
81.
or marakiz of Matrouh Governorate: Marsa Matrouh, El Negila, El Barrani, El Saloum, El Dabaa, Siwa 
and in the El Moghra settlement in El Alamein in the 60,000 feddan of newly reclaimed lands allocated 
to youth groups. The selected areas are relatively poor areas despite the growing tourist industry 
along the coast. The project investments in these districts will consider the relative poverty levels in 
the districts while determining the volume of support. The two poorest districts, El Saloum and El 
Nagila will receive 25 percent each of the cisterns, latrines, nutrition and livelihood packages and 
literacy classes. Within the project area, DRC will plot and geo-reference the household clusters, 
which will constitute the units for planning interventions for women given that women’s mobility is 
restricted to these clusters. The project will also plot the existing cisterns and sanitation facilities in the 
homestead to support transparent targeting. The budget for El Moghra has been separately 
earmarked for the youth and smallholder groups in this new settlement. 
82.
  Direct Targeting Approach: The project will adopt a direct poverty targeting approach in 
providing its investments at the household level. In providing water for agriculture and watershed 
management, an important criteria for allocating reservoirs for irrigation and wadi development will be 
that at least eighty percent of farmers will be small-holder farmers with 50 to 100 trees.40 The project 
will have a sharp poverty and vulnerability focus in targeting the cisterns, livelihood packages, 
sanitation facilities and mobile health units to disadvantaged women. Houses will be prioritized and 
selected for cisterns, livelihood packages and sanitation facilities on the basis of a poverty score. The 
project will support the construction of rural roads and other social sector services by prioritizing the 
needs of remote communities 
  The On-farm water management support in El Moghra will be given exclusively to the youth 
83.
who have established companies for farming and investing in the newly reclaimed lands in the 
Moghra settlement. A criteria has also been specified for this in detail in the foregoing sections and 
includes equity within the groups, number of members, first come first serve basis and progress on 
the ground.  
  A poverty scoring system will be detailed and used to screen participants in project villages. 
84.
Households will be screened and assigned a poverty score that will be based on the following 
determinants of poverty and nutrition vulnerability: (i) women-headed household: this will include 
widows, divorcees and women whose husbands are too ill to earn an income (ii) dependency ratio (iii) 
education level of women and (iv) distance from existing health unit (v) number of children under five. 
Beneficiaries will be geo-referenced to promote transparency and accountability. Mobile health units 
will prioritize clusters of households living over 30 km away from a health unit. 
  Gender and Targeting Action Plan: The gender strategy of the project will be sensitive to the 
85.
specific nature of women’s constraints in Matrouh and focus on affirmative action to increase their 
level of empowerment, well-being and visibility as development actors. The empowerment of women 
will be ensured through a range of strategies. Targets will be set for women’s participation in all key 
activities with women and women-headed households receiving priority. A gender and targeting action 
plan will be formulated at the implementation stage by the PMU with implementation partners and 
reviewed on a yearly basis. The project will be sensitive to arrangements required to enable 
40 Trees are a better indicator of poverty than land to the highly variable productivity of land. 
20 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
women/girls to participate – such as arranging literacy, health and nutrition sessions as well as 
training in fig and olive harvesting at the cluster level given the limitations on women’s mobility, 
providing incentives for mobile health clinics and one-room schools to be staffed by women. 
  The terms of reference for staff and technical experts will include responsibilities for following 
86.
the gender strategy of the project. The PMU will be required to recruit Women’s Programme 
Specialists at DRC to work at the district level, and a short term Gender Specialist for the PMU on a 
periodic basis. An NGO with experience in working with women will be recruited for assisting in 
implementation of project activities targeted at women. The monitoring and evaluation framework will 
include indicators disaggregated by sex to track the project’s performance in promoting women’s 
empowerment in terms of their capacity-building, grant packages and other investments. The 
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) tool and key questions from the Women's 
Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI) will also be incorporated. Any studies undertaken by the 
project will address gender issues and disaggregate data collection, analysis and findings by gender. 
A gender assessment of project activities will be conducted prior to the mid-term review. A poverty and 
gender specialist will be included in the yearly supervision missions, Mid-Term Review and Project 
Completion Mission. 
  Overall, the project will strongly contribute to the objectives of IFAD's Gender Policy. This 
87.
includes directly addressing two of the three dimensions: economic empowerment (through the 
livelihood packages) and reduction of drudgery (through the provision of sanitation/ WASH facilities 
and water for domestic usage). With regard to promoting representation/ decision-making, based on 
an in-depth assessment of local contexts and the extremely oppressive conditions at present, it was 
decided that this will be addressed at a later stage of the project to work through a gradual approach. 
However, some women's groups will be promoted in the management of the WASH facilities, 
education and health units, and through the livelihood/ pigeon packages.  
  Self-selection: The project interventions for horticulturists and livestock farmers such as 
88.
provision of training and extension services, support for cooperatives and companies through training 
and provision of small equipment will principally be attractive for small-holder horticulturists and small 
ruminant farmers who have challenges with orchard and livestock management and limited access to 
training and extension services. Similarly, in the newly reclaimed lands, the project will work with 
those new settlers who self-select themselves and indicate their commitment to developing the new 
lands. The project will ensure that the selection of cooperatives and companies will be based on a 
criterion that measures their commitment and capacity for sustaining project investments. The Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM) will ensure appropriate phasing of project activities with both the farmer 
groups, cooperatives and companies in the project area 
B.
  Organizational framework 
89.
  National Level: The Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation will be the lead agency 
responsible for the implementation of the project. The project will have a Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) at the National Level. It is expected that the MALR will activate the PSC prior to the initiation of 
operations on the ground. The PSC will have as its members the MALR, the Ministry of Water 
Resources and Irrigation (MWRI), MIIC, the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, Ministry of 
Environment, ARC, DRC, ECDC and a representative of the Governorate of Matrouh. The PSC will 
also include as observers, one or two representatives of the Association of the youth farmer 
companies of El Moghra. The PSC will also include technical resource people to be nominated by the 
MALR. The PSC will meet at least once a year and provide guidance on key technical and 
programmatic aspects. The National Project Coordinator will be the Secretary of the PSC. Appendix 5 
describes the project implementation arrangements. 
  Central Project Management Unit: A Central Project Management Unit will be established in 
90.
Cairo at the MALR and will assume the overall responsibility for the implementation of the project, on 
the ground. This PMU will provide the basis for establishing a consolidated approach to programme 
management for the country programme in the future. The staff in this unit will be competitively 
21 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
recruited from project resources and work on a full time basis in managing and supervising project 
activities. The PMU will be staffed with a dedicated National Project Coordinator, financial, 
procurement, M&E specialists. Short-term technical expertise will be used for cross-cutting issues of 
poverty and gender targeting, environmental assessment and other technical areas. The best staff 
available will be recruited for the crucial management roles. IFAD and the IFAD Country Office will 
follow up with the relevant Ministries (MIIC and MALR) to ensure that these positions are filled as 
soon as possible after project approval (within 3 months of signing). 
  The Central PMU will supervise project activities being implemented by DRC in the coastal 
91.
areas and Siwa, which will be implemented by DRC with support from an NGO for the women’s 
activities and government line agencies. The Central PMU will be directly involved in the 
implementation of the project activities in the newly reclaimed lands in El Moghra in coordination with 
the Agriculture Research Centre, DRC, the line Ministries and the facilitation and support of ECDC. 
The PMU will provide quality assurance and monitoring and evaluation and supervision for all project 
activities.  
92.
  For the settled communities in Matrouh, the project activities will be implemented by the 
Sustainable Development Resource Centre for Matrouh (SDRCM) of the DRC which has previous 
experience of managing the World Bank and EU funded projects in the area. The project will use the 
existing five Extension and Support Units of DRC, its research farms in Siwa at the district level and 
will establish an additional unit in El Dabaa. These units will be provided operational support for the 
implementation of project activities. The funds provided under the project are significantly higher than 
DRC has been receiving from the Government and its capacity for effective utilization will be 
considerably enhanced under the project. While DRC has a large staff in Matrouh, they have had 
limited resources to spend from the normal Government budget. Thus the DRC capacity to implement 
the project, procure and manage the financial resources, monitoring and engaging with women will be 
enhanced through technical assistance and field support and additional field staff. This will also 
include environmental, social and climate change specialists to oversee implementation of the ESMF 
and manage the climate monitoring stations. 
  Based on the skills needed to implement the project in the Matrouh area, DRC will use the 
93.
following categories of staff; (i) a core team from within the existing DRC pool of 230 staff members; 
(ii) Additional staff to be competitively recruitment from the market and (iii) part-time staff from among 
the DRC existing pool. The core staff will work on the project on a full time basis and will be paid from 
the Government budget. The salaries of additional staff hired for the project will be paid from the 
project budget. DRC will designate the staff needed by the project from among the DRC existing pool 
on a part time basis.41 The part-time staff will have to submit quarterly time sheets for time spent on 
project activities with a clear indication of tasks undertaken. Government will pay the salaries of the 
full-time and part-time DRC staff while the project will only cover incentives for them. Appendix 5 gives 
the details of the positions and the project budget provides for the additional costs of salaries and 
stipends. 
  An NGO will be competitively recruited to implement the activities targeted at women under the 
94.
empowerment for nutritional change sub-component. There are a few NGOs which have been active 
in Matrouh such as Misr El Kheir Foundation, Kenana, etc. Misr El Kheir was created in 2007 and its 
core programmes including health, education, science technology and innovation, social solidarity and 
life enhancing skills. The NGO Kenana conducts educational and training programs and offers literacy 
programmes, health services, and environment awareness seminars. These organizations recognize 
the importance of empowering women and especially female heads of households. Some of these 
organizations have emerged as influential grassroots and environment focused NGOs, and a leading 
advocate for women's rights. In its first year the Central PMU will advertise for the services of a 
qualified NGO to implement the literacy and nutrition awareness programmes for women. 
41 A tentative list of positions has been given in the detailed budget.  
22 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
  The programme for the new lands in El Moghra will be coordinated by the central PMU in 
95.
Egypt. The Central PMU will work in close collaboration with a host of line agencies for the purpose. 
The Agriculture Research Centre, DRC, ICBA, FAO, etc., government line agencies and private sector 
companies can implement project activities based on acceptance of proposals by the Project Steering 
Committee for access to the funding provided under the project. The PSC will initiate a call for 
proposals to assist the youth companies in El Moghra and qualify the selected proposals based on a 
criterion specified in the relevant sections of the report. ICBA is interested in working in El Moghra and 
has submitted a concept note to ECDC for assessing the potential for bio-saline agriculture. DRC has 
also indicated its interest in establishing a research centre in Moghra. The local line agencies of 
Agriculture, Livestock, Health and Education, Roads and bridges will implement activities in El Mogha 
which can be financed from the project budget under coordination and approval by the Central PMU. 
  ECDC is the main agency responsible for allocation of land to the selected groups. The project 
96.
has no direct role in the land allocation or titling decisions. The project will only provide the support 
services after group formation and land allocation to the youth companies. ECDC will facilitate the 
PRIDE project implementation in the following ways; (i) share the data on the 252 groups of youth and 
smallholders; (ii) share the Master plan of El Moghra; (iii) shares studies on the water quality and 
quantity in the wells in El Moghra and (v) use its leverage to facilitate development by other line 
agencies, the Central Bank and private sector; (vi) provide support to the farmers through access to 
credit and marketing services that it is arranging for the newly reclaimed lands and (vii) Use its 
leverage to support the youth groups in Moghra and (viii) mobilise additional funding for Moghra. 
C.
  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
Planning 
In the first year the project will conduct a Start-up Workshop, with the aim of sensitizing the 
97.
Central Project Management Unit Team and other potential implementing partners, such as the DRC, 
ARC, ECDC, ICBA, Association of youth ocmpanies and the line Ministries involved in implementing 
the project about the project objectives and scope. The partners of the project will also be provided an 
opportunity to learn about IFAD’s systems of procurement, financial management, annual work plans 
and monitoring and evaluation. During this initial period, the Central PMU and the Regional PMU 
hosted by DRC at the SDRCM will prepare the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), which will 
specify the implementation modalities and selection criteria and roles and responsibilities for each of 
the project components. The financial flows, procurement and monitoring and evaluation 
arrangements will also be identified in the PIM. 
  The Central PMU will prepare an Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and corresponding 
98.
procurement plans for the project as a whole. The SDRCM will prepare the work plan and budget for 
those activities which are part of the DRC’s area of responsibility, and the Central PMU will prepare 
for the El Moghra area in close coordination with potential implementing partners such as ARC, line 
agencies in the Governorate and ECDC. The PRIDE annual planning will build on existing 
participatory approaches with local communities which will incorporate local community action plans 
prepared in collaboration with the local community leaders or the mandoubs and will include all project 
activities including community rangeland plans, breed improvement and activities focused on women 
in discussion with the NGO implementing women’s programmes.  
  The AWPB will be used as a tool for specifying implementation priorities, identifying the 
99.
financial and procurement requirements and establishing a work plan with specific targets for the staff 
and implementing partners. The AWPB will constitute the basis for release of funds and for financial 
management. The National Project Coordinator in the Central PMU will assume the overall 
responsibility for the preparation of the AWP/B. He/She will coordinate with all implementing partners 
for the purpose. The AWPB will be submitted to IFAD for its no-objection prior to its approval and 
inclusion in the Government budget. Appendix 6 gives some more details of the planning, monitoring 
and evaluation aspects of the project. 
23 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Monitoring and evaluation 
  The Project’s Logical Framework provides indicators for Project implementation along with their 
100.
corresponding means of verification. The M&E system will generate quantitative and qualitative 
information on the project’s performance in a form that will compare physical progress against the 
planned targets and allow assessment of performance and undertake any remedial action if required. 
The project will use IFAD’s revised RIMS framework to enhance the measurement of IFAD's results at 
the outcome level. Updated IFAD reporting systems, including the Online Log-frame, currently being 
developed in IFAD, will be introduced to the project as they are finalised and rolled out (as per IFAD 
corporate plans, all new projects will eventually feed in their key RIMS and M&E data into the Online 
Log-Frame). Appendix 6 describes M&E arrangements for the project. 
  The monitoring and evaluation indicators will be disaggregated by gender. The project team will 
101.
fine-tune the progress, performance and impact indicators of the project at the Start-Up Workshop 
with support from IFAD. The Project Management Unit will define targets and refine the indicators for 
subsequent years annually as part of the internal planning processes and build on the experience 
gained as the project evolves. Part and parcel of the project’s M&E system will be the monitoring of 
environmental and social impacts of project interventions employing indicators identified for this 
purpose in the project’s ESMF. The Project Management Unit will define targets and refine the 
indicators for subsequent years annually as part of the internal planning processes and build on the 
experience gained as the project evolves. In addition to the above, the PMU will consider performing 
annual environmental and social audits aimed at specific areas of concern to the project. 
  The overall responsibility for the M&E activities will be assumed by the National Project 
102.
Coordinator at the Central PMU who will be assisted by the Monitoring and Evaluation Officers at the 
national level and the M&E officers at the Governorate level in preparing all progress and monitoring 
reports. Given the limited capacity for monitoring and evaluation overall in the country, the project will 
select strong monitoring and evaluation candidates for the Central PMU and further train the M&E 
staff at DRC who have developed a good system for recording data on the programme beneficiaries. 
Women officers at the Central PMU, DRC and the NGO implementing the programme for women will 
be especially tasked with collecting gender disaggregated information, geo-referencing all 
investments and undertake case studies on the perceptions of women beneficiaries and the impact of 
the project on them. 
  The Project will be assisted in the development of a Management Information System (MIS) 
103.
with IFAD support. The system will be designed based on the requirements identified in the Logical 
Framework and in keeping with IFAD RIMS requirements and the guidance provided by the technical 
divisions of IFAD on M&E. The system will have the capacity to provide gender-disaggregated data on 
all key indicators. In addition, and in line with recent IFAD corporate priorities, the M&E system will 
also capture all people-specific indicators disaggregated by age to capture the engagement of youth 
in the project. With regard to the MIS, NEN will also introduce DRC to the 'NEN Planner', an MIS tool 
currently being developed in-house to facilitate the management of AWPBs, annual progress reports 
and RIMS reporting. 
  The Desert Research Centre already has a Geographic Information System (GIS): which will be 
104.
used to map interventions. The GIS system will be upgraded and an initial GIS survey will be 
conducted in the first year (with GIS data to be updated through regular monitoring). The overall 
objectives of the survey and tracking are to: (a) provide an overview of the project, including the 
various components and interventions; (b) provide synthesized reports and graphical elements (charts 
and maps) on the various activities of the Programme including investments per community, status of 
infrastructure completed, (c) provide updates on various project outcomes through the life of the 
project: geophysical (e.g. land cover, water resources availability, etc.), infrastructure (e.g. schools, 
health centre, roads, cisterns, reservoirs, etc.), and demography (population, poverty, etc.); and (d) 
provide objective elements in defining the priority list of areas to be targeted by the Programme. 
  A Third party will be contracted to undertake a Baseline Survey that will be conducted during 
105.
the first year of the Project. IFAD will provide the PMU and SDRCM guidelines in developing the terms 
24 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
of reference and the household questionnaire for the baseline survey. Assistance will be sought from 
IFAD’s newly established Strategic Planning and Impact Assessment Division if required. Beneficiary 
feedback surveys will be conducted in year 3 and end of year 6 through a Third Party to track some 
intermediate outcomes. 
  A Mid-Term Review will be carried out towards the end of the Project’s third year. The review 
106.
will cover: (i) physical and financial progress as measured against AWPBs; (ii) progress in the 
implementation and emerging outputs and intermediate outcomes of the infrastructure schemes; (ii) 
assessment of the efficacy of the capacity building activities; (iii) progress in crop and livestock 
productivity through provision of training and community rangeland plans; (iv); participation of women 
and youth and their perceptions of the project and the emerging outcomes reported by them and (v) 
the progress of settlement of the new communities and companies in the newly reclaimed lands. 
  Final Evaluation: An independent Final Evaluation will take place three months prior to the 
107.
Project completion date, and will assess overall project outreach, outcomes and impact. The final 
evaluation will also review the sustainability of results and the potential for scaling-up. The final 
evaluation will provide recommendations based on lesson learnt. The Final Impact Assessment will be 
undertaken by a neutral agency with no previous involvement in project implementation. The Terms of 
Reference for this evaluation will be prepared by IFAD. 
Learning and knowledge management 
  The PRIDE project contains several components expected to provide significant lessons key in 
108.
the national development agenda of the Government and reflect IFAD corporate priorities. As such, 
learning and knowledge management will be important in drawing out the lessons from the project to 
assist the Government with refining its policy and for scaling up the successful elements of the 
project. Some of the key areas in which the lessons will be important will include the following; (i) 
development of a comprehensive prototype model for Oases development in Egypt; (ii) ancillary 
support required to attract and support emerging communities in the 1.5 million feddan initiative to 
reclaim new lands; (iii) model for community rangeland development; (iv) Attributes of a successful 
approach to gender-sensitive and nutrition mainstreaming measures; (vi) using technology in water 
quality monitoring, inducing behaviour change and in the MIS system; (vii) Sustainable management 
of resources in the new lands; (viii) Development of modalities for the development of youth 
companies in the new lands. 
  The lessons from each of these experiences will be carefully documented by the component 
109.
lead in the PMU under direct supervision by the NPC. Where required, short-term technical 
assistance will be used to write up succinct case studies of each of these elements of the project and 
present them in workshops and shared through technical reports. The project lessons on these 
aspects will be disseminated to the Government, implementing partners, other development partners 
in the country and shared with IFAD. The IFAD country office will play a supporting role in assisting 
the project to organise the sharing events and workshops budgeted as part of the project activities. 
The lessons will be shared more widely by IFAD through its various tools for sharing the knowledge 
gleaned from IFAD-supported projects and programmes such as through the use of what is termed as 
“Learning Routes" to share knowledge transfer among development partners. 
D.
  Financial management, procurement and governance 
  The Borrower/Recipient will open two Designated Accounts (DA) for the loan and grant in US$ 
110.
or Euros in the Central Bank of Egypt. Funds will flow from the DAs to correspondent project 
operating accounts opened in Egyptian Pounds. The PMU Director in the Central PMU and the 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) Controller assigned to MALR will be authorized to operate these accounts. 
Funds will be transferred in local currency from the operating accounts managed by CPMU to the 
operating accounts managed by the Regional PMU at DRC in Matrouh in advance i.e every six 
months on the basis of the AWP/B. Payments to other service providers such as the NGO 
implementing the women’s empowerment component, the firm implementing the Siwa study and other 
25 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
agencies implementing the programme in El-Moghra will be paid on the basis of a work plan, progress 
and payment schedule specified and agreed in their contracts and MOUs with the Central PMU. 
Appendix 7 outlines the financial management arrangements. 
  The project will adopt accounting procedures and policies consistent with international public 
111.
sector accounting standard (cash basis). The CPMU will be responsible for consolidation of the 
project accounts and the financial reporting for all financing sources on a monthly, quarterly, semi-
annual and annual basis, and furnish the reports to IFAD on a quarterly basis. Disbursement methods 
used in PRIDE will include reimbursement, direct payment and replenishment of the DAs. The CPMU 
will submit timely withdrawal applications to IFAD. 
  Conditions to be met prior to disbursement will include the following: (i) Establishment of CPMU 
112.
and recruitment of key project staff; (ii) procurement and installation of well-tested web-based 
accounting software to record all financial transactions at the Central and regional PMU; (iii) 
preparation of detailed PIM; (iv) preparation of detailed AWPB for the first year of Project 
implementation and the 18-month Procurement Plan; and (v) opening of the DAs and (vi) designation 
of persons authorized to sign withdrawal applications electronically through IFAD Client Portal (ICP). 
Start-up costs will be allocated to meet the related cost of some of the disbursement conditions (i,ii 
and iii) above. Start-up cost can be withdrawn after the entry into force of financing agreement. 
113.
  Audit Arrangements. The Recipient, through the PMU, will appoint an independent auditor 
acceptable to IFAD, under terms of reference cleared by IFAD. The proposed FMS consultant will help 
the PMU in preparing the external audit TOR. The contract for the audit will be awarded during the 
first year of the project and thereafter, extended from one year to the next with the same independent 
auditor, subject to satisfactory performance and IFAD clearance up to a certain time period. The 
auditor will give a separate opinion on each account and provide a ‘Management Letter’ addressing 
the adequacy or otherwise of the accounting and internal control systems. The Recipient, through the 
PMU, will submit the above- mentioned certified items to IFAD not later than six months after the end 
of the fiscal year to which they relate. The external auditor will be changed or rotated every 3-4 years. 
  Procurement: The procurement experience of IFAD funded projects in Egypt reveals several 
114.
challenges as a result of which the projects in the current portfolio have experienced considerable 
delays in the bidding, evaluation and negotiation sub-processes, and ultimately contract management. 
Delays in the preparation and finalisation of the bidding documents are caused by various factors, 
including incomplete terms of reference, inadequate specification of equipment, lack of proper 
specification of qualification and evaluation criteria, inconsistencies in the use of procurement 
methods, and low capacity or performance of project procurement staff. There are issues related to 
the use of the most appropriate shopping method, the evaluation processes are not always consistent 
with the Merit Point evaluation method being used where the Compliance should have been used or 
vice versa. As a result, the existing projects in the portfolio have experienced disbursement delays 
leading to sub-optimal performance. The design of the current project will attempt to put in place some 
safeguards to ensure that the project does not suffer from similar problems during implementation. 
This includes reduction of the thresholds during the initial period until the project can demonstrate 
confidence in its systems and methods. 
IFAD’s procurement guidelines specify that national procurement systems will be used under 
115.
the conditions that the systems are assessed as satisfactory or better. The Project will adopt the 
Egypt’s Public Procurement Law 89/98, to the extent that it is consistent with the IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines 2010. National system will be applied to all procurements except the one above the 
threshold for international competitive bidding (ICB) that will be undertaken according to the World 
Bank Guidelines. Appendix 8 describes procurement issues and arrangements. The procurement plan 
for the first 18 months has been prepared and is available. 
116.
  The Central and regional PRIDE PMUs will be responsible to manage and oversee overall 
Project-related procurement including International Competitive Bidding (ICB), National Competitive 
Bidding (NCB) procurements and selection of consultants for larger consultancy contracts as well as 
26 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
National Shopping, though it will require extensive support. The majority of the procurement activities 
under PRIDE will be small in nature and value, with substantial community participation; relatively few 
high-value/specialized procurement packages will attract ICB. Rather, most will be within the 
thresholds of NCB, national shopping (quotations) and community procurement. Appropriate 
thresholds that can maximize the efficiency of procurement implementation but contain the 
governance risks will be specified in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB).  
  The Project will contribute to building up the in-house procurement capacity of the Ministry of 
117.
Agriculture and Land Reclamation and Desert Research Center, instilling best practices and the 
required approach and methodology, and monitoring the timeliness and quality of the process. IFAD 
plans an intensive training programme at start-up to familiarise PRIDE staff with IFAD Guidelines. The 
effectiveness of procurement will be assessed during supervision and alternate arrangements put in 
place if necessary. 
  Start-up costs. Withdrawals from the IFAD financing in respect of expenditures for procurement 
118.
related start-up costs incurred before the satisfaction of the general conditions precedent to 
withdrawal will not exceed an amount of USD 25,000. These funds are intended to cover the 
recruitment of a consultant for the PMU, who will be dedicated to procurement activities of the PRIDE 
including: (i) start-up procurement activities, (ii) setting-up of the procurement system and (iii) 
preparation of the procurement section of the PIM. 
E.
  Supervision 
  The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. The Country Programme Manager and his in-
119.
country team will provide on-going implementation support to the project. However, a core team from 
headquarters will undertake a mission on an annual basis to assess overall management 
arrangements and performance including financial and procurement aspects and monitoring and 
evaluation. Based on field team’s findings, the CPM and his team will make an overall assessment of 
the progress, visit the project Governorate and determine the areas requiring implementation support. 
The participation of Government representatives from MIIC and MALR in the supervision mission will 
be encouraged. 
F.
  Risk identification and mitigation 
  A risk mitigation matrix has been developed to identify and elaborate on how the threat of some 
120.
of the potential risks will be managed or mitigated. 
27 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Table 2. Project Risk Profile and Mitigation Measures 
Risk  
Probability of 
Occurrence  
Severity  
Risk Mitigation Measures  
(i) Delay due to approval and 
ratification.  
Low  
Medium  
(ii) The capacity of DRC to 
effectively utilze the resources 
allocated to it. 
Low 
Medium 
(iii) Difficulty of involving women in 
the extremely conservative 
traditional social society in the 
Governorate;  
Medium  
Medium  
Strong support for the project and 
commitment by the highest level at the 
Governorate to expedite approvals and 
facilitate timely implementation.  
The amount of resources allocated to DRC 
have been kept to a level that is considered 
is within their capacity to implement. DRC 
capacity will be strengthened and in 
addition implementation support through an 
NGO will be provided for implementing 
selected activities as well as support of the 
line agencies for activities within their 
mandate 
Women will be organized at the cluster 
level and as an incentive and entry point 
for their participation facilities of high 
importance for women such as health 
facilities, schools for girls and integrated 
nutrition and livelihood packages will be 
provided.  
(iv) Elite capture of the benefits of 
the project by the tribal leaders;  
Low  
Low 
Strong targeting criteria and strengthening 
of monitoring and targeting measures.  
(vi) The new communities in El 
Moghra are slow to develop the new 
lands and make them productive. 
Medium 
Medium 
The project design incorporates support for 
defraying initial capital investments and 
facilitate support to the emerging 
communities. The resources will be 
reallocated based on progress at Mid-
Term. 
IV. Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.
  Project costs 
121.
  The overall budget of the project is estimated to be USD 81.59 million over a seven-year 
period. Appendix 9 gives details of the project costs and financing. The phasing of the project over its 
entire duration is shown in the table below. The cost of Component 1: Climate Resilient Livelihoods 
will be expected to cost USD 42.535 mn. Component II: Integrated Nutrition-Sensitive Investments will 
be expected to cost USD 31.520 mn. The cost of project management will be 7.544 mn. Of the total 
allocation from IFAD sources, USD 57.098 million will be spent on programmes of which DRC will be 
implementing programmes valued at USD 36.84 million in the rain-fed areas, an NGO wil be 
implementing programmes valued at USD 7.9 mn (14%) while the central PMU will be implementing 
programmes worth USD 12.35 million (22%) on the newly reclaimed lands. 
28 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Table 3. Budget by Component (USD 000) 
  Given that the rate of settlement on the new lands is uncertain, a review of the progress in the 
122.
use of the funds will be made during mid-term and the funds re-allocated between the two programme 
regions depending on which of the pillars of the project are disbursing the allocated funds effectively 
to meet project objectives. 
B.
  Project financing 
123.
IFAD will provide a loan of USD 61,871,399 from the Performance Based Allocation System 
(PBAS) for Egypt for the current financing cycle from 2016 to 2018. In addition, IFAD will provide a 
grant of USD one million. The Government contribution will be approximately US$ 13.95 million, of 
which US$ 7.6 million will be in-kind contribution42 for the use of its staff and facilities in the project 
area and US$ 6.35 million will be for income foregone for taxes or in cash contribution to pay the tax 
component. The rates and amounts of the taxes and duties in the project’s costs presented below are 
defined only to determine the Government contribution and to value the total project cost. 
Beneficiaries will provide US$ 4.77 million as their in-kind contribution for labour in selected project 
activities such as 20% of the cost of cisterns, reservoirs, sanitation facilities, community rangeland 
development, etc. The proposed financing plan is summarized in Table 4 below. 
Table 4. Budget by Financier 
IFAD funding will be used as follows; Component 1: Climate Resilient Livelihoods USD 32.023 
124.
million. Component 2: Integrated Nutrition-Sensitive Investments will cost USD 24.730 million and 
project management and support will cost USD 5.118 million. An analysis of the projected use of IFAD 
funds by category shows that the largest share of IFAD loan proceeds will be used for civil works 
(54%), followed by goods, services and inputs (29%). Training and workshops are expected to cost 
7%, consultancies, including the Siwa Drainage study are estimated to cost 5%, salaries and 
allowances 4% and operating costs 2%. strengthening the MIS system. 
42 In kind-contribution  
29 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
  The IFAD grant of USD 1 million will be used for technical assistance, for hiring the services of 
125.
an NGO for implementing activities related to nutrition and livelihood packages for women, and the 
development of an MIS system. A division of the budget by categories is given in Table 5 below. 
Table 5. Budget by Category 
C.
  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
126.
  The benefits expected from the project include both quantitative and qualitative benefits. 
Appendix 10 gives a detail analysis of the benefits and costs of the project. It is expected that the 
project will benefit around 36,000 households. This number includes some double counting of 
households. The project outputs are expected to include the following; (i) reduction in the water deficit 
in the area by at least 20% or 825,000 cubic meters; (ii); increase in area under agriculture production 
by 19,000 feddan from the development and rehabilitation of old and new wadis; (iii) provision of 200 
kilometres of rural roads; (iv) a comprehensive feasibility study and costed engineering designs for 
irrigation and drainage for the Siwa Oasis; (v) improvement in the vegetative and regeneration 
capacity of 90,000 feddan of rangelands; (vi) increase in livestock productivity; (vii) supporting the 
families in newly reclaimed lands to initiate crops and production activities adapted to desert 
environments over 42,000 feddans of newlands; (viii) introduction of a range of new technologies to 
improve the system of water quality monitoring and management; (ix) assist in improving the 
interaction between research and extension of varieties suitable for desert environments; (x) improved 
quality of diets for households, especially women and children; (xi) increase in employment 
opportunities for rural women and youth; (xii) increase in sanitation facilities for 3000 households, 
access to school facilities for 1000 students annually and health facilities for 15,000 women annually. 
Table 6. Project Beneficiaries of PRIDE Project 
Estimated no. of beneficiaries by component and activities 
Component 1: Climate Resilient Livelihoods 
Reservoirs for Irrigated Agriculture  
Wadi Development  
Feeder Roads /a 
Rangeland and livestock development  
Horticulture Training 
Cooperative Management 
On farm water management (Moghra) 
Component II: Integrated Nutrition Investments 
People 
Women 
Notes 
500 reservoirs 
1900 feddans 
HHs 
500 
2000 
250 km 
10200 
7159 
2000 
3000 
12000 
61200 
42954 
12000 
4284 
25704 
Domestic Water Supply  
845,000 m3 
6500 
39000 
Nutrition supplementation g Pigeon Towers & Poultry 
Nutrition Supplementation (homestead plants) 
1000 
6000 
30 
1000 
4000 
5000 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Income generation 
Health & Nutrition Awareness 
Literacy Classes 
Formal Schools  
Multi-grade schools 
Health Units Services  
Mobile Health Units  
Sanitation Facilities l 
Total  
1000 
6000 
1000 
6000 
400 
2400 
400 
3000 
2000 
330 
225 
22500 
75000 
3000 
 36 043  
 216 258  
 116 455  
3 
15 
3 
5 
/a 150 km of roads are financed by the IFAD loan and 100 km by the GoE.  
  While women will benefit from the activities targeted at the households, they will also benefit 
127.
from activities directly targeted at them. It is expected that 6500 women will benefit directly from the 
project packages especially designed for them including potable water, nutrition & livelihood 
packages, training and literacy classes. The most significant benefit for women will be the availability 
of potable water at the homestead, which will save them the additional water costs as tankers charge 
EGP 145 or more for the cost of transporting and purchasing water for each 4 cubic meter. In addition, 
around 100,000 women and girls will benefit from access to the health and education services over 
the course of the seven-year period. This number includes double counting especially women who 
may access health services several times during the course of the project period. Table 6 below gives 
the overall number of beneficiaries. 
  The benefits of health interventions in terms of Disability adjusted Life Years were difficult to 
128.
incorporate into the economic analysis due to the complexity of assigning a value to this metric and 
was not included although the anecdotal data shows that there is a high rate of morbidity and mortality 
in the region. The cost savings of health expenditures due to reduction in child morbidity alone will be 
significant but was not calculated due to paucity of specific data. 
  Girls’ education has some powerful multiplier properties and there is a strong demonstrated 
129.
positive association between maternal education, child survival and reduction in fertility rates.43 These 
generate additional quantifiable benefits in terms of reduction in health expenditures, increased 
productive investment and reduction in poverty levels. Children born to more educated mothers are 
more likely to survive and less likely to experience malnutrition. The more educated women are, the 
more likely they are to have better access to reproductive health and provide better nutrition to their 
children, all of which reduce the risk of child mortality.44 The internal rate of rate for the schools being 
established by PRIDE was calculated using only the partial returns from the incremental income of 
high school graduates. This was found to be 21% with a Net Present Value of EGP 28 million. The 
assumptions used were based on the labour force participation rate of men (48%) and women (18%) 
and the wage rates used were based on current salary levels incorporating the wage differentials for 
women. 
  Net Present Value (NPV) and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR). In undertaking the 
130.
economic analysis the benefits related to (i) crop production especially from figs, olives in the wadis; 
(ii) agriculture in the newlands which included production of jojoba (iii) livestock production including 
small ruminants and (iv) pigeon packages (iv) rural roads (v) construction and rehabilitation of 
homestead cisterns and reservoirs for increasing households' access to drinking water. Appendix 10 
elaborates the models used in the financial and economic analysis. The aggregation of these models 
was phased according to the outreach expected over the life of the project. The Project economic 
costs were calculated to remove price contingencies, taxes and duties. A discount rate of 10% was 
used for the economic analysis. The net present value of the Project is positive and amounts to USD 
43 Watkins, Kevin. April 2012. When learning saves lives: education and child mortality. Education for All Global 
Monitoring Report. 
44 Cohen, 2008; Lewis and Lockheed, 2008; Singh-Manoux et al., 2008. 
31 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
51 million. The economic internal rate of return is estimated at 20% over a 20 years period. 
Incorporating the benefits from access to education and health facilities will substantially increase the 
returns from the investments. 
  Sensitivity Analysis. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the variation of the EIRR 
131.
and the NPV according to various scenarios. The risks highlighted in the main risk section of the 
report were included.The sensitivity analysis investigated the effect of fluctuations in project costs, 
project benefits, and delays in implementation on the NPV and ERR. It A sensitivity analysis was 
conducted to assess the variation of the EIRR and the NPV according to various scenarios. The risks 
highlighted in the main risk section of the report were included. The Project remains profitable in all 
scenarios. The switching values were also estimated for the project and the analysis shows that the 
project will still be feasible if benefits decrease by up to -66% or costs increase by up to +197%. 
D.
  Sustainability 
  There are many aspects that will enhance the sustainability of the project investments such as 
132.
use of tested techniques for construction of water harvesting and collection of domestic water, the 
demand-driven and self-selection approach, community contribution in initial capital costs and low 
cost of operation and maintenance and careful selection of project activities based on need. The 
technology for making the cisterns was first pioneered by the Romans many centuries earlier. Given 
the extreme shortage of rain in Matrouh, cisterns and reservoirs are one of the few means of ensuring 
water supply for domestic use and for supplemental irrigation of crops. There is virtually no 
maintenance cost involved after their construction. 
133.
  The project ensures the sustainability of the irrigation infrastructure through a two-pronged 
approach, which establishes a pre-qualification criterion for the investments at the community or 
company level in the first instance and once the agreement at this collective level has been ensured, 
individual owners take responsibility for their individual plots. Along the coast, the project 
management will first ensure that all the claimants of land in a Wadi have reached a consensus on 
how the land will be allocated and managed along the site for watershed management. Within each 
plot of land, the responsibility for management will belong to individual households. Previous 
experience in the coastal areas of Matrouh shows that there is a well-defined system of land 
ownership, distribution and management which has worked well in ensuring the sustainability of the 
infrastructure in the watersheds. Each individual household maintains the dikes, water diversion 
structures and bunds along the contours of the valley bed in his plot of land. In El Moghra, the 
experiment with the youth groups is new and remains to be tested. However, the project will select 
those groups who are committed to developing their land and have initiated the initial investments on 
their plots. The company structure provides an element of cohesion and shared responsibility and the 
individual shareholders know that they need to work together to succeed. The project will capitalize on 
this collective spirit and sign a terms of partnership with the youth companies to select those groups 
who demonstrate a strong commitment to maintain the infrastructure and have a well-developed 
management plan for the purpose.  
  The roads will be built according to the standards of the Roads Department and maintained by 
134.
them. The high schools and Health Units will be taken over by the concerned line agencies as soon 
as they are constructed. Their staffing and operation will be the responsibility of the Government. The 
mobile health and veterinary services will be managed by the Government line agencies with support 
from the project.  
  The demand driven nature of the project will further ensure that the project chooses 
135.
beneficiaries from among those who will value the investments. Thus apart from careful targeting of 
project beneficiaries, the project will also require a contribution of 20% in kind for most investments 
either in terms of initial labour contribution. The project will also ensure that the delivery mechanisms 
used to impart different types of trainings are appropriate for the target group. Thus the timing and 
location of the training will be carefully planned especially for women to ensure their participation. The 
training content for the youth will be discussed with them and the potential for employment and self-
32 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
employment opportunities available will be assessed. The project’s emphasis on building local 
capacity for services, which the newly established communities in El Moghra will be willing to pay for, 
will be made prior to training youth in these vocational skills and trades to ensure that their services 
are valued by communities in the new lands. 
  Further, environmental and social sustainability will be ensured through monitoring and 
136.
participatory approaches. An ESMF for the project will be developed with regular monitoring. An 
annotated Table of contents for the framework is at Annex 5. In terms of sustainability of natural 
resources, the project will be implemented in line with Egypt's National Strategy for Adaptation to 
Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction (2011). Appropriate management and utilization of 
groundwater from the pumps will be integrated into all activities promoted by the project. In addition, 
the project and the IFAD country team will maintain linkages with the African Development Bank and 
other donors working on assessing the utilization and sustainability of groundwater resources in 
project areas and across new lands. With regard to community ownership and grievances, IFAD has 
developed a Complaints Procedure for “Alleged Non-Compliance with its Social and Environmental 
Policies and Mandatory Aspects of its Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures”. 
Parties adversely or potentially adversely affected by IFAD-funded projects and programmes may 
bring issues to existing programme-level grievance redress mechanisms or to the Fund’s attention 
using SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org. Guidance on the steps involved for submitting complaints are 
given at https://www.ifad.org/topic/gef/secap/tags. 
33 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Egypt falls in the medium human development category.45 There has been some notable 
1.
progress in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in the country. Between 1990 and 
2015, Egypt’s life expectancy at birth increased by 6.7 years. Mean years of schooling increased by 
3.6 years, and expected years of schooling increased by 3.3 years. Infant mortality rates have also 
shown improvements in the past four decades, dropping from 25 to 20.3 in 2015 and child mortality 
dropped from 28 to 24 in the same period. Between 1990 and 2015, Egypt’s HDI value increased from 
0.547 to 0.691, an increase of 26.4 percent. This is above the average of 0.631 for countries in the 
medium human development group, and above the average of 0.687 for the countries classified as 
the Arab States. Egypt’s GNI per capita increased by about 71.5 percent between 1990 and 2015.46 
Economic Overview: Egypt is the largest Arab country by population and has the second 
2.
largest economy in the Arab world. Since 2011, the country has experienced political upheaval and 
societal unrest that spread across the region and highlighted the unmet aspirations of the population 
regarding lack of political inclusion and economic opportunities. The subsequent developments in the 
country have adversely affected the Egyptian economy and people's livelihoods. The internal turmoil 
has been exacerbated by the instability in the region and has led to a sharp decline in revenue from 
tourism and reduction in remittance income due to the return of Egyptian labour working in the 
regional countries. The rising energy crisis in the country has also taken a toll and threatens the 
growth rate. Economic growth in the past three decades has been moderate and uneven, and 
insufficient to reduce poverty or absorb the rapidly growing supply of labour. Unemployment remains 
high, particularly for women and youth. Egypt is rated as a lower middle-income country with a GDP 
per capita estimated to be around US$ 3,614 in 2015.47 The economy is gradually improving with 
annual rates of GDP growth reaching 4 percent in 2015/16, up from an average of only 2 percent 
during the period 2010/11-2013/14.48  
3.
Currency Devaluation and Inflation: There has been a consistent attempt by the Central 
Bank of Egypt to set the exchange rate of the Egyptian Pound at levels which reflect the demand and 
supply and close the gap in the black market rate which is a key supplier of foreign exchange for 
those unable to meet their needs at banks. The last two rounds of major devaluations took place in 
March 2016 and November 2016. In the first round, the Central Bank of Egypt devalued the EGP by 
12.6 percent to EGP 8.8 to the dollar and in the second one it has brought the rate down by 74% 
against the dollar to around EGP 15.35-15.75 to the dollar. The move is designed to attract fresh 
capital into the country and end a hard currency shortage that has plagued the economy for years. In 
the free-floating exchange rate regime, the EGP is currently trading at EGP 18 to the USD. To mitigate 
the impact of the rising inflation due to the devaluation, the Government increased its food subsidy 
allocation by 20 percent per beneficiary in May 2016.49 However, consumer prices in Egypt rose 31.5 
percent year-on-year in April of 2017.50 Egyptian Pound forecasts are expected to remain more or less 
stable for the next few years and expected to depreciate by around 5% on an annual basis.51  
Agriculture: Agriculture is a key sector in the Egyptian economy, providing livelihoods for 55 
4.
per cent of the population and directly employing about 23 per cent of the labour force.52 Although the 
sector’s contribution to GDP has fallen over time, it still accounts for about 13 per cent of GDP and 20 
per cent of total exports and foreign exchange earnings. Agriculture-related industries such as 
45Egypt’s Progress Towards Achieving the Millennium Development Goals (2010), p. 15. 
46 UNDP, Human Development Report, The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World, Egypt, (2016) 
www.undp.org/content/dam/rbas/img/docs/Egypt.docx 
47 https://www.google.com.eg/?gfe_rd=cr&ei=iI8mWZXFKrCs8wfT8Z-gAg#q=gni+per+capita+egypt 
48 http://www.indexmundi.com/egypt/gdp_real_growth_rate.html 
49 FAO Country Report. August 2016.http://www.fao.org/giews/countrybrief/country.jsp?code=EGY 
50 http://www.tradingeconomics.com/egypt/inflation-cpi 
51 http://www.tradingeconomics.com/egypt/currency/forecast 
52 FAO Statistics. 2014  
35 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
processing and marketing and input supplies account for a further 20 per cent of GDP. Agriculture is 
important for growth and poverty reduction, as a rise in farm income can drive demand for the large, 
employment-intensive rural non-farm sector. The area of agricultural land in Egypt is confined to the 
Nile Valley and delta, with a few oases and some arable land in Sinai. The total cultivated area is 7.2 
million feddans, representing only 3 percent of the total land area. The entire crop area is irrigated, 
except for some rain-fed areas along the Mediterranean coast. Due to its growing population and 
limitation in cultivated area, Egypt cannot meet its food requirements and is the world’s largest wheat 
importer. Cereal import requirements in the 2016/17 marketing year (July/June) are forecast at around 
20.1 million tonnes with wheat imports estimated at 11.5 million tonnes.53 To meet the food 
requirements, the Government has set the reclamation of new land for agriculture as one of its highest 
priorities.  
  Weak farmer organizations and marketing infrastructure: Smallholders generally lack the 
5.
mechanisms for integration with markets due to their limited produce, lack of organization or effective 
cooperatives. The agriculture cooperatives in the country have been used as an administrative 
mechanism to distribute seeds and fertilizers rather than assist farmers to reduce their transactions 
costs through collective input supply or marketing. The individualistic nature of Egyptian farmers has 
also served to inhibit collaboration among them. There is a high degree of variability in prices of 
agricultural commodities and limited market information. There is a lack of post-harvest, processing 
and marketing facilities and low levels of agricultural industrialization. The high degree of perishability 
of horticulture and dairy produce leads to rapid quality deterioration, a consequent reduction in prices 
and reduces farmer incomes. However, along with these constraints there are also opportunities. 
Contract farming is becoming more commonplace because of the “supermarket revolution”. In some 
contract farming arrangements, the private sector provides most of the agronomic information in place 
of extension agents. The Government’s experiment of creating Youth and Smallholder companies on 
the newly reclaimed lands is one measure to help deal with the issue of land fragmentation and 
encourage collective enterprise. Large private sector investors are interested in engaging in contract 
farming arrangements with these emerging companies in order to meet the demand for some special 
crops such as Jojoba on the new lands.  
  Water Scarcity: The country has little or no rainfall except in a narrow band along the northern 
6.
coast. Egypt has an arid climate with an annual average rainfall ranging from 60 to 190 mm along 
the Mediterranean coast to 25 to 60 mm in the Nile delta, and less than 25 mm in Upper Egypt and 
its adjacent areas. Scarcity of water is a key constraint to agricultural growth. The Nile River is the 
main and almost exclusive source of surface water for Egypt. Based on a 1929 agreement, Egypt 
currently maintains its historic right to three-quarters of the Nile’s water or about 55.5 billion cubic 
meters of the Nile’s total flow of roughly 84 billion cubic meters. Per capita fresh water is expected to 
decline from 711.0 m3 in 2008 to 550 m3 in 2030.54 The country is experiencing severe water poverty 
which is likely to worsen due to population growth and climate change combining to raise the risks of 
inadequate water supplies and conflict over the available supplies – and further pressure is expected 
from the increased demand of Nile resources by other members of the Nile Basin Commission.  
7.
Sensitivity of agriculture to climate change: Analysts estimate that the expected rise in 
temperature will lead to up to 20 per cent decrease in productivity for some major crops (wheat, barley 
and maize) by 2050. It will reduce the production of livestock and affect the productive potential of 
many agricultural zones in the country. The marginal agricultural areas will be negatively affected and 
desertification will increase. High temperatures will increase evaporation and water consumption and 
put a further strain on the acute water scarcity in the country. A rise in sea levels will have a negative 
effect on coastal areas, tourism and agricultural land in the Nile Delta region.55 Enhanced resilience to 
climate change will hence have close resonance with responding to water scarcity, increasing land 
productivity and livelihood diversification. Adaptation measures on the supply-side include ways to 
improve irrigation techniques and know-how, increased use of water harvesting and watershed 
53 FAO Country Report. August 2016. http://www.fao.org/giews/countrybrief/country.jsp?code=EGY 
54 According to Sustainable Agricultural Development Strategy Towards 2030 (SADS, 2009 
55 Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency, 2014. 
36 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
management in the north coastal zone where there is some rainfall, introduction of drought and 
salinity tolerant cultivars, introduction of renewable energy alternatives, as well as improving post-
harvest facilities.56 
Poverty: The Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) maintains that 
8.
Egypt’s poverty rate57 increased over the year 2012/2013, reaching 26.3 percent compared with 
25.2 percent in 2010/2011 and nearly 25 percent live just above the poverty line.58 Some 11.9 
percent of Egypt’s population is in extreme multi-Dimensional Poverty.59 In addition, many of the 
households along the poverty line are highly vulnerable and susceptible to falling back into poverty 
as a result of a host of factors. Data also shows that there has been an increase in inequality, with 
the Gini-coefficient rising from 28.7 to 31 between 2005 and 2010.60 While more recent data is not 
available, it is believed that inequality is still on the rise. Unemployment continues to be an overr iding 
concern, especially for youth and women with many of the Egyptians working in the Middle East 
region returning home because of growing regional instability. Several studies have tried to estimate 
poverty by Governorate. Due to the difficulty of conducting surveys among the widely scattered 
population in some Governorates like Matrouh and the New Valley, these studies appear not to 
reflect the actual situation on the ground and tend to underestimate the poverty and illiteracy rates. 
Using the percentage of female illiteracy as a proxy indicator of poverty shows with a gender 
illiteracy rate at 36.3%61 Due to the difficulty of conducting surveys among the widely scattered 
population in some Governorates like Matrouh and the New Valley, Matrouh is one of the poorest 
Governorates ranked at 24 out of the 27 Governorates in the country. 
Malnutrition: Despite Egypt’s significant progress in reducing infant and child mortality in the 
9.
last decades, high levels of child malnutrition still persist across the country. Egypt is one of the 20 
countries in the world with the highest number of children suffering from chronic malnutrition. Child 
malnutrition was deteriorating even at times when Egypt experienced rapid economic growth and, it is 
expected that the malnutrition status of children will continue to deteriorate if necessary measures are 
not put in place rapidly.62 It is estimated that 22% of children under the age of five are stunted, 13% 
are low birth weight underweight, and 10% are wasted.63
National averages, however, obscure vast 
regional differences in under-nutrition prevalence. In recognition of its nutritional challenges, Egypt 
has developed a 10-year Food and Nutrition Policy and Strategy (2007 – 2017). 
56 FAO, 2014. 
57 The extreme poverty limit is an annual EGP 3,570 (US$ 518) per person, which means approximately EGP 312 per 
month per person, or EGP 10 (approximately US$ 1.5) per day per person). 
58 Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS). Arab Republic of Egypt, 2012. 
59 World Food Programme, The Status of Poverty and Food Security in Egypt: Analysis and Policy Recommendations 
(2013). 
60 Economic growth, inequality and poverty: social mobility in Egypt between 2005 and 2008, 2009, World Bank, 2010. 
61 Based on the results of a survey of income, expenditure and consumption in 2015. CAPMAS 2016. Page 578. 
62 UNICEF. https://www.unicef.org/egypt/immunisation_7133.html 
63 http://ebrary.ifpri.org/utils/getfile/collection/p15738coll2/id/129926/filename/130137.pdf 
37 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
  Gender inequality: The Constitution of Egypt guarantees equal treatment of all citizens. 
10.
However, this has not translated into equality of status, assets or opportunities for women. Their 
marginalization and exclusion from social, economic and political life has led to lower access to 
education, health, employment and productive resources making them more vulnerable to poverty, 
food security, ill-health and violence than men. Egypt ranks low on international indicators of gender 
equity. It had a Gender Inequality Index (GII)64 value of 0.60 and a rank of 129 of 142 countries in 
2014.65 Although indicators relating to women have improved over the years, they still remain large 
differences between men and women in literacy and schooling, the labour force and unemployment 
rates, wage differentials and political participation. It is assessed that the deeply entrenched, cultural 
values, and social class as well as the urban/rural location are factors that affect the situation of 
Egyptian women, but it is the cultural tradition that most strongly affects their lives. In some areas the 
situation of women is even worse such as in the tribal structure of Bedouin societies found in the 
deserts of the country where the traditional norms are still prevalent like in the Matrouh Governorate 
Government Policy and Strategy 
  Sustainable Development Strategy (Vision 2030): The strategy launched in March 2016 
11.
spans over the three dimensions of sustainable development, namely; economic, social and 
environmental dimensions, and outlines the broader principles which will guide Egypt in pursuing its 
developmental goals. The strategy envisages focused and strategic investments to areas that have 
been left behind. The first two milestones of the political roadmap adopted in July 2013 – the 
ratification of the new Constitution in January 2014 and presidential elections in May 2014 – have 
been completed. This has returned Egypt to political stability, providing the government with the 
opportunity to tackle anew the country’s economic constraints and to launch far-reaching structural 
reforms.66 The Government has demonstrated strong resolve to deal with the issues of economic 
development and growth and is committed to pursuing policies for rural growth and poverty alleviation. 
Egypt’s Vision 2030 outlines a well-structured programme to restore macroeconomic imbalances, 
address social inclusion priorities, and achieve sustainable and diversified growth. The sustainable 
development plan and budget for FY 2016/2017 are primarily focused on achieving inclusive 
economic growth, enhancing social justice, and increasing employment rates, particularly among 
young people.  
  Sustainable Development Goals: For Egypt, inclusive and sustainable development is a core 
12.
constitutional value and objective. The Constitution of Egypt covers economic, social, and 
environmental dimensions, as well as many of the 17 SDGs in its different articles, presented as 
national goals, binding all sectors and levels of government, and calling upon different stakeholders to 
participate in the developmental process towards achieving them. The Government of Egypt has 
expressed its full commitment to achieving the SDGs. To maintain the momentum for advancing this 
transformative agenda, and ensure effective institutional mechanisms are installed, an inter-ministerial 
committee for the follow up on the implementation of the SDGs was established, chaired by the Prime 
Minister and including all relevant ministries and national entities. The Ministry of International 
Cooperation has been entrusted with the role of the National Coordinator of the committee. A key 
priority for the Government has been poverty eradication, addressing inequalities, gender 
mainstreaming and boosting sustainable economic growth, through decent job creation, sustainable 
infrastructure, access to adequate and affordable housing, quality health and education, as well as, 
expanding the use of renewable energy. Women and youth are particularly being targeted under the 
strategy.67 The Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) has been tasked with 
publishing a new study every February to measure the government’s progress in implementing the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
64 The Gender Inequality Index (GII) reflects gender-based inequalities in three dimensions – reproductive health, 
empowerment, and economic activity. 
65 http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2014/rankings/ World Economic Forum. 
66 Egypt’s Five Year Macro-Economic Framework and Strategy. FY14/15 to FY 18/19. Egypt Economic Development 
Conference. Sharm El Sheikh. March 2015. Government of Egypt. 
67. Sahar Nasr. Minister of International Cooperation Arab Republic of Egypt. National Review. Sustainable 
Development Goals. July 2016. http://moic.gov.eg/MopRep/MIC/English.pdf_915201625622PM.pdf 
38 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
  The Flag Ship 1.5 million Land Reclamation Programme: Egypt has one of the world’s 
13.
lowest per capita holding of agricultural land. It is annually decreasing as population growth rate 
greatly exceeds that of the expansion of agricultural land. A corner stone of Government policy is land 
reclamation aimed at expanding Egypt’s farmland by 20%. This project aims to expand Egypt's 
prospective agricultural land from eight million to 9.5 million feddans or (630,000 hectares). The 
project aims to reduce the food gap and increase the populated area through the creation of new 
urban communities. The main objective of this project is to create an integrated society in the 
reclaimed lands, support economic diversity, the provision of productive and decent job opportunities, 
and ensuring the participation of all Governorates in achieving inclusive and sustainable growth. The 
Government has placed special emphasis on developing areas with the potential for land reclamation 
and has identified 10 potential sites in a three-phase programme. In the first phase, El Moghra, the 
Toshka region and the Frafra Oases will be developed. A private company named the Egyptian 
Countryside Development Company (ECDC) or Reef El Masry has been formed with equity 
participation from the Ministries of Finance, Agriculture and Housing to facilitate the acquisition and 
allocation of land. The Government is allocating the land to investors, youth and smallholders on 
payment with partial development in some sites. 
39 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Poverty in Egypt 
The Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) show that Egypt’s poverty 
1.
rate increased over the year 2014/2015, reaching 27.8 percent compared with 25.2 percent in 
2010/2011, with extreme poverty reaching 5.3 percent.68 The current poverty line stands at an 
average 482 EGP (about $54) per month while the extreme poverty line stands at 322 EGP (about 
$36). About 56.8% of those living in Upper Egypt's rural areas cannot meet their basic needs, 
compared to 19.7% in the Nile Delta's rural areas. This applies to roughly a third of people in Upper 
Egypt's urban areas. Some 11.9 percent of Egypt’s population is living in extreme Multi-Dimensional 
Poverty69. There are also high levels of inequality with the poorest 40 percent of the population 
accessing a mere 22.3 percent of the country’s income. The unemployment rate was 13.4 percent in 
2014. Nearly half the population is vulnerable to external shocks, especially the rising food prices. The 
Gini coefficient was reported to be 31 overall in 2010 with 22 in rural areas.70 
Inflation has been one of the key drivers of rural poverty in the recent past but there are other 
2.
structural drivers of poverty, which include lack of adequate public infrastructure, private capital 
accumulation, and low investment in human capital, the absence of pro-poor programme-based fiscal 
policy and small size of land-holdings. The annual rate of inflation in consumer prices reached 14.8 
per cent in June 2016.71 The vast majority of landowners in rural Egypt (91%) own less than 3 
feddan.72 which on its own, with current levels of productivity is insufficient to maintain an average 
family of 6 members. The lack of access to credit, agricultural extension services and post-harvest 
facilities, coupled with exploitative marketing mechanisms further contributes to poverty. 
Food insecurity in Egypt remains an issue of household access to food driven by purchasing 
3.
power. Approximately 74.7 percent households reported rising food prices as the main shock. The 
consequences of this are negative household coping strategies, particularly a reduction in dietary 
diversity (35 percent of Egyptians suffer from poor dietary diversity, rising to 58.3 percent for the 
poor). This increase in food insecurity has been driven largely by rising poverty levels and a 
succession of crises from 2005 (including the avian influenza epidemic in 2006, the food, fuel and 
financial crises of 2007–09, further global food prices increases from late 2010 and a challenging 
macroeconomic context in the wake of the 2011 revolution). CAPMAS’s 2011 Household Income, 
Expenditure and Consumption Survey (HIECS), highlights an increase in the prevalence of food 
insecurity to 17.2 percent (13.7 million people) in 2011 from 14 percent of the population in 2009.73 
Government Policy and Strategies for the Poor 
4.
Policies aimed at helping households withstand the effects of the financial crisis were not 
sufficient to prevent an increase in poverty. The crisis revealed that Egypt does not have a scalable 
targeted social protection system that could adequately protect the poor and those in danger 
of falling into poverty.74 During the crisis, Egypt dramatically expanded its subsidized food 
programme, and increased budget support to subsidize bread. The data show that without this 
68 The extreme poverty limit is an annual EGP 3,570 (US$ 518) per person, which means approximately EGP 312 per 
month per person, or EGP 10 (approximately US$ 1.5) per day per person). 
69 WFP, (2013)Status of Poverty and Food Security in Egypt :Analysis and policy Recommendation Preliminary 
Summary Report  
70 EDHR, 2010. 
71 Egypt Independent 27 July 2016 - http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/278-percent-egyptian-population-lives-
below-poverty-line-capmas  
72 Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics, Statistical Yearbook 2015 
73 WFP, 2013, The Status Of Poverty And Food Security In Egypt: Analysis And Policy Recommendations 
74 World Bank, Social and Economic Development Group Middle East and North Africa Region, Report No. 60249-EG, 
”Arab Republic of Egypt Poverty in Egypt 2008-09:Withstanding the Global Economic Crisis” (June 17, 2011) 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/12551/602490ESW0P1180osed0May0230201200EG.pd
f?sequence=1 
41 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
expansion, the poverty incidence will have been at least 3 percent higher. However, the increased 
support was not well targeted and was costly (at least 1 percent of GDP). Cash social assistance 
programmes were also expanded and helped some of the poor to avoid extreme poverty, but they 
remained too small to have a visible effect on national averages.  
In recognition of its nutritional challenges, Egypt has developed a 10-year Food and Nutrition 
5.
Policy and Strategy (2007 – 2017). Egypt is confronted by the double challenge of malnutrition and 
malnutrition-obesity. The prevalence of stunting in Egypt is 21.4 percent making it one of the 20 
high- burden countries of the world75. Egypt’s nutritional challenges can be classified into two 
broad categories: maternal, infants and young children, youth and young adults. The causes of 
nutrition problems in Egypt are a function of many factors: most households are food insecure 
because of low income, high food prices and low local agricultural production, in addition to poor 
dietary practices due to lack of awareness, inadequate health advice, adoption of Western diets high 
in refined carbohydrates, saturated fats and sugars, as well as a more sedentary lifestyle. These are 
commonly cited as the major contributors to the increase in overweight and chronic diseases. There 
are also the problems of environmental pollution and food safety challenges due to lack of 
enforcement of existing laws. There is an overarching health system challenge that derives from 
uncoordinated and disjointed planning of nutrition activities; often leading to sub-optimal use of 
resources and impact on nutrition status76. (see Annex 1 on Status of Nutrition in Egypt). 
Gender Inequality in Egypt 
6.
Although the Constitution of Egypt guarantees equal treatment of all citizens, this does not 
translate into equality of status, opportunities and access and control over resources for women. 
Gender inequality persists, directly undermining the country’s socio-economic progress. Egypt 
ranks low on international indicators of gender equity. It has a Gender Inequality Index (GII) value of 
0.57, ranking it 135 out of 188 countries in the 2015 index. In Egypt, 2.2 percent of parliamentary 
seats are held by women, and 54.5 percent of adult women have reached a secondary or higher level 
of education, compared to 68.2 percent men. For every 100,000 live births, 33 women die from 
pregnancy related causes; and the adolescent fertility rate is 51.9 births per 1000 live births. Women’s 
participation in the labour market is 22.8 percent compared to 76.1 for men, marking a very large 
disparity77. Cultural norms and customary practices are compelling determinants of social and familial 
attitudes that influence the position and condition of women resulting in their marginalization and 
exclusion from social, economic and political life. Women’s lower access to education, health, 
employment, income, and productive resources makes them more vulnerable to poverty than men. 
Labour statistics commonly under-estimate women’s labour force participation as they do not take into 
account their high engagement in the informal sector or in home-based activities. A defining 
characteristic of women’s employment is the gender-based differential in remuneration: male wages 
are higher both in rural and urban areas with women estimated to earn the equivalent of 26% of men’s 
income78.  
  Women in rural Egypt face greater deprivation along several axes compared to their 
7.
urban counterparts. Rural women do most of the agricultural work. Of the 53% of the working 
population engaged in the agricultural sector, 79.78% are comprised of female workers, compared to 
39.62% for males. Around 42% of employed women are unpaid workers in agriculture, 35% are self-
employed, and only 3% are agricultural wage earners. Gender disparities are also more pronounced 
in rural areas. For example, larger differences exist between poor girls and boys compared to non-
poor girls and boys, where 19% of poor girls in rural areas are not enrolled in school, as opposed to 
13% for poor boys (for the non-poor, the corresponding figures are 7% and 6%, respectively)79. 
75 WHO Indicators 2017 
76 UNICEF, Egypt Nutrition Landscape Analysis Report 2012. 
77 The Gender Inequality Index (GII) reflects gender-based inequalities in three dimensions – reproductive health, 
empowerment, and economic activity. - http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII  
78 UNDP, Egypt Human Development Report, 2008 
79 UNDP, Arab Development Challenges Report 2011,  
42 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
However, total percentage of employment in agriculture has fallen to 25.84 (2015) percent, with 
women’s participation to 43.22 percent (2014)80. 
The burden of unemployment in Egypt falls particularly on young women and the more 
8.
highly educated. According to recent CAPMAS statistics (2015), 24 percent women were reported to 
be unemployed, in comparison to 9 percent men, and 9.6 percent are illiterate. The unemployment 
rate of young females is more than five times that of young males (38.1 per cent versus 6.8 per cent). 
The unemployment-to-population ratio is 11.9 per cent among female youth compared to 5.2 per cent 
among male youth.81 Gender disparity is key to understanding the situation of youth in the Egyptian 
labour market. Despite significant strides in reducing the gender gap in education in Egypt, young 
women are much more likely to fall in the Neither in Education Employment or Training (NEET) 
category than young men (49.5 per cent and 9.3 per cent, respectively). More young working women 
than men are unpaid family workers. Almost one-third of female working youth (28.9 per cent) are 
unpaid family workers compared to 14.2 per cent of male working youth. 
Youth in Egypt 
Egypt’s population of over 9582 million has a high proportion of young people. As much 
9.
as 31percent of Egypt’s population in 2014 was dependent with 27 million children under the age of 
15 years, and another 30 percent between the ages of 15 and 30 years (25.7 million youth)83. In 
Egypt, overall 40.7 percent of young people are in the NEET category. 43.8 percent of the men age 
24–29 in this category hold a university degree, yet their qualifications seem insufficient for existing 
job opportunities. The NEET phenomenon is not gender neutral and disproportionately affects women: 
two out of three young women in rural Egypt (69.7 percent) and more than half of the female youth in 
urban areas (60.4 percent) are NEET. In contrast, only one out of eight young men in urban areas 
(13.2 percent) and a tenth of young men in rural Egypt (10.5 percent) are NEET.84 If the increase in 
the number of working-age youth contributes to productive activities in their societies, the youth bulge 
can be used to yield a demographic dividend. However, if a large group of youth cannot find good jobs 
and obtain a satisfactory income, then the youth bulge could become a potential source of social and 
political unrest.85 
Target Area 
  The Governorate of Matrouh is one of the largest in Egypt in terms of area. Matrouh is sub-
10.
divided into eight districts (marakiz) and 56 villages. Only part of the two of the six districts, Al 
Hammam and Al Alamein are irrigated. The rest of the districts are arid and dependent on rainfall. An 
updated poverty rate for Matrouh Governorate is not available. Poverty rates and other statistics for 
Frontier Governorates are often aggregated due to the low percentage of population living in these 
areas and the challenges of collecting data from scattered populations living in the desert. The 
extreme multi-dimensional poverty rate for rural areas in the Frontier Governorates is 25 percent, well 
above the national average of 11.9 percent.86 The Frontier Governorates also have the highest 
percentage of households without toilet facilities in the country. An indication of the poverty and 
deprivation in this area relative to other governorates is provided by the following statistics from the 
Egypt Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS), despite the urban bias in the sample size for Matrouh 
(70 per cent urban to 30 percent rural). Matrouh has 37.9 per cent of its population living in the lowest 
wealth quintile, only Sohag and Minya have a higher percentage. It has the highest rate of illiteracy 
80 World Bank, Data Bank : Egypt 2017. 
81 Ghada Barsoum, Mohamed Ramadan and Mona Mostafa 2014, Labour market transitions of young women and men 
in Egypt (ILO funded study) 
82 http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/egypt-population/ 
83 Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics, Statistical Yearbook 2015 
84 World Bank Quick Notes Series (December 2016), Egypt’s Youth Outside Work And Education 
85 World Bank (2011). World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development. Washington, DC. 
86 WFP, (2013) Status of Poverty and Food Security in Egypt :Analysis and policy Recommendation Preliminary 
Summary Report  
43 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
among women (43.9%), the highest TFR of all governorates at 4.8, and the third highest percentage 
of teenage pregnancies. It has the lowest percentage of mothers receiving antenatal checkups at 59.9 
percent – 10 percent below the governorate with the second lowest percentage.87  
  The Bedouin community in the coastal areas of the Governorate of Matrouh has been 
11.
neglected for many years. The settlement of the nomadic herders in an area that has between 50 to 
150 millimeters of rainfall and is chronically water deficit has put increasing pressure on the land, 
water and vegetative resources. Most of the rural population is dependent on the dwindling natural 
resource base with few opportunities for off-farm employment. While livestock represents the main 
source of income there has been a rapid decline in numbers due to the degradation of the rangelands 
and limited water for fodder production. Since the settlement of the population and its transformation 
into a sedentary community, the livestock holding capacity has been significantly reduced from about 
one million animals to around 500,000.88 Field visits by the IFAD Mission to several settlements 
confirmed that the rural population was in fact living in conditions of extreme multi-dimensional 
poverty with very limited access to basic social sector services like domestic water supply, sanitation, 
health, education, electricity or transport exacerbated by the scattered nature of the settlements. 
  Al Moghra in Al-Alamein will also be a target area for the project. Al Moghra is desert land which 
12.
is part of 1.5 million feddan land reclamation scheme of the Government of Egypt. Due to prolonged 
period of droughts and the degradation of the natural vegetation, part of this land which was at one 
time used as range lands, was no longer in use. The Bedouins who used this land at one time, no 
longer live there and are dispersed in the adjoining Governorates. Since the last five or six years, 
pioneering private sector companies in search of scarce agricultural land moved into this area. Private 
sector investment in the area relied on Law 143, enacted in 1981 to grant security of tenure to 
individuals and companies provided they can demonstrate that they have been farming uninhabited 
desert lands. Their entry into Morgha was facilitated by the six Bedouin tribes who assert traditional 
usufruct right to this land89. Currently, 22 investor companies have ‘bought’ usufruct rights on around 
27,000 feddans90 by paying the Bedouin chiefs for security. The tribes in turn ensure that there are no 
competing claims on the lands granted to them. These companies have capitalized upon the 
availability of water at shallow depths to undertake agriculture production. The salinity levels in the 
water range between 2000 to 8000 ppm but are suitable for a range of salt tolerant crops such as 
jojoba, pomegranate, olives and selected fodder varieties.  
  The private sector interest in the area is driven by high demand for Jojoba oil. The traders in 
13.
Europe and the Far East were reluctant to deal with companies with smallholdings and wanted to 
engage primarily with companies with large productive potential. This has led to a massive spurt in 
growth in the area. The levels of production of Jojoba seed required for participating in the 
international market has translated into a keen interest in the youth famers who are viewed as 
potential producers of Jojoba and providers of labour. The companies in the area have established 
Jojoba plantations and many of the areas have begun Jojoba oil production. These companies are 
counting on the existing law and expecting that their ownership will be regularized by ECDC as part of 
the 1.5 million feddan project. Currently, the companies are in the process of acquiring legal 
ownership and are in negotiation with the Government. 
Target Groups 
  The primary target group of PRIDE in Matrouh Governorate will be women and men who are 
14.
poor small-holder livestock farmers, poor small-holder horticulturists, principally growing figs and 
olives rearing livestock along the coastal areas. In Al Moghra, the primary target group will be youth 
companies who are being granted ownership rights by ECDC. In Matrouh Governorate, 70 to 85 
87 Ministry of Health and Population (2015), Egypt Demographic Health Survey, 2014 
88 Government of Matrouh and the Database of the Desert Research Centre. November, 2016 
89 ECDC claims that all land belongs to the Government and contests the claims of the Bedouin. 
90 ECDC claims that the actual land which is being farmed is less than half of this area. 
44 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
percent of livestock farmers have herds of up to 50 animals.91 In Siwa Oasis, ninety percent of the 
farmers are smallholders owning ½ to 2 feddan. Seventy-five per cent have less than five small 
ruminants and a few have cows.92 In Al Moghra, youth and small farmer companies jointly own a 
parcel of 238 feddan of reclaimed land in joint ownership. These groups can have up to 23 
shareholders with a minimum shareholding of 10 feddan each. ECDC has already selected 140 youth 
companies and will select another 112 for the new lands in Al Moghra.  
  Smallholder semi-nomadic livestock farmers: The project will focus on farmers living in the 
15.
rangeland belt 15-50 km inland from the coast. The Bedouins living in the rangeland usually own 
some family land in the 1 to 2 km radius around the household clusters they live in. The level of 
education among these farmers is typically low. Some are not literate, others have attended primary 
school with few studying up to the preparatory level (12th grade). Women’s education is limited to 
primary and illiteracy is high. Household sizes tend to be large. Although official sources maintain the 
average size of household is 6, anecdotal evidence shows larger households with typically three to 
five families living together in one housing unit. 
16.
Livestock is their principal source of income, food security and their safety net. The poor 
livestock farmers the project will be engaging with will have from 50 – 100 small ruminants, goats and 
sheep, and may own some poultry and pigeons. These farmers graze their small ruminants on family 
owned and communal rangeland. Due to deterioration of the rangeland and frequent droughts, the 
farmers, often under pressure, have to move to a semi–intensive system and purchase feed for their 
livestock. Marketing of livestock is not a problem and there is ready access to the weekly district 
livestock markets. Some of these farmers also engage in daily wage labour to supplement the family 
income. The critical challenges they face include scarcity and cost of fodder due to the degradation of 
the rangelands, scarcity of water, low productivity of livestock due to poor feeding, inbreeding and 
poor management practices, inability to afford feed, lack of access and cost of veterinary care as well 
as lack of access to formal credit. Loans with interest are considered haram (strictly forbidden in 
Islam).  
  Women are involved in looking after livestock – cleaning, feeding and milking – when the 
17.
livestock is around the homestead. There is no strong tradition of processing the milk of small 
ruminants beyond some yogurt for household consumption. Women are involved in raising pigeons, 
ducks and poultry, if the household can afford it. This is used mainly for home consumption but can be 
a source of income for women as the proceeds from selling eggs and poultry are considered women’s 
income even when sold through the men. The project will benefit these farmer households through 
providing incentives and support for rangeland management, support to grow perennial fodder inter 
cropped with barley, cisterns and reservoirs for households and livestock, a breeding programme to 
provide high quality rams and mobile veterinary clinics for improved animal healthcare. 
  Small-holder horticulturist farmers: The project will also engage with small holder 
18.
horticulturists who have up to 100 trees with some livestock and will be mainly located in the narrow 
coastal strip, about 5 km inland which has good alluvial soils and horticulture is the main farming 
activity. The farmers rear livestock and grow barley in the mixed production strip, 5-15 km inland 
which has lower rainfall and soil quality, and practise a mixed farming system in the wadis. Most of the 
agricultural tasks are performed by men but women are involved in harvesting crops and fruits. In 
Matrouh, their main constraints are availability of water, post-harvest losses, lack of access to storage, 
grading and processing facilities. The project will be providing these farmers with training on orchard 
management, post-harvest and marketing, increased availability of water through cisterns and 
reservoirs and access to extension services. In Siwa, the main constraints include excessive salinity, 
water-logging and inappropriate irrigation management which have led to high tree mortality in many 
areas, threatening the age old agriculture in the area. The project will undertake a study on the 
91 Andrea Pape-Christiansen. 2000. Impact assessment of rangelands improvement activities in the Matrouh Resource 
Management Project. Consultancy Report 
92 Based on community dialogues and consultations with DRC staff 
45 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
irrigation and drainage problems of Siwa and help to disseminate information on crops suitable for 
desert environments through the DRC research station.  
19.
  Women: In the project area, the hierarchical and patriarchal tribal structure of the Bedouin, as 
well as the distinct customs of the Berber people in Siwa puts women at a much greater disadvantage 
compared to many other parts of the country. Women are virtually incarcerated in the homestead. The 
strict codes which women have to observe limit their access to resources, limit their mobility and 
access to health and education services with few opportunities for productive employment. Bedouin 
settlements comprise scattered clusters of houses (5–25 in each cluster) which may or may not be 
connected by roads. The access to basic services such as schools and health units is limited both by 
their availability, cultural norms and the cost of accessing the facilities. 
  Young girls are often deprived of even a basic education. This is essentially due to two factors. 
20.
One, the non-availability of schools within 2-3 kilometres requires arrangement of transport in 
communities which are poor and do not prioritize girls education. Two, primary schools are staffed by 
the government with male teachers for remote areas and, due to cultural restrictions in the majority of 
the communities, a girl after puberty is not allowed to be taught by a male teacher. Similarly, the non-
availability of health units within walking distance limits access. Communities can be as much as 50 
km from a health unit. Poverty, scarcity of water, lack of access to basic health and education 
services, limited access to markets, a harsh desert environment which limits food diversity coupled 
with cultural restrictions on women and girls lead to poor health outcomes and malnourishment. 
  During field visits, women and children’s health in the rangeland belt of Saloum and Ras El 
21.
Hikmah was observed to be poor. Children and women appeared malnourished and older women 
were suffering from obesity and diseases. Women reported rice, bread, lentils and beans to be their 
staple food with some vegetables and fruit. Chicken was at best eaten once a week and mutton only 
during the Eid festivals. Pigeons are an important source of protein for those who can afford to keep 
pigeon towers. The scarcity of water and sanitation arrangements appears to have a greater impact 
on women and children’s health as they are essentially confined to the homestead. In the districts of 
Matrouh, with some exceptions, where women are involved in some handicrafts but income 
generating activities are mostly limited to sewing tents, some income from poultry and working as 
agricultural labour during the harvesting season.  
  During field visits in Saloum, Ras El Hikmah and Siwa, women reported that deliveries mostly 
22.
took place at home with a woman in the cluster acting as the midwife. Antenatal visits were rare. 
There was a strong tradition of breastfeeding children anywhere from 9 months to 2 years. However, if 
a woman became pregnant, breast-feeding was stopped. The age at which infants were provided with 
solid food varied from 6 months to 2 years. 
23.
In Siwa oasis, women and children access to health, education and food is better compared to 
women living in the desert belt. There is a stronger tradition of sending girls to school and girls were 
attending up to grade 9, even if the school was co-educational. Girls have greater mobility and fewer 
restrictions before they are married, unlike girls in the rangeland belt, however as soon as they are 
married, the norms become as restrictive as elsewhere in Matrouh. However, transport costs, ancillary 
expenses and cultural restrictions limited the access of girls to secondary school (Grade 11 and 12). 
Unmarried girls were allowed to access training in sewing and handicrafts as long as it was in women 
only groups. However, once a girl gets married, much higher levels of restrictions come into force. 
There was a village in Siwa, Ain Safi, where it was reported that both married and unmarried women 
could work outside the home. Community-based NGOs that have the confidence of the community 
were able to provide training to married girls and women. During field visits, women and children 
appeared to be healthier than those in the desert belt with women reporting higher intakes of 
vegetables, fruits and meat (fish, chicken and sheep/ goat organs). Although women in Siwa are also 
confined to the homestead, denser population leads to greater interaction with other women and 
women are engaged in several livelihood activities such as basket weaving, making clay ovens, date-
honey, silver jewellery etc. During the early part of the project implementation, socio-economic 
46 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
characteristics, vulnerabilities, assets and livelihoods with constraints and opportunities of different 
groups of women/girls will be collected and gender mainstreaming activities based on this analysis. 
24.
  The project will support women by increasing their well-being, their nutritional status 
and promoting their dignity. It will help save women’s time and labour as well as have a beneficial 
impact on their health by building cisterns to increase the availability of water. Women will be provided 
with livelihood packages (poultry, pigeons and goat93) as well as support for income generating 
activities to help them improve their own and their families’ nutritional status. Another intervention to 
promote improved nutrition will be the introduction of the Moringa tree which has multiple health 
benefits. Mobile health units with women staff will be provided through the Department of Health to 
women living in remote areas. A critical intervention to promote the health and dignity of women will 
be the provision of sanitation facilities. Nutrition and health awareness sessions as well as literacy 
sessions will be provided for women and the access of children, particularly girls, to primary education 
will be addressed through providing multi-grade one-room classrooms. Girls and boys would also be 
provided with access to formal education through the establishment of three formal schools up to 
preparatory (Grade 9) with the objective of particularly increasing the number of girls receiving an 
education beyond primary.  
It should also be borne in mind that the project will recruit gender specialists both at the level of 
25.
the central PMU and the field PMU. This will ensure that all gender constraints are addressed and 
specific strategies are implemented to enhance empowerment/ gender mainstreaming. 
  Youth: Education and livelihood opportunities for young men and women are limited, with 
26.
young women facing severe restrictions. In the rural areas, young men can be non-literate or have low 
levels of schooling. Girls, especially in the rangeland belt, are much more likely to be non-literate and 
at best have completed primary school. Young men are involved in the agriculture sector and are 
under-employed or unemployed. The local tourism industry in the coastal area has been growing but 
can offer employment for only two-to three months in the year. Some young men seek employment as 
casual wage labourers in other governorates for three to four months in the year to supplement family 
income. Young women face the challenge of early marriage, multiple pregnancies and highly 
restricted mobility. However, there are instances of women breaking through the glass ceiling, 
graduating from university and working with NGOs and government institutions such as DRC. 
  The project will provide young men with training in orchard management and livestock 
27.
management, employ young men as veterinary doctors for the mobile clinics and provide vocational 
training for young men to become electricians, plumbers, carpenters, technicians in drip irrigation, etc 
with the potential for employment with Investors or companies on new lands. Young women will 
benefit from all the packages for empowering women for nutritional change and increased access to 
health services through the establishment of Health Units and Mobile Health Clinics. Young women 
will also receive training in fig and olive harvesting through demonstration on special packages 
developed for display on tablets. In addition, the project will provide employment opportunities for 
local young women who have broken through the cultural restrictions as Women Development 
officers. 
  Small holder and youth farmers in newly reclaimed lands in AL-Moghra: The project will 
28.
support the small-holder farmers and youth companies in the newly reclaimed lands in Moghra in the 
Governorate of Matrouh. The Government of Egypt has allocated 60,000 feddan in parcels of 238 
feddan of reclaimed land to 252 youth and smallholder farmer groups. The eligibility criteria are as 
follows: (i) groups of 10 to 23 youth and smallholder farmers form a company (age 21 and above) (ii) 
at least one shareholder has experience in agriculture and one to is a graduate (iii) share-holders 
participate in a training programme (iv) minimum share in the company is 2 per cent or 10 feddans. 
Currently the price per feddan in Morgah is LE 18,000. The shareholders of youth and farmer 
companies are required to deposit 25% of the cost of the land in the company LE 1,071,000 ($59,500) 
upfront. However, 5% of this has to be paid with the application for land, 10% on possession. The rest 
93 Only in Siwa oasis where alfalfa is increasingly cultivated and goats can easily graze. 
47 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
has to be paid over six years after a two year grace period. The youth companies are expected to 
take possession and begin work on these lands by August-September, 2017.  
  The mission met with some of the shareholders in these youth companies. These young men 
29.
and women come from diverse backgrounds ranging from school and university teachers, 
entrepreneurs with small businesses, smallholder farmers. Some were currently unemployed. These 
young men and women were under 30 years old and their investments in these companies had been 
made by either selling a small piece of land, selling the family home or savings from a small business 
or employment in the country or in the Gulf States. The mission was informed that between ten to 
twenty percent of the shareholders of these companies are women. These young men and women 
have limited resources and are counting on support in several areas to develop the land. ECDC has 
dug a well for each parcel of land and is in the process of creating a master plan for this area. ECDC 
plans to provide roads, access to basic services, electricity and access to loans. However, basic 
services and timeframes for the provision of these services have to be negotiated with other 
government departments These groups will be supported by the project with training in on-farm 
sustainable water management, suitable agricultural activities, vocational training for youth, roads, 
desalinization plant and social infrastructure such as schools and health units. 
Targeting Strategy 
30.
  Project Target Group: There are estimated to be 41,589 rural households in the proposed 
project area.94 The project will target these households based on an approach and strategy outlined 
below. 
Table 2.1. Potential Target Group95 
Total Rural  HHs 
Communities 
Marsa Matrouh  56,185 
9,364 
17 
El Dabaa 
El Negila 
Barrani 
El Saloum 
Siwa 
El Moghra 
Total 
48,723 
25,705 
46,896 
17,990 
28,329 
21,420 
5 
6 
7 
8 
8,121 
4,284 
7,816 
2,998 
4,722 
4,284 
252 
245,248 
41,589 
  Poverty Targeting Approach: PRIDE will help to build the resilience of poor rural households 
31.
to the harsh climate conditions in the Matrouh Governorate by improving their productive capacities, 
assist communities to enhance the productive potential of the newly reclaimed lands and assisting 
women from poor households to improve their nutritional and socio-economic profile thus helping 
Egypt in meeting its Sustainable Development Goals. There is a strong focus in the current project on 
women with respect to improving their access to better diets, water, sanitation, health and education 
facilities. These will be included due to IFAD’s strong commitment to ‘inclusive and sustainable rural 
transformation“ so that extreme poverty is eliminated and every rural family lives in dignity. For IFAD 
nutrition is a key focus area and its Nutrition Action Plan is designed to promote the equality and 
empowerment of women in ways that help them improve nutrition for themselves, their children and 
94 CAPMAS figures on the rural population are considered highly underestimated by key stakeholders such as the 
Governor of Matrouh, NGOs working in the area and DRC. The census was last conducted in 2006 and is being 
conducted again this year. The challenge of collecting data from scattered populations in the desert possibly drives this 
underestimation. 
95 There are 252 groups in El Moghra each with an average of 17 households as indicated by ECDC. In addition, there 
are Bedouin families and youth in El Alamein and surrounding areas who could benefit from opportunities for 
employment on the new lands. These numbers will be confirmed during final design. 
48 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
their families. These commitments require investing in literacy, education and sanitation as improving 
nutrition requires cross-sectoral investments. 
32.
  Geographical Targeting: The project will be implemented in the rural areas of six districts 
(marakiz) of Matrouh Governorate: Marsa Matrouh, El Negila, El Barrani, El Saloum, El Dabaa, Siwa 
and in Mograh settlement in Alamein in the 60,000 feddan of newly reclaimed lands. The Project will 
be working with the 43 communities identified to be living in 40 villages in these areas. Project 
benefits will be equitably distributed between these communities based on a range of criteria including 
poverty, population, relative remoteness, etc. The two poorest districts, El Saloum and El Nigela will 
receive 25 percent each of the cisterns, latrines, nutrition and livelihood packages and literacy 
classes. One hundred nutrition and livelihood packages and 400 handicraft packages have been 
reserved for Siwa Oasis. Within the project area, the project will plot and geo-reference the household 
clusters which will constitute the units for planning interventions for women given that women’s 
mobility is restricted to these clusters. The project will also plot the existing cisterns and sanitation 
facilities in the homestead to support transparent targeting. The budget for Mograh has been 
separately earmarked.  
  Self-selection: The project interventions for horticulturists and livestock farmers such as 
33.
provision of training and extension services, will principally be attractive for small-holder horticulturists 
and ruminant farmers who have challenges with orchard and livestock management and limited 
access to training and extension services.  
  Direct targeting: The project will have a sharp poverty and vulnerability focus in targeting the 
34.
cisterns96, livelihood packages, sanitation facilities, multi-grade classrooms, mobile health units to 
disadvantaged women and girls. DRC and the implementing NGOs will take a number of steps to 
ensure that these beneficiaries are identified in a fair and transparent manner. Community meetings 
will be held in the project with representatives from each household to inform households about 
project interventions and criteria for selection. Google earth will be used to plot the clusters of 
households in a given area and the cisterns, pigeon towers and latrines that already been provided 
through other projects will be pinpointed on this map and submitted to the PMU. All project 
interventions will be geo-referenced. During a visit to a cluster, the M&E team will hold a meeting with 
men and women separately to ascertain that all the households that meet the selection criteria 
specified by the project in a given community are included. Each beneficiary will be visited, verified 
and geo-referenced by DRC’s / NGOs M&E team (men and women). Beneficiary data will be entered 
in the project’s MIS with their geo-coordinates. Over the course of the project the M&E team will visit 
each household cluster to collect geo-reference baseline data on the poorest and poor households.  
  The poorest houses will be prioritized. In all communities, the poorest households, essentially 
35.
those considered eligible for zakat, will be identified according to the following criteria and served first: 
(i) women-headed (this includes women who are single, divorced or widowed as well as households 
in which adult men are unable to earn due to age or any kind of disability) (ii) households with no land 
and no livestock (iii) households with no member employed (this does not include women’s 
engagement in handicraft or casual wage labour.) 
  Once all the poorest women in the area have been served, in each district, DRC/NGO will 
36.
target the number of clusters across communities in the districts of Marsa Matrouh, El Negila, El 
Barrani, El Saloum, El Dabaa that are over 30 km inland and have poor access to water sanitation 
and health. These will be ranked by remoteness with the most remote receiving top-priority for 
homestead cisterns, nutrition and livelihood packages. The following scoring system will be used to 
rank beneficiaries: 
Table 2.2 Scoring Criteria for Ranking Households 
96 In the case of cisterns, selection will take place on the basis of socio-economic criteria but the final allocation is 
based on the type of soil and rock formation, the characteristics and extent of the water catchment area, the topography 
and characteristics of the landscape. DRC will determine whether to construct a cistern (rocky soil) or reservoir (soft 
soil), the use of instruments/ tools for construction, etc. Contributions from the beneficiaries are only in terms of labour 
(opening of the aperture), ensuring that poorer HHs also have the capacity to construct cisterns/ reservoirs. 
49 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Indicator 
Ownership of livestock (Number) 
None 
20 or less 
50 or less 
Over 50 
Number of under-five children 
Over 5 
Up to 5 
None 
Ownership of Productive Land (Feddan) 
Under 5 feddan 
Between 5.1 to 10 
Over 10 feddan 
Off-Farm Employment (Number Employed Off-Farm Full Time) 
None 
Between 1 and 2 
Above 2 
Disability 
More than 1 
None 
Score 
10 
8 
5 
3 
10 
5 
3 
10 
5 
3 
10 
5 
3 
10 
3 
  Beneficiaries will be given priority based on the score they receive in descending order. Those 
37.
with the highest score will get the service first. All households in a given household cluster who meet 
the criteria will be served to promote fairness and social cohesion. In case there are sufficient 
resources left to serve more women, after the women in clusters in the over 30 km inland belt have 
been served, clusters in the 20 to 30 km belt. 
  Multi-grade schools will be established for household clusters that do not have access to one. 
38.
Women teachers will be paid special incentives to increase the number and duration for which girls 
remain in school. Most multi-grade schools currently have male teachers as hiring women teachers 
entails higher expenditures since special incentives and transportation have to be provided. Mobile 
and stationary health units will only be provided if the Department of Health commits to providing 
women staff.  
39.
In providing water for agriculture and watershed management, an important criteria for 
reservoirs for irrigation and wadi development will be that at least eighty percent of farmers will be 
small-holder farmers with 50 to 100 trees.97 The desalinization plants and on-farm water management 
support will be given exclusively to the farmers and youth companies investing in the newly reclaimed 
lands in the Morgah settlement. The project will support the construction of rural roads, prioritizing the 
needs of remote communities. The criteria for roads will be elaborated further in the final design 
mission. 
  Eighty per cent of the beneficiaries of support for livestock farming, mobile veterinary clinics, 
40.
livestock training, incentives for resting rangeland and alley fodder planting will be farmers with herds 
of up to 50 small ruminants. The project will take a broader, more inclusive approach for community 
rangeland management. Eighty percent of the beneficiaries supported for orchard management and 
cooperatives will be horticulturists with up to 100 fig and/or olive trees. One thousand women will be 
targeted for training in harvesting figs and olives. 
97 The number of trees are a much better indicator of the household status compared with land which may not be very 
productive due to water scarcity or poor water quality. 
50 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
  Roads for the coastal areas will be selected based on the following criteria; (i) areas which have 
41.
no previous road connection; (ii) No of households benefitting; (iii) areas which will benefit more 
based on reduction in costs of transporting water, animal feed, access to social sector services and 
access to trade and markets. The roads for El Moghra will be selected based on the following criteria; 
(i) the roads are in accordance with the Master Plan for the area; (ii) No existing source of financing is 
available; (iii) location will be based on areas where young farming companies have initiated farming 
activities; (iv) priority will be given to areas with the highest concentration of young groups.  
  The project will provide a limited amount of grants to youth groups to defray the initial capital 
42.
cost of developing the new lands in El Moghra.[1]. While ECDC is making arrangements to enable the 
smallholders to access agriculture credit through the formal banking system, it is not yet clear how 
quickly or easily this will be accessible to them. The private sector is also expected to play a role in 
the provision of some inputs especially drip irrigation systems and saplings and recover the cost from 
future production. However, these efforts will need to be supplemented by the project. The costs that 
will need to be defrayed will typically include the development of the on-farm water management 
system including the installation of drip irrigation systems, the erecting of fences around the land 
perimeter to protect against sand dune encroachment, purchase of key inputs like saplings, fertilisers, 
etc.  
  The grants will be provided only to the youth companies on the new lands based on the 
43.
following selection criteria; (i) The grants will be allocated on first come first serve basis to those with 
a signed contract with ECDC; (ii) the groups have developed and submitted a production plan to 
ECDC; (iii) groups will have to demonstrate that they have a well-defined financing plan that could 
include their own funds, loans and forward contracting with private sector; (iv) Only those groups will 
be eligible who have started farming on the ground and expect to bring 70% of the land under 
cultivation; (v) the matching grants will be prioritized based on the number of shareholders within a 
group; (v) Equitability of shareholding will be given priority and groups where one member has more 
than 30% of the land will not qualify for the matching grant and (vi) a maximum of USD 5000 will be 
provided per shareholder in a group. 
  Empowering and Capacity building: the participation of men and women small-holder 
44.
farmers in orchard management and livestock will increase their capacities for effective management 
of their productive resources. The participation of women, who are bound by severe cultural 
restrictions, in literacy classes, health and nutrition classes with exposure to electronic tablets will 
increase their confidence, well-being and happiness. Children and girls in particular will be 
empowered through providing them with access to education. As demonstrated by research, this will 
have wide-ranging social benefits for women and girls. In addition, their capacity to make wise 
choices for improved nutrition will be increased through their participation in the BCC nutrition 
campaign. The ownership of assets given through the livelihood packages and/or increase in income 
through market based handicraft development will empower women. The allocation of cisterns and 
sanitation facilities in women’s name will also promote their visibility and dignity. Youth will be 
empowered through skill development in orchard management and livestock training as well as 
vocational training as electricians, plumbers etc. for the newly reclaimed lands in Moghra. Local 
women who have broken through the restrictions placed on women will be hired by the project as 
Women’s Development Officers. 
  Enabling measures for poverty targeting and mainstreaming gender: The project will 
45.
sensitize and increase the capacity of MOA and DRC to work with women. It will also increase the 
capacity to develop participatory plans for rangeland management with poor smallholder livestock 
farmers. The poverty screening of households and workshops on Gender and Targeting will further 
help to sensitize MOA /DRC to gender and poverty targeting issues. 
  The gender strategy of the project will be sensitive to the specific nature of women’s 
46.
constraints in Matrouh and focus on affirmative action to increase their level of empowerment, well-
being and visibility as development actors. The empowerment of women will be ensured through a 
range of strategies: (i) targets will be set for women’s participation in all key activities with women and 
51 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
women-headed households receiving priority; (ii) a gender and targeting action plan will be formulated 
at the implementation stage by the PMU with implementation partners and reviewed on a yearly basis; 
(iv) the terms of reference for staff and technical experts will include responsibilities for 
operationalizing the gender strategy of the project; (v) the project will be sensitive to arrangements 
required to enable women/girls to participate – such as arranging literacy, health and nutrition 
sessions as well as training in fig and olive harvesting at the cluster level given the limitations on 
women’s mobility, providing incentives for one-room schools to be staffed by women, making the 
funding of health units and mobile units contingent on the provision of women staff (vi) the monitoring 
and evaluation framework will include indicators disaggregated by sex to track the project’s 
performance in promoting women’s empowerment in terms of their capacity-building and benefits. The 
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) tool and key questions from the Women's 
Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI) will also be incorporated (vii) DRC will be required to 
recruit 6 Women’s Development Officers (ix) a Gender Specialist will be contracted under technical 
assistance by the PMU to conduct a gender assessment in year 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6(ix) an NGO with 
experience in working with women will be recruited for assisting in implementation of Component 2 (x) 
any studies undertaken by the project will address gender issues and disaggregate data collection, 
analysis and findings by gender (xii) a detailed gender assessment of project activities will be 
conducted prior to the mid-term review (xiii) a poverty and gender specialist will be included in the 
yearly supervision missions, Mid-Term Review and Project Completion Mission. 
52 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Country Performance 
Egypt is IFAD's largest recipient of financial assistance in the Near East and North Africa 
1.
region. The organization has committed US$392.7 million in loans to Egypt since 1981 to support 
agricultural development and reduce rural poverty, benefiting a large number of people. In total, IFAD 
has invested in 12 agricultural development programmes and projects designed in collaboration with 
smallholders, the government and other partners in Egypt. Eight of the projects have been completed, 
and four are on-going. Egypt has also benefited from a number of regional grants focused on soil and 
water management, gender mainstreaming, development of knowledge-sharing networks, and 
promotion of microfinance for poor rural people. IFAD’s programme in Egypt has comprised two main 
themes and groups of activities: support for settlement in lands reclaimed from the desert in Lower 
(northern) Egypt and support for productivity improvement in the old lands in the Nile Valley and 
Upper Egypt. 
2.
IFAD’s completed and ongoing projects have: (i) reached 1.3 million households or about 7 
million poor rural people; (ii) reclaimed 447,000 feddan of land (188,000 ha); (iii) established and 
strengthened 800 WUOs, reaching more than 20,000 members; (iv) established and supported farmer 
marketing associations (FMAs), with 31,170 members (in addition to the ones being established by 
the Upper Egypt Rural Development (UERDP), PRIME and SAIL projects); (v) established and 
supported 37 CDAs as financial intermediaries to provide microfinance to end-users (in addition to 
100 CDAs expected to be established by the PRIME and SAIL projects); (vi) extended loans to 
100,000 beneficiaries for a total value of US$66.4 million; (vii) established 33 schools (junior, primary 
and secondary) with a yearly intake of 14,560 students (under the West Noubaria Rural Development 
Project (WNRDP)); and (viii) rehabilitated 14 medical clinics and provided 126 medical caravans, 
benefitting some 43,600 people.   
3.
Several completed IFAD projects demonstrate the impact that the projects have been able to 
secure for the target group in close partnership with the Government. The WNRDP and the UERDP 
have both shown significant and positive results. IFAD’s interventions have resulted in: (i) an increase 
in smallholder incomes by 43 per cent for conventional export crops, and 63 per cent for organic 
horticulture products, through contract farming arrangements and establishment of FMAs. Further 
increases in household incomes have been achieved through the direct sale of produce by Farmer 
Marketing Associations. The WNRDP impact study also showed (i) significant decreases in irrigation 
costs by 25 per cent, through enhanced managerial capacity of WUO executive committees, 
conversion from diesel to electric pumping, and promotion of modern irrigation systems; (ii) 50 percent 
decreases in fertilizer use through drip irrigation; (iii) a 20-fold increase in the market price of land, 
due to improved infrastructure and access to services promoted by WNRDP. The project evaluation of 
UERDP reported that the main benefits achieved as a result of applying the new farming systems and 
cropping models included higher land and crop productivity and reduction in the costs due to more 
rationalized use of seeds, fertilizers and water. 
Lessons learned 
The lessons from the experience of IFAD’s on-going and completed projects as well as its 
4.
experience from its grant funded projects and the findings from the most recent Country Programme 
Evaluation (CPE) undertaken in 2016 by the Office of Evaluations have been considered in the 
current design. These lessons address the implementation arrangements, targeting, components, 
opportunities for policy dialogue and knowledge management. 
5.
Some of the important lessons that emerge from this analysis include the following; (i) Project 
Management arrangements within the MALR need to be strengthened as a lean PMU is economical 
but has trade-offs in terms of effectiveness; (ii) Use of existing institutions and implementation 
arrangements enhances the sustainability of project interventions and can expedite start-up; (iii) 
53 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Greater efficiency and effectiveness can be realized through focusing projects in a concentrated area 
and not spread them over a large geographic area; (iv) Greater support and funding is required for 
funding and support to capacity building; (v) dedicated resources and staff for women’s participation 
ensures the likelihood of their inclusion in project activities; (vi) a multi-pronged strategy to address 
the exclusion of women is required through facilitating access to basic rural services, infrastructure 
and improved rural water supply; (vii) special strategy is required to include youth in a participatory 
manner in project activities; (viii) Sanitation and waste treatment has been insufficiently addressed in 
IFAD projects; (ix) Greater investment in rural institutions should be the key starting point for all 
project activities and should provide the anchor for all investments; (x) clear delineation between 
public, community and private goods for long-term sustainability; (xi) greater focus on linking farmers 
with markets through the use of specialist expertise as Government and NGO staff generally do not 
have the orientation or training for this purpose (xii) a pragmatic approach to policy engagement is 
more effective given high turnover of senior staff in the Ministries; (xiii) document lessons from both 
successes and failures to avoid repeating shortcomings or mistakes.  
IFAD has also accumulated a range of lessons, which are very pertinent to the type of area that 
6.
it will be focusing on in the current project. IFAD’s experience in the new lands in the West Noubaria 
and SAIL shows that an integrated package of support is required to make projects effective in the 
new lands. Thus even if education and health are not strictly part of the normal IFAD package of 
support, without access to social sector services, newly emerging communities will not move into the 
new lands. Many new land developments, not only in Egypt, but in many other parts of the world have 
failed because of lack of support for basic services. Discussions with the youth representatives who 
had been allocated land in El Moghra stated that they needed support with access to potable water, 
emergency health care and road network. Providing these basic facilities expedites land reclamation 
and the establishment of strong rural communities that can focus on agriculture development.  
The current design has also incorporated some of the key lessons from the Implementation 
7.
Completion Report (ICR)98 of the World Bank financed Matrouh Resource Management Project. The 
ICR rated the overall performance of the project as satisfactory and noted the positive impact of the 
project on water resource management, crop and livestock productivity as well as communal 
rangeland management. The ICR noted that the project was significantly delayed in getting off the 
ground and that its rural finance component was a failure. The lessons that it identified from its 
experience include the following; (i) multi-sectoral/multi-disciplinary approach in natural resource 
management and poverty alleviation projects is more likely to lead to achievement of objectives than 
the single-sector projects of the past and requires the use of multi-disciplinary teams; (ii) participatory 
project implementation requires flexible budgeting that is not constrained by predetermined outputs, 
but relies on a truly demand-driven identification of activities, in order for the participatory planning 
and implementation approach to be fully responsive to beneficiary demands; (iii) Given the time 
required for community-level discussion and negotiation to agree on beneficiary priorities, full-time 
dedicated and skilled staff should be assigned to interface with communities and support their process 
of organization; (iv) Rural credit programs, particularly in remote areas, require innovative 
mechanisms that adapt to constraints such as collateral, religious views to interest rate payment and 
need for credit delivery at lowest levels99; (v) Targeting the poorest segments of the society can be a 
challenging process where communities have strong traditional structures, and requires time, clear 
monitoring mechanisms and strong engagement with the tribal organization; (vi) Community 
rangeland management may be a more suitable approach than activities targeting individual farmers, 
but requires more initial time to be invested in negotiation and conflict resolution. 
98 Implementation Completion Report (IDA-25040). Matruh Resource Management Project. June 3, 2003. World Bank.  
99 The Projects rural finance component was declared a failure and eventually cancelled. 
54 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
The Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) Project will consist of two main 
1.
components which will include (i); Climate Resilient Livelihoods (ii) and Integrated Nutrition-Sensitive 
Investments. 
Component 1: Climate Resilient Livelihoods  
2.
The Climate Resilient Livelihoods component will consist of four subcomponents; (i) Water for 
Agriculture and Watershed Management; (ii) Enhancing Connectivity; (iii) Livestock and Rangeland 
Development and (ii) Crop Production. 
(i)  Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management 
  Water reservoirs for supplementary irrigation: Along the coastal zone in the Matrouh 
3.
Governorate, the incomes of the rural population come mainly from livestock and the arboriculture 
represented mainly by the olive and the fig trees grown in valley beds and depressions along the coast. As it 
is a semi-arid to arid region where rainfall varies from about 150mm-200mm near the coast to about 50mm 
inland, water harvesting is vital for human and animal consumption and crop production. Studies have 
shown that application of supplementary irrigation can appreciably increase crop productivity in these 
rain-fed areas and presents an important measure for adaptation to climate change100. The project will 
invest in 500 water reservoirs with a capacity of 300m3. These reservoirs are critical for providing 
supplementary irrigation in an area where the rainfall pattern is very uncertain. A criteria has been 
developed for the allocation of the water reservoirs along the valley beds and other suitable locations 
(Appendix 2) and will be implemented along with the valley watershed development programme. 
4.
Rehabilitations and development of the wadis – One of the main sources of livelihood in the 
Governorate is the plantation of olives and fig trees in the valley beds, which relies on soil water retention in 
these water scarce areas. Households rely on levelling and contouring the wadi beds and constructing small 
dikes of slightly compacted soil of about 50 cm on the downstream limit of the family plot to retain water run-
off, enable its infiltration into the soil for use by the crops. There are 218 wadis located in an area extending 
from Fouka to El Salloum on a distance of about 300 km. Among them more than 71 have already been 
partially rehabilitated. The project will assist in the rehabilitation of 100 existing or new wadis to enhance the 
area under cultivation. The average cost of equipping one km of a wadi with about 80 meters of average 
width (19 feddans) and about 13 to 14 weirs is about EGP 450,000 or about EGP 23,000 per feddan. The 
cost of rehabilitation is almost the same because it is similar work, but in more restricted spaces. 
The technology for building the dikes has improved over time and the current technique will provide 
5.
part of the dike with a weir formed of rock blocks to allow the water to pass to the next plot, thereby 
preventing damage to the dikes and the erosion of the plot. The rehabilitation process will use this technique 
to restore the wadis beds by replacing the still existing earth dikes by new masonry weirs in order to better 
retain the water and prevent soil erosion. The weirs will be constructed 50 cm higher than the soil behind it, 
in order to allow for proper water infiltration into the soil layer for trees and crops. The masonry weirs cross-
sections selected will depend on the nature of the foundation grounds (erosion and bearing capacity) and on 
the height of the weir. The drawings will be supplemented by an explanatory and supporting note which 
specifies under what conditions each weir profile will be used. The layout and location of a dike or masonry 
weir are not always made according to the topography of the site or the longitudinal profile of the wadi, but 
also take into account ownership pattern. DRC has been implementing a well-developed methodology for 
the purpose which will be followed under PRIDE. A written document will be executed to clarify the 
arrangements. The weirs are located in a manner which allows clear delineation of land plots of each 
household to avoid any conflicts. To further ensure consensus, the establishment of the masonry weir will be 
undertaken in the presence of an agreement of all families possessing lands along the wadi. This procedure 
will be undertaken both for rehabilitation and new wadi development. 
100 Samiha A. H et al. Management of Climate Induced Drought and Water Scarcity city in Egypt. Pp 27-46. Rain Fed 
Areas in Egypt: Obstacles and Opportunities. May 2016. 
55 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
6.
Development of New Valley beds or Wadis: The project will also invest in developing new wadis. 
For the selection of new wadis, the following criteria will be adopted: (i) sufficient arable soil to fill the wadi 
bed, (ii) extent of erosion, (iii) extent of the watershed, (iv) the number of beneficiaries. The process that will 
be adopted for the new wadi development will include: (a) the choice of the masonry weirs axes in the 
presence of the different owners so that two successive weirs limit the land of the same family; (b) 
construction of the masonry weir at the required height according to the topography of the site; (c) The weir 
profile is chosen by the civil engineer according to its height and the nature of the foundation grounds; (d) 
The weir also includes the lateral walls to channel the flows; (e) For cost reasons, the masonry weir 
generally does not extend from bank to bank but occupies a large part of the central section of the wadi; (f) 
Back filling, by fertile soils and up to the desired elevation, of the space between two successive weirs; (g) 
The weir must be about 50 cm higher than the soil behind to allow water retention and deep infiltration (h) 
construction between the banks and the weir of the earthen shoulders (dikes) properly moistened and 
compacted; (i) The dikes must be higher than the weir to channel water to the discharge section of the weir 
and (j) The execution must ensure that the overflow section of the weir is perfectly horizontal and without 
depression in the middle which could favour the concentration of the flows in the center of the downstream 
plot. 
SIWA Drainage Study: IFAD has undertaken several reviews of the irrigation and drainage issues in 
7.
Siwa over the last six months and has also examined the previous studies on the subject. The rising levels 
of salinity and water logging pose a serious threat to agriculture in the Oasis. There is a range of options 
that were examined and discussed with the key stakeholders such as the Egyptian Public Authority for 
Drainage Projects (EPADP), the Chairman of the Groundwater Sector (GWS) and other officials of the 
Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation (MWRI). The issue is extremely complex and needs further in-
depth study to ensure that the solutions proposed are long-term and sustainable. Similar issues are 
beginning to emerge in the other oases in the New Valley Governorate such as Kharga and Frafra. 
  While there is considerable pressure to implement an immediate solution to the problems in Siwa, the 
8.
project will finance a comprehensive analysis of the Siwa Oasis with a detailed feasibility study, engineering 
design and costed plans of the potential options. IFAD will finance the study under the PRIDE project and 
select an international firm on a competitive basis for the purpose. The MWRI and MALR will both be 
involved in the preparation of the study and the results will help in identifying the technical options, the 
institutional and policy changes regarding digging of new wells and the on-farm water management 
practices required. The study will be used for key policy dialogue with the Government and will be used as a 
prototype for Oases development in Egypt especially in the New Valley Governorate. ECDC will also be 
consulted for the use of the surplus drainage water for new land development envisaged as part of the 1.5 
million feddan in Siwa in the next phase of the mega Government project. 
On-Farm Investments for Youth Companies in El Moghra: The project will provide a limited 
9.
amount of grants to youth groups to defray the initial capital cost of developing the new lands in El 
Moghra.101. While ECDC is making arrangements to enable the smallholders to access agriculture credit 
through the formal banking system, it is not yet clear how quickly or easily this will be accessible to them. 
The private sector is also expected to play a role in the provision of some inputs especially drip irrigation 
systems and saplings and recover the cost from future production. However, these efforts will need to be 
supplemented by the project. The costs that will need to be defrayed will typically include the development 
of the on-farm water management system including the installation of drip irrigation systems, the erecting of 
fences around the land perimeter to protect against sand dune encroachment, purchase of key inputs like 
saplings, fertilisers, etc. 
  The grants will be provided only to the youth companies on the new lands based on the following 
10.
selection criterion; (i) The grants will be allocated on first come first serve basis to those with a signed 
contract with ECDC; (ii) the groups have developed and submitted a production plan to ECDC; (iii) groups 
will have to demonstrate that they have a well-defined financing plan that could include their own funds, 
loans and forward contracting with private sector; (iv) Only those groups will be eligible who have started 
101 Some salt tolerant fodder species can be grown as annual crops and give relatively quick returns. However, the 
typical crops currently being grown such as Jojoba and pomegranates can take between 3 to 5 years for full maturity.  
56 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
farming on the ground and expect to bring 70% of the land under cultivation; (v) the matching grants will be 
prioritized based on the number of shareholders within a group; (v) Equitability of shareholding will be given 
priority and groups where one member has more than 30% of the land will not qualify for the matching grant 
and (vi) a maximum of USD 5000 will be provided per shareholder in a group. 
(ii) 
Enhancing Connectivity 
  Egypt has one of the lowest road network concentrations in the region102 with the Matrouh 
11.
Governorate among the lowest areas of concentration within the country. The project will invest in the 
construction of 250 kilometers of feeder roads with the expectation that IFAD financing will cover 60 percent 
of total investment cost and GoE counterpart funding will cover the rest. The identification of the roads will 
be undertaken in close participation with local communities with the assistance of DRC. The identification of 
the roads will be undertaken in close participation with local communities with the assistance of DRC and 
the Master Plan prepared for the Moghra settlement by Refl El Masry The Department of roads and bridges 
in the Matrouh Governorate will prepare the design, BOQs, technical specifications and supervise the 
process jointly with the DRC civil engineers. The roads will follow the road design standard given in the 
Egyptian Code for the Work of Urban and Rural Roads. 
  The roads for the coastal areas will be selected based on the following criteria; (i) areas which have 
12.
no previous road connection; (ii) No of households benefitting; (iii) areas which will benefit more based on 
reduction in costs of transporting water, animal feed, access to social sector services and access to trade 
and markets. The roads for El Moghra will be selected based on the following criteria; (i) the roads are in 
accordance with the Master Plan for the area; (ii) No existing source of financing is available; (iii) location will 
be based on areas where young farming companies have initiated farming activities; (iv) priority will be given 
to areas with the highest concentration of young groups. 
(iii)  Livestock & Rangeland Development 
13.
Livestock is a major source of income for the population of the project area There are 17,541 
livestock breeders in the project Governorate possessing 485,298 sheep, 144,124 goats, 18,048 camels. 
Livestock production is vulnerable because of low production and the degraded condition of rangelands, the 
frequency and duration of drought episodes, and the high feed cost to maintain the herd through the 
summer and early fall or through the entire year in a dry year. This vulnerability could worsen as a result of 
the effects of climate change on the productivity of rangelands and in growing feed crops like barley. In 
addition, most of livestock owners have small herd size (depending on the district: 52% to 76% have less 
than 25 heads of small ruminants, 14% to 22% have 25 to 50 heads and only 7% to 15% have from 50 to 
100 heads). The constraints to herd productivity include inbreeding and inadequate health and feeding 
practices. 
14.
In order to overcome some of these constraints, the sub-component will promote sustainable 
rangeland management and improved herd management practices to improve livestock productivity. Given 
the large expanse of rangelands in the area, the project will capitalize on IFAD’s experience in several 
countries103 to develop community rangeland management plans.104 These plans will include a range of 
activities to improve rangeland regeneration processes and productivity, as well as improving perennial 
fodder productivity on cultivated barley fields, the project will work closely with local Mandoubs to establish 
community rangeland plans. DRC and participating communities will identify Terms of Partnership, which 
will specify the responsibility of individual households participating in the plans, overall community 
responsibility in supervision and monitoring and the role of DRC.  
  Within the framework of these plans, the project will in agreement with the communities, provide 
15.
support to: i) 1000 individual smallholders to plant perennial fodder shrubs in alley cropping with barley on 
15,000 Feddan; ii) 500 individual smallholders to adopt the practice of resting family rangelands on 50,000 
102 Misr National Transport Study (MINTS). The Comprehensive Study on The Master Plan for Nationwide Transport 
System in the Arab Republic of Egypt. Technical Report No 1. JICA. March 2012. 
103 Examples of PDPEO I&II, and PDRTT in Eastern Morocco, PRODESUD in Southern Tunisia, and BADEA in Syria 
104 Lessons Learnt: Pastoralism Land rights and Tenure. Land Tenure Toolkit. 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/885a2f03 c359-4396-9b8b-94f4c2fd78af. IFAD October 2014. 
57 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Feddan; iii) communities to adopt the practice of resting community rangelands on 5,000 Feddan each; iv) 
resting small areas on community rangeland sites for seed production of native plant species to be utilized 
to aid regeneration of rested rangelands; v) DRC to produce fodder shrub seedlings to be used in alley 
cropping and to conduct periodic monitoring of rangeland condition; vi) training and exchange visits relevant 
to sustainable rangeland management, fodder shrub use, and harvesting of native plant seeds. 
  The project will support the smallholders to improve herd productivity through: i) effective production 
16.
of improved breeds within the DRC station in Marsa Matrouh and distribution of local Barqi breed stud rams 
in order to overcome the constraint of inbreeding in small herds; ii) improving access to veterinary services 
by providing two mobile veterinary units; iii) improving feeding and herd management practices through 
training and exchange visits. The Project will support DRC in providing mobile veterinary services especially 
to farming communities in the hinterlands which do not have access to proper veterinary care and animal 
health services.  
  The farmer capacity to enhance the productivity of the small ruminant herds of sheep and goats will 
17.
be undertaken through a breed improvement programme. DRC will implement a breed improvement plan in 
close collaboration with the smallholder farmers and private breeders. The project will provide 120 high 
quality stud rams of the Barqi and Damascus breed and feed resources to DRC. The breed improvement 
plan will entail the signature of a Terms of Partnership under which DRC will provide improved rams to 
selected communities, which agree to abide by the terms and conditions of partnership. The communities 
will oversee the agreement while individual farmers will implement the programme. The farmers will rent the 
rams from DRC and ensure their circulation within the smallholder farmers. The rams will be provided to 
participating communities and households just before the start of the mating season in May and returned at 
the end of each season. Each ram is expected to serve 33 ewes in each season. The payment for the use 
of the ram will be in the form of an off-spring from the improved breed. The combination of the improved 
project rams and those with the farming communities are expected to cover the entire small ruminant 
population over the seven-year project period. DRC will make a proper breed plan and include it in the PIM 
at the start of the project and develop suitable mechanisms to monitor and track progress.  
In areas of new settlements such as El-Moghra, the project will assess the type of services required 
18.
by the new settlers and discuss how best to organise these in discussion with the Livestock Department and 
other potential service providers who can also submit proposals in this regard. The project will provide 
technical assistance, training and support for livestock activities. Investment in aquaculture has proved to be 
a viable investment given the need to build sedimentation ponds to settle the excess iron in some of the 
wells in Moghra. Farmers have found that these ponds can provide an important source of income through 
fish farming and sale to the adjoining areas of Al Alamein. Some of the private sector farmers and 
companies which are currently located in Moghra have invested in appropriate livestock. Technical 
assistance will be provided to the farming communities to explore some viable livestock production 
activities. 
(iv)  Crop Production 
  Crop production subcomponent: Crop production subcomponent will consist of supporting farmers in 
19.
the old lands along the coast as well as the new lands in El Moghra. The project will provide support in the 
following activities: (i) Rehabilitation of DRC Nursery (ii) Horticulture training (iii) establish research facilities 
in Moghra; (iv) support to farmers on new lands; (v) support farmers in accessing equipment; (vi) Provide 
processing facilities for farmers in Moghra (vii) Agriculture extension & dissemination; (viii) Exchange Visits 
(ix) Applied Research & dissemination (x) Water Quality Monitoring & Capacity Building and (xi) Laboratory 
and Technical Equipment for DRC. 
  The DRC nursery will be rehabilitated to produce certified olive and fig trees and to propagate 
20.
promising species and varieties well adapted to the Matrouh rainfed agro-ecological conditions. The 
increase in production areas of figs and olives (wadi rehabilitation, land reclamation) will increase the 
demand of plants in Matrouh governorate. The nursery will provide the needed plants to the farmers at a 
competitive price. It will also provide virus free fig plants, virus being a concern for figs, and bacterial free 
olives plants, particularly Xylella fastidiola bacteria which is a serious threat to olives, first discovered in Italy 
58 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
which is a main olive collaborator with Egypt. The nursery will also offer the opportunity to DRC to propagate 
and offer drought and saline tolerant varieties identified through varietal trials.  
21.
  Horticultural training will reach a total of 5000 farmers and will comprise orchard management 
practices and improving the on-farm management practices. These practices will include soil tillage, 
mulching under tree canopy, annual forage crops mown in April to reduce water competition to trees while 
the remaining straw will play a role of total mulch to reduce water evaporation, organic manure or compost, 
which in addition will improve soil fertility and reduce salinity effect. Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
techniques will be implemented to limit the use of pesticides and qualify the local farm produce to eventually 
receive certified labeling. Farmers will also receive training in the adequate use of pesticides in accordance 
with safety standards. Farmers will also be introduced to improved pruning techniques to increase yield. 
Training in harvesting techniques will improve substantially the fig and olive oil marketing value and improve 
farm income. 
  The new youth farming companies are expected to initiate their farming activities in Moghra within the 
22.
next few months. Some of the shareholders have some previous experience of farming, while most have no 
direct experience. In any case, the farming conditions on the new lands are vastly different from those found 
in the Nile valley and all youth groups are likely to need technical assistance for initiating farming under the 
conditions found in Moghra. The land in El Moghra has not been previously cultivated. The soil is saline-
sodic with high levels of salinity and iron content in the water. The success in Al Mogha depends on the 
proper choice of the most suited species and varieties tolerant to saline soils, effective saline water 
management and appropriate crop management practices. Some of the private companies, which have 
been farming here under Law 143105 are choosing to plant jojoba because it is tolerant to salinity (up to 
5000 ppm with no effect on yield) and commands a high market price. The current farming in the area is 
dominated by e jojoba which is grown on almost 75% of the 27,000 feddans presently being cultivated here 
followed by minor crops such as olives (19%) olives and pomegranates (6%) and salt tolerant fodder trials.  
  The new farming communities will require training in the following; i) training and assistance in testing 
23.
the water and soil quality and adapting their farming practices to the local conditions; ii) mitigation and 
remedial measures such as how best to remove the iron from the water and the type of irrigation system to 
install given that sprinkler irrigation systems may not be suitable because of the high risk of leaf burns to 
crops given the high levels of sodium and chloride in the water; iii) Irrigation water management techniques 
to minimize accumulation of salt and heavy metals in the soil; (iv) field management techniques for jojoba, 
olives and pomegranate, and other new and potentially interesting crops which are salt tolerant such as 
barley, caper, Ziziphus, Atriplex); v) assistance and training to youth companies in establishing varietal trials 
to demonstrate crop performance under different conditions. The Central PMU will invite proposals for the 
purpose from agencies such as ARC, DRC, the International Center for Bio-saline Agriculture (ICBA), 
private companies, etc.  
  The project will also provide support to farmer cooperatives and companies in accessing equipment 
24.
and processing facilities as and when required to help them with the pruning, harvesting, sorting, grading 
and processing of their produce. This type of support is envisaged for the old lands as well as the new 
lands. This support will be provided to individuals, groups, cooperatives and companies. On the old lands or 
lands along the coast, tools will be provided to farmers for pruning, pest control and harvesting for improved 
orchard management and harvesting. On the new lands, this type of support may only be required a few 
years downstream when the crops begin to produce. Prior to providing the equipment, the cooperatives and 
companies will be provided training to ensure there are familiar with the technical and business 
management aspects of the technology. The project will facilitate linkages with private companies to ensure 
uptake of farm produce and linkages with markets. The selection of these cooperatives and companies will 
be on the basis of the number of members involved, their seriousness as demonstrated by their level of 
investment, stage of production, etc 
  While DRC is primarily a research institution and it has been able to test many varieties and species 
25.
and farming practices suitable for desert environments, its capacity for dissemination and monitoring of 
105 Which allows farming in desert lands with the potential for claims to the land after a certain period. 
59 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
adoption rates is not very strong. The project will assist DRC in strengthening the links between research 
and the farmers through expertise in technology transfer and dissemination of practical findings to farmers 
and strengthening its capacity for establishing a system for tracking adoption rates by farmers. It is expected 
that around 30 agriculture extension staff will be trained for evaluating new plant varieties and techniques 
and disseminating them. DRC will also be provided some assistance in undertaking applied research and 
agricultural extension programmes to address some specific field problems and production constraints 
farmers encounter. The sub-component will include dissemination of these new findings to farmers through 
transfer of technology through onsite visits and establishment of field schools. 
  Water Quality Monitoring & Capacity Building will be undertaken to assess the salinity levels in the 
26.
water and soils. Plant analyses will be complementary to determine the mineral status in the plants and 
monitor the effect of salinity and other mineral nutrient on plant growth and development. The package will 
also help to monitor trends over time provide guidance on adequate corrective measures or practices. The 
system for monitoring water and soil levels will be provided to farmers in old and new lands and individual 
farmers, groups and companies will be trained to understand the readings and apply appropriate measures. 
DRC will also be provided laboratory and technical equipment analyses and tasks such as water and soil 
analyses, plant foliar analyses and weather forecast stations. Equipment will also be provided for the basic 
climate monitoring stations to be installed in selected project sites.  
  The project will support 40 DRC staff and farmers to undertake exchange visits with the aim to 
27.
broaden the knowledge of the participants on issues such as water conservation, irrigation, crop 
management, related to successful achievements in rain-fed areas with scarce rainfall, either locally or 
abroad. 
Component 2: Integrated Nutrition Investments 
  Given the socio-economic profile of the population in the Matrouh Governorate, particularly the 
28.
situation of women and children, this component will promote the equality and empowerment of women in 
ways that help them improve nutrition for themselves, their children and their families by providing a 
comprehensive package which includes access to domestic water and sanitation, improved access to 
nutritious food, knowledge of feasible practices for improving nutrition, access to health and education 
services, as well as income generating opportunities for women. This component will consist of three sub-
components: (i) Water for Health (ii) Empowerment of Women for Nutritional Change (iii) Social 
Infrastructure. 
(i)  Water for Health  
  The domestic water supply sub-component will increase the availability and consumption of 
29.
drinking water, particularly for women and children who spend most of their time in the homestead. 
This will protect children and women from issues arising as a result of inadequate and unsafe water 
consumption (water-borne infections are one of the causes of malnutrition in children). It will result in 
saving of women’s time and labour as they are responsible for looking after children if they fall ill and 
for fetching water from nearby wells. Women in women-headed households will especially benefit, as 
they have to fetch water themselves even if it is far from the homestead. With closer water supplies, 
women will have more time in the domestic setting, the extra time allowing them to better improve the 
overall health and nutrition of their families. Malnutrition in children is partly a function of infection 
mainly resulting from unsafe drinking water. Thus, having access to clean, nearby water sources 
empowers women through reducing their burden. It will also promote women’s visibility and dignity, as 
these will be given in the name of the women of the household. 
  The project will provide 6000 cisterns (120 m3) and 500 reservoirs (150 m3) at the homesteads 
30.
for the harvesting of rainwater. The project will also support the rehabilitation of 100 Roman Cisterns 
(500 m3) that are used for drinking water and water for livestock. The community is well-versed in the 
construction of these cisterns and reservoirs, as well as the rehabilitation of Roman cisterns. DRC has 
the capacity to implement the activities in this sub-component as they have managed and supervised 
it for different projects in the past. DRC will also be provided equipment to test the quality of the water. 
60 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
In all communities, the poorest households, essentially those considered eligible for zakat, will 
31.
be identified according to the criteria specified (Appendix 2): Once all the poorest households in the 
area have been served, in each district, DRC will plot the number of clusters across communities in 
the districts of Marsa Matrouh, El Negila, El Barrani, El Saloum, El Dabaa that are over 30 km inland 
and have poor access to water (over 25 km) sanitation and health. These will be ranked by 
remoteness with the most remote receiving top-priority for homestead cisterns. A scoring system will 
be used to rank beneficiaries within these regions (Appendix 2). The 100 Roman cisterns used for 
livestock and human use will be selected based on the following criteria: 
Only cisterns on common lands, with no cisterns on private lands selected for 
 
rehabilitation106.  
 
Suitability of aperture and walls for rehabilitation107  
Roman cisterns will be rehabilitated in the southern part of the project area which faces 
 
acute shortages of water.  
Cisterns that serve the remotest areas (over 30 kilometres) and/or the highest number of 
 
households will receive priority 
  The implementation of these water facilities will explore nutrition integration through transmitting 
32.
key messages, Behavoiur Change Campaign on health behaviour, especially the danger of deadly 
faecal-oral diseases for malnutrition and child mortality. At household level, more emphasis will be 
given on optimal hand washing, household level treatment and storage of safe drinking water, 
sanitation and food safety issues. Households will be reached through household visits. 
(ii)  Women’s Empowerment for Nutritional Change 
  This subcomponent seeks to raise the nutritional status of households, particularly women and 
33.
children through aggregating a number of interventions: increasing access to nutritious food through 
nutrition and livelihood packages and the cultivation of the Moringa tree, literacy classes, as well as a 
behaviour change campaign for increased awareness of health and hygienic practices around 
nutrition, water and sanitation. A customized and well-researched Behaviour Change Campaign 
(BCC) will be launched to support the changes in knowledge, attitude and practice required for 
Bedouin households, especially women and children, to benefit from project interventions. Electronic 
tablets will be used as a key channel to maintain quality of the BCC campaign across the board and 
provide women whose mobility is highly restricted with a window into the modern world. It will be 
implemented by an NGO. The same criteria that will be used to award cisterns will be used for this 
subcomponent. 
  Nutrition & Livelihood packages will comprise of poultry (chicken, ducks, etc.), pigeon and 
34.
goat packages and handicraft support for 3000 women. The objective is to increase household 
consumption of meat / eggs and make a modest contribution to women’s incomes in a desert 
environment in which women’s livelihood opportunities are highly restricted. Beneficiaries will choose 
the package they want. The 100 goat packages will be limited to Siwa where fodder is available and 
alfalfa is an important crop. The 2600 poultry, pigeon and goat packages will include housing and feed 
and supplements for the first three months to help overcome the financial constraints that prevent 
poor households from owning these assets. In addition, the women will receive basic training in caring 
for the animals. The project will be responsible for periodic visits to the women to provide guidance on 
the health of the animals and administer required vaccines for the first year. The training and support 
for beneficiaries will take place under the guidance of a woman veterinary doctor. The project will also 
establish a helpline with a woman vet at DRC who can answer any questions that beneficiaries may 
have about their animals. 
106 These Roman cisterns will be selected in common lands. These are often used for grazing. The cisterns will serve 
the water needs of livestock and herders/ HHs 
107 Extensive damage to aperture and walls raises the cost much beyond EGP 60,000. In most cases, extensive 
damage (aperture opened due to top damage) implies the cisterns cannot even be rehabilitated.  
61 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
In areas such as Siwa, where women are involved in a range of handicraft activities such as 
35.
basket weaving, clay ovens, silver jewellery, date-honey, cloth weaving, 400 women will be supported 
in these activities to increase women’s purchasing power and enable them to secure better nutrition, 
healthcare and education opportunities for themselves and their children. This support will include 
training, provision of equipment and support for marketing. However, this support will only be 
extended if a market-led approach can be taken or the beneficiary has already got access to a 
market, otherwise the budget will be used to provide nutrition packages. The Egyptian Italian 
Environmental Cooperation Project III (EIECP) is in the process of setting up a market led approach to 
handicraft development. If this approach is successful, PRIDE can use the same approach for its 
beneficiaries.  
36.
In addition to these packages, a more widespread nutrition sensitive intervention through 
women empowerment that will reach 6000 households will be the provision of the Moringa tree 
saplings (minimum of three per household), also known in Egypt as the Tree of Life. The Moringa 
plant is a nutrient dense tree, fast-growing, drought-resistant tree that grows even in marginal soils 
and with very little care. 
Table 4.1. Nutrients in the Leaves of the Moringa Tree108 
Nutrient 
(per 100 gm) 
  Moringa 
Leaves 
  Other Foods 
Vitamin A 
Vitamin C 
Calcium 
Potassium 
Protein 
  6780 mcg   Carrots: 1890 mcg 
  220 mg 
  Oranges: 30 mg 
  440 mg 
  Cow's milk: 120 mg 
  259 mg 
  Bananas: 88 mg 
  6.7 gm 
  Cow's milk: 3.2 gm 
It has innumerable health benefits. Nearly all parts of this tree can be eaten and its leaves are 
37.
an excellent source of vitamins, minerals, protein, amino acids and anti-oxidants. It is one of few 
vegetable sources of amino acids. It has been used in Asia and Africa to treat child malnutrition with 
positive results. Its seeds are also used to purify water. There are many ways to use the Moringa tree, 
its leaves, buds and drumsticks can all be used. Moringa recipes will be taught to the women to 
encourage its use. DRC will use its women field workers to explain the method for cultivating the 
Moringa tree, explain its benefits and ways in which it can be incorporated into the diet. This will be 
further reinforced through the behaviour change communication campaign. Other nutrition sensitive 
activities will include food demonstration and new recipe development using Moringa and animal 
protein foods; establishing mother-to-mother support groups on feeding and care practices; equipping 
mothers with the tools to prepare recipe from available food sources for adequate dietary intake at 
home. 
  The Moringa has already been successfully grown by DRC in its research stations in the project 
38.
area. DRC will grow and distribute saplings of the Moringa tree to beneficiaries. The beneficiaries of 
these trees will be selected on the following basis: (i) women-headed households with children under-
five in communities over 30 km will be the highest priority among those households who have been 
given cisterns in this project or previous projects (ii) next priority will be poor households over 20 
kilometres inland using the scoring system developed for awarding cisterns. The overlap of 
beneficiaries of cisterns and Moringa trees is desirable as the project recognizes that the poorest 
households will need to benefit from multiple interventions if their nutritional status is to be improved.  
Literacy classes will also be provided to 2000 young girls/women as improving literacy levels 
39.
has potentially large social benefits, such as increase in women’s empowerment, increased life 
expectancy, reduced child mortality and improved children’s health.109 Priority will be given to 
108 http://www.treesforlife.org/our-work/our-initiatives/moringa/nutritional-information 
109 UNESCO (2006), EFA Global Monitoring Report 2006: Literacy for Life.  
62 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
household clusters with high levels of illiteracy and poor access to education services and a demand 
for literacy classes. These literacy classes will be six-months long and will provide an additional 
channel for the behaviour change communication campaign. The curriculum for the literacy courses 
will further reinforce the messages regarding improved health, nutrition and other behaviour change 
messages. Literacy classes with the integration of health-nutrition components will support women to 
improve their overall wellbeing as well as their family and children in particular. According to the World 
Bank (2016), such programme is essential in "the reduction of child and maternal mortality, 
improvement of child nutrition and health. The planned literacy classroom lessons will contain visual 
nutrition messages; assign nutrition education homework that women can do with their families. 
  Behaviour change communication (BCC) is an interactive process with community members 
40.
to develop tailored messages and approaches using a variety of communication channels to develop 
positive behaviours; promote and sustain individual, community and societal behaviour change; and 
maintain appropriate behaviours. Effective BCC can increase nutrition knowledge, stimulate 
community dialogue (such as malnutrition risk factors, marginalized practices, cultural practices 
pertaining to feeding and nutrition), promote essential attitude changes, and improve skills and self-
efficacy. A Behaviour Change Campaign for the project will be designed to ensure that Bedouin 
families derive the maximum benefit from the project interventions and improved access to water, 
sanitation, nutritious food and income is translated into an increase in the nutritional status of 
households, especially for women and children. This campaign will target a minimum of 3000 
beneficiaries. The BCC will be based on formative research. The primary target group will be women 
and children. A secondary target group will be teachers and community facilitators who will function as 
channels for the campaign.  
  Nutrition KAP in project baseline: The project baseline survey will include questions on food 
41.
knowledge, attitude and practices (KAP) for health and nutrition focussing on areas that will promote 
the effectiveness of project interventions. A nutrition specialist will prepare the questions to be 
included. The National Institute of Nutrition in Egypt, a semi-autonomous research institute under the 
Ministry of Health is well-positioned to provide technical input. Some of the areas to be explored 
include: 
 
WASH 
 
 
 
 
 
Breastfeeding and complementary feeding  
Child feeding practices 
Intra-household allocation of food 
Dietary diversity and meal frequency  
Perceptions & food myths 
  Contracting Technical Expertise for the BCC campaign: The responsibility for designing the 
42.
BCC campaign will rest with the NGO hired to implement the nutrition component. The NGO will 
engage technical experts on nutrition and food research as well as expert on communication for the 
formative research and design of the BCC campaign. 
  Formative research: The technical specialist hired by the NGO will use the findings of the 
43.
nutrition and food KAP survey as a basis for formulation of key messages and communication 
channels, development of behaviour change material. Methods for conducting formative research may 
include reviews of existing data, in-depth interviews, focus group discussions, observations, dietary 
recalls, recipe trials, Trials of Improved Practices (TIP), and positive deviance inquiry. TIPs is a highly 
recommended methodology for PRIDE as beneficiaries will be involved in interventions which will be 
new to them such as the cultivation and utilization of Moringa Tree and even sanitation facilities where 
none existed before. TIPS will enable PRIDE to learn from families, providers and communities what 
practices the program should promote, eliminate or modify; what are the most effective motivations 
and most significant barriers to new practices; what level of change in particular behaviours the 
program can expect; and in some cases, what level of health or nutrition impact the program can 
expect. TIPs will focus particularly on WASH, the utilization of the nutrition and livelihood packages, 
63 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
the cultivation and utilization of the Moringa tree. As some project interventions have been 
implemented in this area by DRC, in depth-interviews and focus groups can be used to supplement 
TIPs and identify critical messages and behaviours around cisterns, sanitation facilities and pigeon 
towers. 
  Design of BCC: Based on findings of TIPs, the nutrition specialist will formulate the BCC 
44.
campaign with specific nutrition objectives, desirable behaviours, channels and strategies. The 
specialist will then collaborate with the specialized design and communication firm hired to develop 
the materials for the BCC. As electronic tablets are to be used in this campaign this will include the 
development of material to be shown on the tablet in the form of animations, video clips etc., as well 
as any other material that may be considered appropriate. Once the material has been developed, it 
will be field-tested, not only with women but also with men who function as gatekeepers for any 
intervention involving women. The material will be finalized after it has been validated by 
beneficiaries. 
Implementation of the BCC: the NGO will implement the BCC campaign targeting primarily 
45.
women and children in beneficiary households and children in one-room schools. The target group will 
include beneficiaries of cisterns, sanitation facilities, Moringa tree and nutrition and livelihood 
packages. The NGO will hire women facilitators to visit household clusters for literacy training and for 
delivery of the nutrition messages with the electronic tablets and any other material or tools required 
to deliver face-to-face training sessions. Women facilitators and the teachers of the one-room 
classrooms will be trained to channel key messages to women and children. In addition, women 
development officers hired by DRC will also receive training as a channel for behaviour change 
communication campaign, particularly with regard to promoting positive behaviours concerning WASH 
and the cultivation and use of the Moringa tree. 
  Some exposure visits for women will also be undertaken, once sufficient confidence building 
46.
has taken place, to handicraft exhibitions and to women groups in other parts of the governorate or 
country. 
(iii)  Social Infrastructure 
  This subcomponent will contribute to increasing access to health and education, particularly for 
47.
women and children. The practice of open defecation is widespread leading to danger of deadly 
faecal-oral diseases, and compromising the health, dignity, and very often safety as well, of women 
and girls. Poor households are unable to afford latrines, with particularly dire health consequences for 
women. Therefore, a key intervention the project will make will be to provide 3000 latrines. Nutrition 
and health messages will be an integral part of the health, school and latrine facilities.. The BCC will 
support this intervention by promoting positive behaviour in this regard. 
  Households are often at distances of 30-50 km from health units and a combination of poverty 
48.
and restrictive cultural norms, severely limits access of women and children to even basic medical 
services. In order to improve access to health, the project will build 3 health units and provide 5 
mobile clinics. The Health department of the Governorate of Matrouh has agreed to run these 
facilities. However, these units will only be financed if the health department commits to provide 
women doctors and nurses for these units. These units will be built and run by the Department of 
Health. One of the mobile health units will be used for El Moghra to provide emergency health care to 
farming communities who move into the area. Over time, depending on need, one of the health units 
may also be established there if sufficient families move there within the project period. 
  The project will also invest in the education of children, particularly girls. Many girls are 
49.
deprived of even a primary education due to the distance from schools and cultural norms which do 
not allow them to be taught by male teachers provided by the Governorate. The project will build 15 
multi-grade schools and staff them with women teachers by providing special incentives. It will also 
build 3 high schools (11 room) as there is a paucity of high schools in the area. The education 
department in the Governorate of Matrouh has committed to taking over these facilities and operate 
them. While the education facilities are primarily designed for the settled communities in the areas 
64 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
between Dabaa and El Salloum, and Siwa, one or two of the multi-grade schools and one high school 
may also be located in El Moghra if there is a need identified for these facilities in that area. This 
intervention has the opportunity of promoting nutrition outcomes through the integration of nutrition 
education and promotion of WASH activities. 
  Employment of youth: The project will provide young men training in the construction of 
50.
cisterns, reservoirs, pruning of olives, date palms and figs, production of saplings and nursery 
management, watershed management and rangeland development. The project will assist DRC in 
recruiting young men to work on its research farms and in the implementation of project activities as 
apprentices. Those candidates who do well will be provided with kits and tools to enable them to 
generate an income through provision of services to the community. Similarly, the project will also 
explore opportunities for training youth for provision of the range of vocational skills required by 
investors and small holders on the newly reclaimed lands such as electricians, plumbers, pruners, 
harvesters, carpenters, construction workers, etc. 
  There is a possibility to integrate nutrition messages in the youth training through the use of 
51.
Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) approaches to influence consumption of nutritious foods 
and diets, teach food safety issues. Integrating short , simple and tailored nutrition messages. This will 
involve training of trainers and provision of context specific messaging to meet individual participant's 
learning needs. 
  Technological innovations that will be included in the project will include (i) the use of electronic 
52.
tablets for the dissemination of messages for women for behaviour change; (ii) MIS system which will 
be tablet based and will record a GIS referenced monitoring and evaluation system for greater 
transparency, accountability an accuracy; (iii) An android based system for tracking water quality; (iv); 
introduction of a range of solar and energy saving technologies in the new lands. A budget line is 
available for utilizing these technologies for the newly reclaimed land as appropriate. 
53.
Integrated pathways for nutrition sensitive interventions: The implementation of the 
proposed nutrition sensitive interventions will follow one or more integrated pathways described below 
which is developed based on the theory of change for nutrition outcomes. 
  The first pathway (Water, hygiene and sanitation-WASH) follows the assumption that the 
54.
move towards improved nutrition is achieved through making visible the existing burden of diseases, 
such as the deadly faecal-oral diseases causing malnutrition and child mortality relates to the domain 
of water, hygiene and sanitation (WASH). The hypothesis is that when community members, 
particularly children, have lower exposure to diseases, their requirement for nutrients goes down. 
Along with the provision of safe water, community and household level WASH campaigns on safe 
disposal of human faces, safe storage and treatment of water, hand washing. etc. will help in 
addressing the problem. Access to latrine and health facilities add up to the personal hygiene and 
well-being of women and children which in turn results in improved nutrition outcomes. 
  The second pathway (women empowerment-income) assumes that providing women with 
55.
the opportunity and access to clean water is not sufficient. They also need to be able to make 
decisions about the use and management of resources. This pathway therefore stretches to address 
household income using livelihood packages, skill training, and decision-making within households, 
which may contribute to improved health and nutrition status indirectly. Also, women access to income 
will increase purchasing power for nutritious food and ultimately better consumption at individual and 
household levels. 
  The third pathway (production-consumption) combines the food availability and accessibility 
56.
of nutritious food. With regards to accessibility, both men and women ought to decide how much 
household income is to be spent on food and non-food items; and how much to be sold and kept for 
home consumption. This pathway also involves the preparation and utilization/ consumption of food. It 
is mainly influenced by current customs, beliefs around the meaning of what constitutes nutritious 
foods; building awareness regarding dietary diversity. The challenges here is poor intra household 
distribution of food where those who prepare the food (women), need the power to make decisions 
65 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
about food choices, how they prepare it and how to divide the food among household members. 
Therefore, adequate BCC combined with the capacity building of women will bring about improved 
KAP, the preparation, distribution and consumption of the available nutritious food. 
66 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 5: 
arrangements 
Institutional aspects and implementation 
Participating Institutions 
Overall Structure: PRIDE will be implemented through a two-tiered institutional structure at the 
1.
Central and Governorate level. At the central level, the Ministry of Investment and International 
Cooperation will represent the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt (“the Borrower”) and the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) will be the main implementing agency. At the 
Governorate of Matrouh level, the Desert Research Center will be the executing agency of the project. 
The two-tier institutional arrangement aims to lessen the approval layers for faster decision-making 
and consequently more efficient project implementation. 
2.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) will be the lead implementing 
agency of the project on behalf of the government. MALR is the government agency responsible for 
formulating sector policies for promoting and upgrading Egyptian agriculture and implementing 
agricultural programmes and projects in the country. MALR has jurisdiction for providing a variety of 
agricultural services and regulate and supervise the activities of public and private entities involved in 
production and processing of agricultural products. The responsibilities of MALR for services and 
regulation are carried out at the Governorate level through the Governorate Directorates of Agriculture 
(GDA) and Governorate Directorate of Veterinary Services (GDVS), which are administratively 
responsible to the Governor but technically responsible to MALR. MALR has proved to be a capable 
partner that has in the past assumed the responsibility for project oversight and providing strategic 
guidance and facilitation in the implementation of strategic policy decisions. 
At the level of the Governorate of Matrouh: The Desert Research Center (DRC) will be the 
3.
key implementing partner at the Governorate level. During the design process IFAD and Government 
examined alternative options for the implementation arrangements of the PRIDE. The design process 
concluded that DRC is the most appropriate Implementing Agency for Matrouh activities, with 
implementation of specific components and activities outsourced to a large number and scattered 
groups of beneficiaries with the appropriate expertise and mandate. Selection of DRC is based on the 
(i) relevance of their mandate; (ii) previous experience in implementing similar donor projects; (iii) 
strong relationship with the targeted beneficiaries and (iv) technical and administrative staff of over 
1000 in the country. Moreover, DRC has strong management structure and it has field presence in 
Matrouh Governorate. 
4.
DRC’s main role is in applied and adaptive research for desert environments. The Center has 
been collaborating with both national and international organizations. At the International level DRC 
has had partnerships with the African Union, European Union, Italian Cooperation, the World bank, 
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP), 
Food & Agriculture Organization FAO, International Atomic Energy Agency, etc. DRC has a large staff 
at the DRC headquarters and its 8 Stations, and 5 Associated Units (Tissue Culture Lab, 
Geographical Information Systems (GIS), Satellite Receiving Station, Private Service Unit (PSU), and 
Library). The center constitutes of 32 Laboratories and 4 Major Divisions, 14 Departments. The 
Center will provide frequent support to Matrouh PMU through its in-hose technical capacity. 
Sustainable Resource Development Centre Matrouh (SRDCM). This Centre was established by 
5.
the World Bank project. It will act as the PRIDE Management Unit and be responsible for the 
implementation of the project activities between Dabaa and EL Salloum. It will implement key project 
activities related to reservoirs for irrigated agriculture, wadi development, community range 
management, breed improvement and animal husbandry, horticulture, water quality monitoring, 
development of cisterns and reservoirs, etc. In addition, it will also be responsible for all 
investigations, surveys, research, development and design of water harvesting works and of 
watershed management works to be implemented under the project. The project will benefit from the 
67 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Training Centre that was established under the World Bank Project for all training events. While DRC 
has a staff of 230 in Matrouh, they have had limited resources to spend from the normal Government 
budget. Thus the DRC capacity to implement the project, procure and manage the financial 
resources, monitoring and engaging with women will be enhanced through technical assistance and 
field support and additional field staff. 
Sub regionals support Centres (SRSC). Four SRSC's that were established Under the World 
6.
Bank project, at Ras El Hikma, Marsa Matruh, Negila and Sidi Barrani will be used for the 
implementation of project activities. In addition, the project will support the establishment of a SRSC in 
Dabaa and a training centre in Siwa. Each SRSC will be headed by a Director responsible for 
coordinating Community activities and for overall administration of the activities of the centre. Each of 
the five centres will be staffed by Subject Matter Specialists (SMSs) in field crops, horticulture, 
livestock, range management, rural women extension specialist, a Community Liaison Coordinator, a 
water harvesting specialist, a watershed management specialist and a number of technicians to 
support all activities. The units will be strengthened by a number of technical staff either from the DRC 
Head Quarter or from Matrouh Governorate. At the technical level, each of the disciplines will 
coordinate its activities with its corresponding parent organization at the SRDCM level in Marsa 
Matrouh PMU. 
Other Implementing Partners 
Agricultural Research Centre (ARC). Under MALR, ARC is the principal organization 
7.
responsible for technology generation and transfer for agriculture growth and development. It is one of 
the largest research organizations in the Middle East dedicated to research and development of 
agricultural sciences and has contributed significantly to Egypt’s agricultural successes. ARC’s major 
responsibilities are: (i) conduct applied and basic research to generate a continuous flow of 
technologies that help increase productivity and reduce production costs; (ii) transfer new 
technologies to the farming community through an effective extension service; and (iii) develop its 
human capacity and facilities to shoulder its responsibilities. Its achievements include new high 
yielding and early maturing varieties of wheat, maize, rice, etc.; improved agronomic and livestock 
management practices; and better food processing techniques. Research has been dedicated to 
solving problems within the overarching goal of maximizing the economic returns per unit of land and 
water. ARC’s structure includes 16 research institutes, 13 central laboratories, 10 research stations, 
36 commodity research stations including El-Qasr Research Station in Matrouh Governorate, 4 
research/extension training centres and over 4,500 research and support staff.  
8.
NGOs. As DRC has limited capacity with respect to gender issues, PRIDE will contract a 
National/International NGO through a competitive process to undertake the overall responsibility for 
the activities targeted at women under the integrated nutritional change sub-component. The main 
criteria for selection of the NGO will be corporate capability, outreach in the project areas and past 
experience in community mobilisation with special emphasis on women, capacity building, support for 
incoming generating activities, social sector services particularly multi-grade schools and monitoring 
of behaviour change. There are several NGOs in the project area with the relevant expertise and 
capability. 
Governorate Level Coordination. To ensure that Matrouh Governorate mobilises and 
9.
develops the necessary capacity for the coordination and implementation of Project activities, a 
Governorate Project Coordination Committee (GPCC) will be established and chaired by the 
Governor to provide overall guidance to project implementation. The GPCC will review project 
progress against targets, assess management effectiveness, decide on corrective measures where 
appropriate, review lessons learned and good practices and review progress reports. It is expected 
that the Governorate of Matrouh will contribute to the project in terms of: 

Participate in the implementation of the project activities through its respective 
departments (Road Department, Health Department, Education Department, etc.). 
68 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 




Secure the necessary land for the construction of schools, health centres and other 
social sector facilities. 
Ensure that all operational costs for the high schools and health units are assumed by 
the Government as soon as the facilities are completed; 
Ensure the availability of women doctors, nurses and health facilities for the project social 
sector services; 
Assign adequate number of technical staff to fill the gaps in the PMU. 
Project Structure 
  National Level: The Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation will be the lead agency 
10.
responsible for the implementation of the project. The project will have a Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) at the National Level. It is expected that the MALR will activate the PSC prior to the initiation of 
operations on the ground. The PSC will have as its members the MALR, MIIC, the Ministry of Water 
Resources and Irrigation (MWRI), the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, Ministry of 
Environment, ARC, DRC, ECDC and a representative of the Governorate of Matrouh. The PSC will 
also include technical resource people to be nominated by the MALR. The PSC will meet at least 
once a year and provide guidance on key technical and programmatic aspects. The National Project 
Coordinator will be the Secretary of the PSC. 
  Central Project Management Unit: A Central Project Management Unit will be established in 
11.
Cairo at the MALR and will assume the overall responsibility for the implementation of the project, on 
the ground. This PMU will provide the basis for establishing a consolidated approach to programme 
management for the country programme in the future. The staff in this unit will be competitively 
recruited from project resources and work on a full time basis in managing and supervising project 
activities. The CPMU will be staffed with a dedicated National Project Coordinator, financial, 
procurement and M&E specialists. Short term technical expertise will be recruited for areas such as 
gender, poverty targeting and environment. A project committee will be established for the screening 
and short listing of all proposals for the selection of services providers, social sector facilities and 
grants under the project. The project committee will be led by the MALR and include representation 
from MWRI, Ministry of Environment. The National Project coordinator will ensure that all proposals 
and screened and scored by this committee prior to their approval by the PSC. 
  The CPMU will be responsible for supervising DRC in the implementation of the activities in the 
12.
coastal areas from Dabaa to El Salloum, recruitment and overseeing the work of service providers 
such as the third party organization undertaking the baseline and project completion surveys, the 
international firm to undertake the Siwa Drainage & Irrigation Feasibility Study, the recruitment and 
supervision of the NGO for undertaking project activities related to nutrition and women’s 
empowerment activities. The PMU will provide quality assurance in all project activities and also 
oversee the use of high quality technologies, educational materials and best practices in the 
implementation of project activities. 
  The CPMU will be directly responsible for coordinating the activities related to Moghra. The 
13.
CPMU will invite three types of proposals for the development of the new lands in Moghra. These 
proposals will include the following; (i) proposals to provide technical assistance and training to the 
youth companies in agriculture production and marketing; (ii) proposals for the provision of social 
sector services from line agencies and NGOs in the Matrouh Governorate which will include 
desalinization plants, roads, multi-grade schools and mobile health services and (iii) proposals from 
the youth companies or their association for provision of on-farm water management, sand dune 
structures and other initial investments on the land. 
  The agencies which will qualify for the submission of proposals for technical assistance and 
14.
training will include those who have the skills to undertake this type of activity in the country such as 
ARC, DRC, ICBA, FAO and the private sector. The Department of Roads will submit proposals for 
roads in coordination with the ECDC, which has prepared a Master plan for the purpose. The 
69 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Department of Education, Health and NGOs can submit proposal for providing the desalinization 
plants, and social sector services such as mobile health units, multi-grade schools and high schools. 
However, only youth companies or their association will qualify for submitting proposals for grants to 
defray the initial capital cost of initiating farming activities or downstream processing and marketing 
activities. 
  The project activities will be based on an annual work plan. Coordination with the local line 
15.
agencies of Agriculture, Livestock, Health and Education, Roads and bridges will be coordinated by 
the Central PMU. ECDC’s role will be as a facilitator. ECDC has already allocated the land to 252 
youth and small groups in El Moghra and provided wells for irrigation water. Its main role will be to 
ensure that there is water in the wells in the allocated lands which can be used for irrigation. ECDC 
will facilitate the PRIDE project implementation in the following ways; (i) share the data on the 252 
groups of youth and smallholders who have been allocated the land in the project area; (ii) share the 
Master plan of El Moghra; (iii) shares studies on the water quality and quantity in the wells in El 
Moghra and (v) use its leverage to facilitate development by other line agencies; (vi) provide support 
to the farmers through access to credit and marketing services that it is arranging for the newly 
reclaimed lands and (vii) facilitate interaction between the private sector investors and youth 
companies.  
  The Regional Project Management Unit (RPMU): For the settled communities in Matrouh, 
16.
between Dabaa and El saloum, the project activities will be implemented by the Sustainable 
Development Resource Centre for Matrouh (SDRCM) of the DRC which has previous experience of 
managing the World Bank and EU funded projects in the area. The RPMU will be led by the Project 
Director and will have overall responsibility for the day-to-day operations of the project in Matrouh. 
The other staff that the PMU will comprise of include a Deputy Director, M&E Specialist, Livestock 
Specialist, Horticulture Specialist, Rangeland Specialist, Gender Specialist, Procurement Officer, and 
Financial Management Specialist. This staff will be from the existing staff of DRC and will receive 
incentives to work on the project on a full time basis. In addition, DRC will competitively procure civil 
engineers (3), livestock specialists (3), horticulture specialists (3), gender specialists (5), drivers (6), 
nursery workers (3) and laboratory technicians (2) from the market. The staff will be assigned to the 
PMU or at the district level as required. The project will pay the salaries for these full time staff 
throughout the project period. The project will also obtain short-term technical assistance as and when 
required for reviewing environmental, social and climate change specialists to oversee implementation 
of the ESMF and manage the climate monitoring stations and nutritional impact of the project. 
  The project will use the existing five Sub-Regional Support Centres of DRC in each of the five 
17.
districts and will establish an additional unit in El Dabaa. The staff already employed by DRC in these 
centres will work for the project on a part-time basis. They will maintain time sheets for the work that 
they undertake under the project and receive a stipend for the additional work. These units will be 
provided operational support for the implementation of project activities.  
  An NGO will be competitively recruited to implement the activities targeted at women under the 
18.
empowerment for nutritional change sub-component. There are a few NGOs that have been active in 
Matrouh such as Misr El Kheir Foundation, Kenana, etc. In its first year the Central PMU will advertise 
for the services of a qualified NGO to implement the integrated nutrition components which will 
include literacy classes, nutrition packages, sanitation facilities, multi-grade schools, and behavior 
change campaigns for women. 
  Framework Agreement and Protocols. In order to facilitate the implementation of the project 
19.
activities a Framework Agreement or Protocol will be signed between the PRIDE PMU and the 
respective ministry/entity (Ministry of Health or its representative in Matrouh, Road Department in 
Matrouh Governorate and General Authority for Educational Buildings) to implement project activities 
such as construction of health centres, construction of schools and construction of feeder roads. In 
which the respective ministry/entity declares its support to PRIDE objectives and commits to work 
together in helping the project realise these objectives. The agreement will include the responsibilities 
of each party during the implementation and arrangements for handing over, the responsibility for staff 
70 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
for the schools, multi-grade schools, health units, mobile health services, etc. A sample of the Arabic 
version of the framework agreement is given as an attachment in the PIM at Appendix 11. The table 
below summarises the contribution of the Government and the PRIDE project to the different cost 
categories. 
Table 5.1 Social Sector Facilities and Main Responsibility 
Type 
Infrastructure 
Costs 
Staff 
Operating 
Cost 
GoE 
GoE 
PRIDE  PRIDE (7 
Type of staff 
Teachers (women)  
Teachers (women) 
GoE 
GoE 
years) 
GoE 
PRIDE (7 
years0 
Nurses and doctors (women) 
Nurses  and  doctors  (women)  except 
in Moghra where staff can be male. 
High Schools  PRIDE 
PRIDE 
Multi-Grade 
Schools 
Health Units 
Mobile  health 
Clinics 
PRIDE 
PRIDE 
Specific Implement Arrangements 
  Wadis rehabilitation and development: The wadis to be equipped will be identified in 
20.
collaboration between the beneficiary communities and the Regional PMU (RPMU). The axes of the 
masonry weirs will be positioned in the presence of the farmers so as to have a single family between 
two weirs. When the axis is defined, the RPMU civil engineer will choose the cross-sectional profile 
that best suits the topography of the site. The construction will be entrusted to a locally recruited 
contractor who will hire labour locally, thereby generating additional income for the local households. 
The price of one cubic meter of masonry is agreed and the payments are made on the basis of each 
meter. The length of each weir is known in advance. A written contract is established between the 
RPMU and the informal entrepreneur. Payments will be made as the work progresses. The work will 
be supervised by a technician or a civil engineer of the RPMU. 
  Siwa Irrigation & Drainage Study: IFAD has prepared an initial TORs for the study. A 
21.
specialised firm will be competitively recruited to undertake the study which will include a detailed 
study of the problem, presenting of options, engineering designs with an estimate of costs for each 
option. The selected firm will be hired in the first year and complete the study within six months. The 
firm will be given two months for an initial inception phase in which the scope of the work will be 
clearly elaborated, key deliverables identified and agreed with a clear time plan between the CPMU, 
MALR and MWRI, DRC and other key stakeholders such as the drainage authority, local farmers, etc. 
ECDC will also be consulted as it has plans to include Siwa in the second phase of the 1.5 million 
land reclamation project and the excess water from the salt lakes of Siwa could potentially be used for 
reclaiming new lands. The potential for using the Siwa study as a prototype for other oases will be 
elaborated. The CPMU will supervise the work and ensure its presentation to Government as well as 
initiate ay policy dialogue that may be required for its proper implementation. 
  Feeder roads: The Roads and Bridges Department of the Governorate will assume the 
22.
responsibility for the tendering for the roads in collaboration with DRC. The identification of the roads 
for the coastal areas will be made in close collaboration with the RPMU at DRC which will consult with 
local communities for the purpose and identify the roads based on the criteria established for the 
project. The roads assigned to El Moghra will be coordinated by the CPMU with ECDC which is 
preparing Master Plans for the site. The road design will be based on the standard set for rural roads 
by the Government. The Roads department will be responsible for estimating costs and preparing 
tenders on behalf of the CPMU and RPMU. The tender will be issued by the CPMU in Cairo and the 
RPMU for coastal areas. The Roads Department and the CMPU and RPMU will participate in the 
evaluation of the tenders and the selection of the contracting firm according to pre-established criteria 
specified in the invitation to tender. The department will monitor the work and the payments made by 
the CPMU upon satisfactory completion will be determined by the Roads Department. The roads will 
follow the selection criteria specified in Appendix 4.  
71 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  Management of homestead cisterns/ reservoirs: Payment for these will be made in a 
23.
phased manner. DRC will sign a Terms of partnership with the selected household which will specify 
the payment plan and the responsibility of each party. The selected household will dig the aperture in 
the site recommended by DRC technical staff; second, the DRC technical staff will verify the technical 
specifications of the aperture; The selected household will complete the work either itself or contract it 
out to a private contractor; After the completion of 50% of the work, DRC will make 50% of the 
payment, After completion of the work, DRC will make full payment upon verification of the completed 
works. After construction, the management of cisterns/ reservoirs is the responsibility of the individual 
beneficiary household. DRC will provide only technical advice as requested/ needed.  
  Roads, schools and health units: The technical services of each line Ministry are present at 
24.
the level of each governorate to ensure the execution of the works within its mandate. The Ministry of 
National Education and those of the Ministry of Health will participate fully in the identification and 
designing of these facilities in collaboration with the CPMU. The RPMU will assist in the identification 
of the facilities for the settled areas of the Governorate while the CPMU will identify the needs for 
social services in El Moghra in discussion with the appropriate authorities as and when required. The 
Ministry of Education will take over the high schools as soon as they are constructed and the Ministry 
of Health will take over the management of the Health Units and the Mobile Health Units. Part of the 
costs of the mobile units will be provided by the project. A memorandum of understanding will be 
executed between the CPMU, RPMU and the Governorate line agencies for each of these facilities to 
identify the responsibility and role of each for operating, staffing and maintain the facilities. 
Livestock and Rangeland Management 
25.
  The Livestock and Rangeland Management Sub-component will be implemented by DRC. 
DRC’s field offices will work closely with communities to develop the Community rangeland plans 
based on demand. DRC will work with the concerned communities using participatory land use 
planning methodologies, community land use plans to identify and geo-reference community 
rangeland sites to be rested for 2 to 3 years and those to be protected for seed production and to 
identify individual smallholders interested and willing to rest their family rangelands and those 
interested in alley cropping. Agreements will be signed between the project and community 
representatives defining the roles and responsibility of each party. The project will consider providing 
a matching compensation fund based on estimated production of the rangeland to be rested. This 
fund will be used in community investments or to hire guards or for other incentives as agreed by the 
community members with DRC. The community representatives will designate the land to be rested, 
supervise the guards and adopt sustainable rangeland practices on the rested site by respecting the 
carrying capacity and the recommended grazing period. 
  Agreements will also be signed between the project and individual livestock owners for: i) alley 
26.
planting of fodder shrubs with barley. Since there are no private nurseries for fodder shrubs in the 
area, the project will support the DRC to establish the needed seedlings of fodder shrubs in its 
nursery. In addition, the project will provide incentives for planting and watering the fodder shrubs for 
the first two years of establishment. The DRC will monitor the condition of plantations; ii) resting family 
rangelands. The area to rest will be identified, geo-referenced and delineated by field signs. 
Compensation will be provided by the project as an incentive for the owner to adopt sustainable 
rangeland management and ensure that the rested site is guarded. The DRC will supervise the rested 
family rangelands. Monitoring of rangeland condition will be conducted in a participatory approach by 
DRC in association with community representatives or organizations. Training and exchange visits on 
sustainable rangeland management and on use of fodder shrubs will be organized by DRC, using 
local and international technical assistance. 
27.
In order to produce and distribute the Barqi stud rams, the project will provide support to DRC 
to establish a breeding station, purchase the initial herd, the feed, and the equipment to prepare feed 
mixes. The project will then distribute the stud rams to smallholders and to lead farmers on a rental 
basis during the breeding season in May each year. The cost of the rented ram will be recovered by 
requiring the lead or elite farmers to repay the project by giving one off-spring from the improved 
72 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
breed. This arrangement suits the farmers as they do not have to bear the feed costs of the stud ram 
for the entire year. The project will provide 120 rams to DRC which will be replaced by DRC by selling 
those rams which are beyond their peak performance. The project, through DRC, will provide support 
to the smallholders and lead farmers interested in multiplying the animals further for distribution and 
sale to individual livestock owners. These ‘breeders’ will receive needed training, to be organized by 
DRC, in the animal breeding and husbandry best practices including animal health, nutrition and 
fattening, and herd management for the multiplication of the improved animals. Training to improve 
herd management will be undertaken by selecting interested candidates and using their farms as the 
location for farmers field schools (FFS). The project, through DRC, will apply improved practices of 
herd management in these farms which will then serve for training other smallholders. In order to 
improve the veterinary services provided to livestock owners, the PMU will develop a partnership with 
both DRC and the Directorate of Agriculture in Marsa Matrouh. The project will provide two veterinary 
mobile units and support for vaccines and medicines to be used at a reduced cost as incentives to 
improve herd management. These mobile units will be operated by DRC due to its more extensive 
outreach to inaccessible areas. 
Crop Production: Training for capacity building 
  The training under the crop production component will consist of 5 different themes (soil 
28.
management, water management, pruning, IPM and harvest). Each theme will be conducted for a day 
with 25 participants each, repeated over 5 working days in each of the 5 regional DRC centers. The 
expected beneficiaries will be at least 5000. The implementation of the course will be no more than 2 
hours of theory in the classroom to clarify the content of the session and the rest of the day in the field 
as practical training. The successful candidates from the training courses will receive equipment to 
enhance orchard management. The equipment will consist of pruning shears, hand saws, mechanical 
saw, mechanical backpack pesticide sprayers, pesticide protecting suits, orchard ladders, plastic 
crates, harvest nets of 160 m2 (8m x 20m), and mechanical battery operated hand harvester machine. 
29.
  Training for DRC researchers and agriculture extension services of Matrouh Governorate will 
be proposed for 30 participants. The training will allow the beneficiaries to broaden their know-how on 
specific areas related to introduced species or varieties that have a strong potential to adapt to the 
harsh climate of Matrouh but not well known by the DRC researchers or the extension services, or to 
develop expertise on some issues specific to the Matrouh environment, such as dealing with water 
management and soil reclamation under arid and dry climates. 
Rehabilitation of DRC facilities 
30.
  Nursery facilities exist already at DRC in Matrouh. However, the greenhouses and glasshouses 
are old and most of the equipment is old and out of order. However, good infrastructure exists such as 
good quality land plots, running water, irrigation reservoirs, and water evacuation canalisations. 
Equipment needed will consist of plastic to rehabilitate plastic houses, soil heating system, mist 
system in the rooting plastic houses and in the propagation of field plots, rehabilitation of shading 
houses, virus free houses with insect proof nets, humidity and temperature sensors. Small equipment 
and chemical stocks (alcohol, phyto-hormones). A call for tender will be announced for nursery 
rehabilitation. 
  Applied research and dissemination section will need land plots rehabilitated to receive all 
31.
vegetative material of introduced or native species and varieties to conduct adaptation and variety 
trials. Vegetative material will include (i) drought and salt tolerant species with either high nutritional 
value or high commercial value such as the Moringa trees, capers, large fruiting zyziphus, Barbary 
figs, and (ii) either local or introduced varieties of figs and olives with commercial interest such as figs 
for drying, high olive oil content or quality varieties, and local endemic varieties of figs and olives. 
  Equipment for laboratories for analyses of water, soil, plants, pesticides residues and 
32.
contamination, insect and disease plant protection and weather stations will be purchased through 
proper procurement processes. 
73 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Integrated Nutrition Investments 
  As the integrated nutrition sensitive investments are multisectoral, the nutrition sensitive 
33.
activities will be implemented in collaboration with a number of potential partners and actors. , TA will 
be engaged for facilitation and coordination of nutrition-sensitive interventions in PRIDE. All effort will 
be made to bring on board relevant partners (both government and NGOs ) for each core nutrition 
sensitive intervention. For effective implementation of the integrated nutrition interventions, a 
stakeholder’s consultative meeting will be arranged on coordination of activities, defining roles and 
responsibilities, and sharing best practices. 
  Under this component, nutrition interventions will be integrated at the household level to 
34.
maximise impact as far as possible. Women who receive cisterns, will also receive sanitation facilities, 
Moringa trees, livelihood packages, literacy and health and nutrition training. The 
implementers/service providers and NGOs in this component will be contracted through competitive 
bidding by the central PMU. The NGO will undertake a mapping of household clusters and a poverty 
screening of villages and households in the project area according to the criteria specified for each 
activity. It will also field test and refine the criteria if required. It will provide the RPMU with a 
prioritized, geo-referenced list of beneficiaries for all the activities under this component. It will use the 
community representatives (Mandoub) nominated by the Council of Tribal Elders to work with DRC as 
a resource in this process. This will help to sensitize them to gender and poverty issues and facilitate 
the NGOs entry into communities. 
  Cisterns: The cisterns and reservoirs for water in the homestead will be implemented through 
35.
DRC, based on their well-developed methodology in this regard. Local households are extremely 
skilled in this ancestral technology and will not require any additional technical skills. The modalities of 
construction have also been well established by DRC based on their past experience and will not 
need to be modified. The choice of the site will be made by the beneficiary and verified by the RPMU 
civil engineer who will verify that the site is composed of a thick robust rock slab. The cistern will be in 
the name of the women head of the household as a gesture to aid her sense of empowerment and 
self-worth and to point out that women can potentially be owners of assets. This will probably be one 
of the few things that women will ever own. The drilling of the rock slab that serves as a roof to the 
cistern will be made by the beneficiary, which represents the household contribution. The excavation 
of the cistern with a prefixed volume will be entrusted to the beneficiary or a contractor depending 
upon household preference. The payment will be made in stages and based on the volume of work 
carried out. The supervision of the work will be undertaken by the technician of the RPMU. 
  Reservoirs: For reservoirs with a capacity of less than 300 m3 constructed of masonry, the 
36.
implementation procedure will be similar to that of cisterns. For large reservoirs, that can only be built 
in concrete, the design will be made by the civil engineer of the RPMU and the construction entrusted 
to a contractor selected by tender. The RPMU will supervise the work. 
37.
  Sanitation facilities (latrines): The latrine will be in the name of the women head of the 
household to promote women’s ownership, self-worth and visibility. The choice of the site will be 
made by the beneficiary and verified by the civil engineer of the NGO which will be implementing this 
component. The design of the latrine will be from among the standard designs and the construction of 
the latrine with a standard design will be entrusted to the beneficiary or a contractor based upon 
household preference. The payment will be made in stages and based on the volume of work carried 
out. The supervision of the work will be undertaken by the technician of the NGO with overall 
monitoring by the M&E Specialist of the RPMU and the district female staff of DRC. 
  The NGO will conduct a needs assessment to identify the location of one-room schools based 
38.
on poverty and remoteness criteria, community willingness as well as a sufficient number of children 
in the catchment area. The NGO will design, build and run the multi-grade one room schools. The 
NGO will staff at least 50 percent of these schools with women teachers. The NGO will also organize 
literacy classes for women in the household clusters. It will also manage health and nutrition 
awareness training on electronic tablets. The content of the health and nutrition awareness training 
74 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
will include key messages on health and nutrition, the use of the Moringa tree, the use and care of 
sanitation facilities, managing livelihood packages plus training videos for olive and fig harvesting. 
Each facilitator will have a set of tablets which will be taken from household cluster to cluster to 
educate women. These could be used for health awareness and literacy training. It will also be tasked 
to manage the formative research for the health and awareness training so that feasible health advice 
could be given to women. The research will use the Positive Deviance or Trials for Improved Practice 
approach. The NGO will contract in specialized technical assistance for the research, the formulation 
of a Behaviour Change strategy and the development of training material for tablets. The NGO will 
nominate a woman leader in each cluster to function as a point person and help organize women for 
literacy and health and nutrition awareness sessions. 
  Schools and health units: For the coastal areas from Dabaa to El Salloum, the RPMU will 
39.
contact the technical department concerned to request assistance and define the terms of 
collaboration and compensation. The choice of the location of the building will be made on the advice 
of the population and in collaboration with the RPMU and the urban planning services if necessary. 
The technical department of the ministry concerned will be responsible for designing the building, 
estimating costs, preparing the tender documents and collaborating in the selection of the contracting 
firm. The tender will be launched by the RPMU. The department will control the execution of the 
works, Payments will be made by the RPMU after favourable opinion of the department. For El 
Moghra, the same procedure will be followed, except that the CPMU will invite proposals from the line 
agencies for El Moghra based on demand from the youth companies and in coordination with the 
ECDC. The responsibility for supervision and tendering for the works will be coordinated by the CPMU 
in this case. 
  An MOU between the PMU of PRIDE and the Health and Education department of the Matrouh 
40.
Governorate will be signed under which PRIDE will build three high schools, three health units and 
finance 5 mobile clinics. DRC will tender and contract the design and construction of high schools and 
health units. The department of Health and Education will staff these units with additional incentives 
from PRIDE for women staff. The mobile health units will be staffed by women doctors and nurses 
and serve communities identified by the NGO as the most poor and remote with the least access to 
health services. 
  The identified beneficiaries of the livelihood packages will be consulted on the kind of livelihood 
41.
packages they want. DRC will be in charge of conducting further trials on the Moringa tree and other 
plants that can grow in the desert and provide families with nutrition. The DRC will distribute Moringa 
saplings to women beneficiaries. 
Eligibility Criteria for Specific Components 
Reservoirs for Irrigation and Wadi Rehabilitation 
  The reservoirs for irrigated agriculture (300 m3) are designed to provide supplemental irrigation 
42.
for increased crop production as a mitigation measure for climate induced droughts. The first 
preference for the location of reservoirs will be at the site of the wadis (to ensure sustainability of 
irrigated agriculture near wadis). Location of reservoirs along the wadis will be determined based on 
consultations with the tribes along the wadi. 





Out of the 500 reservoirs, 200 reservoirs will be reserved for the wadis to be rehabilitated 
by the project (2 per km across 100 km).  
40% of the reservoirs (80 reservoirs) will be reserved for wadis with no crops.  
60% (120 reservoirs) will be reserved for wadis with newly planted crops. 
Reservoirs will cover 10 feddan of irrigated land. 
300 reservoirs will be reserved for newly planted orchards (started in the last 1-5 years), 
which are more susceptible to climate change/ variability in rainfall. 
75 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Criteria for selection of wadis to be rehabilitated 
  The Wadi selection will be based on a combination of socio-economic and technical criteria. As 
43.
a first step, DRC will ensure that in beneficiary meetings with household representatives, all 
communities are informed of this opportunity for wadi development and the criteria for selection. DRC 
will solicit requests for reservoirs and wadi rehabilitation from all communities. The following criteria 
will be used to qualify requests: 



A signed agreement that all households along the wadi wish to participate 
Wadis with a minimum of 10-12 families per km  
Wadis with minimum length of 0.5 km 
  Those Wadis which meet these criteria, will then be ranked with the highest number of 
44.
households receiving the highest priority. If there are several wadis with the same number of 
households and project funds are insufficient to cover the demand, remoteness from a town centre 
can be used with the wadi furthest away getting the highest ranking. 
  Management of wadis and reservoirs for irrigation: DRC will formalize MOUs/ agreements with 
45.
communities who benefit from the wadi rehabilitation and the reservoirs for irrigation. Agreements will 
be signed with a representative from each family benefiting from 0.5 km of the wadi rehabilitation 
(approx. 5-6 families). Individual farmer names will also be included in the agreements. The daily 
management of the length of the wadi and the reservoir will be the responsibility of the families in 0.5 
km stretches (5-6 families). 
Homestead cisterns/ reservoirs 
  The selection criteria for homestead cisterns and water reservoirs designed primarily for 
46.
domestic use primarily as a source of drinking for households, livestock and to water any plants 
around the homestead will be based on the following criteria. 
  District and Community Level Allocation: All communities will be eligible for homestead 
47.
cisterns. However, as El Negila and Barrani are the two poorest districts, each will have a 25% share 
of the 6500 homestead cisterns and reservoirs. The rest of the districts will be allocated around 16% 
each. This may vary depending on the presence of households in these areas who meet the specified 
criteria. 
  Beneficiaries will be selected on the basis of socio-economic criteria. Cisterns/reservoirs will 
48.
then be located where it is feasible to build them. The final allocation is based on the type of soil and 
rock formation, the characteristics and extent of the water catchment area, the topography and 
characteristics of the landscape. DRC will determine whether to construct a cistern (rocky soil) or 
reservoir (soft soil), the use of instruments/ tools for construction, etc.  
  DRC will take a number of steps to ensure that these beneficiaries are identified in a fair and 
49.
transparent manner. Meetings will be held in the project with household representatives to inform 
households about project interventions and criteria for selection. Google earth will be used to plot the 
clusters of households in a given area and the cisterns already provided through other projects will be 
pinpointed on this map and submitted to the PMU.  
  Contributions from the beneficiaries are only in terms of labour (opening of the aperture), 
50.
ensuring that poorer HHs also have the capacity to construct cisterns/ reservoirs. 
  Household Level Allocation: In all communities, the poorest households, essentially those 
51.
considered eligible for zakat, will be identified according to the following criteria and served: (i) 
women-headed (this includes women who are single, divorced or widowed as well as households in 
which adult men are unable to earn due to age or any kind of disability) (ii) households with no land 
and no livestock (iii) households with no member employed (this does not include engagement in 
handicraft or casual wage labour.) Households that have already received a cistern under any other 
project will not be eligible. 
76 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  A preliminary list of beneficiaries fitting this profile can be taken from the Mandoubs. However, 
52.
each beneficiary will be visited, verified and geo-referenced by DRC’s M&E team (men and women). 
During a visit to a cluster, the M&E team will hold a meeting with men and women separately to 
ascertain that all the households that meet the selection criteria in that given community have been 
included. Any households left out of the Mandoub list will be included. Beneficiaries data will be 
entered in the project’s MIS with their geo-coordinates. Over the course of the project the M&E team 
will visit each cluster to collect geo-reference data on the poorest and poor households. 
  Once all the poorest households in the area have been served, in each district, DRC will plot 
53.
the number of clusters across communities in the districts of Marsa Matrouh, El Negila, El Barrani, El 
Saloum, El Dabaa that are over 30 km inland and have poor access to water (over 25 km) sanitation 
and health. These will be ranked by remoteness with the most remote receiving top-priority for 
homestead cisterns. The following scoring system will be used to rank beneficiaries: 
Table 5.2: Scoring System for Ranking Beneficiary Households 
Indicator 
Ownership of livestock (Number) 
None  
20 or less 
50 or less 
Over 50 
Number of under-five children 
Over 5  
Up to 5 
None  
Ownership of Land (Feddan) 
Under 5 feddan 
Between 5.1 to 10 
Over 10 feddan 
Off-Farm Employment (Number Employed Off-Farm Full Time) 
None  
Between 1 and 2 
Above 2  
Disability 
More than 1 
None 
Score 
10 
8 
5 
3 
10 
5 
3 
10 
5 
3 
10 
5 
3 
10 
3 
  Beneficiaries will be given priority based on the score they receive in descending order. Those 
54.
with the highest score will get the service first. All households in a given household cluster who meet 
the criteria will be served. 
  Roman Cisterns( 500 m3 for livestock/ human use): The 100 Roman cisterns used for 
55.
livestock and human use will be selected based on the following criteria: (i) Only cisterns on common 
lands, with no cisterns on private lands selected for rehabilitation.110 (ii) Suitability of aperture and 
walls for rehabilitation.111 The cisterns that can be rehabilitated will be in the southern part of the 
project area which faces acute shortages of water. Cisterns that serve the remotest areas (over 30 
kilometres) and/or the highest number of households will receive priority. 
110 These Roman cisterns will be selected in common lands. These are often used for grazing. The cisterns will serve 
the water needs of livestock and herders/ HHs 
111 Extensive damage to aperture and walls raises the cost much beyond EGP 60,000. In most cases, extensive 
damage (aperture opened due to top damage) implies the cisterns cannot even be rehabilitated.  
77 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Figure 1. PMU Organizational Chart 
78 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge 
management 
Introduction 
  This appendix covers three inter-related aspects to be integrated in the programme 
56.
management unit (PMU) for the project at the central and the regional PMU levels: (a) monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E), (b) planning, and (c) knowledge management. The M&E system and processes will 
be built around the following key principles: 
 
 
 
Focusing on the main objectives/ goals of the project: Building resilience through the 
ability to manage and adapt to climate change and through increased food security and 
nutrition outcomes.  
Building on community-based and participatory processes: The M&E system will 
build on participatory community practices, planning and evaluation.  
Focusing on outcome and impact measurement: Besides the regular collection of 
output-level data, the project will emphasise the measurement of outcome-level results 
and the use of these assessments in learning, accountability and guiding project 
orientation. 
  The appendix builds on the relevant latest resources in IFAD, including: (i) the latest version of 
57.
IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS, the latest version approved by IFAD's 
Executive Board in April 2017), (ii) the best practices and principles outlined in the Evaluation Manual 
developed by the Independent Office of Evaluation (IOE, current version of 2015), and (iii) IFAD's 
Knowledge Management Strategy. It also builds on the latest relevant corporate priorities and 
commitments and best practice related to evaluation and surveys. The principles and processes 
outlined in this appendix are aligned with the priorities identified for PRIDE during the design process. 
This appendix also responds to the latest country strategy and programme evaluation conducted in 
Egypt, in particular the recommendations on M&E and the need for disaggregated data.  
  As per IFAD's Development Effectiveness Framework (approved by the Executive Board in 
58.
December 2016), and in line with global best practices, the planning and M&E activities and 
Knowledge Management should have the following objectives: 
 
 
 
Strengthening the focus on results through the project cycle;  
Enhancing self-evaluation and learning for results; 
Fostering the use of evidence in project management. 
59.
  Therefore, activities planned to examine all three aspects should have a clear eye on achieving 
and measuring results, on identifying failures or constraints and taking appropriate and swift corrective 
action, and on learning that could be used to scale up achievements in the project or across 
development interventions of partners. 
60.
  The M&E officer in the Central PMU in Cairo and officers in the regional PMU at DRC will be 
primarily responsible for M&E and knowledge management. The Central PMU in Cairo will appoint 
one M&E Officer, and there will be three district-level officers (two covering Matrouh DRC activities 
and one for the new lands). For the new lands, the M&E unit will also coordinate with the M&E unit in 
the Egyptian Countryside Development Company (ECDC/ El Reef El Masry) to obtain data on the 
newly settled youth and smallholder groups. The women officers being recruited for the regional PMU 
at the SDRCM will also be responsible for monitoring and reporting on women’s activities. These 
reports will be assimilated by the M&E officers at the regional and Central level for integrating into all 
project reports. 
79 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
  The project monitoring and evaluation system and processes will be established and managed 
61.
in accordance with established IFAD procedures by the project team with support from IFAD. The 
Logical Framework provides indicators for implementation along with their corresponding means of 
verification. These will form the basis on which the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system will be 
built (which could also include an extended/ more comprehensive list of indicators). The M&E 
processes and systems will be in line with IFAD and global best practices. Selected indicators have 
already been included in the design report/Logical Framework. Indicators in this appendix and the 
logical framework have been chosen in alignment, to the extent feasible, with IFAD's RIMS 
framework, with the latest version available at https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/120/docs/EB-
2017-120-R-7-Rev-1.pdf. The final indicators will be defined in the start-up workshop using the Logical 
Framework. For any future iterations, the PMU should select SMART indicators (specific, measurable, 
attributable, reliable and time bound) relevant to the local context and Logical Framework. 
  The Desert Research Centre already has a well-functioning M&E system at the output level, 
62.
with clear quantitative measurement of outputs produced by previous projects. All activities and 
infrastructure developed under previous interventions have also been mapped in the DRC Geographic 
Information System (GIS) (including dikes and wadis constructed under the previous World Bank-
financed Sustainable Development Centre for Matrouh Resources). These existing strengths will be 
built on during project start-up and implementation, extending the M&E system to cover the whole 
project.  
  Structure: The M&E system will have a three-level structure, consisting of output monitoring, 
63.
outcome monitoring and impact evaluation. Outputs generated by the project are the direct products, 
capital goods or services which result from a development intervention promoted by the project. 
Outcomes are the likely or achieved short-term and medium-term effects of an intervention’s outputs. 
Impacts are the positive and negative, long-term effects produced by a development intervention, 
directly or indirectly, intended or unintended. See below for monitoring/ evaluation at the different 
levels. .  
  Output monitoring (RIMS first level) is concerned primarily with the monitoring of input 
64.
delivery, activity implementation and output achievements that can help the PMU to continually take 
timely decisions and self-evaluate progress. This will be done at all levels; by the community 
representatives, M&E team, PMU, and implementing partners. AWPBs will provide the targets for first 
level monitoring. The M&E officers will ensure real time tracking of the implementation of the activities 
and associated outputs and should be calculated taking into consideration the period from 1st January 
to the 31st December of a given year. Results from outputs will feed into the MIS/ planning tool.  
  Outcome assessments (RIMS second level) cover Outcomes, that are the medium-term 
65.
effects of the outputs produced by the Project. The purpose of monitoring the outcome is to inform 
Project management of the mid-term results of Project initiatives, identify the most successful 
implementation experiences as well as the setbacks that have hindered the achievement of expected 
objectives. The project outcomes, which also include RIMS indicators, could be assessed from the 
third year or the Project (to allow for consolidation of changes at the outcome level) and should be 
reported to IFAD either on an annual or biannual basis, depending on the type of indicator and the 
methodology employed. Outcome indicators will be collected through focus groups, in-depth 
interviews, participatory assessments, studies/surveys in the target areas. The methodologies 
employed will be participatory, building on the system of community representatives, and will reflect 
the preferences and feedback of communities being served by the project (DRC has experience in 
conducting participatory rapid rural appraisals, which were implemented during the World Bank 
financed Matrouh Resource Management Project). At the outcome level, the Project Start-up 
Workshop will also review and adopt, if feasible, IFAD's Annual Outcome Survey methodology (to be 
shared by IFAD country team at the time of the Project Start-Up workshop), and integrating the key 
outcomes in the Log-Frame.  
80 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
66.
 Annual outcome surveys, including outcomes relating to gender mainstreaming/ women's 
empowerment will be conducted from the fourth year onwards and continued in year 5 and year 6. In 
year 7 key elements of the outcome surveys will be integrated into the completion impact survey. 
Impact assessments will cover Impacts, the changes that are logically expected to occur by 
67.
the end of the project (with some impact indicators taking longer to be visible, and most apparent only 
in the long-term or post-completion). Impact assessment will primarily be done through a baseline 
survey to be conducted at project start-up and a completion impact survey to be conducted at project 
completion (the baseline survey will also provide baseline data for some key outcome indicators 
identified in the Logical Framework). The Baseline Survey will be conducted during the first year of the 
Project and immediately after the Project Start-up Workshop. The final evaluation including a 
household survey will precede the Project Completion Mission and will measure the impact of the 
Project throughout the course of its implementation.  
  The baseline survey will be conducted with a two-stage sampling approach: first stratified by 
68.
agro-ecological zones in the Matrouh coastal area and the new lands, but within the agro-ecological 
zone, households to be selected through simple random sampling. (Stratification could also be done 
by project intervention type, but the segregation by intervention type will overlap closely with agro-
ecological zones; the detailed sampling framework will be developed during the survey.) For Moghra, 
the only HHs sampled will be from among the youth groups (who are the primary target group of the 
project in Moghra). The completion survey will adopt the same sampling framework and the 
questionnaire to ensure comparability.  
  With regard to selection of a control group, it was decided not to conduct the survey across a 
69.
control group. Based on the discussions with DRC, the project will cover almost all communities in a 
certain agro-ecological zone (e.g. all rural communities in the rain-fed areas in Matrouh or in Siwa 
Oasis). And for the new lands in Moghra, the project will include all the smallholder households and 
youth groups covered by the project. Therefore, the scope for selecting a comparable sample of 
households/ communities that do not receive project services as a control group is limited (the agro-
ecological zones are unique, and it will be difficult to find a control group in a different agro-ecological 
zone in Egypt with similar attributes). The analysis will focus on before and after analysis of the 
farming households. 
70.
In terms of questionnaire development, the standard IFAD RIMS survey will not be used and 
will instead be adapted to the context. For example, the assets that can be measured to distinguish 
between HHs at different poverty levels vary from most IFAD project regions. The surveys will be 
aligned with the key priorities of the project. These include: climate resilience, nutrition-sensitive 
activities and gender mainstreaming. Therefore the surveys will integrate elements of: 
 
 
 
 
The RIMS impact survey, to be adapted for the context (based on a participatory 
approach to questionnaire and survey development, especially to determine the assets 
that most accurately determine/ reflect poverty levels).  
For climate resilience, the Multi-dimensional Poverty Assessment Tool (MPAT) will be 
used, in particular component 11 on adaptation and resilience with regard to climate 
change.  
For nutrition and food security, the project will integrate elements of the FAO Dietary 
Diversity Score (to assess HH level food security) methodology. The dietary diversity 
assessment will be done through the Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) 
tool. 
For gender mainstreaming, key questions from the Women's Empowerment in 
Agriculture Index (WEAI) will be adopted. 
71.
In addition, the baseline survey will also be used to collect data on the technical components. 
Therefore, it will cover both the results at the household/ community level and the baseline data for 
technical components. This will include geo-referencing current and existing infrastructure, including 
81 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
water cisterns, reservoirs and roads, so that the project could use clear criteria to determine the 
locations of new infrastructure.  
72.
  Management Information System (MIS): The Project will be assisted in the development of a 
Management Information System (MIS) with IFAD support. The system will be designed based on the 
requirements identified in the Logical Framework and in keeping with IFAD RIMS requirements and 
the guidance provided by the technical divisions of IFAD on M&E. The system will have the capacity 
to provide gender-disaggregated data on all key indicators. In addition, and in line with recent IFAD 
corporate priorities, the M&E system will also capture all people-specific indicators disaggregated by 
age to capture the engagement of youth in the project. With regard to the MIS, NEN will also introduce 
DRC to the 'NEN Planner', an MIS tool currently being developed in-house to facilitate the 
management of AWPBs, annual progress reports and RIMS reporting.  
  Geographic Information System (GIS): The Desert Research Centre already has a GIS. This 
73.
has been used to map interventions under previous projects including the recent EU-financed project. 
The GIS will enable the presentation of data in an interactive geographical interface. A GIS mapping 
survey will be conducted in the first year. This will track the existence of infrastructure (wadi) and 
homestead water-related infrastructure (cisterns, reservoirs). The same database will be used to 
update information on project interventions across communities, including the provision of nutrition 
and livelihood packages. The project will introduce direct input through tablets to be employed to 
update the GIS system and M&E database. Twenty-five tablets for the project areas (purchased at 
USD 200 per tablet, with the distribution to be shifted depending on project progress) will be 
purchased for real-time updates on HH characteristics, project output delivery and quality, beneficiary 
feedback and outcomes.  
  The overall objectives of the survey and tracking are to: (a) provide an overview of the project, 
74.
including the various components and interventions; (b) provide synthesized reports and graphical 
elements (charts and maps) on the various activities of the Programme including investments per 
community, status of infrastructure completed, (c) provide updates on various project outcomes 
through the life of the project: geophysical (e.g. land cover, water resources availability, etc.), 
infrastructure (e.g. schools, health centre, roads, cisterns, reservoirs, etc.), and demography 
(population, poverty, etc.); and (d) provide objective elements in defining the priority list of areas to be 
targeted by the Programme. 
  GIS up-gradation as part of the GIS mapping exercise: An initial activity related to the 
75.
development of the package for the tablets will be implemented in the first project year. The 
development of the customised input and user interface will include, but not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
The characteristics and results to be inputted in the interface/ GIS system 
Definition of user rights across the system: This will include defining and assigning rights 
for read/ view rights (only inputting data or viewing data), edit/ update rights, approval 
rights (the central M&E officer/ project coordinator/ CPM), administration rights (assigning 
rights to other users, by the central M&E officer) 
Alignment and harmonization with other systems: The system will be able to export data 
and results to Excel/ SPSS/ other common data management softwares. It should be 
able to also export to Google Maps/ ArcMap 
System requirements: The system will have a light system requirement so that 
computers/ PCs in project areas without high capacity can also access and use the 
system. 
  Reporting processes will capture data periodically from different sources and stakeholders 
76.
about project interventions, which are consolidated at different levels, processed, analyzed, classified 
and presented into customized tables that are used for the preparation of different reports namely: (i) 
monitoring reports (including RIMS/ upgraded versions of RIMS or the Online Logframe currently 
being developed in IFAD), (ii) progress reports (iii) financial reports; (iv) audit reports; and 
(v) completion reports. This set of reports constitutes the minimum reporting requirements.  
82 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
  Updated IFAD reporting systems, including the Online Log-frame, currently being developed in 
77.
IFAD, will be introduced to the project as they are finalised and rolled out (as per IFAD corporate 
plans, all new projects will eventually feed in their key RIMS and M&E data into the Online Log-
Frame).  
  Project external monitoring will comprise: annual IFAD supervision; Mid Term Review; ad hoc 
78.
thematic/diagnostic assessments; yearly audits; and the Project Completion Evaluation and Survey/ 
Project Completion Report. Annual reports and significant outcome/ impact level reports will also be 
shared with the Project Steering Committee.  
  The M&E Officer will be responsible for managing the M&E system and ensuring the timely an 
79.
accurate production of all reports. The M&E Officer will also be responsible for organizing the baseline 
and impact assessment survey. The M&E unit at the CPMU and RMPU will develop formats, 
questionnaire and other data collection tools that will be used to identify baselines and progress 
during the course of the Project. 
  Start-up Workshop: A start-up workshop will be organized in the first project year to establish 
80.
planning, financial management, governance, procurement, M&E, project organizational and 
operational modalities, technical specifications and processes (as part of the PIM development 
process).  
  Mid-Term Review: A mid-term review will be carried out towards the end of the Project’s third 
81.
year/ fourth year. The review will cover, among other things: (i) physical and financial progress as 
measured against AWPBs; (ii) performance and financial management of contracted implementing 
partners; (iii) an assessment of the efficacy of technical assistance and capacity building activities; (iv) 
an assessment of the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, sustainability and impact achieved by the 
project approaches; and (v) recommendations related to any strategic changes to be made to the 
project to achieve its development objectives, if needed.  
82.
  Final Evaluation/ Project Completion Report: An independent Final Evaluation will take 
place within the last six months prior to the project completion date, and will focus on the same issues 
as the mid-term evaluation, and will include the completion survey. The Final Evaluation will also 
provide recommendations for follow-up activities. The evaluation will feed into the Project Completion 
Report (PCR), and will be undertaken by a neutral agency with no previous involvement in Project 
implementation.  
  During the final year of Project implementation, as part of the preparation of the IFAD-required 
83.
Project Completion Report, the M&E data collected over the Project implementation period will be 
used as part of a thorough assessment of project achievements.  
  A completion mission and review exercise will be conducted at project completion, with a final 
84.
PCR to be submitted by the PMU to IFAD no later than 6 months after project completion as per IFAD 
guidelines. Results achieved by the project at both outcome and impact levels will be reflected in the 
report. The PCR will also include lessons learned that could be incorporated into future project/ 
country programme design in Egypt or globally. The PCR will review the relevance, effectiveness, 
efficiency sustainability and impact achieved by the project. Additional evaluation criteria will include 
gender equality and women's empowerment, innovation potential for scaling up, adaptation to climate 
change, and targeting. The assessment of project achievements will be in line with IFAD's project 
completion guidelines and the IOE Evaluation Manual (current/ latest version available at 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/bfec198c-62fd-46ff-abae-285d0e0709d6).  
  After project completion, the MALR will nominate a focal point for any communication/ liaison 
85.
regarding the completed project. If the project is chosen for a Project Performance Evaluation (PPE) 
conducted by IFAD's Independent Office of Evaluation (IOE), the focal point and former Project 
Manager will ensure that data, information, stakeholder contacts and interviews are available for the 
IOE team. 
83 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Planning 
  The planning structure and processes of the project will ensure realistic targets are established, 
86.
these are met, and mid-course corrective action taken during implementation if evidence and reports 
indicate that the project is not on course in terms of approach or progress.  
  Planning instrument/ AWPB: Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) and corresponding 
87.
Procurement Plans (see Appendix on Procurement) will be the project’s principal planning 
instruments. The purpose of the AWPB is to provide the PMU with a timetable for implementation of a 
set of scheduled activities, together with their respective budgets/inputs. AWPBs are formulated taking 
into account the Project Design Report, supervision report recommendations and legal agreements, 
contract and management agreements of service providers and participating partners, M&E and 
results targets, procurement plans and timelines and development priorities of target communities. 
Activities should have clear financial allocations, which will be the basis for release of funds and for 
financial control. The AWPB will also reflect the phasing of the project between the DRC areas and 
the new lands.  
  The AWPB is an essential covenant in the legal Financing Agreement; failure to prepare it on a 
88.
timely basis may lead to delay or suspension of fund disbursement by IFAD. The first AWPB will be 
prepared, together with the Procurement Plan for the first 18 months of the project and be presented 
for discussion during the start-up workshop for submission to IFAD for no objection. The elaboration of 
the following AWPBs will be prepared, discussed and approved no later than thirty days before the 
beginning of the financial year covering the AWPB.  
  Processes: To allow full participation of the project stakeholders, the process of AWPB 
89.
preparation will start with a consultation at different levels: with the target communities/ community 
representatives, partner institutions (including MALR and MIIC), implementing partners and then be 
consolidated at the PMU level.  
90.
In particular, PRIDE annual planning will build on existing participatory approaches: with local 
communities developing the local community action plan, an annual M&E plan, analysis of problems 
and constraints at the level of the community, proposed solutions and a community action plan. The 
AWPB will be translated into a project level action plan.  
  The results of the action plan will be consolidated in the Annual Project Progress Report. 
91.
Annual Stakeholder Review and Planning Workshops will review the Annual Project Progress Reports 
and provide inputs to the project's AWPBs for the succeeding year, thus closing a circle of 
participatory, demand-driven and forward-looking planning and implementation. The AWPB will be a 
living document, with any failure to achieve monthly/ quarterly results triggering discussions and 
corrective actions. Any failure to meet targets in a quarter by more than 30% will trigger a CPMU and 
RPMU discussion and a report to the IFAD Country Office on proposed corrective action.  
92.
  The AWPB will also be aligned with the results framework of the project, with key activities and 
outputs aligned with the key results outlined in the Logical Framework and in the annual RIMS report 
to be submitted to IFAD (all supervision missions will also ensure updated RIMS and results reporting 
as annexes to the supervision reports). The AWPB will outline activities by the key project sub-
regions: (a) rest of Matrouh Governorate (including both the coastal areas and the Siwa Oasis), and 
(b) Moghra. 
  The project will conduct, at its onset, a Start-up Workshop, with the aim of sensitizing and 
93.
training project partners, PMU staff and other potential implementing partners. At this workshop, time 
will be allocated to familiarize all participating partners with the planning and annual work plan 
process as well as the monitoring and evaluation system. A special session will be included in the 
start-up workshop on M&E to brief participants about the project Logical Framework, progress 
reporting and evaluation arrangements. A session will also be held to familiarize the participants with 
IFAD’s RIMS system, performance based contracting system and key performance indicators 
regarding the sustainability and effectiveness of water harvesting and management processes and 
84 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
infrastructure, enhanced crop and livestock production, and improved awareness of and access to 
social services. 
  Responsibility: In terms of responsibility, the project M&E officer will be primarily responsible, 
94.
under the guidance of the project coordinator, for updating and finalizing the AWPB. Inputs will be 
submitted by technical specialists/ component heads on the respective components. 
Knowledge Management 
  Given the alignment of PRIDE in the national development priorities and the role of knowledge 
95.
management in improving water harvesting/ management practices, crop/ livestock production 
practices, gender-sensitive and nutrition mainstreaming measures, and the crucial role of knowledge 
collection and dissemination to develop a prototype for Oases development and support the 1.5 
million feddan initiative to reclaim new lands, the dissemination of project experiences and results to 
stakeholders and other development partners will be crucial.  
  The PMU (in particular the M&E officer) will engage in relevant platforms and forums to improve 
96.
information flow among actors. This will enable dissemination (and learning) in terms of innovations 
and best practices. To the extent feasible, the PMU will ensure dissemination of best practices to 
other rural development projects in Egypt, to policy makers and other development partners. To the 
extent possible, and as feasible, such exchanges will feed into country-level policy engagement (to be 
facilitated through the Project Steering Committee/ MALR) or into other regional forums. Where 
applicable, regional knowledge networking will be supported to build and share approaches, tools, 
methodologies, technologies and best practices. Any activities related to international knowledge 
exchanges will be aligned with the objectives of IFAD's Approach to South-South and Triangular 
Cooperation (approved by the Executive Board in December 2016): 
 
 
SSTC objective 1: Share relevant rural development solutions and knowledge, and 
promote investments among developing countries. 
SSTC objective 2: Establish and support partnerships and other forms of collaboration for 
improved rural livelihoods. 
In terms of operational details, the project will package and disseminate information to the 
97.
respective stakeholders in the appropriate formats (e.g. brochures, studies, articles, newsletter, and 
internet). The Project Steering Committee will have the responsibility for identifying the policy lessons 
and ensuring that these are communicated appropriately. Innovations and best practices at village 
level will be documented for the purpose of replication and scaling-up. Farmers/ livestock owners with 
innovations and best practices will be used as mentors for other farmers in order to accelerate the 
scaling-up and replication of those innovations.  
  Knowledge management and communication will be a shared responsibility. The overall 
98.
responsibility will belong to the Project Director and the M&E Officer. Service providers will have a key 
responsibility for sharing lessons learnt during the Project through preparation of special case studies 
and Learning Notes. All activities related to KM should also be aligned with IFAD's Knowledge 
Management Strategy, available at https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/ad197dcd-93f9-4e50-ab3d-
d773619a89e5.  
  During the final year of PRIDE implementation, as part of the preparation of the IFAD-required 
99.
Project Completion Report/Impact Assessment, the M&E data and KM products collected over the 
Project implementation period will be used as part of a thorough assessment of Project achievements. 
85 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement 
arrangements 
Financial Management Risk Assessment 
A comprehensive financial risk assessment has been carried out for the proposed Project. 
1.
Inherent, country and entity weaknesses and strengths are detailed below. Financial management 
arrangements at the Central and Regional Project Management Units have also been assessed. The 
inherent financial management risk and country risk after the implementation of mitigation measures 
is rated as Medium.  
2.
Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index ranked Egypt 108 of 176 countries in 
2016, with a score of 3.4 in 2016, down from 3.6 in 2015. The latest PEFA assessment for Egypt was 
carried out in 2009 but not publically available. No further financial management assessment was 
carried out since then. However, in the Country Partnership Framework for the Arab Republic of Egypt 
for the period FY 2015-2019, the World Bank (WB) assessed the country fiduciary risk as substantial 
and stated that the use of funds may not achieve sufficient value for money with integrity, due to 
deviations from transparency caused by weak practices and unclear accountability.  
3.
Further, the African Development Bank's (AfDB) Country Strategy Paper 2015-2019, identified 
public financial management (PFM) issues which require improvements such as: (i) accelerating the 
reform on the medium-term and program budgeting; (ii) approving budget laws and annual audited 
final accounts by a Parliament instead of the Head of the State; (iii) introducing recurrent and capital 
ceilings in the budget circular to spending agencies for a better alignment to strategic objectives; and, 
(iv) and extending treasury single account (TSA) coverage while reducing various bank accounts.  
The Government Financial Management Information Systems, an important aspect of the PFM 
4.
reform, is being implemented but slowly. Two charts of accounts are used in parallel, one for budget 
preparation and the second for recording actual transactions. A separate e-payment system is 
functioning but only available for payments of salaries. The Law relating to accounting and reporting 
needs to be updated to align with the gradual adoption of accrual basis accounting and compliance 
with IPSAS. The internal control arrangements (segregation of duties, ex-ante control, supervision 
from the Financial Controller, etc.) are set up inside the Accounting Units for execution of the public 
expenditures, but the absence of an internal audit function for ex-post control is noticeable.  
5.
  With regards to the external audit duties and activities, the Accountability State Authority (ASA) 
that acts as the Supreme Audit Institution of Egypt, conducts financial, compliance and performance 
audits of all the entities using public resources. The ASA audit reports are not published, as the legal 
framework has not yet been updated. However, the GOE has made significant strides in improving 
fiscal transparency after the 2011 Revolution by adopting provisions in the new Constitution to 
strengthen independence and transparency of the supreme audit institutions and by making the 
budget publicly available through publishing a citizens’ budget in 2014 and 2015. In addition, the GOE 
has recently finalized the Manual of Procedures of the Internal Financial Control, clarifying and 
standardizing the financial controls for each category of expenditure. There are at least twelve anti-
corruption authorities in Egypt and the GOE has in place an anti-corruption strategy serving as a 
roadmap for the authorities on anti-corruption issues. There is a draft code of conduct in place as well 
as a whistle-blower mechanism, but these are yet to be adopted. The GOE is in the process of 
finalizing the PFM reform Agenda, creating a PFM Coordination Committee to perform effective 
monitoring of implementation progress and drafting a revised procurement law. 
The e-system for payments has been recently expanded recently to cover all types of payment 
6.
from the public budget.  
Challenges for the financial management of this Project lie in the coordination between the 
7.
multiple actors involved e.g. Central and regional PMUs; and Service providers/NGOs which will be 
87 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
responsible for the implementation of different activities. This is also the first time for IFAD to partner 
with the Desert Research Center which has a capacity in term of financial management. While the 
World Bank funding was substantial, the donor agencies providing funds in the last few years such as 
EC and Italian Cooperation have been relatively small. 
The inherent financial management risks for the PRIDE project and proposed mitigating actions 
8.
are detailed in Appendix 7.2 below. 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
(i)  Financial management organization and staffing 
A CPMU will be established within MALR in Cairo by a ministerial decree and will have the 
9.
overall responsibility for the management and monitoring of the project. CPMU key staff will be 
competitively hired, from within MALR or local market whose terms of reference will be approved by 
IFAD prior to the recruitment process. The finance related staffing and management structure will 
comprise of Financial Manager - Chartered Accountant/Certified Public Accountant, with at least ten 
years of experience in financial management, preferably including experience of public sector 
accounting and experience with international development partners. In the event that the appointed 
finance manager is a government employee, he or she should be fully dedicated to the project. 
10.
  A regional PMU will be created within the Sustainable Development Centre for Matrouh 
Resources (SDCMR) of the Desert Research Center (DRC) in Matrouh governorate. The Regional 
PMU staffing will comprise of at least three accountants which will be seconded as full time staff from 
the existing SDCMR's accounting team, and will be supported and trained through a part time 
qualified Finance Management Specialist on consultancy basis, with sound experience on the 
financial management of internationally funded projects. 
  As a condition of disbursement, the CPMU shall have been established and key staff hired and 
11.
in place before disbursements begins.  
  Service providers/NGOs are being hired for the implementation of certain activities under 
12.
PRIDE. The following criteria will be assessed to ensure that each service provider/ NGO has 
sufficient financial management capacity. This assessment will be carried out by the CPMU Financial 
Manager or the Financial Management Specialist of the Regional PMU. 
  Detailed job descriptions will be available for all staff and will be included in the PIM. 
13.
Competitively recruited staff will be hired with annual contracts renewable on satisfactory 
performance. Changes to seconded staff may be at the request of IFAD or GoE with agreement from 
the other. 
88 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Table 7.1: Checklist for assessing financial management capacity of service providers/NGOs 
  The following sections set out the scope of FM activities. Appendix 7.3 lists the roles of the 
14.
implementing units in carrying out the various tasks. 
(ii)  Budgeting 
  All Project activities will be included in an Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) that will 
15.
indicate what activities and expenditures will be implemented by CPMU and Regional PMU, and the 
extent to which budgeted expenditures are intended to be financed from each financing source (IFAD 
Loan, IFAD Grant, counterpart funds and beneficiaries contribution). Budgets will be presented in a 
format that presents the amounts quarterly and each financier separately. Budget initiation will begin 
at the field level based on beneficiaries needs. Regional PMU will submit the AWPB to CPMU. CPMU 
will ensure that all budgets are prepared in a consistent and timely manner for submission to the 
Project Steering Committee and IFAD. AWPBs, once approved, will be available to all Project parties. 
To ensure transparency, Project related documentation will be stored by CPMU on a single cloud 
storage site with access to all staff. Regional and Central PMU will ensure that sources needed from 
counterpart funds are included in the submission of the annual government budget. 
  The accounting system will include a module that will allow for budgeting to facilitate tracking of 
16.
actual against budgeted expenditures and to facilitate course corrections for variations from the 
budget. 
(iii) Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds 
  The Project will use available disbursement methods of replenishment, reimbursement and 
17.
direct payments. It is expected that most expenditures will be through the designated accounts using 
the imprest mechanism. The ceiling authorized allocation will be based on budgets for six months. 
  Withdrawals from the IFAD financing in respect of expenditures for start-up costs incurred 
18.
before the satisfaction of the general conditions precedent to withdrawal shall not exceed an amount 
of USD 400,000. These funds are intended to cover the recruitment of CPMU key personnel and their 
salaries for four months, and incentives and salaries for SDCMR/DRC staff as applicable (USD 
105,000); technical assistant for SDCMR (USD 40,000); the purchase and installation of an 
89 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
appropriate accounting software and MIS system (USD 105,000); purchase of basic equipment such 
as computers, photocopier and printers (USD 105,000); and preparation of the Project Implementation 
Manual (USD 45,000). 
  Replenishment Applications prepared by the CPMU for the entire project will be submitted to 
19.
IFAD through IFAD Client Portal (ICP), at a minimum every quarter or when 30% of the designated 
account has been utilized for eligible expenditures, whichever occurs earlier. Details regarding the 
designated account allocations and SoE thresholds will be given in the Letter to the 
Borrower/Recipient. 
  The Funds Flow arrangements to meet eligible project expenditures are as follow, (and set out 
20.
in a chart in Appendix 7.1 below). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two Designated Accounts in EUR or USD (one for the Loan and one for the Grant) will 
be held at the Central Bank of Egypt from which drawdowns will be made to the Egyptian 
Pound operational accounts. 
Project Operational Account A in Egyptian Pound will be opened and managed by the 
CPMU, shall receive funds transferred from the Loan Designated Account. 
Project Operational Account B in Egyptian Pound will be opened and managed by the 
CPMU, shall receive funds transferred from the Grant Designated Account. 
Project Operational Account C in Egyptian Pound will be opened and managed by the 
Regional PMU in Matrouh, shall receive funds transferred from the Loan Operating 
Account managed by CPMU. 
Project Operational Account D in Egyptian Pound will be opened and managed by the 
Regional PMU in Matrouh, shall receive funds transferred from the Grant Operating 
Account managed by CPMU. 
CPMU will ensure timely transfer of funds to the Regional PMU based on six months 
cash forecast against the approved AWPB; subsequent transfers are to be made once 
75% of the immediate instalment and 100% of the earlier instalment are utilised. 
Regional PMU in Matrouh will be responsible for advances and expenditures for activities 
to be implemented by the regional PMU and as identified in the approved AWPB. 
All bank accounts in the project will have at least two authorised signatories. All 
payments will be by bank transfers or checks, except petty cash expenditures which 
should kept to minimal. 
Government cash contribution will be made available in advance on quarterly basis for 
the project and payment will be executed through e-payment system. 
Transfers of funds to service providers/NGOs will be made to the designated account 
opened specifically for PRIDE related interventions. Transfers for each agreement will be 
made will be based on the Implementation Plans (IPs) which are part of the Financing 
Agreement signed with NGOs/services providers. The first instalment to NGOs will be 
released as per IP in advance. Release of subsequent instalments will be subject to 
acceptable quarterly narrative and financial reports.  
Flow of funds and accounting treatment of the match grants by beneficiaries will be 
documented in the PIM. 
In-kind government and beneficiaries contribution and will be included within budgets and 
captured in the expenditures recorded. 
(iv) Internal Controls 
  Sufficient staffing at the CPMU and the Regional PMU in Matrouh will allow for appropriate 
21.
segregation of duties to ensure that the following tasks are separated between staff: 
 
custody of assets; 
90 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
 
 
 
 
 
authorization or approval of related transactions affecting those assets:  
recording or reporting of related transactions; 
compliance with applicable IFAD and national rules and procedures; 
timely and relevant financial reporting; and  
automated controls built into the computerized accounting system, along with adequate 
backup procedures. 
  The signatories of MoF Controllers assigned to the Accounting Units in MALR and SDCM are 
22.
mandatory as a second signatory on all payments (bank and cash). 
  All internal control mechanisms will be detailed within the financial management manual to be 
23.
prepared before implementation begins. Test of internal controls will be performed by an internal 
auditor/firm hired in the mid-term of the implementation; the ToR will be cleared by IFAD. Additionally 
the external audit will report any internal control weaknesses within the Management Letter. 
(v)  Accounting systems, policies and procedures 
  The CPMU will procure and install accounting software with multi-currency tracking and 
24.
reporting, and multiple location installation and consolidation ability (like TOMPRO); the ToR will be 
cleared by IFAD. The accounting system will include a budgeting module, procurement and reporting 
module and will have the capability to generate WAs automatically. The installation of an accounting 
system and training on the software will be provided by the supplier to all finance staff and other users 
of the system which will be a disbursement condition. The data will be backed up on a hard disk on a 
daily basis. 
  All accounting policies and procedures, related to the Project will be clearly documented in the 
25.
financial management manual, (part of the PIM). The preparation of the PIM will be a condition for 
disbursement and will have to be designed in a manner that is simple and succinct to all. It is 
recommended that an audit firm familiar with donor procedures are hired to prepare the FM Manual 
for the Project. 
26.
  The Project will adopt International Public Sector Accounting standards (Cash basis). 
  The CPMU will record the transfer to the Regional PMU as a cash in transit, and Regional PMU 
27.
through double entry will close the cash in transit account, and book the fund as cash in hand/bank. 
The Regional PMU will record all expenditures as they are incurred. 
  Beneficiary and government contributions in kind will be recorded under a separate fund set up 
28.
within the accounting system and will be disclosed in the notes to financial statements. 
(vi) Financial reporting 
  The CPMU will prepare monthly financial reports for the dissemination to the project 
29.
management in Cairo and Matrouh level and the steering committee. These will be consolidated 
further into quarterly unaudited financial reports to be submitted to IFAD. The financial Statements will 
be in formats acceptable to IFAD and samples of the same will be available within the Financial 
Management Manual. It is expected that the financial reports will provide information to management, 
IFAD and related parties to facilitate decision-making processes. 
  NGO/service providers will be required to submit simplified quarterly financial report as stated 
30.
above, and in addition to audited financial reports to Central and Regional PMU as applicable for 
validation. 
  The CPMU will consolidate its accounts for the entire Project and produce audited financial 
31.
statements in line with IFAD’s General Conditions, will be submitted to IFAD within four months of the 
end of the fiscal year. The financial Statements will be prepared in accordance with international 
public sector accounting standards (cash basis). 
91 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
(vii) 
Internal Audit 
  As the internal audit function as per modern internal audit practices does not exist within the 
32.
Egypt context, and given the complexities and risks arising from the wide geographical spread of 
Project activities, the various implementation parties proposed, a risk-based internal audit will be 
carried out by a qualified internal auditor/firm hired by the CPMU at the mid-term of the Project to 
evaluate/review the effectiveness of internal controls, risk management and governance, the 
economical and efficient use of project resources, the reliability and integrity of financial information, 
the achievement of operational/physical targets, and the project’s compliance with the financing 
agreement and applicable rules and regulations. 
Internal audit reports will be made available to MALR, the Project Steering Committee, Central 
33.
and Regional PMU and external auditors. 
(viii) 
External Audit 
  The MALR, through the CPMU, will appoint an independent auditor to audit the accounts of the 
34.
entire Project on an annual basis, following the international auditing standards. The Terms of 
Reference for the audit will be cleared by IFAD on an annual basis. The performance of the auditor 
will be reviewed every year to confirm whether the auditor will be reappointed. An annual audited 
financial statement together with a management letter on audit observations on internal controls will 
be submitted to IFAD no later than 6 months after the end of the fiscal year. i.e. by 31 December of 
every Project year. To ensure that audit reports are submitted to IFAD within the deadline, 
engagement of the auditor will commence four months before the end of each fiscal year. The Project 
will also be subject to audit by the ASA. The audit reports issued by ASA will be made available to 
IFAD and supervision missions as well as the appointed private external audit firm. 
(ix)  
Anticorruption and Good Governance Framework 
  The primary responsibility of detecting fraud and corruption lies with the borrower. However, 
35.
IFAD applies a Zero Tolerance Policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in 
projects financed through its loans and grants. “Zero Tolerance” means that IFAD will pursue all 
allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied where 
the allegations are substantiated. IFAD will take all possible actions to protect individuals who help 
reveal corrupt practices from reprisals and individuals or entities subject to unfair or malicious 
allegations. Given IFAD’s Zero Tolerance described above, it is important that the staff and all 
stakeholders of the Programme are familiar with IFAD’s as well as national anticorruption policies and 
whistle blowing procedures. The IFAD anticorruption policy is available on the IFAD website at 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm). The IFAD website also provides instructions on 
how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and Oversight 
(http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). 
(x)  Taxation 
  As per IFAD policy, IFAD cannot be utilized for the payment of Taxes. Ministry of Planning in 
36.
close collaboration will MALR will allocate on a yearly basis, and as part of the investment budget of 
MALR, the required resources to cover the indirect taxes such as Value Added Tax, customs and 
duties in relation all goods, works and services procured under this project. Consequently, MALR will 
be responsible for making payment/settlements of these taxes to the Tax and Custom Authorities 
through the e-payment system; and also for ensuring that supporting documents and reports are kept 
securely readily available. 
(xi) Financial Management Supervision and Implementation Support 
  Based on the risk assessment, the supervision and implementation support plan for PRIDE 
37.
project will include: 
 
 
Full training of Finance unit staff as part of the project start-up workshop. 
Participation of Finance unit staff in workshops or training sessions organized by IFAD. 
92 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Review of the FM staffing as well as FM arrangements in the procedures manual, 
including relevant guidelines and procedures with regard to all activities. 
One full fiduciary review (as part of a supervision mission) and at least one follow-
up/implementation support mission each year, including updating of the financial 
management risk assessment. 
Refresher training to finance staff as required, as part of the supervision or 
implementation support missions. 
Desk reviews of periodic progress reports, interim financial reports and annual financial 
statements prepared by CPMU. 
Desk reviews of internal audit reports and annual (external) audit reports and 
management letters. 
Follow-up on work performed and recommendations issued by the Internal Auditor and 
the external auditors. 
Table 7.2: Summary of actions needed to mitigate FM risks 
Action 
Establishment of CPMU by a 
ministerial decree 
Responsible 
party/person 
MALR 
Recruitment of key staff of CPMU. 
MALR/DRC 
Target date/Covenants 
Disbursement condition in 
the Financing Agreement 
Disbursement condition in 
the Financing Agreement. 
Accounting software installed at 
Central and Regional PMU, and users 
are trained on the system. 
Project Implementation Manual 
(including formats for all transactions). 
Internal auditor/firm to be hired in mid-
term. ToR to be cleared by IFAD. 
CPMU 
Disbursement condition. 
CPMU 
Disbursement condition. 
PMU 
Mid-term of the project 
implementation. 
93 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7.1: Flow of funds 
94 
 Suppliers and service providers,  outside Sudan above  USD/EUR Loan Designated Account held at the Central Bank by CPMU Loan Operating  Bank Account  by CPMU(EGP) International Fund for Agricultural Development (Loan and Grant) Contractors, suppliers, consultants, services providers, staff, etc.. Grant Operating Account held at a Central/commercial bank by Regional PMU in Matrouh (EGP) Direct Payment (Foreign Payments) Payments of large values Suppliers and service providers, outside Egypt   USD/EUR  Grant Designated Account  held at the Central Bank by CPMU Grant Operating  Bank Account  by CPMU (EGP) Grant Operating Account held at a Central/commercial bank by Regional PMU in Matrouh (EGP) NGOs, research centres, private sector  Component 2 (iii) and El- Mogrha related activities will be implemented through Contractors, suppliers, consultants, matching grants, etc..  
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7.2: Summary of financial management risks and mitigating actions 
FM risk category 
A. 
Inherent Risks 
Country Level. 
1.  Transparency International rating deteriorated slightly 
dropped in 2016 compared to previous two years of 
2015 and 2014, with a score of 3.4. 
2.  Economy of Egypt is suffering currently from relatively 
high inflation. 
Entity and Programme design. 
1.  First time that IFAD will work with DRC. 
2.  Programme spread over dispersed localities within 
Matrouh Governorate. 
3.  Implementation will happen at the village levels 
through public and private service providers and 
NGOs. 
B.  Programme Control Risks 
1. Organization & Staffing. 
a)  Adequate qualified staff, with prior knowledge of donor 
procedures, are difficult to find within MoALR and 
DRC. 
b)  Project Organizational structures created within 
MoALR and SDCMR of DRC are significantly 
influenced by the Ministry/DRC. 
Proposed FM risk mitigating measures 
Initial 
risk 
rating 
Medium 
N/A 
Residual 
risk rating 
Medium 
High 
a)  CPMU will be established with MoALR in Cairo through a ministerial decree and 
Medium 
staff will be hired on a competitive basis. 
b)  Regional PMU will be established in SDCMR of DRC in Martrouh for 
implementation and will be allocated key staff for the implementation of this 
Project. 
c)  Measures for assessment of service providers and NGOs have been put in place 
in the implementing arrangements to ensure that FM risk is controlled. 
High 
a)  Criteria for staff is prior experience on donor funded projects financial 
Medium 
management and disbursement. 
b)  Semi Independent Central and Regional PMUs. 
c)  Recruitment of key CPMU staff is a disbursement condition. 
d)  Staff ToR to be cleared by IFAD before recruitment. 
e)  Finance Manager at CPMU to be recruited competitively and Regional PMU 
finance team will be supported through an experienced part time qualified FM 
consultant. All contracts to be performance based. 
f)  Overall coordination will be within the ToR of the Financial Manager at the CPMU. 
95 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
2. Budgeting. 
a)  Project budget will follow a bottom up approach; 
however capacity at the beneficiary and Regional 
PMU levels in creation of a budget is weak. 
b)  Lack of knowledge of IFAD procedures. 
c)  Too many layers within the budget creation and 
approval process. 
d)  Overruns and unrealistic budgets. 
3. Funds Flow & Disbursements 
a)  Limited abilities to forecast fund use leading to slow 
disbursement. 
b)  Management of funds between the CPMU and 
regional PMU could result in liquidity issues, delayed 
fund flow and disbursement because of the multi-layer 
structure. 
c)  Counterpart funds may not flow to the Project, per the 
commitment, which will impact and increase the risk 
on special account funds, which could be utilized in 
lieu of counterpart funds. 
d)  Implementation delays due to lack of knowledge of 
IFAD procedures. 
High 
a)  Budget coordination will remain with the CPMU in Cairo. 
b)  Regional PMU will receive technical assistance to ensure that the budgets are 
Medium 
prepared in a realistic and appropriate manner. 
c)  Training will be provided to all staff – including procurement and subject specialists 
on the preparation of budgets. 
d)  Budgets to include all sources of financing separately and to show estimates by 
quarter. 
e)  CPMU will present to the PRIDE Steering Committee and IFAD and ensure that 
f) 
timelines are maintained. 
Interim financial reports prepared by Regional PMU and CPMU and consolidated 
by CPMU, showing progress against budgets to be submitted to IFAD quarterly. 
g)  IFAD office in Egypt and FMD will provide implementation support on processes 
and procedure as required. 
h)   
High 
a)  Budgeting issues will be mitigated, thereby facilitating the forecast of funds 
Medium 
utilization. 
b)  Clearly detailed fund flow arrangements and continuous follow-up of the same 
within the first year of implementation to ensure any course corrections will be 
made to mitigate risk of liquidity problems. 
c)  CPMU will maintain control of funds disbursed to Regional PMU, based on levels 
of approved AWPB i.e. every six month in advance. 
d)  Counterpart funds will be included in the budget which will be submitted to GoE 
relevant ministries for consideration and approval prior to the annual budgeting 
process. 
e)  GoE funds should be made available to the project account every quarter for 
spending through e-payment system. 
f)  Training will be provided to all staff, including senior managers involved in the 
project management, on IFAD financial management and disbursement 
procedures. 
g)  A mid-year follow up on implementation will be conducted in the first year to 
ensure that things are on track. 
h)  Financial implementation manual will be a condition for disbursement and 
knowledge of the same will be mandatory for all staff involved in finance. 
96 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
4. Internal Control. 
High 
a)  Weak control structures magnified with vast distances 
between Central and Regional PMU and number of 
parties will be involved in the implementation of the 
project (NOGs and private sector.). 
b)  Remoteness of villages where expenditures are going 
to take place. 
5. Accounting Systems, Policies & Procedures. 
a)  Manual or Excel based accounting prevails. 
b)  Policies and procedures are created but are not 
adhered to by accounting staff. 
c)  Lack of consistency with different layers within the 
Project structure in application of accounting policies 
and procedures. 
6. Reporting & Monitoring. 
a)  Unable to produce financial management reports. 
b)  Linkages through all levels to ensure that funds are 
properly tracked recorded and reported. 
c)  Periodic monitoring of financial reports does not exist. 
d)  No structure in place for the contract-based service 
providers or NGOs to report periodically. 
7. Internal Audit. 
a)  Ex ante check of each transaction, therefore the true 
nature of the function does not exist. 
a)  An internal auditor /firm will be hired in the mid-term of the project implementation. 
ToR to be cleared by IFAD. The role will be: to ensure controls (as defined in the 
manual) are in place at Central and Regional PMU levels; to test the functioning of 
the controls; report control weaknesses; and recommend corrections. 
b)  M&E function established with Central and Regional PMU will play a role in 
ensuring that funds are used for the intended purposes. 
Medium 
High 
a)  Procurement and installation of an accounting system linking the central PMU and 
Medium 
Regional PMU, and allowing for consolidations, on which training will be 
mandatory, will be a disbursement condition. 
b)  Financial manual will be a disbursement condition. 
c)  All finance staff will be required to take and pass IFAD’s e-learning on financial 
management. 
d)  Internal control mitigation measure (in 4 above) will ensure that consistency is 
maintained for application of policies and procedures. 
High 
a)  Accounting software to be able to produce financial reports. 
b)  Training to be provided to staff and contract-based providers on accounting 
Medium 
system and IFAD's reporting requirements. 
c)  Reporting and monitoring requirements will be detailed within PIM and as a 
deliverable within the contracts with contract providers/NGOs. 
High 
a)  Private internal auditor will be hired by CPMU at mid-term of the project 
Medium 
implementation, to cover the entire project at center, regional and field levels. 
8. Auditing 
Medium 
a)  Hold an information/dialogue session with appointed private auditor and invite 
Low 
a)  Private external auditors do not comply with IFAD 
Audit Guidelines and TORs. 
b)  Late submission of final audit reports. 
Project Fiduciary Risk at design: 
OVERALL FM RISK 
HIGH 
auditor for FM training events to ensure that IFAD requirements are fulfilled; and 
FMD to clear TOR on annual basis. 
b)  CPMU will ensure timely procurement and appointment of the project external 
audit firm to allow for the firm to schedule the project to meet audit delivery time-
frame. 
MEDIUM 
97 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7.3: Financial management organisation 
98 
          Each team will:  Prepare the budget for the planned activities to be implemented in each financial year  based on beneficiaries'  demands segregated by quarter.         Each PMU ( Central and Regional ) will:  Prepare the projected budget six months before the end  each  fiscal year. Budget will show the source of financing (including GoE) and segregated by quarter.  Prepare the final AWPB two months before the end of the fiscal year. AWPB will show the sources of financing  (including GoE)  by component, sub-component and categories and segregated by quarter.  Prepare own monthly and quarterly financial management reports of budget versus actual against the approved budget.      CPMU will:  Consolidate its own and received budget from regional PMU six months before end of each fiscal year for government approval and inclusion in the government budget. Consolidated budge will show the sources of financing  (including GoE) and segregated by quarter.  Consolidate the overall AWPB. The AWPB will show sources of financing (including GoE) by component, sub-component and categories and segregated by quarter and which PMU is responsible for making the payment for each budget line. The CPMU will be responsible for submission of consolidated AWPB to the project steering committee and IFAD for approvals.  Submit  consolidated withdrawal applications for replenishments to IFAD every 90 days or when 30% of the authorized allocation is utilized  whichever happened earlier; withdrawal applications for reimbursement; and direct payments.  Ensure GOE counterpart contribution are budgeted for and follow up on the approval and timely flow of funds..  Generate  consolidated quarterly financial management reports and submit them to the concerned persons/stakeholders with explanatory notes on significant variance to aid management decision makings.  DRC ( Regional PMU) Technical Team – coastal areas related activities from Daba to El Salloum, and selected activities in the Siwa Oasis MoALR (Central PMU) Technical Team -  El- Moghra related activities  Regional PMU - Finance Manager,  accountants and procurement teamCPMU - Finance and Procurement  Managers  Finance Manager  CPMU IFAD   
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Procurement Regulations applicable to PRIDE: IFAD’s procurement guidelines specify that 
1.
national procurement systems will be used under the conditions that the systems are assessed as 
satisfactory or better. The Project will adopt the Egypt Public Procurement and Disposal Act 2015, the 
Public Procurement Regulations (to be issued soon), and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines 2010. 
National systems will apply to all procurement except international competitive bidding (ICB) for 
contracts above an agreed threshold. The IFAD guidelines state that ICB procurement will follow the 
procedures recommended by the World Bank. Egyptian national procurement systems can be relied 
upon to undertake procurement below the agreed ICB thresholds. 
Governance. With regards to procurement conducted through IFAD-funded Projects in Egypt, 
2.
the overall assessment is partially satisfactory with a number of areas requiring improvement. In 
establishing the procurement mechanisms under the proposed project, the procurement processes 
will be strengthened. In accordance with the Business Anti-Corruption Portal of the Global Advisory 
Network (GAN) Integrity Solutions, Legislation, Corruption in the form of active and passive bribery is 
covered by the Egypt Penal Code. Egypt ratified the United Nations Convention Against Corruption 
(UNCAC).  
  With regards to procurement conducted through IFAD-funded projects in Egypt, the overall 
3.
assessment is moderately unsatisfactory due to the following anomalies: 
Planning, execution and monitoring of procurement projects and activities are usually not 
 
handled in a timely manner. This culminates in delays in the bidding, evaluation and 
negotiation, and ultimately contract management. 
Tender/Bidding documents: Delays in preparation and finalisation of the bidding 
 
documents are caused by various factors, including production of over- or under-specified 
equipment of the requisitions and user units, incompleteness of terms of reference of the 
requisitions, absence or incompleteness of qualification and evaluation criteria and frameworks, 
inconsistencies in use of procurement methods, and evidently low capacity and/or performance 
of project procurement staff. There is some difficulty with the use of the Shopping method and 
its bidding document, the Request for Quotation. Also, there is a latent misunderstanding and 
resultant misuse of consulting services procurement – the documents, the methods, the 
evaluation, and what to negotiate or not to negotiate. 
Evaluation process needs to be considerably strengthened and improved. Following from 
 
the incomplete evaluation criteria in the bidding documents, the evaluation processes are 
neither consistent nor effective and the use of inappropriate evaluation criteria. It is also clear 
that the coordination of consensus evaluation is an issue, with evaluation reports being 
submitted even where the individual scores are markedly disparate. 
Contract Administration and Management: Due to the lack of competence, Contract 
 
management is considered one of the major challenges facing the implementation of IFAD-
funded projects in Egypt. 
4.
The review of the procurement system in the Desert Research Center, one of the lead 
implementing agencies, indicated that the procurement capacity is inadequate, mainly due to lack of 
experience in procurement due to limited funds being provided to it. Common areas of weakness in 
procurement arrangements include: (a) the need for improvement of procurement practices; (b) weak 
capacity at all levels; (c) Instructions to bidders, qualification, evaluation, award criteria, and contract 
management are not sufficiently clear; (d) the contract conditions can be improved to achieve a more 
equitable balance between employer and contractor/supplier. A major shortcoming that leads to 
awarding contracts to non-performing contractors/suppliers is not applying a post-qualification process 
on the nominated contractor/supplier for award. These shortcomings will be addressed by developing 
and implementing a procurement procedures manual and Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs), as 
99 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
part of the PIM. The SBD evaluation criteria will ensure that contracts/suppliers are awarded only to 
bidders who meet the minimum financial and technical qualifications. 
5.
Overall Procurement Risk: The overall procurement risk is “High” on account of inherent 
weaknesses, particularly those associated with inadequate procurement capacity at central and local 
levels. The following additional measures will be implemented to minimize procurement risk: (i) 
integrating procurement planning as part of the budgeting process and using procurement plans as a 
management tool for allocating responsibilities, improving accountability, and monitoring procurement 
performance; (ii) recruiting or seconding a qualified and experienced procurement officer at the central 
level to among other regular functions, effectively monitor contracts and undertake post-procurement 
evaluations to strengthen systems, enhance performance, and measure improvement; (iii) 
establishing and maintaining a structured and effective filing and records management system, and 
allocating adequate and secure office space for filing; (iv) preparing a detailed procurement 
procedures manual for use at the central and local levels; (v) using the project website to proactively 
disclose procurement information. Attachment 8.1 summarises the procurement risk and mitigation 
measures. 
Borrower/recipient officials engaged in procurement activity will have to undertake the following 
6.
key tasks; 
 
Maintain and enhance the reputation of the borrower/recipient country by: 
-  Maintaining 
the  highest  standards  of  honesty  and 
integrity 
in  all  professional 
relationships; 
-  Developing the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
-  Maximizing the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are responsible for 
the 
funds  and 
resources  were  provided 
for  which 
these 
to 
the  purposes 
borrower/recipient country; and 
-  Complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
-  The financing agreement; 
-  The laws and regulations of the borrower/recipient country; 
-  Accepted professional ethics; and 
-  Contractual obligations;  
Declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed by others 
 
to affect, impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of interest). In a situation of 
this nature, the official concerned should not participate in any way in the procurement process, 
to avoid mis-procurement; and 
Respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not use such 
 
information for personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, supplier or contractor. 
Information given in the course of their duties shall be true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
The Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) will be developed by the lead implementing agency to 
7.
be used for undertaking procurement under this Project and consistency with IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines should be ensured. Concepts relating to Accountability, Competition, Fairness, 
Transparency, Efficiency, Effectiveness & Economy and Value for Money contained in IFAD’s 
Procurement Guidelines and which are central to IFAD’s Procurement Philosophy are discussed 
below. 
The Procurement Process involves the purchasing, acquiring, hiring or obtaining of goods, 
8.
works and services by any contractual means and can be defined in more detail as procurement of 
goods, procurement of works and procurement of services. The procurement cycle consists of 
General Procurement Notice, Tender Document Preparation, Pre-Qualification, Advertisement, 
Receipt of Tenders, Public opening of Tenders, Evaluate of Tenders, Award of Contract, Issue of Work 
Order or Purchase Order and Performance of contract. 
9.
Each Annual Procurement Plan will identify procedures, which must be implemented by the 
Borrower in order to ensure consistency with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. IFAD may require 
100 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
that all bidding documents and contracts and other records for procurement of goods, works and 
services financed by the Loans/Grants are: 
(i) 
Available for full inspection by the Fund of all bid documentation and related records; 
(ii)  Maintained for five years after the closing date of the financing; and  
IFAD may also require that the Project cooperate with agents or representatives of the Fund 
(iii) 
carrying out an audit or investigation into procurement issues. 
IFAD’s review of and no objection to procurement plans is compulsory under all financing 
10.
agreements directly supervised by IFAD. There will be a similar agreement for PRIDE. 
IFAD monitoring and review to ensure that the procurement process is carried out in conformity 
11.
with IFAD procurement Guidelines and with the agreed procurement plan, IFAD will review 
arrangements for procurement of goods, works and services proposed by the borrower/recipient, 
including: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contract packaging;  
Applicable procedures and procurement methods;  
Bidding documentation; 
Composition of bid evaluation committees; 
Bid evaluations and award recommendations; and 
Draft contracts and contract amendments. 
  The extent to which these review procedures will be applied to the current project will be 
12.
contained in the letter to the borrower/recipient and the procurement plan. For full details on the 
review processes, refer to the Procurement Handbook. 
  Post-review: All other contracts will be subject to post-review and may be subject to 
13.
procurement audit by the Fund. The Project staff will maintain accurate records of all procurement 
activities and documents related to the Project. The procurement files will be maintained for review by 
IFAD supervision missions and independent audits. The Project staff will also consolidate 
procurement activities into quarterly and annual progress reports. 
  Ex post review: The Project will retain all documentation up to five years after the closing date 
14.
of the financing for examination by IFAD or by independent auditors. This documentation includes, but 
not be limited to, the signed original contract, the evaluation of the respective proposals and 
recommendation of award. 
  Mis-procurement: IFAD will not finance expenditures for goods, works or consulting services 
15.
that have not been procured in accordance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and the financing 
agreement. In such cases, IFAD may, in addition, take other remedial action under the financing 
agreement, including cancellation of the amount in question from the loan and/or grant account by 
declaring it ineligible. Even if the contract was awarded following IFAD’s “no objection” statement, the 
Fund may still declare mis-procurement if it concludes that this statement was issued on the basis of 
incomplete, inaccurate or misleading information furnished by the borrower/recipient, or that the terms 
and conditions of the contract had been modified without IFAD’s approval. 
  The Project will contribute to building up the in house procurement capacity of the Ministry of 
16.
Agriculture and Land Reclamation and Desert Research Center, instilling best practices and the 
required approach and methodology, and monitoring the timeliness and quality of the process. IFAD 
plans an intensive training programme at start-up to familiarise PRIDE staff with IFAD Guidelines. The 
effectiveness of procurement will be assessed during supervision and alternate arrangements put in 
place if necessary. 
17.
Institutional arrangements. PRIDE will be implemented under a two-tiered institutional 
arrangement, namely at the central, subnational levels. At the central level, central PMU (CPMU) will 
be established within Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR). At subnational level, 
101 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Desert Research Center will establish a PMU at Matrouh Governorate at the SRDCM. With regard to 
procurement management, staff with required qualifications and experience will be assigned from the 
implementing agencies or recruited from the market. With additional TA to strengthen procurement 
capacity, the institutions can undertake implementation, facilitation, and coordination of the project 
with reduced risk.  
  At the central level, the CPMU anchored in the MALR will be responsible for implementing 
18.
procurements for activities in Moghra. At Matrouh Governorate level, the PMU to be established within 
the DRC will spearhead execution of procurement activities for the coastal areas and in Siwa. To 
enhance the procurement capacity at the PMUs, the PRIDE will provide short-term training in IFAD 
procurement procedures (works, goods, and consultants) during project implementation. 
Subsequently, regular procurement clinics will be held to deepen PMU procurement capacity. 
  The two PRIDE PMUs will be responsible to manage and oversee overall Project-related 
19.
procurement including International Competitive Bidding (ICB), National Competitive Bidding (NCB) 
procurements and selection of consultants for larger consultancy contracts as well as National 
Shopping, though it will require extensive support. The majority of the procurement activities under 
PRIDE will be small in nature and value, with substantial community participation; relatively few high-
value/specialized procurement packages will attract ICB. Rather, most will be within the thresholds of 
NCB, national shopping (quotations) and community procurement. Appropriate thresholds that can 
maximize the efficiency of procurement implementation but contain the governance risks will be 
specified in Letter to the Borrower (LTB).  
  Establishment of a PRIDE Special Procurement Committees (SPC). An ad-hoc Committee will 
20.
be established by DRC in order to i) fast track each step of PRIDE procurement processes; ii) 
monitoring on the overall procurement processes of the Project putting in place corrective actions 
when needed; iii) Guide PRIDE in planning procurement processes and in preparing procurement 
documentation in order to assure the right timing of the processes and that tender documents are 
accurately prepared; iv) follow up on the requests of No Objections to avoid delays in treatment. The 
committee will be chaired by the DRC Vice President and the membership shall be as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRC-PMU Director 
Financial Controller 
Procurement Officer 
Head of Project Components 
M&E Officer 
Representative of Legal Unit of DRC 
  Procurement Methods: The methods which are permitted for the procurement of works and 
21.
goods are: a) international competitive bidding (ICB), b) limited international bidding (LIB) or restricted 
tendering, c) national competitive bidding (NCB) or open tender, d) international or national shopping 
or requests for quotations, e) direct contracting, f) procurement from United Nations agencies, and g) 
procurement with community participation. 
22.
  The methods which are permitted for the procurement of consulting services are: a) quality and 
cost-based selection, b) quality based selection, c) selection under a fixed budget, d) selection based 
on consultant’ qualifications, e) least cost selection, f) single-source selection, and g) selection of 
individual consultants. 
23.
  For each contract to be financed by IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement methods, 
estimated cost, prior review requirements and time-frame will be agreed between the Project and 
IFAD respectively in the Procurement Plan. 
24.
IFAD financed procurement of works, goods and consultancy services. While eventually the 
specific thresholds for procurement financed under the Project will be stipulated in the Letter to the 
Borrower, the recommendations are the following: 
102 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
 
Works estimated to cost more than USD 1 Million equivalent will be procured through 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World Bank’s applicable Standard 
Bidding Documents (SBDs). Works estimated between USD 25,000 and USD 1 Million 
equivalent will be procured through the National Competitive Bidding (open tender). While 
works estimated below USD 25,000 will be procured through National Shopping (request for 
quotations) or Community Participation. Direct contracting will have to be identified and 
approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of such method. 
 
Goods estimated to cost more than USD 200,000 equivalent per contract will be 
procured through the International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World Bank’s 
applicable SBDs. Goods estimated to cost between USD 25,000 and USD 200,000 equivalent 
per contract will be procured through National Competitive Bidding (open tender). Goods 
estimated to cost less than USD 25,000 equivalent per contract will be procured through the 
Shopping methods (request for quotations). Direct contracting will have to be identified and 
approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of such method. 
  Consultancy services. Quality and Cost Based Selection will be the standard method applied 
25.
unless otherwise approved. The following thresholds and processes will apply: i) International 
Request for Proposal (RFP)– for contracts with a value of USD 100,000 equivalent and above; ii) 
National Request for Proposal (RFP) – for contracts with a value of less than USD 100,000 equivalent 
and more than USD 10,000 equivalent. Contracts with a value of USD 10,000 equivalent or bellow, or 
procurement of individual consultancy or Technical Assistance services, will be based on National 
Shopping (request for quotation).  
  Non-Consultancy services. The following thresholds and processes will apply: i) Request for 
26.
Quotations using NCB (open tender) method – for contracts with a value above USD 10,000. 
Contracts with a value of USD 10,000 equivalent or below, will be National Shopping (request for 
quotation from predetermined shortlist). 
27.
  However, these financial thresholds may be adjusted as appropriate, with prior IFAD approval, 
depending of the nature of the assignment. And the method of procurement to be followed will be pre-
determined in each approved annual procurement plan. 
  Prior Review Thresholds: For the purposes of Appendix I, paragraph 2, of IFAD’s 
28.
Procurement Guidelines, the following shall be subject to prior review by the Fund. These thresholds 
may be modified by the Fund during the course of Project implementation. 
  First five contracts for goods and equipment undertaken by each of the CPMU and PMU, and 
29.
thereafter, award of any contract for goods and equipment estimated to cost USD 50,000 equivalent 
or more; 
  First five contracts for works undertaken by each of the CPMU and PMU, and thereafter, award 
30.
of any contract for works estimated to cost USD 50,000 equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for consultancy services undertaken by each of the CPMU and PMU, and 
31.
thereafter, award to a firm of any contract for consultancy services estimated to cost USD 25,000 
equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for non-consultancy services undertaken by each of the CPMU and PMU, 
32.
and thereafter, and thereafter, award to a firm of any contract for non-consultancy services estimated 
to cost USD 10,000 equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for individuals undertaken by each of the CPMU and PMU, and thereafter, 
33.
award to an individual of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost US$ 5,000 equivalent 
or more;  
34.
  Award of any contract through direct contracting, single source selection, including selection of 
United Nations’ agencies, irrespective of the amount. Furthermore, for consultancy services, all Terms 
of Reference, Short-listing (if applicable) and draft contracts will be subject to IFAD prior review. 
103 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
35.
  The afore mentioned may be modified from time to time as notified by the Fund to the Borrower. 
  Synchronization of civil works. Contracts for civil works will be based on unit costs and bills 
36.
of quantities. Once the tender documents are finalised, they should be submitted to IFAD for prior 
review. IFAD will commission an engineering consultant to review them prior to issuing its 
observations and/or clearance. 
  Performance based contracts: For Contracts, MoU and Framework Agreements between 
37.
CPMU/RPMU and the Service Providers, it is suggested that performance-based contracts in the 
delivery of hardware and software goods and services will be adopted. Such contracts will focus on 
outputs and outcomes of service provision, with clear milestones, with triggers for contract extension 
linked to achievements. There will be no automatic extensions in time or scope. All contracts, MOUs 
and Framework Agreements will include the payment schedules with performance incentives and 
penalties, monitoring and quality assessment, and value-for-money assessment. They will also define 
the key responsibilities of the partners at national and field levels, and will be jointly monitored and 
supervised. This is not dissimilar to current government personnel procedures which incorporate 
performance based assessment. 
  Service Providers: The Project will be managed by the CPMU/RPMU and implemented by 
38.
contracted service providers on performance related contracts. Service providers will include: (i) 
preselected public institutions (such as Ministry of Health or its representative in Matrouh, Road 
Department in Matrouh Governorate and General Authority for Educational Buildings) who may have 
the status of Project Parties and be required to ensure that procurement actions undertaken by them 
and financed by IFAD or Government be undertaken in compliance with the stipulated procedures of 
IFAD and Government; and (ii) non-preselected civil society or private sector entities such as NGOs 
that will participate in the implementation of project activities and consultancy firms. Service providers 
not pre-selected will be procured on the basis of IFAD procurement guidelines. 
  Register of Contracts: Procurement carried out at regional level will be recorded and 
39.
registered against the Procurement Plan. In addition, all contracts, with or without prior IFAD approval, 
will be listed in the Register of Contracts maintained by the procuring entity with the dates of approval 
as provided by IFAD. When a contract is amended, the amendment will be recorded in the Register of 
Contracts. If a contract is cancelled or declared ineligible for financing by IFAD, this information will be 
written in the Register of Contracts. As this register facilitates the review and approval of payment 
requests on contracts, it is to be updated and submitted to the IFAD country programme director on a 
quarterly basis. The sample form to be used and instructions are detailed in Annex 6 of IFAD’s Loan 
Disbursement Handbook. It will also be necessary that the CPMU/RPMU prepare annual statistics 
disaggregated by type and methods of procurement, for the overall procurement transactions carried 
out for the Project. 
40.
Issuing the Bidding documents: All bidding documents for the procurement of goods, works 
and services will be prepared by the procurement officers with the support of the technical expert(s), 
who will supply specifications, terms of reference, Bills of Quantities, etc. as required. 
Draft 18 months Procurement plan 
  Accurate and realistic planning and prioritization of needs is an essential prerequisite to 
41.
effective procurement and a key tool for monitoring Project implementation. At the time of negotiation 
of each project, the borrower/recipient, in consultation with IFAD, must establish an 18-month 
procurement plan, which must include, as a minimum the following. A draft procurement plan has 
been made and is available as part of the design report. 
104 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Reference 
Description 
Estimated cost  
Number of 
Packages 
Procurement 
Method 
Start Date 
Bid Opening Date  
Domestic 
Preference  
Prior Review 
A unique reference for the procurement contract 
A description of the procurement contract 
This is the base cost and the expected physical and price 
contingencies for the procurement item. 
An estimate of the expected economical packages for the procurement 
items. 
The method of procurement as per the IFAD guidelines. 
The date the procurement has to be planned, including initial stages of 
establishing detailed requirements, preparation of bidding documents 
and gaining all the necessary approvals as Public Procurement Act. 
The expected date for opening of the bids. 
Domestic preference will be applicable for all ICB contracts. 
Transaction will be subject to prior review by IFAD in accordance with 
the provisions of the Procurement Guidelines. 
Attachment 8.1: Summary of Procurement Risk Factors and Recommended Remedies 
Overall Procurement Risk – HIGH. The overall procurement risk is “High” on account of inherent 
weaknesses, particularly those associated with inadequate procurement oversight systems at national 
and local levels. Summary of the Procurement Risk Factors and Recommended Remedies are 
presented in the table below. 
Risk 
What can happen 
Remedial actions 
(Recommendations) 
In some cases, procuring 
entities issue tender notices, 
receive, and evaluate bids and 
award contracts without 
ensuring whether or not funds 
are actually available for 
contractual payments. 
The available expertise at PE 
does not meet the need for 
specialised procurement 
knowledge. 
Payment delays lead to 
lack of trust by potential 
bidders who do business 
with the state, causing 
lack of competition. 
Integrating procurement planning as 
part of the budgeting process and using 
procurement plans as a management 
tool for allocating responsibilities, 
improving accountability, and 
monitoring procurement performance. 
The general quality and 
timeliness with which the 
agency handles each 
phase of the procurement 
cycle will be negatively 
affected. 
Recruiting a qualified and experienced 
procurement officer at the central PMU 
and seconding qualified staff at DRC-
PMU to carry out procurement 
activities. 
As an initial mitigation measure, the 
thresholds for IFAD review to the 
procurement decisions were brought 
down to lower levels to ensure that the 
project are handling procurement 
activities appropriately that can be 
amended later on based on the 
performance of the PMUs.  
105 
for 
items 
Train  staff  in  preparing  clear  technical 
specifications.  Create  and  maintain  a 
database  of  sample  specifications  and 
technical 
standard 
prepare 
procured 
specifications 
frequently. 
term 
In  addition, 
technical  assistance  will be provided to 
in  developing  STB,  drafting 
help 
professional 
technical  specifications 
and TORs 
A 
simple
adopted. 
system  should  be 
  pass  or  fail 
long 
The  bidding  documents  should  include 
clear  provisions  on 
the  complaint 
mechanism 
Establish  central  procurement
filling 
system  including  all  related  documents 
and allocate adequate and secure office 
space for filing. 
In  addition 
to 
the  compliance  with 
minimum  time  offered  by  the  law
,  the 
procuring  entity  should  consider  the 
transaction  and 
complexity  of 
extend the time accordingly. 
Hiring qualified civil engineers to ensure 
the quality of civil works.  
the 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Technical  specifications  are 
ambiguous;  requirements  are 
unclear  and  unrealistic  such 
requirement  of  delivery 
as 
completion  time  that  bidders 
cannot  meet  and  frequently 
absence  of 
qualification  and 
experience requirements. 
Bids are based on poor 
quality; and cheap goods, 
works, and workmanship 
are offered by unqualified 
and inexperienced 
bidders. 
Continue using point system 
for the evaluation of works and 
goods procurements. 
The architecture of the 
complaint review system is not 
efficient 
PE recordkeeping practices 
remain poor. 
Frequently  bidders  have  very 
short bid 
preparation
 time. 
The  available  expertise  at  PE 
construction 
with 
management  not  meet 
the 
standard level 
regard 
fairness  of 
Bidders are disqualified 
on flimsy and 
inappropriate grounds 
the 
The 
system  of 
is 
negatively  perceived  by 
potential users
Contracts admiration, 
management and audits 
will become inefficient. 
review 
Limited  participation  of 
potential  bidders,  leading 
to 
  prices 
and  loss 
of economies. 
higher
Acceptance  of  low  quality 
works  in  relation  to  the 
expenditure. 
106 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Introduction 
1.
This appendix covers the project costs and financing plan for the PRIDE project and also 
describes the assumptions underlying them and sets out the basis and details of the estimated project 
costs. 
Project Costs and Financing  
PRIDE is financed over a seven-year period, and it is assumed to start in the second semester 
2.
of 2018. Costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing during project design in July 
2017. 
Physical and price contingencies. A physical contingency of 5% has been applied to civil 
 
works to take into account the uncertainty of the exact implementation quantities while price 
contingencies have been applied on all costs.  
Inflation. Inflation in Egypt has been driven mainly by the impact of the currency float and 
 
the imposition of VAT at 14%, which replaced the general sales tax of 10% used up to 
September 2016. However, following an inflation slowdown in month-on-month terms — from 
over 4% in January to 1.7% in April - the Economist Intelligence Unit suggests that the 
inflationary surge may be coming to an end. The forecast sees an average inflation rate to ease 
from 17.2% in 2018 to 8.4% in 2021112. For the purpose of this analysis, a gradual inflation 
decrease – from 17% to 8.4 % has been applied. For foreign inflation, an average inflation of 
1.8% has been retained. 
 
Exchange rate. An exchange rate of LE 18 to the USD has been used. The Egyptian 
pound has declined heavily against the US dollar in the last year. The exchange rate appears to 
have stabilised for the time being. The foreign exchange share was included for most of the 
goods, material and equipment imported to Egypt, e.g. sensitive to the fluctuation of exchange 
rate. 
Taxes and duties. Part of the Government contribution will be the exemptions from taxes 
 
and duties on all project inputs that involve funding from IFAD loans. The estimate of taxes and 
duties was based on the rates in effect prevailing at the time of the design. In conformity with 
the principle that no taxes or duties will be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD loan/grant, 
any future changes in tax legislation will have to apply to the project. 
 
The items to be imported for the project attract import and excise duties of varying 
proportions, and a value-added tax (VAT) of 14% is levied on all imported goods. Taxes on civil 
works are considered at 19%, as per the latest information collected from the tax system. 
Project costs 
The total project costs including physical and price contingencies are estimated at US$ 81.59 
3.
over the entire implementation period. Project costs by components are summarized in Table 9.1, 
while a complete set of project summary tables and detailed costs tables are presented in 
Attachments 1 and 2 of this appendix. 
4.
Project costs by components. Project investments are organized into two major components: (i) 
Climate Resilient Livelihoods (52% per cent); (ii) Integrated Nutrition Investments (39% per cent of the 
costs); and (iii) Project management (9% of the costs). A summary breakdown of the project costs by 
components is shown below in Table 9.1. 
112 Economist Intelligence Unit, Egypt Country Report, July 2017.  
107 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 9.1. Project costs by component 
Project financing. As shown in table 9.2, the total project costs of US$ 81.59 million will be 
5.
financed by an IFAD loan of US$ 61.87 million and an IFAD grant of US$1 million. The Government 
contribution will be approximately US$ 13.95 million, of which US$ 7.6 million will be in-kind 
contribution113 for the use of its staff and facilities in the project area and US$ 6.35 million will be in 
terms of income foregone and cash contribution for taxes. The rates and amounts of the taxes and 
duties in the project costs presented below are defined only to determine the Government contribution 
and to value the total project cost. Beneficiaries will US$ 4.77 million as their in-kind contribution for 
labour in selected project activities such as 20% of the cost of cisterns, reservoirs, sanitation facilities, 
community rangeland development, etc. The proposed financing plan is summarized in Table 9.2 
below. 
Table 9.2. Project financing 
6.
Expenditure and disbursement accounts. The Project will be rolled out through the central 
Project Management Unit - which will manage and coordinate the flow of funds and the expenditures 
incurred on account of the project activities. Financial management and procurement procedures are 
described in Appendices 7 and 8. A summary of the total costs by expenditure accounts per year is 
shown in table 9.3 and a summary of the total costs by disbursement accounts and financier is 
presented in table 9.4. 
113 In kind-contribution in the  
108 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies2018201920202021202220232024TotalA. Climate Resilient Livelihoods 1. Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management 3 5251 6132 0472 4692 6572 7102 04617 0662. Enhancing Connectivity 4087 1277 287----14 8223. Livestock & Rangeland Development 1215653301 3172602652453 1044. Crop Production 1 0292 1712 714713611305-7 543Subtotal 5 08311 47612 3784 4983 5283 2812 29142 535B. Integrated Nutrition Investments 1. Water for Health 9382 7094 2423 8832 92959-14 7602. Nutrition Enhancement & Education 8367391 4741 4931 5241 0465197 6313. Social Infrastructure 3023 9782 3301 3443853913979 129Subtotal 2 0757 4268 0476 7214 8381 49591631 520C. Project Management 2 4997931 1818498338065827 544Total PROJECT COSTS 9 65819 69521 60612 0699 1995 5833 79081 599 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 9.3. Expenditure accounts by financier 
Table 9.4. Disbursement accounts by financier 
109 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsExpenditure Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)IFADIFAD_GrantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 2 89866.294021.5--53712.34 3765.4B. Goods & Services 12 68587.0600.42171.51 61111.114 57317.9C. Trainings & Woskshops /b 4 26190.8----4309.24 6915.7D. Civil Works 33 20171.4--4 5539.88 72318.846 47857.0E. Grants 5 153100.0------5 1536.3Total Investment Costs 58 19977.31 0001.34 7706.311 30115.075 27192.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 2 61050.5----2 55849.55 1676.3B. Operating costs /c 1 06391.5----988.51 1611.4Total Recurrent Costs 3 67258.0----2 65642.06 3287.8Total PROJECT COSTS 61 87175.81 0001.24 7705.813 95717.181 599100.0 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsDisbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)IFADIFAD_GrantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Consultancies 2 89866.294021.5--53712.34 3765.4Goods, Services 12 68587.0600.42171.51 61111.114 57317.9Grants_DA 5 153100.0------5 1536.3Workshops & Trainings 4 26190.8----4309.24 6915.7Civil Works 33 20171.4--4 5539.88 72318.846 47857.0Salaries and Allowances 2 61050.5----2 55849.55 1676.3Operating costs /a 1 06391.5----988.51 1611.4Total PROJECT COSTS 61 87175.81 0001.24 7705.813 95717.181 599100.0 _________________________________\a including maintenance 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Attachment 9.1:  Summary cost and financing tables (US$) 
Table  Description 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Components by Financier  
Expenditure Accounts by Financier  
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs 
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies 
Project Components by Year -- Base Costs 
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies 
Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Base Costs 
Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies 
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
Disbursements by Semesters and Government Cash Flow 
110 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
111 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsComponents by Financiers(US$ '000)IFADIFAD_GrantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Climate Resilient Livelihoods 1. Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management 15 42790.4--1 3578.02821.717 06620.92. Enhancing Connectivity 7 62651.4----7 19648.614 82218.23. Livestock & Rangeland Development 2 61584.2--2177.02728.83 1043.84. Crop Production 6 35684.3----1 18715.77 5439.2Subtotal 32 02375.3--1 5743.78 93821.042 53552.1B. Integrated Nutrition Investments 1. Water for Health 11 96281.0--2 67018.11280.914 76018.12. Nutrition Enhancement & Education 6 47884.93464.5--80610.67 6319.43. Social Infrastructure 6 28968.9--5275.82 31325.39 12911.2Subtotal 24 73078.53461.13 19610.13 24710.331 52038.6C. Project Management 5 11867.86548.7--1 77223.57 5449.2Total PROJECT COSTS 61 87175.81 0001.24 7705.813 95717.181 599100.0 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
112 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsExpenditure Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)IFADIFAD_GrantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 2 89866.294021.5--53712.34 3765.4B. Goods & Services 12 68587.0600.42171.51 61111.114 57317.9C. Trainings & Woskshops /b 4 26190.8----4309.24 6915.7D. Civil Works 33 20171.4--4 5539.88 72318.846 47857.0E. Grants 5 153100.0------5 1536.3Total Investment Costs 58 19977.31 0001.34 7706.311 30115.075 27192.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 2 61050.5----2 55849.55 1676.3B. Operating costs /c 1 06391.5----988.51 1611.4Total Recurrent Costs 3 67258.0----2 65642.06 3287.8Total PROJECT COSTS 61 87175.81 0001.24 7705.813 95717.181 599100.0 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
113 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsExpenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs(US$ '000)Climate Resilient LivelihoodsWater forAgricultureIntegrated Nutrition InvestmentsandLivestock &NutritionPhysicalWatershedEnhancingRangelandCropWater forEnhancementSocialProjectContingenciesManagementConnectivityDevelopmentProductionHealth& EducationInfrastructureManagementTotal%Amount I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 2 280405-205-392-1 0104 292--B. Goods & Services --2 5623 4421 0154 3431 44599913 807--C. Trainings & Woskshops /b --3421 482-2 397-1884 409--D. Civil Works 8 50013 222-2 11812 329-5 50454742 2214.82 010E. Grants 4 769-------4 769--Total Investment Costs 15 54913 6272 9047 24713 3447 1316 9492 74569 4982.92 010II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances ------1 5203 3254 845--B. Operating costs /c -------1 1001 100--Total Recurrent Costs ------1 5204 4255 945--Total BASELINE COSTS 15 54913 6272 9047 24713 3447 1318 4697 16975 4422.72 010Physical Contingencies 425661-5616-275272 010--Price Contingencies Inflation Local 6 0524 2497771 3735 5352 2832 18087623 325--Foreign 19918290121471029571--Subtotal Inflation 6 2514 2508591 4635 5472 4312 19090523 896--Devaluation -5 159-3 716-659-1 172-4 748-1 931-1 805-558-19 749--Subtotal Price Contingencies 1 0925342002917994993853474 1472.6107Total PROJECT COSTS 17 06614 8223 1047 54314 7607 6319 1297 54481 5992.62 117  Taxes 2822 3522481 0051288061 0704576 3482.5161Foreign Exchange 3 5841791 2671 6904572 2243941 05610 851-- _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
114 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Climate Resilient LivelihoodsWater forAgricultureIntegrated Nutrition InvestmentsandLivestock &NutritionWatershedEnhancingRangelandCropWater forEnhancementSocialProjectManagementConnectivityDevelopmentProductionHealth& EducationInfrastructureManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 2 297408-211-395-1 0654 376B. Goods & Services --2 7383 6421 0424 6771 4691 00714 573C. Trainings & Woskshops /b --3671 565-2 560-2004 691D. Civil Works 9 61614 414-2 12613 718-6 01159346 478E. Grants 5 153-------5 153Total Investment Costs 17 06614 8223 1047 54314 7607 6317 4802 86575 271II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances ------1 6493 5185 167B. Operating costs /c -------1 1611 161Total Recurrent Costs ------1 6494 6796 328Total PROJECT COSTS 17 06614 8223 1047 54314 7607 6319 1297 54481 599  Taxes 2822 3522481 0051288061 0704576 348Foreign Exchange 3 5841791 2671 6904572 2243941 05610 851 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
115 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsProject Components by Year -- Base Costs(US$ '000)Base Cost2018201920202021202220232024TotalA. Climate Resilient Livelihoods 1. Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management 3 4501 5201 8902 2402 3602 3601 72915 5492. Enhancing Connectivity 4056 6116 611----13 6273. Livestock & Rangeland Development 1205503141 2282382382162 9044. Crop Production 1 0292 1362 586665559274-7 247Subtotal 5 00410 81811 4014 1333 1562 8711 94539 328B. Integrated Nutrition Investments 1. Water for Health 8862 5613 8493 4492 54950-13 3442. Nutrition Enhancement & Education 8297201 4041 3931 3939374567 1313. Social Infrastructure 2863 7482 1361 2183613613618 469Subtotal 2 0017 0297 3896 0594 3031 34881728 945C. Project Management 2 4707741 1137977677305207 169Total BASELINE COSTS 9 47518 62019 90210 9898 2264 9493 28175 442Physical Contingencies 11859368727719570682 010Price Contingencies Inflation Local 4433 6986 5804 2963 9812 3401 98623 325Foreign 18509011410412670571Subtotal Inflation 4613 7486 6704 4094 0852 4662 05723 896Devaluation -397-3 266-5 654-3 607-3 307-1 903-1 616-19 749Subtotal Price Contingencies 644821 0168037785634404 147Total PROJECT COSTS 9 65819 69521 60612 0699 1995 5833 79081 599  Taxes 8922 2702 070570277176926 348Foreign Exchange 2 3681 9071 8991 6861 2051 21157610 851 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
116 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies2018201920202021202220232024TotalA. Climate Resilient Livelihoods 1. Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management 3 5251 6132 0472 4692 6572 7102 04617 0662. Enhancing Connectivity 4087 1277 287----14 8223. Livestock & Rangeland Development 1215653301 3172602652453 1044. Crop Production 1 0292 1712 714713611305-7 543Subtotal 5 08311 47612 3784 4983 5283 2812 29142 535B. Integrated Nutrition Investments 1. Water for Health 9382 7094 2423 8832 92959-14 7602. Nutrition Enhancement & Education 8367391 4741 4931 5241 0465197 6313. Social Infrastructure 3023 9782 3301 3443853913979 129Subtotal 2 0757 4268 0476 7214 8381 49591631 520C. Project Management 2 4997931 1818498338065827 544Total PROJECT COSTS 9 65819 69521 60612 0699 1995 5833 79081 599 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
117 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsExpenditure Accounts by Years -- Base Costs(US$ '000)Base CostForeign Exchange2018201920202021202220232024Total%Amount I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 3 40532814012312386864 29243.91 882B. Goods & Services 1 3923 3833 2622 3981 3241 32472313 80743.66 013C. Trainings & Woskshops /b 2127011 1721 040988247494 409--D. Civil Works 3 38012 87013 7465 5463 9091 4101 36042 221--E. Grants 2005007001 0001 0001 0003694 76950.02 385Total Investment Costs 8 58917 78319 02010 1077 3444 0672 58769 49814.810 280II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 4857217657657657655784 845--B. Operating costs /c 4011161161161161161161 100--Total Recurrent Costs 8868378828828828826955 945--Total BASELINE COSTS 9 47518 62019 90210 9898 2264 9493 28175 44213.610 280Physical Contingencies 11859368727719570682 010--Price Contingencies Inflation Local 4433 6986 5804 2963 9812 3401 98623 325--Foreign 18509011410412670571100.0571Subtotal Inflation 4613 7486 6704 4094 0852 4662 05723 8962.4571Devaluation -397-3 266-5 654-3 607-3 307-1 903-1 616-19 749--Subtotal Price Contingencies 644821 0168037785634404 14713.8571Total PROJECT COSTS 9 65819 69521 60612 0699 1995 5833 79081 59913.310 851  Taxes 8922 2702 070570277176926 348--Foreign Exchange 2 3681 9071 8991 6861 2051 21157610 851-- _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
118 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsExpenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies2018201920202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies /a 3 43133714713213596984 376B. Goods & Services 1 4023 4723 4202 5641 4401 46680914 573C. Trainings & Woskshops /b 2147201 2301 1161 081275564 691D. Civil Works 3 51713 79515 1526 2444 4921 6531 62646 478E. Grants 2025137351 0721 0941 1164205 153Total Investment Costs 8 76518 83720 68311 1288 2414 6063 00975 271II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 4887388008168318466495 167B. Operating costs /c 4041201221251271301331 161Total Recurrent Costs 8928579229419589767816 328Total PROJECT COSTS 9 65819 69521 60612 0699 1995 5833 79081 599 _________________________________\a It includes Technical assistance and studies\b It includes meetings\c including maintenance 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
119 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsDisbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000)LocalIFADIFAD_GrantBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesConsultancies 2 89866.294021.5--53712.34 3765.41 9191 919537Goods, Services 12 68587.0600.42171.51 61111.114 57317.96 3556 6311 587Grants_DA 5 153100.0------5 1536.32 5762 576-Workshops & Trainings 4 26190.8----4309.24 6915.7-4 261430Civil Works 33 20171.4--4 5539.88 72318.846 47857.0-42 7823 695Salaries and Allowances 2 61050.5----2 55849.55 1676.3-5 167-Operating costs /a 1 06391.5----988.51 1611.4-1 06398Total PROJECT COSTS 61 87175.81 0001.24 7705.813 95717.181 599100.010 85164 4006 348 _________________________________\a including maintenance 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
120 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsDisbursements by Semesters and Government Cash Flow(US$ '000)Costs tobeFinancing AvailableFinancedThe GovernmentIFADIFAD_GrantBeneficiariesProjectCumulativeAmountAmountAmountTotalCostsCash FlowCash Flow1 3 8012531884 2414 829-587-5872 3 8012531884 2414 829-587-1 1753 6 891503327 2739 847-2 574-3 7494 6 891503327 2739 847-2 574-6 3235 7 676516088 33610 803-2 467-8 7906 7 676516088 33610 803-2 467-11 2577 4 915535765 5446 034-490-11 7478 4 915535765 5446 034-490-12 2389 3 782544164 2524 600-348-12 58610 3 782544164 2524 600-348-12 93411 2 322361312 4902 791-302-13 23512 2 322361312 4902 791-302-13 53713 1 54831341 6851 895-210-13 74714 1 54831341 6851 895-210-13 957  Total 61 8711 0004 77067 64181 599-13 957-13 957 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Attachment 9.2:  Detailed Project costs (US$) 
Table  Description 
1.1  Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management 
Enhancing Connectivity 
1.2 
Livestock & Rangeland Development 
1.3 
Crop Production 
1.4 
2.1  Water for Heath 
2.2 
2.3 
3 
Nutrition Enhancement & Education 
Social Infrastructures 
Project Management 
121 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
122 
Egypt Promoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 1.1. Water for Agriculture and Watershed ManagementDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Reservoirs for irrigate Agriculture 300m2 no.6060707080808050012.0007627769269461 1031 1251 1486 785CWIFAD ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% )B. New/old rehabilitation of wadi development kms km1012141616161610025.0002643233864504604694782 831CWIFAD ( 100% )C. Siwa Drainage Study lumpsum2 297------2 297CONSIFAD ( 100% )D. Grants for new lands per year2025137351 0721 0941 1164205 153GRANTSIFAD ( 100% )Total 3 5251 6132 0472 4692 6572 7102 04617 066Egypt Promoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 1.2. Enhancing ConnectivityDetailed CostsOther AccountsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureDisb.Unit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountAcct.Fin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Feeder Roads in Matrouh km-7575----15044.444-4 2764 372----8 648CWCW_DAIFAD (100%)B. Feeder Roads in Matrouh (GoE) km-5050----10044.444-2 8512 915----5 766CWCW_DAGOVTC. Design & supervision costs lumpsum1------1355.556408------408CONSCONS_DAIFAD ( 100% )Total 4087 1277 287----14 822Egypt Promoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 1.3. Livestock & Rangeland DevelopmentDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Community rangeland management no-5555553033.333-1711751791821861901 083G&SIFAD ( 80% ) , BEN ( 20% )B. Rangeland seed collection no--12---39.444--1123---34G&SIFAD (100%)C. Purchasing of high quality rams no120------12036050------50G&SIFAD (100%)D. Implementation of breeding plan per year222323242425-142G&SIFAD (100%)E. Veterinary mobile health unit No.-2-----283.333-195-----195G&SIFAD (100%)F. Operational cost of health unit per month-7272----144800-6769----136G&SIFAD (70% )G. Crop and livestock on new lands lumpsum---1---1850.000---1 039---1 039G&SIFAD (100%)H. Training programme on livestock development training1111111742.85749505152535556367T&WIFAD (100%)I. Equipment for feed mix lumpsum-1-----150.000-59-----59G&SIFAD (100%)Total 1215653301 3172602652453 104 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
123 
Egypt Promoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 1.4. Crop ProductionDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Rehabilitation of DRC nursery per year-1-----180.000-103-----103CWIFAD (100% )B. Nursery operational costs per year171812----47G&SIFAD (100% )C. Horticulture training module-1 5001 5001 0001 000--5 000250-439449306312--1 505T&WIFAD (100% )D. Research facilities in Moghra centre1 0121 012-----2 023CWIFAD (75%)E. Support to farmers on new lands lumpsum-234239244250254-1 222G&SIFAD (100% )F. Support to farmers for equipment module-555---158.000-474849---144G&SIFAD (100% )G. Processing facilities for youth & small farmer companies in Moghra module--1----11.500.000--1 795----1 795G&SIFAD (100% )H. Agricultural extension & DRC training in dissemination participants-102020---501.000-122424---60T&WIFAD (100% )I. Exchange visits participants--10101010-404.000--48495051-198G&SIFAD (100% )J. Applied research & dissemination lumpsum-1-----1180.000-211-----211CONSIFAD (100% )K. Water quality monitoring & capacity building per year-393940---118G&SIFAD (100% )L. Laboratory and technical equipment for DRC lumpsum-5960----118G&SIFAD (100% )Total 1 0292 1712 714713611305-7 543Egypt Promoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 2.1. Water for HealthDetailed CostsUnitQuantitiesCostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Cisterns homestead 120 m3 No.3006001 8001 8001 500--6 0001.6665291 0783 3053 3762 871--11 160CWIFAD ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% )B. Reservoirs homestead 150m3 No.80120200100---5004.000339517882450---2 188CWIFAD ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% )C. Roman cistern rehabilitation 500m3 No.202015151515-1003.333717255565759-370CWIFAD ( 100% )D. Desalinization plants for new lands Lumpsum-1 042-----1 042G&SIFAD ( 100% )Total 9382 7094 2423 8832 92959-14 760 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
124 
 EgyptPromoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 2.2. Empowerment for Nutritional ChangeDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Nutrition & livelihood packages women HH4006006006006006006004 0006673064684794894995095193 271G&SIFAD (100% )B. Nutrition supplement plants trees-1 2001 2001 2001 2001 200-6 00050-7072737576-367G&SIFAD (100% )C. Health & nutrition awareness No--1 0001 0001 000--3 000400--479489499--1 467T&WIFAD (100% )D. Litteracy classes for women women250350350350350350-2 000500126180184188192195-1 064T&WIFAD (100% )E. Trainings for community facilitators person151520----505009912----29T&WIFAD (100% )F. Support to communities on new lands lumpsum--237242247252-978G&SIFAD (100% )G. Exchange visits person-2020202020-100500-1212121213-61G&SIFAD (100% )H. Support to NGO for behaviour change management lumpsum1------1343.500395------395CONSIFAD_GRANT (100%)Total 8367391 4741 4931 5241 0465197 631Egypt Promoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 2.3. Social InfrastructureDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. High schools /a school-21----3333.333-855437----1 292CWIFAD (100%)B. Multigrade one-room schools school-87----1515.000-154138----292CWIFAD (100%)C. Health units /b no.-21----3333.333-855437----1 292CWIFAD (100%)D. Mobile health clinics & mobile lab /c no.-5-----5138.889-813-----813G&SIFAD (100%)E. Sanitation facilities for women No300900900900---3 000800302924944965---3 135CWIFAD ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% )F. Design & supervision costs lumpsum-1-----173.333-86-----86G&SIFAD (100%)G. Incentives & transportation  for women  teachers to remote areas /d per year-70100100100100100570G&SIFAD (100%)Total Investment Costs 3023 7572 0571 0651001001007 480II. Recurrent Costs A. Personnel & Costs for Schools and Health Units High School personnel & other costs Persons year-274243444546246SA_RCGOVTMultigrade school personnel and operating costs per year-377172747577406SA_RCIFAD (100% )Health unit personnel Person year-2424242424241442.222-555657586061347SA_RCGOVTMobile health units personnel Person Year-6060606060603601.667-103105107109112114650SA_RCGOVTTotal Recurrent Costs -2222742802852912971 649Total 3023 9782 3301 3443853913979 129 _________________________________\a Government to provide all runing costs and salaries\b Government to provide all running costs and salaries\c Government to provide all running costs and salaries\d Calculation based on a total of 30 teachers (2 per school). Amounts will be negotiated during implementation. 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
125 
Egypt Promoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 3.1. Project ManagementDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Equipment MIS System & Istallation no.1------160.00069------69G&SIFAD_GRANT ( 100% )Accounting system no.1------130.00034------34G&SIFAD ( 100% )Vehicles 4X4 (DRC) /a vehicle18------1832.000662------662G&SIFAD ( 100% )Vehicles 4X4 (central PMU) /b vehicle2------232.00074------74G&SIFAD ( 100% )Minibus (DRC) /c vehicle1------130.00034------34G&SIFAD ( 100% )Truck (DRC) /d vehicle1------125.00029------29G&SIFAD ( 100% )Computers no.30------301.00034------34G&SIFAD ( 100% )Laptops no.7------71.50012------12G&SIFAD ( 100% )Printers no.12------125007------7G&SIFAD ( 100% )Photocopier No9------95.00052------52G&SIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 1 007------1 007B. DRC Centres DRC Centre in Daba (TSU) centre1------1190.000239------239CWIFAD ( 100% )Upgrading of DRC centre in Siwa centre--354----354CWIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 239-354----593C. Meetings and workshops 1. Project launch & other  workshop event2222---815.00030313132---125T&WIFAD ( 100% )D. M&E studies Baseline study baseline1------1100.000115------115CONSIFAD ( 100% )PIM development manual1------140.00046------46CONSIFAD ( 100% )GIS mapping study1------150.00057------57CONSIFAD ( 100% )Outcome surveys/mid-term workshop---111-320.000---242525-75T&WIFAD ( 100% )Impact assessment study------1160.000------7878CONSIFAD ( 100% )Targeting & gender assessment study--1----115.000--18----18CONSIFAD ( 100% )Audit audit-111111610.000-12121212131374CONSIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 218123037373891463E. Technical Assistance Technical assistance (DRC) /e persons/month181717171711-975.44511310811111311576-637CONSIFAD_GRANT ( 100% )ESFM assessment persons/month-11111165.445-67777740CONSIFAD_GRANT ( 100% )Subtotal 113115117120122837677Total Investment Costs 1 607157533189160121982 865 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
126 
Egypt Promoting Resilience in Deserty EnvironmentsTable 3.1. Project ManagementDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit2018201920202021202220232024Total(US$)2018201920202021202220232024TotalAccountFin. RuleII. Recurrent Costs A. Central PMU Project Director person.month12121212121212843.00036373839394041270SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Financial Management Specialist person.month12121212121212842.00024252526262727180SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Procurement Specialist person.month121212121212-722.000242525262627-153SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )M&E Specialist person.month12121212121212842.00024252526262727180SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 10911111311611812196783B. DRC (PMU) 1. Salaries Project Director /f person.month1212121212126782.50030313132333317208SA_RCGOVTDeputy Director /g person.month1212121212126782.00024252526262714166SA_RCGOVTM&E Specialist /h person.month1212121212126781.2001515151516168100SA_RCGOVTLivestock Specialist /i person.month1212121212126781.2001515151516168100SA_RCGOVTHorticulture Specialist /j person.month1212121212126781.2001515151516168100SA_RCGOVTRangeland Specialist /k person.month1212121212126781.2001515151516168100SA_RCGOVTGender Specialist /l person.month1212121212126781.000121213131313783SA_RCGOVTProcurement Specialist /m person.month1212121212126781.50018181919202010125SA_RCGOVTFinancial Management Specialist /n person.month1212121212126781.50018181919202010125SA_RCGOVTCivil Engineers /o person.month363636363636182341.00036373839394020250SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 1972012052102142181111 357C. Incentives to DRC staff (central level) /p 1. Project Director (incentives) person.month121212121212678380555555332SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )2. Deputy Director (incentives) person.month121212121212678330444444227SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )3. M&E Specialist (incentives) person.month121212121212678222333333218SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )4. Livestock Specialist (incentives) person.month121212121212678222333333218SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )5. Horticulture Specialist (incentives) person.month121212121212678222333333218SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )6. Rangeland Specialist (incentives) person.month121212121212678222333333218SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )7. Gender Specialist (incentives) person.month121212121212678222333333218SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )8. Financial Management Specialist (incentives) person.month121212121212678222333333218SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )9. Procurement Specialist (incentives) person.month121212121212678222333333218SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 27282929303015188D. DRC District level staff 1. Salaries Livestock Specialists /q person.month36363636363618234300111111121212675SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Horticulture Specialists /r person.month36363636363618234300111111121212675SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Gender Specialists /s person.month6060606060603039030018181919202010125SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Drivers /t person.month72727272727236468160121212121313780SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Nursery workers /u person.month36363636363618234110444444227SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Technicians for laboratories /v person.month24242424242412156160444444227SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 59606263646634409E. Incentives to DRC District level staff /w 1. Incentives to two DRC livestock specialists /x person.month24242424242412156115333333219SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )2. Incentives to two current DRC horticulture specialists /y person.month24242424242412156115333333219SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )3. Incentives to 13 DRC drivers /z person.month156156156156156156781 0146091010101010565SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )4. Incentives to other DRC staff per year50707070707070470SA_RCIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 65858686868778573F. Government part-time staff time from DRC per year30313132333317208SA_RCGOVTG. Operating costs Car fuel and maintenance lumpsum69707273757678513OMIFAD ( 100% )Travel /aa day2 8802 8802 8802 8802 8802 8802 88020 16016,6748495051535455360OMIFAD ( 100% )Office supplies and stationery lumpsum287------287OMIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal 4041201221251271301331 161Total Recurrent Costs 8926366486616736854844 679Total 2 4997931 1818498338065827 544 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Overview 
PRIDE will be implemented in the Matrouh Governorate and will include specific interventions 
1.
for the coastal areas from Dabaa to El Salloum, selected activities in the Siwa Oasis and El Moghra in 
the Al Alamein District. The development goal of the project will be to reduce poverty and enhance 
food and nutrition security in rural areas through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods. 
The development objectives of the project will be to build the resilience of poor rural households to the 
harsh climate conditions in the Matrouh Governorate by improving their productive capacities, assist 
communities to enhance the productive potential of the newly reclaimed lands and assist women and 
children from poor households to improve their nutritional and socio-economic profile. 
2.
A financial and economic analysis was undertaken to assess the financial and economic 
impacts of the project on direct beneficiaries and on the society as a whole. In order to represent the 
project financial benefits, six financial models and two social models have been prepared. The 
financial and social models have also been used as building blocks for the economic analysis.  
3.
Benefits are expected to derive from (i) reduction in the water deficit in the area by at least 20% 
or 845,000 cubic meters; (ii); rehabilitation of old and new wadis and reservoirs, mostly benefiting figs 
and olives plantations; (iii) provision of 250 kilometres of rural roads; (iv) improvement in the 
vegetative and regeneration capacity of rangelands; (vi) increase in livestock productivity through 
improved animal husbandry and veterinary assistance; (vii) supporting families in newly reclaimed 
lands to initiate crops and production activities, such as jojoba and aquaculture; (viii) introduction of a 
range of new technologies to improve the system of water quality monitoring and management; (ix) 
nutrition packages for women, which will contribute to improving women's quality of diets as well as to 
generate an additional source of income for them; (xii) increase in sanitation facilities, access to 
school facilities and health facilities for 15,000 women annually.  
4.
Number of beneficiaries. The total number of households receiving services promoted or 
supported by the project is 36,000 circa, or 216,250 circa people. About 116,400 of them are expected 
to be women. A summary of the total number of households by component and activity is shown in 
Table 10.1 below. As explained in the economic analysis section, in order to conservatively calculate 
the project economic internal rate of return (ERR) and to take into account any unforeseeable events, 
the final economic aggregation considers beneficiaries' adoption rate of 85%. 
127 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 10.1. Expected total number of households and beneficiaries by component 
Financial Analysis 
5.
The primary objective of the financial analysis is to determine the financial viability and 
incentives of the target group for engaging in the project activities, by examining the impact of project 
interventions on, cash flow, family labour and net incomes. Based on field visits, consultations with the 
Desert Research Centre (DRC), and discussions with beneficiaries, 8 illustrative financial and social 
models were prepared to demonstrate the financial viability of the investments. Three crop models on 
1 feddan each were developed to show the profitability of investing in wadis and reservoirs 
rehabilitation with enhanced productivity and production of: (i) olives with investment in wadis and 
reservoirs, (ii) figs with investment in reservoirs, (iii) and enhanced olives with investment in 
reservoirs. Three HHs models were developed to show benefits to (i) HHs receiving nutrition 
packages - pigeon HHs model -, (ii) HHs benefiting from rehabilitated rangelands and improved small-
ruminant productivity – goat and sheep HHs model -, (iii) HHs living in the Moghra area, who will 
benefit from improved water quality and management and technical assistance and extension 
services to increase crop productivity – Moghra HHs model with jojoba and aquaculture. Also two 
social models were developed114 to estimate benefits from the rehabilitation of (i) cisterns at 
homestead, reservoirs and roman cisterns at the homestead115, and (ii) from the construction of 
250km of roads. A cash-flow analysis was carried out to present the “with” and “without” project 
analysis. All models form the building blocks for the economic analysis. 
Key assumptions. The following information gathered during the design mission has been 
6.
used to set up the analyses: (i) interviews with potential beneficiaries, including people already living 
in Moghra, (iii) mission and agricultural and livestock experts' estimates, (iii) information from similar 
114 Described in the economic analysis section 
115 Total of 845,000 m3 
128 
Component 1: Climate Resilient LivelihoodsNotesHHsPeopleWomenReservoirs for Irrigated Agriculture 500 reservoirs5003000Wadi Development 1900 feddans200012000Feeder Roads /a250 km1020061200Rangeland and livestock development 715942954Horticulture Training2000120001000Cooperative ManagementOn farm water management (Moghra)428425704Component II: Integrated Nutrition InvestmentsDomestic Water Supply 845,000 m3650039000Nutrition supplementation g Pigeon Towers & Poultry4000Nutrition Supplementation (homestead plants)100060005000Income generation400Health & Nutrition Awareness100060003000Literacy Classes2000Formal Schools 310006000330Multi-grade schools15225Health Units Services 322500Mobile Health Units 575000Sanitation Facilities l40024003000Total 36,043     216,258  116,455  /a 150 km of roads are financed by the IFAD loan and 100 km by the GoE. Estimated no. of beneficiaries by component and activities 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
projects implemented by DRC. In particular, information on labour and input requirements for various 
operations, capital costs, prevailing wages, yields, farm gate and market prices of commodities, and 
transport costs were collected. Conservative assumptions were made both for inputs and outputs in 
order to take account of possible risks. Key assumptions made were as follows: 
 
Exchange rate. The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 USD = 18 LE. 
Prices. The financial prices for project inputs and products were collected in the field by 
 
the design team. Prices used represent estimates of the average seasonal prices and the 
analysis is carried out using constant prices. 
Labour. Family labour has been valued both in financial and economic analysis. It has 
 
been assumed that both family labour and hired unskilled labour are priced at LE 150 per day, 
which is the prevailing market rate in rural areas. 
Opportunity cost of capital. A discount rate of 11% has been used in this analysis to 
 
assess the viability and robustness of the proposed investments. The selected value is 
calculated by taking into account actual market interest rates on loans116 and the discount rate 
calculated by the Economist Intelligence Unit, (EIU).  
Crop models representing investments in wadi and reservoirs. The water harvesting and 
7.
watershed management sub-component of PRIDE will undertake watershed development on 100 kms 
of new and old wadis to bring around 1900 feddans under improved watershed management where 
mainly figs and olives are grown. About 1100 feddans are expected to directly benefit from reservoirs 
to provide supplementary irrigation for crops. Three models have been developed to represent the 
benefits generated by investing in reservoirs and wadis. All models present a scenario with project 
intervention (WP) and a scenario without project intervention (WOP). Increase in yields is expected 
due to (i) increased water availability and (ii) improved crop management skills thanks to technical 
support provided by the project.117 The average yields considered in the WOP of the models are 
average yields that would have been achieved over a period of 20 years118 and without 
wadis/reservoirs rehabilitation and improved technical assistance. As shown in the cash flow analysis 
at the end of each model, the reservoirs and wadis investments are financed by the project. 
 
Olive crop model with investment in the wadi and the reservoir (1 feddan). The WP 
scenario is developed over 25 years, and it assumes that trees are newly planted119. Because 
olives are expected to increase revenue more than figs120, the trend is expected to be that new 
plantations by the wadis will mainly be olives. The main investment is made on year 1 and it is 
estimated at about LE 45,000 per feddan. After the 10th year, olive trees achieve full production. 
However, yearly fluctuations of bearing fruits and possible climate change effects are also 
taken into account in the model. The model's main output is olive oil. Self-consumption121 is 
also considered in the model, assuming that in the WP farmers will become more commercial 
and therefore will increase the quantity of olive oil sold vs the quantity kept for self-
consumption. Overall, the model shows that the investment per feddan is profitable (NPV Le 
3,954, IRR 12%, B/C 1.1). Average net income is Le 8,600 per feddan. 
 
Olive crop model with investment in the reservoir (1 feddan). The WP scenario is 
developed over 25 years, and it assumes that trees are three years old122. The investment in 
the reservoir is made on year 1 and it is estimated at LE 21,600 per feddan. After the 7th year, 
which would be the 10th year of the trees' life, full production is achieved. However, yearly 
fluctuations of bearing fruits and possible climate change effects are also taken into account. As 
in the previous model, the main output considered in this model is olive oil. Self-consumption is 
116 Economist Intelligence Unit, Egypt Country Report, July 2017. 
117 Sub-component 1.4 
118 Starting, as in the WP, with newly planted olive trees. 
119 Assumptions made following field visits in the project area. 
120 Farmers seem preferring them, mainly because olive oil is more profitable than figs 
121 https://www.oliveoilmarket.eu/trends-in-world-olive-oil-consumption-ioc-report/ 
122 Assumptions made following field visits in the project area. 
129 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
considered in this model too. Overall, the model shows that the investment is profitable (NPV 
Le 20,178, IRR 20%, B/C 1.6). Average net income is Le 10,800 per feddan.  
Figs crop model with investment in the reservoir (1 feddan). This model relies on the 
 
same assumptions made for the olive crop model described in the previous paragraph. It has 
been developed to show the profitability of another common crop in the same area and with the 
same investment. All profitability indicators are positive although returns per feddan are lower 
than in the olive model because olives are processed and sold as olive oil (NPV Le 3,529, IRR 
14%, B/C 1.3). Average net income is Le 6,300 per feddan). 
8.
Moghra HH model – jojoba and aquaculture. As explained in Appendix 4, PRIDE will assist 
the newly settled youth and small farmer groups in El Moghra to increase crop productivity123 by: (i) 
providing them with technical assistance and extension services; (ii) promoting interventions that will 
reduce salt and iron contents in the irrigation water, which if maintained at the current level will cause 
yield decrease in the long-run; and (iii) investing in efficient on-farm management infrastructures, such 
as drip irrigation systems124. It is expected that PRIDE's investment in Moghra will be a valid 
incentives to encourage young people to invest in the new land; therefore, one of the project benefits 
is also expected to be an increase in the youth's resettlement rate in Moghra. 
The Moghra HH model model presents a situation WOP and a situation WP, both developed 
9.
over a period of 20 years and on 10 feddans, which is considered the average cultivable land size for 
young people moving to Moghra. In both scenarios, it is assumed that young people will plant jojoba 
trees, which will start bearing fruits from year 5 and will reach full production on year 10. During the 
first 6/7 years of jojoba production, households are expected to have additional sources of income125. 
In the WP, the additional source of income is represented by aquaculture through the construction of a 
small pond, which benefits will be two-fold: (i) by raising local buri fish in the pond, the additional 
income would be about LE 60,000 per year126; and (ii) the pond's naturally fertilized water127 could be 
used to irrigate jojoba and therefore decrease the cost of fertilizers. 
10.
  From year 10 on, yearly yields keep increasing regularly in the WP while, in the WOP, they start 
a gradual decrease because: (i) in the WP, farmers will access improved and more frequent technical 
assistance; (ii) PRIDE will improve water quality by reducing the quantity of iron and salt in it, which is 
the main cause of yields reduction after year 10. 
  Considering that, in both the WOP and WP, young people are expected to invest in Moghra, a 
11.
cash flow analysis is carried out in both scenarios. The WOP cash flow analysis shows that the 
investment is entirely financed by the households' own savings128. On the other hand, the WP shows 
that the youth will also be able to access a project grant129 to support investments in efficient on-farm 
management infrastructures, such as a drip irrigation system. Grants will not be accessible to all HHs 
in Moghra. Households not accessing grants are expected to self-finance the investment in Moghra 
land, as per the WOP. Nonetheless, they will directly benefit from PRIDE's intervention in improved 
technical assistance and improved water management. All profitability indicators are positive, as per 
the following summary. 
123Crops in this area may be for example jojoba, pomegranate or olives. Because farmers have mostly expressed 
interest in it, and currently this is the most cultivated crop in the area, the Moghra model is based on jojoba.  
124 For this kind of investment, the project will provide a total of $ 5.3 million Grants (grants will not cover all direct 
project beneficiaries in Moghra but only a part of them).  
125 E.g. Following interviews with potential beneficiaries and private companies working in Moghra, additional sources of 
income may be to be employed as workers on other people's lands or by the companies. 
126 Considering an average of 20,000 buri fish per year, which will be both self-consumed and sold by the HH. 
127 Fertilized by the fishes. 
128 Through private companies, young people have facilitated access to loans. Some of them receive family's economic 
support. 
129 No. of grants and amounts to be defined during implementation. 
130 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
  Goat and sheep HH model. This model presents a situation WP and a situation WOP. The 
12.
number of small-ruminants heads per HH is on average 25. Benefits are expected from: (i) increasing 
small-ruminants productivity through improved animal husbandry and veterinary services; (ii) 
improved rangeland management that allows obtaining, within the farm, an increased quantity of 
fodder that will be used to feed the animals. In the WP, animal physical parameters and assumptions 
(e.g. mortality rate) are therefore improved in order to reflect improved husbandry and access to 
veterinary services. The main investment included in the model is the rangeland rehabilitation, 
calculated at LE 15,000 per household. Overall the model proves to be profitable, as per the following 
summary: 
13.
  Pigeon HH model (nutrition package). Component 2 of the project will seek to raise the 
nutritional status of households, particularly women and children, through integrating a number of 
interventions that will increase access to nutritious food and increase awareness for improved choices 
in nutrition. Households, and more precisely women, will receive a nutrition and livelihood package 
that will provide access to protein rich diets through providing pigeon towers130 with 50, 6 months old, 
pigeons pairs. The package will also include vaccination for the first year and pigeon feed for the first 
three months, which will encourage pigeons to come back to the tower. The main investment, 
including the tower, pigeons, feed and vaccination for the first year is about Le 13,600. Women will 
also receive trainings and technical assistance that will ensure continuity after the first year. The WP 
shows that: (i) households self-consume most of the pigeons and therefore improve their nutrition, 
and (ii) considering the high re-productivity rate of pigeons, households are also able to sell some of 
them (net income is estimated at Le 4,000 per year on average). The WOP is represented by an 
existing source of income (Le 12,000131 per year) that households will keep during the WP. All 
profitability indicators are shown to be positive as per the following summary: 
130 Pigeon towers will be with 500 holes. Packages could also be for goats or poultry. The EFA takes pigeon as a 
representative example. 
131 Expected yearly income of households receiving nutritious packages. 
131 
Return to family labour*4 501                 *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate11%NPV @ 0.11809 283IRR58%NPVb1 202 365NPVc267 310B/C ratio4.5                     Switching values Benefits-78%Switching values Costs350%Return to family labour*794              *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate11%NPV @ 0.1127 780IRR42%NPVb379 951NPVc179 988B/C ratio2.11             Switching values Benefits-53%Switching values Costs111% 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
In brief, the financial analysis of all proposed models shows acceptable results and suggests 
14.
project activities are worthwhile to undertake: 
Table 10.3. Summary of HH models results 
Economic Analysis 
15.
  The objectives of the economic analysis are: i) to examine the overall project viability; ii) to 
assess the project’s impact and overall economic rate of return; and iii) to perform sensitivity analyses 
to assess the benefits from a broad welfare perspective and incorporate the risks into the analysis. 
16.
  Key assumptions. The physical inputs and production established in the financial analysis 
provided the basis to determine the viability of the project investment in terms of opportunity costs and 
quantifiable benefits to the economy as a whole. The estimate of the likely economic returns from 
project interventions are based on the following assumptions: 
 
Project life has been assumed at 20 years;  
Project inputs and outputs traded are valued at their respective economic prices, and 
 
goods are expected to move freely within the project area in response to market demand;  
The social discount rate adopted for this analysis is 10% and it has been chosen by 
 
taking into account the average deposit interest rate in Egypt132 since 2015 (7.4%), the average 
lending interest rate (12.7%), and the average discount rates calculated by the EIU between 
2015 and 2016 (9.9%). 
  Project economic costs and benefits. The economic analysis includes the investment and 
17.
incremental recurrent costs of the project components. The project financial costs have been 
converted to economic values by removal of price contingencies, taxes and duties. In order to avoid 
double counting, the final aggregation considered only those costs that were not included in the 
financial models.  
  Benefits estimation deriving from enhancing connectivity and improved water access 
18.
investments. Two economic models have been developed to assess the economic benefits deriving 
from (i) 250 km of roads construction, (ii) construction and rehabilitation of homestead cisterns and 
reservoirs for increasing households' access to drinking water. The benefits are gradually 
incorporated in the models starting from the first year after the investments take place.  
250 km of roads construction. The investment for constructing 250 km of roads is about USD 
19.
14.4 million. Both quantifiable and unquantifiable benefits are generated by roads construction, as 
follows: 
Savings of about 40% on the cost of water per tank. Following discussions with 
 
previously constructed roads' beneficiaries and based on the per capita amount of water 
needed per day133, it is estimated that households currently purchase on average 60 m3 of 
water per year and that the cost of water will decrease by about 30%. 
133 http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health 
132 
WOPWPMoghra (Jojoba and aquaculture_10 feddan)639 500856 683809 28358%4.5Goat and sheep /b28 187 35 936 27 780 42%2.1 Pigeon_nutrition package /a12 000 16 730 13 386 49%1.4 /a This model includes an additional source of income considered in both the WP and WOP scenarios./b average 25 heads per HHIRRB/CLeHH modelsNet income after labour NPV @ 11% Le 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Savings on transportation costs for going to the market. It is assumed that farmers go to 
 
the market on average once per week. With good roads, the transportation cost per trip 
decreases by approximately 30%. 
It is estimated that around 8,100 households will benefit from 10% reduced post-harvest 
 
losses of agricultural outputs, like figs and olives due to the timely access to markets.  
Many social immeasurable benefits can be generated by roads. Among them, the quality 
 
of people’s life can generally improve by facilitating their physical access to public services, 
such as hospitals, schools or markets. 
 
The following table summarizes the economic profitability indicators of the road model: 
  Construction and rehabilitation of homestead cisterns and reservoirs for increasing 
20.
households' access to drinking water. This model assumes that at least 845,000 m3 of water will 
be saved every year after the construction or rehabilitation of cisterns and reservoirs. Consequently, it 
is estimated that the yearly savings will be about LE 77.7 million or USD 4.3 million, considering an 
average cost of water of LE 100 per m3. The total project investment is estimated at USD 13.7 million. 
Beyond the economic measurable benefits, this investment generates several social benefits: (i) the 
HHs’ quality of life would be significantly enhanced by increasing access to drinking water at any time 
of the day, (ii) hygienic conditions would improve, (iii) illnesses would decrease, and (v) some plants 
like the Moringa could be grown and watered in the backyard so as to improve nutrition. The following 
table summarizes the economic profitability indicators of the model: 
  Benefits Estimation. The incremental benefits stream comprises the economic net values of 
21.
all developed models134. These benefits are then aggregated by the number of households that are 
estimated to uptake each activity or by the number of feddans that are specifically expected to benefit 
from reservoir and wadi rehabilitation. The analysis considers beneficiaries' adoption rate of 85%. 
133 
Discount rate10%NPV @ 0.1162 377 249              IRR23%NPVb411 470 427              NPVc193 154 763B/C ratio2.13                             Switching values Benefits-53%Switching values Costs113%LeDiscount rate10%NPV @ 0.1258 785 678     IRR31%NPVb485 347 572     NPVc173 712 275B/C ratio2.79                    Switching values Benefits-64%Switching values Costs179%Le 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 10.3. Households and feddans phasing in by activity  
(table used for economic aggregation) 
22.
  Economic Pricing. Economic pricing has been based on the following assumptions: 
The opportunity cost of labour is set at 131 LE/day, or 87.1% of financial cost of labour, 
 
which is justified given rural unemployment rate at 12.9%135; 
Economic prices have been calculated for main outputs and inputs136, starting from FOB 
 
or CIF prices for main importable and exportable goods. Average conversion factors (CF) of 0.9 
and 0.92 have been applied to convert respectively tradable outputs and inputs’ financial prices 
to economic prices. 
 
The shadow exchange rate (SER) has been calculated at 1 USD = 18.71 LE;  
The Shadow Exchange Ratio Factor (SERF), used to obtain economic costs, has been 
 
calculated at 1.04. 
  Economic Rate of Return. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is 
23.
estimated at 20% for the base case. The net present value (NPV) of the net benefit stream, 
discounted at 10%, is USD 51.3 million. Table 10.4 below shows a summary of the total economic 
benefits, total economic costs and incremental cash flow by year. 
Table 10.4. Summary of economic analysis 
  Sensitivity Analysis. In order to test the robustness of the above results, a sensitivity analysis 
24.
was carried out; the outcomes of which is presented in table 10.5 below The sensitivity analysis 
investigates the effect of fluctuations in project costs, project benefits, and delays in implementation 
135 Egypt Country Report, July 2017 prepared by the Economist Intelligence Unit 
136 Or for similar outputs inputs, depending on the availability of CIF prices. 
134 
PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7Total HHsPhasing in %Adoption rate 85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%Pigeon HH model3405105105105105105103400Moghra HH model1463645467287287284013641Goat_sheep  HH model1 0341 0341 0341 0341 0341 0346 207Olives with reservoir_1 feddan8592108116123123123770Figs with reservoir_1 feddan36404650535353330Olives with reservoir and wadi_ 1 feddan2092282662853043043041900No. of feddans by crop phasing in Households' phasing in by activityTotal Benefits USD '000Total Costs USD '000Cash flow USD '000Y1-21098643-10752Y2-98628007-17869Y3-106285593-16221Y4-12053980-5185Y526113050-439Y6817923335846Y71102913979632Y81654220016342Y91900020018800Y102112020020920Y112280120022601Y122424720024047Y132558220025382Y142633420026134Y152645220026252Y162646820026268Y172648420026284Y182644120026241Y192648720026287Y202647520026275NPV@10%51 304                IRR20% 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
on the NPV and ERR. It shows the economic impacts of a decrease in project benefits – up to -50% –
on the project viability. Similarly, it shows how the economic viability of the project will be affected by 
an increase of up to 50% in project costs, and by a one to three-year delay in project implementation. 
Furthermore, switching value benefits and switching value costs indicate that the project would still be 
feasible if benefits decreased up to -66% or costs increased up to +197%. 
  The analysis confirms that the economic viability of the project remains attractive as a positive 
25.
NPV and ERR above 10% are preserved in each case analyzed. 
Table 10.5. Sensitivity analysis 
  Other unquantifiable economic and social benefits. The project will also invest in several 
26.
social infrastructures, such as schools, hospitals or latrines that will generate many unquantifiable 
benefits and positive externalities. Among the many, it is foreseen that social infrastructures 
investments will lead to increased households' hygiene, decreased households' illnesses, increased 
life expectancy rate, and increased literacy rate in the project area.
135 
AssumptionsRelated RiskERRNPV US$ -20%18%35 833 208 -30%17%28 097 564 -50%14%12 626 276 20%18%46 094 107 30%17%43 488 913 50%16%38 278 524 1 year18%36 787 094 3 years14%18 376 666 Delays in project implementationDelays in having the Project approved by all parties. Any other unforeseable event.Project base case20%51 304 496 Decrease in project benefitsLow uptake of project activities. Market/price fluctuations. Delays with trainings/TA/extension services in place. Proper use of skills acquired in trainings. Increase in project CostsMarket/price fluctuations (changes in market demands). Procurement risks. 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Annex A to Appendix 10 
List of prices 
136 
Prices used in crop/livestock/activity budgets (LE)ItemUnitFinancialEconomicOutputs:Olive oill5582.9Figkg4.504.1Pigeonhead22.0019.9Jojobakg75.0067.8Buri fishkg20.0018.1Lambshead2 7002 439sheephead2 1001 897Goathead1 5001 355Inputs:Olive tree seedlingsno.2.001.8fertilizerper feddan2 0001 831pesticidesper feddan1 5001 380Harvesting boxesbox5046Harvesting netsbox2018Transportationbox400352Pigeon towerno.10 000.009 200.0Pigeon pairs (for starting up production)pair60.0055.2Pigeon feedper month100.0092.0Pigeon - vaccinationper year300.00276.0Wellper feddan1 000.00920.0Drip irrigationper feddan5 000.004 600.0Wind protectionper feddan2 000.001 840.0Seedlingstree10.009.2Land preparationper feddan4 000.003 484.0Pondlumpsum10 0009 200.0Electricity for irrigationper feddan6 000.005 520.0Transportation jojobakg1.000.9Baby fish for the pondper 1000120.00110.4Additional feed for fishper month3 000.002 760.0Fish boxes60kg box40.0036.8Ice for the boxesblock20.0018.4fertilizers - fodderlumpsum30002 746pesticides - fodderlumpsum500460Tractor (hs rent) - fodderhs/year15001 307Seedlings for fodder cropsunit22Veterinary services - small ruminantsvisit7061Vaccination - small ruminantsunit3028Transport to the market - small ruminantsrent150138Supplementary food - small ruminantstn15001 380Labourperson.day150131Monthly additional source of income HH modelperson.month30002 613 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Appendix 11: Draft project implementation manual 
Annotated Table of Contents 
1.
The PRIDE Project Implementation Manual (PIM) should be prepared as a living document with 
the following Table of Contents to guide the PMU and ensure timely implementation on ground. The 
PIM provides procedural details and guidance to facilitate proper implementation of the Project. The 
following table indicates the content and preparation status of various chapters of the PIM. 
Chapter 1:  PROJECT FRAMEWORK 
Introduction and background (One Page) 
Describe the purpose and objectives of PIM, mention who are going to use this PIM, indicate 
2.
the advantages of using PIM. Please state that PIM is a dynamic document and it should be 
updated as when required by the PMU staff. 
Project Summary (about 6-10 pages) 
3.
4.
Briefly describe the background to the project.  
Describe the project area, target groups and project goals and objectives; 
Describe the project components, their phasing and financing plan; outline the risks and 
5.
mitigation measures;  
6.
Indicate expected project outputs and outcomes. Describe the exit strategy of the project; 
7.
Include a matrix to show selection criteria for project interventions with columns: type of 
intervention; facilities offered, targeting criteria, role of local community, NGOs, CPMU, DRC-PMU 
and Project Partners in the selection and identification of target activities and beneficiaries, etc. 
8.
Attach Project Log-frame at the end of this Chapter for clarity. 
Chapter 2:  ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
Briefly describe coordination and management arrangements, project steering committees, and 
9.
their roles and functions, coordination arrangements at grassroots levels, organisation structure of 
CPMU and DRC-PMU, staffing plan, roles and responsibilities, terms of reference and procedures for 
recruitment of staff building on those provided in appendix 5. Also indicate the need for gender 
balance in staff structure etc. 
  Arrangements for implementation of project interventions, agencies responsible for the 
10.
implementation of various project components and subcomponents, etc. 
  Develop and provide a matrix with following columns: project intervention, coverage, 
11.
implementation responsibility, procurement, timeline and schedule of implementation, etc. 
Chapter 3:  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (to be extracted from LTB) 
12.
Introduction regarding the purpose of this section. 
13.
  Project costs and financing arrangements; 
14.
  Describe in brief the flow of fund mechanism; 
  Describe type of accounts: designated account, project account, subproject account etc and 
15.
their operations; 
16.
  Specify the mechanism for internal control; 
  Describe the disbursement procedures and withdrawals (to be obtained from the Letter to the 
17.
Borrower and its attachments) 
18.
Include checklist for sending withdrawal application; 
137 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11: Draft [project/programme] implementation manual 
19.
  Describe the financial reporting requirements; 
  Describe audit procedures and arrangements in place for conducting effective audit for each 
20.
year and also describe arrangement for internal audit and its procedures; 
Indicate a list of registers and records to be maintained at CPMU and DRC-PMU office such as 
21.
contract record, contract monitoring form etc. 
Chapter 4:  PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES 
22.
  Describe general conditions of procurement and methods of procurement Regulations;  
23.
  Describe the procurement methods in detail and as applicable to PRIDE; 
24.
  Describe the procurement Cycle - Main Steps 
  Describe approval procedures and appropriate authorities; review mechanisms: prior and ex-
25.
post review; review of pre-qualification bidders or tenders; describe the procurement committees at 
different level and thresholds for approvals at different level;  
26.
  Attach the revised 18-month procurement plan at the end of the chapter; 
Chapter 5:  MONITORING AND EVALUATION.  
27.
  Purpose of M&E and the key pillars to build an effective M&E system for PRIDE Project; 
  Project M&E framework: (i) first level output monitoring; (ii) second level outcome monitoring 
28.
and (iii) third level impact evaluation; 
29.
30.
31.
Indicators for output monitoring; 
Indicators for outcome monitoring; 
Indicators for impact evaluation; 
Impact assessment indicators and anchor indicators – which have also been included at the 
32.
impact level of PRIDE Logical Framework; 
33.
  PRIDE M&E PLAN with cost estimate for each activity; 
34.
  Reporting and communication: annual reports, RIMS survey reports. 
35.
  Attachments: RIMS indicators for PRIDE 
Chapter 6:  GUIDELINES FOR PREPARING ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGET 
36.
  Purpose and objective of this section 
37.
  General introduction on the preparation of AWP&B 
38.
  Review of formats used by ongoing project 
  All annual plans can be prepared based on the concept of result-oriented approach. This can 
39.
be effectively done using both Cost Tables and Project Log-frame. The result-oriented AWP&B will 
typically have the following elements: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective and expected result of component 
Indicators for monitoring and RIMS 
Quarterly targets for implementation (physical) 
Appraisal Target (physical) 
AWP&B Target (physical) 
Unit cost for the proposed activity 
Achievements by Appraisal estimates and Annual Plan estimates 
Budget estimates by Appraisal and Annual plan 
138 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
 
 
Financing rule 
Budget Category 
40.
  Key Tools for the preparation of AWP&B are: project Log-frame, detailed cost table, AWP&B 
template, financing plan, financing rules in the procurement methods, Finance Agreement, last project 
progress report. 
Chapter 7:  GUIDELINES FOR THE INVESTMENTS IN PROCESSING FACILITIES FOR YOUTH & 
SMALL FARMER COMPANIES IN THE NEW LANDS  
  Purpose and objective of this section will be identifying the criteria for the selection of all types 
41.
of infrastructure and provision of in kind grants to enterprises and individuals. 
Chapter 8:  GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SUB-COMPONENT 2.2 
EMPOWERMENT FOR NUTRITIONAL CHANGE 
  An NGO would be competitively recruited to implement the activities targeted at women under 
42.
the empowerment for nutritional change sub-component, Purpose and objective of this sub- 
component, the qualifications and procedures for NGO to implement the activities should be 
described clearly.  
KEY ANNEXES 
  Project Log-frame, updated 
  RIMS Indicators 
  Template for AWPB  
  TOR for CPMU, DRC-PMU staff  
  Procurement Plan 
  Sample form for contracts register 
  Sample form for contracts monitoring form 
  Staff and community training programme/Calendar 
 
Indicators for output, outcome and impact monitors 
  Any other 
139 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies 
Policy 
IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025: 
« Enabling Inclusive and Sustainable 
Rural Transformation » 
Principles of Engagement 
Country level policy engagement 
Alignment with IFAD Policy 
IFAD’s fifth Strategic Framework covers the period 2016-2025, 
serving as an overarching policy guideline to provide direction to 
IFAD’s work, and as a key instrument for consolidating IFAD’s 
development effectiveness. It responds to the new global 
environment and positions IFAD to play a crucial role within it –by 
enabling the transformation of rural areas in a manner that is both 
more inclusive and sustainable. The framework has three strategic 
objectives: 
1. SO1: Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities –
investing in rural people to enhance their access to and control 
over assets and resources. PRIDE will increase the rural people’s 
access to water and knowledge to improve productivity and 
production of crops and animals, enhancing their incomes. 
2. SO2: Increase poor rural people’s benefits from market 
participation –improving the engagement of poor rural people in 
markets for goods, services and wage labour. PRIDE will enhance 
participation of local farmers in remunerative markets through 
improve road connectivity and supply of both animal and crop 
products. 
3. SO3: Strengthen the environmental sustainability and 
climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities. 
Recognizing the key importance of environmental and social 
sustainability to ensure improved livelihoods, PRIDE has 
integrated a variety of activities that will enhance the resilience of 
the rural poor that include: improved water supply for both 
domestic and agriculture use, enhancing capacity of women to 
improve food security and nutrition at household level and access 
to basic social services such as education and health. Climate 
resilience will be increased by promoting access to education, 
health and alternative income generating activities particularly for 
women and youth. 
The current project is well aligned to meeting its overall goal 
and is well aligned with its five principles of engagement 
namely that IFAD-supported programmes will consistently 
aim to target and benefit the largest number of poor rural 
people possible, empower them socially and economically, 
and promote gender equality. IFAD will place a premium on 
innovation, learning and scaling up of successes and, in the 
process, leverage effective and efficient partnerships where 
comparative advantages are exploited for greater impact. 
IFAD promotes policy engagement in projects in order to reach 
two main objectives: (i) help create an enabling environment for 
implementation and achieving the project's impact, and (ii) help 
create the conditions for a large number of rural populations to out 
of poverty. It is a key element of the scaling up agenda. IFAD's 
role is not intended to advocate for specific policy outcomes; it is 
rather to assist Governments to use the project experience in the 
design or reform of policies, and to facilitate dialogue among 
national stakeholders on key policy issues. Recognizing this role 
and the need for policy engagement, PRIDE's approach to 
developing project activities will assist in developing a policy 
engagement agenda in rural development in desert conditions, 
irrigation and drainage systems rehabilitation, wadi development 
and rainwater harvesting. 
141 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Private Sector Strategy 
Targeting policy 
Gender equality and women’s 
empowerment policy 
Climate Change Strategy 
Rural finance policy 
IFAD’s Private Sector Strategy (2011) and the IFAD toolkit on 
Public-Private-Producer Partnerships in Agricultural Value Chains 
(2016) provide guidance on IFAD’s engagement with the private 
sector. While PRIDE will not be directly promoting 4Ps , its work 
with a government promoted youth settlement scheme that 
promotes linkages with the private sector in agri-business 
development that ensures that larger private sector companies are 
interested in working with smallholder farmers. 
IFAD’s poverty targeting implementation guidelines updated in 
January 2013 were completed for the Project and a poverty 
targeting checklist is included as Annex 2. The current project 
takes cognisance of the fact that poor rural people are in the front 
line of climate change impacts; the ecosystems and biodiversity on 
which they rely are increasingly degraded. Special criteria to 
define the poor have been specified for all key interventions based 
on the local context in terms of ownership of assets particularly 
land, trees and livestock. These have been detailed in full in the 
PDR  
IFAD’s gender sensitive implementation guidelines updated in 
January 2013 were completed for the Project and a gender 
checklist is included as Annex 3. The project has not only 
mainstreamed gender but has made specific provisions to ensure 
that more than 50% of the beneficiaries of the project are directed 
towards women. The project will also strengthen the capacity for 
participation of women through a host of strategies such as female 
field staff, recruitment of NGO experienced in dealing with women 
and specific budget lines for interventions targeted at women. 
IFAD’s climate change strategy137 recognizes that the speed and 
intensity of climate change are outpacing the ability of poor rural 
people and societies to cope. The project incorporates IFAD’s 
assessment that climate-related risks, and potential opportunities, 
can be addressed more systematically within its projects and 
policy advice. 
IFAD's Rural Finance Policy (2009) has six guiding principles to be 
applied at the micro, meso and macro levels: (i) support access to 
a variety of financial services; (ii) promote a wide range of financial 
institutions, models and delivery channels; (iii) support demand 
driven and innovative approaches; (iv) encourage –in collaboration 
with private sector partners –market-based approaches that 
strengthen rural financial markets, avoid distortions in the financial 
sector and leverage IFAD’s resources; (v) develop and support 
long-term strategies focusing on sustainability and poverty 
outreach; and (vi) participate in policy dialogues that promote an 
enabling environment for rural finance. 
PRIDE has no direct intervention in rural finance, opting to link 
beneficiaries with existing programmes in the IFAD portfolio, 
whenever there is need. 
137 Climate Change Strategy. IFAD, May 2010. 
142 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Appendix 13: Contents of the Project Life File 
43.
  Annex 1: SECAP Review Note 
44.
  Annex 2: Poverty Check List 
45.
  Annex 3: Gender Checklist 
46.
  Annex 4: ESMF Annotated Outline 
47.
  Annex 5: List of People Met.
143 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
ANNEX 1: SECAP REVIEW NOTE 
Major landscape characteristics and Issues 
Socio-cultural context 
The Matrouh Governorate is one of the largest governorates of Egypt, with a total area of 
1.
166,000 square kilometres and a population of roughly 450,000 people. The governorate extends 
over 450 kilometres along the Mediterranean coast from Alexandria in the east to the Libyan border in 
the west. Most of the population in Matrouh depend on agriculture for their livelihoods. The agriculture 
is largely rainfed, consisting of livestock (sheep and goats) and, increasingly, tree crops (figs, olives 
and dates) with some cereals (barley and wheat) used as fodder for livestock. With the limited rainfall, 
less than 20 percent of the land is arable, which consists of some 120,000 feddans of orchards and 
some 150,000 feddans of barley. About 43 percent of the area is dense to medium rangeland and 
about 38 percent is very sparse rangeland. The number of ruminants in Matrouh has markedly 
declined from about one million to currently less than 500,000 heads as a result of the severe 
degradation of the rangelands. 
2.
The proposed project would support interventions along the coastal areas, in the existing oasis 
of Siwa and on the newly reclaimed lands in El Moghra. In the coastal areas, the population depends 
heavily on livestock, figs and olives for their income. With agriculture being largely rainfed, harvests 
can vary from year to year depending on the precipitation. The topography inland from the coast 
consists of dry streambeds or wadis, which channel rainfall to the sea and suffer severe soil erosion 
when rainfall is heavy. The rangelands inland are severely degraded from overgrazing of livestock 
resulting from the settlement of the Bedouins, who moved their animals from area to area in the past. 
This has contributed to the decline in livestock noted above. In Siwa, which is known for its historic 
and cultural significance, the population depends on the cultivation of dates and olives for their 
livelihoods. Siwa has been recognized internationally for its date production. Recent investments in 
eco-tourism in Siwa have not really improved the incomes of the smallholder farmers. The new lands 
in El Moghra were used for grazing by the Bedouin communities in the past but will be reclaimed for 
agricultural production under the Government of Egypt’s land reclamation program.  
The population of the Matrouh consists of some 60,000 households, 24,000 of which are 
3.
considered rural, with an average household size of six persons. The population along the coastal 
areas was traditionally Bedouin nomads, but they have settled into dispersed communities in recent 
decades. The Bedouin population is composed of six main tribes, which can be further divided into 
sub-tribes. There are about 40 sub-tribes in the project area. The sub-tribe is the social unit of most 
importance in dealing with the government. Each sub-tribe is further divided into clans. The sub-tribe 
has well established and recognized rights over its cultivated area, watersheds and rangelands and 
any new land brought under cultivation is managed based on this well-established system of use and 
proprietary rights. Siwa, on the other hand, is inhabited by some 30,000 people who belong to a very 
distinct Berber community with a unique culture and a distinct language spoken by the Berber called 
Siwa “Amazigh”. The reclaimed lands in El Moghra will be allocated through a lottery by ECDC to new 
investors and small farmers (approximately 4,200 households) who will settle there and cultivate 
various agricultural crops. Largely uninhabited, these lands lack basic social services (schools, health 
services), which the project will provide through the social infrastructure sub-component. 
Natural resources and NRM 
The Desert Research Center (DRC) has documented the state of the natural resources along 
4.
the Matrouh coast in what was the project area of the World Bank project Matrouh Resources 
Management Project (MRMP). The area covers 320 km of coastline from Ras El Hekma to El Salloum 
at the Libyan border and extends inland up to 60 km. The project areas now include 60,000 feddans 
144 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
of reclaimed lands in El Moghra, which is located on the northeastern side of the Qattara Depression. 
The state of water, plant and soil resources in this area can be summarized as follows138: 
Water resources. With no surface water sources and little rainfall, the coastal area 
 
suffers from severe water scarcity. At the time of the NRMP (2003), the World Bank estimated 
that per capita water availability in Egypt had already dropped below the scarcity level of 1,000 
m3 per capita/year and would drop to 670 m3 per capita/year by 2017. (I could not find a current 
estimate.) Average rainfall is low at 140 mm per year and water management practices are 
generally poor, with low water use efficiency and a lack of technologies for water harvesting. In 
Siwa, water is not scarce but abundant from underground springs and wells. But, the 
uncontrolled drilling of wells and over-use of water has led to drainage problems, waterlogging 
of soils and increasing salinity of the water. In El Moghra, where the water will also be derived 
from wells, the groundwater drawn from shallow aquifers is highly saline and the water table 
has declined in recent years as a result of accelerated land reclamation in the West Delta. It 
has a sizeable lake containing brackish water, salt marshes and a swamp with reeds.  
Plant resources. The coastal area’s vegetative cover has been steadily degrading over 
 
the years as a result of harsh climate conditions and uncontrolled animal grazing. The coastal 
rangelands have suffered from overgrazing of livestock and poor rangeland management. In 
Siwa, there is no land for rangeland but thousands of hectares under date and olive cultivation. 
The die back of some of these olive trees has been blamed on the waterlogging or the salinity 
of the water used for irrigation. In El Moghra there is very little vegetative cover as a result of 
overgrazing and increasing desertification. Plant species are limited by the moisture content 
and salinity of the soil.  
Soil resources. The coastal area has witnessed severe land degradation in terms of 
 
water and wind erosion, loss of soil fertility resulting in low productivity and increasing soil 
salinity. As noted above, in Siwa the drainage problems and waterlogging of soils are the major 
threat to date palm cultivation. The soils in El Moghra are mostly coarse loamy sand, with little 
organic content and fertility insufficient for cultivation of crops. 
Climate 
5.
The Matrouh Governorate lies in the Mediterranean coastal belt of Egypt and has a winter 
rainfall (Mediterranean regime), with the rainy season extending from November to April. Average 
annual rainfall ranges from 100 to 150 mm per year. The DRC indicates that average annual rainfall 
along the project area is 140 mm per year (see figure below). The coastal area is characterized by dry 
Mediterranean climate conditions, with average high and low temperatures of 18.1 and 8.1°C in the 
winter and 29.2°C and 20°C in summer seasons, respectively. The coastal area has the highest 
average wind speed in Egypt in the winter which can reach 18.5 Km/h and drops gradually inland.139 
138 The description of the state of resources in El Moghra is drawn from a DRC report – Tentative Summary and 
Conclusion of Moghra Oasis Project for Future Development. 
139 Egyptian National Action Program to Combat Desertification, Desert Research Center, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Land Reclamation, 2005. 
145 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Average annual rainfall along coastal area from 1998-2012 (DRC) 
163 
146 
142 
137 
139 
106 
116 
96 
163 
132 
147 
139 
110 
96 
76 
m
m
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
The Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
6.
(IPCC)140 includes a report on Egypt that concludes that Egypt is one of the African countries that 
could be vulnerable to water stress under climate change. The report indicates that the water used in 
2000 was estimated at about 70 km3, which is already far in excess of the available resources. A 
major challenge is to close the rapidly increasing gap between the limited water availability and the 
escalating demand for water from various economic sectors. The rate of water utilisation has already 
reached its maximum for Egypt, and climate change will exacerbate this vulnerability. Furthermore, 
agriculture consumes about 85 percent of the annual total water resource and plays a significant role 
in the Egyptian national economy, contributing about 20 percent of GDP. More than 70 percent of the 
cultivated area depends on low-efficiency surface irrigation systems, which cause high water losses, a 
decline in land productivity, waterlogging and salinity problems. Moreover, unsustainable agricultural 
practices and improper irrigation management affect the quality of the country’s water resources. 
Reductions in irrigation water quality have, in their turn, harmful effects on irrigated soils and crops. 
Key Issues 
7.
Adaptation to climate change. The Government of Egypt recognizes the grave risks to the 
country posed by anticipated climate change impacts in the next decades, especially to the rural poor 
and marginalized smallholder farmers in regions like Matrouh. The IPCC Report on Africa (2014) 
contains a number of ominous findings on the effects of climate change for Egypt in terms of 
temperature, precipitation and availability of water (see box below).141 The Government has 
demonstrated its commitment to addressing these risks by ratifying the relevant international 
conventions (the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC,1992), the 
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD, 1995), and following up on its 
commitments under these conventions with various strategies and action programs.142 Many of the 
interventions in the proposed project would support the Government of Egypt in carrying out its 
recommended actions under these national strategies and plans. 
140 Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2014).  
141 Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
142 National Action Program to Combat Desertification (2005), Egypt’s National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate 
Change (2011) and the Third National Communication under the UNFCCC (2016). 
146 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
8.
Findings of IPCC Report on Africa (2014) 
- Mean annual temperature rise over Africa, relative to the late 20th century mean is likely to exceed 2°C. 
- A reduction in precipitation is likely over Northern Africa. 
- Climate change will amplify existing stress on water availability in Africa. 
- Climate change will exacerbate vulnerability of agricultural systems, particularly in semi-arid areas. 
-  Progress  achieved  on  managing  risks  to  food  production  from  current  climate  variability  will  not  be 
sufficient to address long-term impacts of climate change. 
- Conservation agriculture provides a viable means for strengthening resilience in agroecosystems. 
Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and 
risks 
Key potential impacts 
9.
Although the specific interventions of the project have not been fully defined, in terms of 
location and type, at this detailed design stage, the project’s various components, sub-components 
and activities have been identified and their impacts and risks can be reviewed for purposes of this 
SECAP Review Note. As is to be expected, the project’s various interventions would have both 
potential positive (or beneficial) and negative (or adverse) social and/or environmental impacts, as 
well as climate change and/or other risks. The table contained in Annex A presents an overview of 
these impacts and risks.  
  As the table indicates, the bulk of the proposed project’s social and environmental impacts are 
10.
expected to be beneficial. The organizing principle connecting all of the proposed project’s activities 
and impacts is building the resilience of the communities in the project areas to the harsh conditions in 
which they find themselves today and to the even harsher conditions they are likely to face in the 
future as a result of climate change. Building this resilience is anchored on (i) securing climate 
resilient livelihoods to increase incomes and improve food security and (ii) ensuring resilient 
households to enhance the overall health and well-being of families, including women and children, in 
the project areas.  
  As indicated in the table in Annex A, increasing farm incomes and improving food security are 
11.
the common social benefits found in all of the activities of the first component, whether making 
investments in water harvesting, wadi development and rural roads or providing support for livestock 
and rangeland development and crop production. And, the environmental benefits derived from these 
activities are equally important in terms of water resources management, rangeland conservation and 
good agricultural practices (including water-use efficiency and integrated pest and crop management). 
Any potential adverse impacts and risks are expected to be minor and site-specific in nature and thus 
readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures, many of which are 
identified in the table. A number of IFAD’s SECAP Guidance Statements143 address the issues 
raised by these project activities and identify actions and measures to avoid, minimize or mitigate their 
impacts. 
In the same vein, enhancing the overall health and well-being of families is the common social 
12.
benefit that connects all of the activities of the second component, whether making investments in 
domestic water supply, improving household nutrition, diversifying livelihoods for women, providing 
basic social infrastructure for communities or providing employment training for youth. Any 
environmental benefits from these activities are secondary; any adverse social or environmental 
impacts or risks are expected to be minimal. As with the first component, any such impacts will be 
remedied by preventive actions and/or mitigation measures as appropriate.  
  As described in V. Recommended Features below, the project will establish an Environmental 
13.
and Social Management Framework (ESMF), early in project implementation, to ensure routine review 
of activities involving potential adverse impacts, particularly construction of dams, roads, schools, 
143 Agrochemicals, Fisheries and Aquaculture, Livestock and Range Resources, Water, Small Dams and Rural Roads. 
147 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
health units, latrines; conversion of grazing lands to agriculture; drilling of wells, withdrawal of 
groundwater, etc. This review would allow appropriate preventive actions and mitigation measures to 
be determined on a site-specific basis before the infrastructure interventions would be undertaken and 
on a periodic review basis for the other project activities. 
Climate change and adaptation 
14.
  As described in 1. C. Climate and D. Key Issues above, the project areas are expected to 
experience adverse climate change impacts in the coming decades, ranging from sea level rise along 
the Mediterranean coast to decreasing and more erratic precipitation with increasing temperatures 
over the areas. These climate change impacts will make the already harsh conditions for humans, 
animals and agriculture in the project areas even more harsh, putting additional stress on the water-
stressed natural resource base and the human and animal populations that depend on it. Egypt’s 
Third National Communication under the UNFCCC (2016) characterized the vulnerability of the 
agricultural sector to climate change based on the following major negative impacts anticipated in the 
coming decades: (i) the expected rise in temperature and change of its seasonal pattern would lead to 
decreasing productivity of some crops and livestock, as well as a change in environmental agricultural 
zones; (ii) marginal agricultural areas would be negatively affected, and desertification rates would 
increase; (iii) higher temperatures would increase water evaporation and water consumption; (iv) 
socio-economic effects, including migration of labour from marginal and coastal areas; and (v) the 
probable rise in sea level, with its negative effects on coastal areas, tourism and agricultural land.144 
  Project activities such as water harvesting and wadi water management, rangeland restoration 
15.
with native species, farming with good agricultural practices (no tillage, groundcover, water-use 
efficiency) and promotion of drought-resistant, salt-tolerant species and varieties are intended to build 
climate resilience in communities in the project areas and represent important climate adaptation 
measures consistent with those identified by Egypt’s National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate 
Change and Disaster Risk Reduction (2011). The National Strategy identifies water harvesting as a 
key adaptation measure (Maximum utilization of rainfall and flash flood water”) and recommends (i) 
construction of dams and reservoirs to collect water and use it for drinking or agriculture directly, or for 
storage in groundwater reservoirs; (ii) using modern techniques in the field of water harvesting, such 
as remote sensing and geographic information systems, (iii) avoiding the risks that may result from 
flash floods through mapping risk assessments for each area, and taking the appropriate precautions 
to avoid potential risks). It also identifies measures for climate adaptation of plant and livestock 
production based on expansion of genetic diversity of plant and animal varieties available to farmers: 
(i) introduction of breeding programs for important plant varieties of field and horticultural crops that 
are capable of adapting to the expected changes in climate indicators, and relying on biodiversity to 
improve livestock production against climate change, especially in terms of species, and the extent of 
their adaptability to climate change.145 The more recent Third National Communication under the 
UNFCCC (2016) mirrors the National Strategy in recommending climate adaptation measures for 
water resources management and agricultural production.146 There remain other climate adaptation 
measures the project should implement, as suggested in the table in Annex A, in order to anticipate 
and prepare for extreme climate events, such as flash floods in the wadis, extended periods of 
drought, etc.
144 Third National Communication under the UNFCCC (2016), p. 131. 
145 Egypt’s National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction (2011), pp. 84-87. 
146 Third National Communication under the UNFCCC (2016), pp. 128-140.  
148 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Environmental and social category 
  The proposed project should be classified Category B under IFAD’s SECAP, as a small-scale, 
16.
rural development project with no potentially significant adverse social or environmental impacts. Any 
adverse project impacts would be minor and site-specific in nature and could readily be remedied by 
appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. Moreover, the potential social and 
environmental benefits of the project’s interventions, in terms of alleviating poverty and enhancing 
food security, conserving fragile natural resources and building resilience to climate change impacts in 
project areas more than outweigh any potential adverse impacts resulting from them. These benefits 
would be directly derived from the project’s investments in irrigation supply wells, water harvesting 
and wadi management infrastructure, promotion of rangeland restoration and good agricultural 
practices, support for improved nutrition for families and alternative livelihoods for women, and 
expanded access to social services for households in the project areas.  
  The project would incorporate environmental and social review procedures in order to identify 
17.
and address any potentially adverse, site-specific impacts resulting from project infrastructure 
investments, e.g. feeder roads in remote areas, check dams in wadis, irrigation supply wells in El 
Moghra, schools, health units, etc. These review procedures will ensure that project interventions 
comply with IFAD’s Natural Resources Management, Climate Change and Land Policies and 
relevant Guidance Statements (as cited above), as well as with the relevant laws and policies of the 
Government of Egypt. To that end, the project would be reviewed by the Ministry of Environment’s 
Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency pursuant to its Guidelines of Principles and Procedures for 
Environmental Impact Assessment under Environment Law No. 4 of 1994. 
Climate risk category 
  The proposed project’s Climate Risk Classification is Moderate according to IFAD’s SECAP 
18.
climate risk classifications. The project’s interventions would not be expected to increase the 
vulnerability of target populations and resources to climate hazards. On the contrary, the project would 
actually strengthen resilience to climate change impacts in the project areas. Because of the desert 
and oasis locations of its project areas, the project recognizes that its interventions are vulnerable to 
climate change impacts and climate-related hazards. Climate trends in recent decades and future 
climate scenarios for the Matrouh Governorate indicate the vulnerability of the project’s wadi 
management, horticulture and rangeland activities to climate hazards (flash floods in the wadis, 
extended periods of drought). Expected decreases in precipitation and shortening of growing seasons 
in the rainfed areas of Matrouh would threaten the cultivation of both tree crops and cereals, and 
increases in temperature in the Siwa oasis would jeopardize date palm production. Many of the 
project’s interventions already represent climate adaptation measures, e.g. water harvesting and wadi 
water and soil retention infrastructure, restoration and management of rangelands with native fodder 
species, promotion of good agricultural practices and research on drought-resistant and salt-tolerant 
varieties for crop production. The project would also investigate incorporation of additional actions, 
consistent with measures identified in Egypt’s National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change 
(2011) and its Third National Communication under the UNFCCC (2016). 
Recommended features of project design and implementation 
Mitigation measures 
  Since the specific location, design and other characteristics of project interventions remain to 
19.
be determined, the project would establish an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to review, on a case-by-case basis, site-specific project interventions with any potential 
adverse social or environmental impacts (including impacts on physical cultural resources). This 
review would employ a standard checklist to identify potential impacts or climate risks and 
recommend appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures to address such impacts. Not all of 
the project’s activities would have to undergo this ESMF review process. It is aimed at those project 
interventions, or sub-projects, involving construction of rural roads, water management infrastructure 
149 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
and other civil works (latrines, health units, schools). The table below identifies the sub-projects that 
are the primary targets of the ESMF review process. 
for  Agriculture  and 
Project Component/Sub-
component 
1. Climate Resilient Livelihoods 
-  Water 
Watershed Management 
- Enhancing Connectivity  
- 
Livestock 
Development 
2. 
Investments 
- Water for Health 
-  Women’s  Empowerment 
Nutritional Change 
- Social Infrastructure 
Integrated 
and  Rangeland 
Nutrition 
for 
Sub-projects subject to ESMF Review 
Cisterns, 
reservoirs,  check  dams  and  other 
water/silt retention structures; irrigation supply wells 
Rural roads 
Aquaculture systems 
Cisterns, reservoirs, Roman cisterns* 
Pigeon towers* 
Latrines, health units, schools 
* Given the small scale and minimal impact of these sub-projects, the project would determine whether they require ESMF 
review.  
  As noted above, the potential adverse impacts and risks of these sub-projects are expected to 
20.
be minor and site-specific in nature and thus readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions 
and/or mitigation measures. Some of the potential adverse impacts and corresponding measures are 
identified in the table in Annex A of this Review Note and in relevant SECAP Guidance Statements. 
The ESMF would also specify public disclosure requirements for project activities and sub-projects 
and establish (or build on existing) local grievance mechanisms for addressing, in a timely and fair 
manner, potential conflicts/concerns raised by project-affected people. 
Multi-benefit approaches 
  The potential project has been designed to take advantage of multi-benefit approaches. All of 
21.
the activities of the first component, whether making investments in water harvesting, wadi 
development and rural roads or providing support for livestock and rangeland development and crop 
production, are intended to produce social benefits by increasing farm incomes and improving food 
security, while at the same time providing significant environmental benefits in terms of expanded 
ecosystem services resulting from wadi development and rangeland management, water resources 
conservation and management, and good agricultural practices (including water-use efficiency and 
integrated pest and crop management) used in crop production. Among the technological innovations 
the project will provide is the introduction of a range of solar and energy-saving technologies in the 
new lands of El Moghra.147 
Incentives for good practices 
  The potential project has built in a number of incentives to promote good practices among 
22.
smallholder farmers in the project areas. The investments in water harvesting infrastructure and wadi 
development would provide strong incentives for the smallholders to engage in sustainable tree and 
horticultural crop production on the improved lands; increased fodder crop production as a result of 
these investments would also relieve pressure on already degraded rangelands and support better 
management of these lands for livestock grazing purposes. In addition, the project would seek to 
promote innovative ideas for communal rangeland management, such as establishing a 
compensation fund for smallholders participating in communal rangeland management efforts or 
leveraging project investments as incentives for proper management. 
147 This may permit the use of renewable energy for pumping irrigation water (the project may benefit from an AfDB 
feasibility study for this purpose). 
150 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Participatory processes 
  The potential project would build on the well-established participatory processes used along the 
23.
Mediterranean coast of Matrouh, by the World Bank MRMP and other projects, to help the regional 
PMU make decisions with respect to project interventions. Under these processes, communities or 
tribal areas in the wadis assumed responsibility for planning managing, implementing, and evaluating 
their activities. Local communities analyzed their problems, developed an annual plan to manage 
efforts to address them, performed monitoring and evaluation, and prepared a community action plan 
and budget. The communities elected a representative to serve as the point of contact between the 
community and the project. This representative participated in the decision-making with respect to the 
type and location of project interventions or activities and ensured the approval and commitment of 
the wider community in these decisions. These processes have proven successful in the past in 
making decisions with respect to investments in water harvesting infrastructure and wadi development 
and they would be critical to development and implementation of the community rangeland 
management plans and village land use plans that would be proposed under the project. Finally, these 
participatory processes would be key to avoiding potential conflicts in participating communities over 
allocation of resources, for example, conflicts over land ownership, between upstream/downstream 
water users in the wadis, over communal rangelands, etc. 
Analysis of Alternatives 
  The “no action” alternative to the proposed project would leave the coastal communities and the 
24.
oasis of Siwa with no assistance in facing their current environmental and social challenges, i.e. the 
scarcity of water resources along the rainfed coast and the waterlogging and increasing salinity of 
groundwater in Siwa, the continuing degradation of rangelands in the coastal areas and the lack of 
access to basic social services in many of the communities. It would leave the newly reclaimed lands 
in El Moghra without assistance in converting to agricultural production. With the impacts of climate 
change likely to increase these challenges in the coming years, this alternative was ruled out. Another 
alternative considered would have put the proposed project areas in two separate Egyptian 
governorates, Matrouh Governorate in the north and New Valley Governorate in the south. After the 
detailed design mission visited both governorates in May 2017, it recommended focusing the project 
on Matrouh Governorate, where it could effectively utilize the full IFAD allocation and also include an 
additional area of new lands made available as part of the Government’s 1.5 million feddans project 
for youth and smallholders. The GOE accepted the mission’s recommendation, which resulted in the 
present project. 
Institutional analysis 
Institutional framework 
  The Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) would be the lead agency 
25.
responsible for project management. The overall responsibility for implementation of the project on the 
ground would be assumed by a Project Management Unit (PMU), which would be established in Cairo 
at the MALR. It would be staffed with a dedicated project director and financial, procurement, M&E 
and poverty targeting and gender specialists. The Central PMU in Cairo would supervise DRC in 
implementation of project activities in Matrouh on the old lands and be directly involved in the 
implementation of the newly reclaimed lands in El Moghra in coordination with Egyptian Countryside 
Development Corporation (ECDC). In the project areas, the project activities for the rain-fed areas of 
coastal Matrouh would be implemented by the Sustainable Development Centre for Matrouh (SDCM) 
of the DRC, which has previous experience managing the World Bank project in the area. The project 
would use the existing four Extension and Support Units of DRC at the district level and would 
establish an additional unit in Daba. These units would be provided operational support for 
implementation of project activities. The DRC’s capacity to implement the project, procure and 
manage the financial resources, monitor and engage with women would be enhanced through 
technical assistance and field support. An NGO would be recruited to implement the activities targeted 
at women. An environmental specialist for the project, who would perform the ESMF reviews and 
151 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
ensure compliance with IFAD and Egyptian environmental policies, would either be designated from 
DRC staff in Matrouh or recruited for this purpose by the DRC. Similarly, a social specialist would be 
designated (in coordination with the poverty and gender specialists) to work closely with the 
environmental specialist in overseeing implementation of the ESMF and compliance with relevant 
social policies.  
  The programme for the new lands in El Moghra would be coordinated by the central PMU, 
26.
which would work in close collaboration with ECDC. The PMU would provide technical resources and 
training for the youth and smallholder farmers on the new lands and would also provide support for 
implementation of the technical packages. Coordination with the local line agencies of Agriculture, 
Livestock, Health and Education, Roads and Bridges, and Environment would be coordinated by the 
PMU. ECDC’s role would be simply as a facilitator. It would acquire legal land titles and allocate the 
land to investors, youth and small groups through a public ballot of all applicants who meet the 
required criteria. ECDC would ensure clear land title and provision of water and other facilities. ECDC 
has already allocated the land to 252 youth and small groups in El Moghra and provided wells for 
irrigation water. 
Capacity building 
  The proposed project would incorporate capacity building, training and study tours in each of 
27.
the sub-components in order to ensure adequate capacity in DRC staff and among local beneficiaries 
to undertake the activities included in the project. An overview of this capacity building as it relates to 
social and environmental issues follows: 
Component 1: Climate Resilient Livelihoods 
 
Water for Agriculture and Watershed Management. This sub-component would include 
capacity building on the latest climate-smart techniques for water harvesting and storage and 
on sustainable management approaches to watershed development, including watershed 
management plans, erosion prevention practices, water-user agreements (among upstream-
downstream users) and techniques for improving water-use efficiency in the watersheds.  
Enhancing Connectivity. This subcomponent would include capacity building required to 
 
ensure that the rural road construction would maximize the use of climate-smart location, 
design and construction measures, minimize land owner conflicts and avoid any physical or 
economic displacement.  
 
Livestock and Rangeland Development. This subcomponent would include capacity 
building on development of community rangeland management plans, climate-smart techniques 
for restoring the regenerative capacity of rangelands, good practices for managing the size of 
herds grazing on restored rangelands (taking into consideration the carrying capacity of the 
rangeland), and participatory land-use planning methodologies for developing village land-use 
management plans. 
 
Crop Production. This sub-component would include capacity building on orchard 
management (including soil and water management, integrated pest and plant management, 
pruning and harvesting), soil and water monitoring and leaf analysis, and the best techniques 
for performing soil and water monitoring with new technologies and laboratory equipment. 
Component 2: Integrated Nutrition Investments 
Water for Health. This sub-component would include capacity building for women on the 
 
construction, management and maintenance of cisterns, reservoirs and Roman cisterns used 
for domestic water purposes. 
 
Women’s Empowerment for Nutritional Change. This sub-component would include 
capacity building for women on family nutrition, basic literacy and various livelihoods (including 
pigeons, poultry, goats and handicrafts). 
152 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Social Infrastructure. This sub-component would include capacity building for women on 
 
maintenance of latrines and personal hygiene and health, and training for young men on 
construction of cisterns and reservoirs, pruning of olives, date palms and figs and watershed 
management and rangeland development. It will also include training for properly managing 
project interventions with waste management implications, such as aquaculture and health 
units. 
  Part of the capacity building for the regional PMU would be the designation (or recruitment) and 
28.
training of environmental, social and climate change specialists, based in Matrouh, who would 
oversee implementation of the project’s ESMF. The ESMF would ensure that project interventions, 
particularly the water harvesting infrastructure and other civil works (roads, schools, health units and 
latrines), would comply with IFAD’s SECAP and Guidance Statements, as well as Egyptian laws and 
policies. The training provided for the environmental, social and climate change specialists would be 
targeted at the specific project impacts and risks identified in Annex A below and in the ESMF. It would 
also involve ensuring the awareness and effective application of the full range of IFAD’s 
environmental and social safeguards, as set out in relevant IFAD strategies/policies, SECAP 
requirements and Guidance Statements (agrochemicals, fisheries and aquaculture, livestock and 
range resources, water, small dams, physical cultural resources and rural roads).  
29.
  The DRC already has proven capacity in development and management of climate resilient 
technologies. Under the project, DRC will also be building their capacity in El Moghra and will develop 
sustainable climate-resilient technologies for the youth groups there.  
Additional funding 
30.
  The proposed project has made no plans to obtain additional funding at this point.  
Monitoring and Evaluation 
  As described in Appendix 6: M&E, Planning and Learning and Knowledge Management, 
31.
the proposed project’s monitoring and evaluation system and processes would be established and 
managed in accordance with established IFAD procedures by the project team with support from 
IFAD. The Logical Framework provides indicators for implementation along with their corresponding 
means of verification. These would form the basis on which the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
system would be built, which could also include a more comprehensive list of indicators. With regard 
to the indicators, draft indicators are already included in the design report and Logical Framework; the 
final indicators would be defined in the start-up workshop using the Logical Framework and the 
indicators highlighted in Attachment 1 to Appendix 6 as the starting point. 
32.
In terms of M&E system implementation, the proposed project is expected to establish a PMU, 
based in MALR, in Cairo, with overall responsibility for project coordination, including M&E. Under the 
supervision of the central PMU, a regional PMU would be established in the DRC in Matrouh, while 
the central PMU would directly implement activities, including M&E, for the new lands in Moghra and 
Siwa. The DRC in Matrouh already has a well-functioning M&E system at the output level, including 
the use of a Geographic Information System (GIS), providing clear quantitative measurement of 
outputs produced by previous projects in the area. 
  Attachment 1: Key Outcome and Impact Sheet to Appendix 6 includes a number of draft 
33.
indicators for some of the social and environmental outcomes/impacts of project interventions (e.g. 
percentage of households reporting: increased asset ownership, increased resilience to climate 
change, improved access to water, improved access to schools, health units, markets). It also 
includes indicators for the project’s adaptation measures for enhancing climate resilience, such as 
improved land management: hectares under climate resilient practices, households reporting adoption 
of climate-smart technologies, increased availability of water for small-holder agriculture, percentage 
of households reporting new technologies/inputs. As noted above, these draft indicators represent a 
starting point for M&E, to which the project may wish to add specific indicators with respect to climate 
153 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
resilience in livestock and crop production, e.g. number of households with improved breeds of sheep, 
number of hectares of more climate-tolerant varieties of cereals. 
In addition to the above M&E system, the proposed project would introduce water/soil quality 
34.
and climate monitoring in the DRC in Matrouh. The DRC does not currently have the capability to 
perform basic water quality monitoring, even for the water for domestic use to be made available to 
households under the project. Such monitoring is critical in order to ensure the quality of drinking 
water. Nor does the DRC have the capability to perform soil quality monitoring necessary for 
determining the fertility, organic content, salinity, etc. of the agricultural soils along the Mediterranean 
coast. In order to introduce this monitoring, the project would provide mobile water quality monitoring 
equipment for determining drinking water quality and the necessary laboratory equipment to DRC’s 
laboratory to perform additional water quality and soil monitoring. Finally, the DRC does not currently 
have the capability to perform basic climate monitoring along the coastal area or in Siwa nor is it able 
to obtain reliable data from other sources. These data would allow the DRC to analyze trends in 
climate conditions (precipitation, temperature) and provide such climate information to local farmers 
and shepherds. To correct this situation, the project would provide simple climate monitoring stations, 
one for each of the coastal districts, Siwa and El Moghra, to gather climate data over the life of the 
project. 
Further information required to complete screening, if any 
35.
  No additional information is required to complete screening. 
Budgetary resources and schedule 
36.
  The detailed design mission produced an indicative budget for the proposed project, which 
included a line for the recruitment and training of an environmental specialist in the regional PMU for 
the life of the project and an allocation for purchasing laboratory equipment for the DRC laboratory 
(mobile water quality monitoring equipment, water/soil monitoring equipment for the fixed laboratory 
and basic climate indicator monitoring equipment for six-eight stations in the project areas). The final 
budget for these items will be determined during the final design mission in July 2017. 
Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public etc. 
  The IFAD team, during its May and July 2017 design missions in Egypt, met with the full range 
37.
of proposed project stakeholders, including GOE officials, development partners, non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) and potential beneficiaries of the proposed project in the various project areas.  
38.
In Cairo members of the team met with officials of the Ministry of Agriculture and Land 
Reclamation, Dr. Hesham Allam, Supervisor of Foreign Agricultural Relations, and the Ministry of 
International Cooperation, Eng. Khaled Rashad, both before and after the mission, to discuss the 
objectives of the mission and report on its findings and recommendations. While in the field visiting 
the various proposed project sites in Matrouh and New Valley Governorates, the team was 
accompanied by the Dr. Naiim Moselhy, President of the Desert Research Center, and his deputy, Dr. 
Abdallah Zaghloul, Vice President for Research Projects and Stations. In Matrouh the IFAD team 
environmental specialist met with various environmental and climate change officers, Drs. Ashraf El 
Sadek, Abdalsamad Aldabaa, and Ahmed Imam, all of whom are based in the DRC’s Matrouh office, 
and in Siwa with Dr. Atef Adel Rady Salama, Director of the Siwa Station.  
In Matrouh Governorate, the IFAD team visited various proposed sites along the Mediterranean 
39.
coast in the districts of Ras El Hekma (Wadi Beharey, Wadi El Hafian), Marsa Matrouh, El Negella 
and Sidi Barrani (Wadi Sakher). In each of these districts the team met in tent consultations with 30 to 
50 local farmers/herders, men and women) and their tribal leaders. The consultations were facilitated 
by the DRC team and the IFAD team broke up into small groups to discuss the various issues the 
locals raised and the team wanted to hear from them on. In most cases, the local communities were 
well prepared for the IFAD visit and presented a list of their needs, from water harvesting/wadi 
management support to assistance with water logging/drainage problems, support for livestock and 
154 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
crop production to schools and health units. Many of these proposals could be accommodated in the 
proposed project. In New Valley Governorate, local officials and the DRC organized similar site visits 
with local farmers. 
40.
In El Moghra, the team met with …
155 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Annex A 
Overview of PRIDE Impacts and Risks 
Project 
Components, 
Sub-components 
Climate 
1. 
Resilient 
Livelihoods 
(i) Water for 
Agriculture and 
Watershed 
Management 
Construction of 
cisterns and 
reservoirs for 
harvesting water 
for crops, 
construction/ 
rehabilitation of 
check dams for 
development of 
wadis; conversion 
of grazing land for 
agriculture, drilling 
wells for irrigation 
(El Moghra) 
(ii) Enhancing 
Connectivity 
Rural roads in 
remote areas of 
Matrouh 
Beneficial impacts 
Adverse 
impacts 
Climate and 
Other Risks 
Measures for 
Prevention, 
Mitigation 
Improved 
management of 
water for agriculture 
and livestock, 
reduction of erosion 
and soil 
degradation, 
increased farm 
incomes and food 
security; expansion 
of agricultural lands, 
improved supply of 
water for irrigation 
purposes 
Dam 
construction-
related 
impacts, 
construction 
wastes, 
reduced water 
for downstream 
users; loss of 
Bedouin 
grazing lands, 
excessive 
withdrawal of 
groundwater 
Unknown water 
quality, 
downstream 
water user 
conflicts, dam 
washout in 
extreme climate 
event (flash 
flood); 
desertification, 
reduction of 
water table 
Dam construction 
due diligence, 
water quality 
monitoring, water 
user agreements, 
ensure climate 
event planning; 
agreements with 
Bedouin herders, 
regulation of 
withdrawals, 
monitoring of water 
table 
Increased access to 
markets and social 
services (education, 
health); increased 
farm incomes, food 
security and welfare 
Road 
construction-
related social 
and 
environmental 
impacts, soil 
erosion 
Landowner 
conflicts, 
physical 
resettlement, 
economic 
displacement, 
road damage in 
extreme climate 
event (heavy 
rainfall) 
Negotiate 
landowner 
agreements, avoid 
any resettlement or 
displacement 
issues, ensure 
climate event 
planning 
156 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
(iii) Livestock and 
Rangeland 
Development 
Community 
rangeland 
management 
planning, 
incentives for 
management, 
breed 
improvement, 
mobile veterinary 
services, 
rangeland 
management 
training, support 
for aquaculture in 
El Moghra 
(iv) Crop 
Production 
DRC nursery 
support, farmer 
training on soil, 
water and pest 
management, 
support for farmer 
cooperatives, 
applied research 
for desert crop 
varieties, water 
and soil 
monitoring, leaf 
analysis 
2. Integrated 
Nutrition 
Investments 
(i) Water for Health 
Construction of 
cisterns and 
reservoirs, 
rehabilitation of 
Roman cisterns for 
domestic water 
supply 
Overgrazing on 
newly restored 
rangelands, loss 
of fodder crops, 
rangelands and 
aquaculture in 
extreme climate 
event (drought) 
Increased fodder 
produced by 
rangelands and 
fodder crops for 
livestock, improved 
animal health, 
improved rangeland 
and aquaculture 
management, 
increased farm 
incomes and food 
security 
Increased herd 
size beyond 
carrying 
capacity for 
restored 
grazing land 
and fodder 
crops, 
increased 
demand for 
water, water 
pollution from 
aquaculture 
Increased crop 
production, better 
agricultural 
practices, effective 
cooperatives, 
improved drought-
resistant/salt-
tolerant species and 
varieties, improved 
monitoring capacity, 
increased farm 
incomes and food 
security, 
Increased 
agricultural 
expansion onto 
rangelands, 
increased 
demand for 
irrigation water, 
increased soil 
salinity, 
reduction in 
yields 
Inappropriate 
cropping for 
water/soil 
conditions, loss 
of trees due to 
increased soil 
salinity, loss of 
arable land, loss 
of agricultural 
production in 
extreme climate 
event (drought) 
Participatory 
rangeland 
management 
plans, sustainable 
community 
management of 
rested rangelands, 
aquaculture 
pollution 
prevention, 
rangeland 
management 
training, ensure 
climate event 
planning (early 
warning system) 
Limitations on 
agricultural 
expansion, training 
on appropriate 
cropping, ensure 
climate event 
planning (early 
warning system) 
Increased water 
supply for domestic 
purposes, improved 
health, hygiene and 
welfare of women 
and children 
Unknown water 
quality, health 
risks, improper 
maintenance 
Water quality 
monitoring, proper 
maintenance 
training for 
domestic water 
supply  
157 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Contamination 
of domestic 
water supply by 
animal 
drippings/ 
waste 
Increased 
demand for 
water for 
domestic plants 
and animals, 
loss domestic 
plants and 
animals in 
extreme climate 
event (drought) 
Training in 
managing 
domestic plants 
and animals, 
particularly around 
domestic water 
supply; ensure 
climate event 
planning (early 
warning system) 
Construction-
related social 
and 
environmental 
impacts, 
construction 
wastes 
Contamination 
of surface or 
groundwater 
sources of 
domestic water 
supply 
Due diligence in 
location, design 
and construction of 
latrines, health 
units and schools 
(ii) Women’s 
Empowerment for 
Nutritional Change 
Packages for 
improving nutrition 
(awareness 
raising, training, 
planting vegetable 
gardens and 
Moringa trees) and 
diversifying 
livelihoods for 
women (keeping 
pigeons, poultry 
and goats, making 
handicrafts)  
(iii) Social 
Infrastructure 
Construction of 
latrines, health 
units (fixed and 
mobile) and 
schools for women 
and girls 
Youth employment 
training for young 
men 
Increased 
awareness of and 
access to improved 
nutrition and health 
among women, 
increased diversity 
of livelihoods for 
women, improved 
incomes and food 
security, improved 
soil fertility from 
pigeon, poultry and 
goat 
droppings/waste, 
reduction in hunting 
of migratory birds  
Improved personal 
hygiene, expanded 
health services, 
increased 
educational 
opportunities for 
women and girls; 
improved chances 
for increasing farm 
incomes and food 
security  
Improved 
employment 
opportunities for 
young men, 
increased incomes 
and food security 
158 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Annex 2: IFAD’s targeting policy - checklist for design 
Updated January 2013 
1. Does the main target group - those expected to 
benefit most- correspond to IFAD’s target group 
as defined by the Targeting Policy (poorer 
households and food insecure)? 
2. Have target sub-groups been identified and 
described according to their different socio-
economic characteristics, assets and livelihoods - 
with attention to gender and youth differences? 
(matrix on target group characteristics 
completed?) 
3. Is evidence provided of interest in and likely 
uptake of the proposed activities by the identified 
target sub-groups? What is the evidence? (matrix 
on analysis of project components and activities 
by principal beneficiary groups completed?) 
4. Does the design document describe a feasible 
and operational targeting strategy in line with the 
Targeting Policy, involving some or all of the 
following measures and methods: 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on poverty data 
or proxy indicators to identify, for area-based 
projects or programmes, geographic areas (and 
within these, communities) with high 
concentrations of poor people 
4.2 Direct targeting - when services or resources 
are to be channelled to specific individuals or 
households 
4.3 Self targeting – when goods and services 
respond to the priority needs, resource 
endowments and livelihood strategies of target 
groups 
4.4 Empowering measures - including information 
and communication, focused capacity- and 
confidence-building measures, organisational 
support, in order to empower and encourage the 
more active participation and inclusion in planning 
and decision making of people who traditionally 
have less voice and power 
4.5 Enabling measures –to strengthen 
stakeholders’ and partners’ attitude and 
commitment to poverty targeting, gender equality 
and women’s empowerment, including policy 
dialogue, awareness-raising and capacity-building 
4.6 Attention to procedural measures - that could 
militate against participation by the intended target 
groups 
Design 
YES. The main target group for MNVRIDP is poor 
women and men living in scattered settlements in ARID 
areas and in NEWLY Reclaimed lands 
yes – Target group characteristics have been described 
in APPENDIX 2 with attention to differences in Gender 
and Youth 
YES - evidence of interest is based on consultations with 
the target group during field visits. details of activities for 
project beneficiaries in Annex 2. 
PRIDE would be implemented in six districts (marakiz) of 
Matrouh Governorate: Marsa Matrouh, El Negila, El 
Barrani, El Saloum, El Dabaa and Siwa. Only two of 
these districts, Marsa Matrouh and Dabaa, have urban 
centres and these urban areas would be excluded. The 
forty villages are all arid, rain-fed areas.  
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
159 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
yes 
yes 
4.7 Operational measures - appropriate 
project/programme management arrangements, 
staffing, selection of implementation partners and 
service providers  
5. Monitoring targeting performance. Does the 
design document specify that targeting 
performance will be monitored using participatory 
M&E, and also be assessed at mid-term review? 
Does the M&E framework allow for the 
collection/analysis of sex-disaggregated data and 
are there gender-sensitive indicators against 
which to monitor/evaluate outputs, outcomes and 
impacts? 
160 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Annex 3: IFAD's key features of gender-sensitive design and implementation 
Updated January2013 
1. The project design report contains – and 
project implementation is based on - gender-
disaggregated poverty data and an analysis of 
gender differences in the activities or sectors 
concerned, as well as an analysis of each project 
activity from the gender perspective to address 
any unintentional barriers to women’s 
participation.  
2. The project design report articulates – or the 
project implements – actions with aim to: 
Expand women’s economic empowerment 
through access to and control over productive 
and household assets; 
Strengthen women’s decision-making role in the 
household and community, and their 
representation in membership and leadership of 
local institutions;  
Design  
Yes - the project would be sensitive to 
arrangements required to enable women to 
participate – restrictive gender norms mean that 
women’s mobility is restricted to the household 
clusters they live in – as such project 
interventions aim to deliver awareness raising, 
literacy at the doorstep and improve the 
conditions under which women live by providing 
water and sanitation facilities and livelihood 
packages 
As the project is working in an area where the 
highly restrictive gender norms severely limit 
women’s engagement in productive employment, 
the project is focusing first on increasing women’s 
access to basic human rights – water, sanitation, 
literacy, nutrition and health. In some pockets, 
such as Siwa Oasis, there is a possibility of 
increasing women’s nutritional status and 
economic empowerment through supporting 
crafts that have a market. The project would have 
some impact on women’s economic 
empowerment through the livelihood packages 
which would result in women owning pigeons, 
chickens and goats – even if the income 
generated would be very limited. Similarly, even 
the giving of cisterns and sanitation facilities in 
women’s name in such circumstances does make 
women feel empowered ( as shared during field 
visits) 
The provision of livelihood packages and where 
possible support for crafts would possibly have 
some impact on decision-making at the 
household level. The norms are too restrictive to 
allow for community level decision-making. 
However, the project would nominate women 
leaders in household clusters to affirm women’s 
leadership role in a culturally acceptable form.  
161 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Achieve a reduced workload and an equitable 
workload balance between women and men.  
Yes. Women are responsible for fetching water 
from nearby sources and women in women-
headed households are responsible for fetching 
water even from distant sources. increased 
supply of water at the homestead would reduce 
their burden. It is also envisioned that improved 
diets through the provision of nutrition packages, 
the Moringa tree and the BCC campaign will 
reduce disease and save women’s time as they 
are the primary care-givers. 
3. The project design report includes one 
paragraph in the targeting section that explains 
what the project will deliver from a gender 
perspective. 
4. The project design report describes the key 
elements for operationalizing the gender strategy, 
with respect to the relevant project components. 
5. The design document describes - and the 
project implements - operational measures to 
ensure gender- equitable participation in, and 
benefit from, project activities. These will 
generally include: 
Allocating adequate human and financial 
resources to implement the gender strategy 
5.2 Ensuring and supporting women’s active 
participation in project-related decision-making 
bodies and committees 
5.3 Ensuring that project/programme 
management arrangements (composition of the 
project management unit/programme 
coordination unit, project terms of reference for 
staff and implementing partners, etc.) reflect 
attention to gender equality and women’s 
empowerment concerns 
5.4 Ensuring direct project/programme outreach 
to women (for example through appropriate 
numbers and qualification of field staff), 
especially where women’s mobility is limited 
5.5 Identifying opportunities to support strategic 
partnerships with government and others 
development organizations for networking and 
policy dialogue 
6. The project’s logical framework, M&E, MIS and 
learning systems specify in design – and project 
M&E unit collects, analyses and interprets sex- 
and age-disaggregated performance and impact 
data, including specific indicators on gender 
equality and women’s empowerment.  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
162 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Annex 4 
Environmental and Social Management Framework for PRIDE 
Annotated Outline 
Executive Summary – a concise summary of the ESMF, its requirements and processes  
1 Introduction – description of the project, objectives of the ESMF and methodology for its 
preparation 
1.1 Background – overview of origins and need for project, previous projects in project areas 
1.2 Rationale and Objectives of ESMF – need for ESMF, objectives of ESMF 
1.3 Methodology for Preparation of ESMF – approach to preparation of ESMF, collaboration with GOE  
1.4 Stakeholder Consultations – consultations during project preparation, consultations on ESMF  
1.5 Disclosure of ESMF – process for public disclosure of ESMF  
2 Project Description  
2.1 Project Areas – description of three project areas: Matrouh coastal area, Siwa and El Moghra 
oases  
2.2 Project Objectives – description of project objectives set out in design report 
2.3 Project Components – description of project components, sub-components and activities 
3 Policy, Legal and Institutional Framework for Environmental Management in Egypt  
3.1 Policies and Strategies – description of relevant environmental and social policy documents  
3.2 Legal Framework – description of Environment Law and other relevant legislation 
3.3 Institutional Framework – description of Ministries of Agriculture and Environment, EEAA 
3.4 IFAD Safeguard Polices – description of SECAP, NRM and climate change policies 
3.5 Differences between IFAD and GOE Policy Requirements – gap analysis of IFAD and GOE 
requirements 
3.6 International Treaties and Conventions – description of relevant environmental treaties and 
conventions 
4 Environmental and Social Setting – overview of environmental and socio-economic issues 
4.1 Matrouh Coastal Region – description of water management and social conditions in coastal area  
4.2 Siwa Oasis – description of irrigation water management and social conditions in oasis 
163 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
4.3 El Moghra Oasis – description of water management in newly reclaimed lands and social 
conditions in new communities of oasis 
5 Stakeholder Consultations  
5.1 Background and Rationale – description of objectives and benefits of stakeholder consultations, 
number, location and participation in consultations  
5.2 Issues Discussed during Consultations – description of issues raised by various stakeholders 
5.3 Perceived Impacts of the Project – description of positive and negative impacts discussed, other 
issues raised 
5.4 Summary of Outcomes of Consultations – description of outcomes achieved as a result of 
consultations, changes/improvements made to planned project activities  
6 Potential Environmental, Social and Climate-Related Impacts and their Mitigation  
6.1 Components with Potential Environmental and Social Consequences – description of project 
components, sub-components and activities with potential impacts, procedures for screening and 
review of sub-projects and activities with potential adverse impacts (using checklists by type of sub-
project or activity) 
6.2 Identification of Preventive Actions and Mitigation Measures – description of appropriate actions 
and measures to prevent and/or mitigate potential adverse impacts (using table of typical 
actions/measures to consider by type of sub-project or activity) 
6.3 Preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) – description of preparation 
of site-specific ESMP (including timeline and budget for actions to be taken) to ensure implementation 
of actions/measures at project site  
6.4 Role of Project Management Unit (PMU) in ESMF Process – description of responsibility of PMU 
staff in overseeing ESMF process, from screening and reviewing sub-projects, identifying appropriate 
actions/measures to be taken, inspecting site to ensure implementation of actions/measures  
7 Climate Risk Assessment  
7.1 Introduction – description of purpose and process for IFAD’s climate risk assessment requirement 
7.2 Climate Risk Analysis – description of key considerations, risk classification and analysis 
7.3 Climate Risk Resilience Measures – description of risk resilience measures incorporated into 
project design and implementation  
8 Environmental and Social Management Framework Procedures 
8.1 Overview – overview of the ESMF procedures for ensuring risk prevention/mitigation 
8.2 ESMF Process – description of the process for screening and reviewing project activities, 
identifying appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures, and ensuring effective 
implementation  
164 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
8.3 Disclosure of ESMPs – description of the requirements for disclosure of the ESMPs prepared for 
sub-projects and activities  
8.4 Grievance Redress Mechanisms – description of mechanism(s) to allow affected stakeholders to 
express grievances for project activities  
8.5 Environmental and Social Monitoring – description of routine monitoring to be performed based on 
environmental and social indicators, compliance with ESMP requirements  
8.6 Quarterly and Annual Reviews – description of periodic reviews of ESMF implementation, 
monitoring results, etc.  
8.7 Reporting – description of periodic reporting on results of quarterly and/or annual reviews and 
environmental and social monitoring  
8.8 Summary of ESMF Processes and Responsibilities – overview of roles and responsibilities, ESMF 
processes, and expected outputs and outcomes from ESMF implementation  
9 Capacity Building  
9.1 Existing Capacity – description of needs assessment of management/technical capacity to 
implement the ESMF  
9.2 Training Topics – description of training needs identified in the needs assessment 
9.3 Target Audience – description of intended audience for training in PMU, local communities, other 
stakeholders  
9.4 Training Approach – description of approach to be taken in providing training to the intended 
audience 
9.5 Technical Assistance – description of any technical assistance needed in providing the ESMF 
training 
9.6 ESMF Implementation Budget – estimate (broken down by activity) of the budget necessary for 
effective implementation of the ESMF  
Tables (indicative examples) 
Table on Environmental Policies and Laws applicable to PRIDE  
Table on EEAA EIA Guidelines of Relevance to PRIDE  
Table on Comparison of MOE and IFAD Requirements  
Table on International Environmental Treaties and Conventions  
Table on Community Consultations  
Table on Typical Environmental and Social Impacts of Project Activities 
Table on Typical Preventive Actions and/or Mitigation Measures for Adverse Impacts  
Table on Screening Checklist  
Table on Climate Risk Screening  
165 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Table on Typical Performance Monitoring Indicators  
Table on Typical Results Monitoring Parameters  
Table on ESMF Processes and Responsibilities  
Table on ESMF Implementation Budget (USD)  
Annexes (indicative examples) 
Annex for References  
Annex for Screening Checklists  
Annex for Guidelines for a Pesticide Management  
Annex for Guidelines for Small Dam Safety  
Annex for List of Persons Consulted  
Annex for Minutes of Community Consultations 
166 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Annex 6: Mainstreaming Nutrition  
Introduction 
1.
Background: Egypt is IFAD’s largest recipient of financial assistance in the Near East and 
North Africa and was one of the first countries to receive IFAD financing (IFAD, 2017). PRIDE aims at 
supporting agriculture and poverty reduction, overcoming poverty and achieve food and nutrition 
security through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods of poor rural households to the 
harsh climate conditions in the Matrouh Governorate. The component 2 of this project proposed 
integrated nutrition sensitive investment in the governorate through promotion of the equality and 
empowerment of women and providing a comprehensive package which includes access to domestic 
water and sanitation; access to basic social services (such as health, education); and income 
generating opportunities for women. 
Food and Nutrition situation: With a population size of about 95 million, Egyptian agriculture 
2.
provides livelihoods for 55 percent of the population and directly employs about 30 percent of the 
labour force (IFAD, 2017). Since the year 2011, right after the revolution, poverty increased by nearly 
40 percent with the Upper Egypt having the highest poverty rate, at 51.5 percent of the population. 
Most of the rural poor people live in Upper Egypt, where there are higher rates of illiteracy and infant 
mortality, less access to safe water and sanitation and more underweight children. The World Food 
Program (2016) estimated that close to 14 million Egyptians suffered from food insecurity in recent 
years. The current high rate of malnutrition among both mothers and children is mainly attributed to 
inability to have adequate and nutritious food due to rising poverty.  
3.
Malnutrition among children in Egypt is manifested in different forms, including undernutrition, 
micronutrient deficiencies, overweight and obesity. According to UNICEF (2014), Egypt is one of the 
20 countries in the world with the highest number of children suffering from chronic malnutrition or 
stunting (manifested by being too short for their age).The rate of stunting among children under five 
years of age is above the World Health Organization (WHO) “high” range of 30-39. Over half of 
children under five were estimated to suffer from anaemia, classified as a “severe public health 
problem” by the WHO. The UNICEF fact sheet for Egypt (2016) reported that 76 percent of children 
under the age of 2 are not being fed according to the minimum standards for Infant and Young Child 
Feeding for diet diversity and meal frequency. Only one in five children under age 2 received vitamin A 
and less than 10 percent received iron supplementation. This was a decline from the 45% observed in 
2005. With regards to women, the pattern of consumption for vitamin A rich food was similar to that of 
children which resulted in significant unfavourable pregnancy outcomes. The situation becomes even 
worse in rural areas , especially in poor communities of the Matrouh Governorate. Youth suffer from 
both forms of malnutrition which is also reflected in relatively high rates of overweight and obesity. In 
2014, 36 percent of adolescent girls aged 15- 19 were overweight or obese, compared to 29 percent 
of boys of the same age group.  
The causes of nutritional problems in Egypt are function of many factors ranging from lack of 
4.
adequate income, high food prices and low local agricultural production to poor dietary practices due 
to lack of awareness, inadequate health advice, adoption of Western diets high in refined 
carbohydrates, saturated fats and sugars, as well as a more sedentary lifestyle. 
Food practices and dietary patterns: The majority of energy supply for Egyptians is derived 
5.
from carbohydrates, fats and protein. Cereals represent the main source of energy, providing about 52 
percent of the total energy (WFP, 2011). Relatively little is consumed in terms of vegetables and 
fruits, meat and dairy products. Wheat is a key staple food crop in Egypt consumed mainly as bread. 
It provides on average, one third of the daily caloric intake of consumers and 34 percent of the daily 
protein consumption (WFP, 2011; FAO, 2008). In Matrouh governorate, the food practices and dietary 
pattern is a bit different. Rice, bread, lentils and beans are the most common staple foods with poor 
consumption of vegetables and fruit. Chicken is best eaten once a week and mutton is relatively 
luxury food item eaten only during the major festivals. Pigeons are an important source of protein for 
those who can afford to keep pigeon towers. There are potentials for consumption of vegetables from 
167 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
the market if income is improved with support on nutrition messaging and behaviour change 
communication (BCC).  
National policies and strategies on nutrition: In recognition of its nutritional challenges, 
6.
Egypt developed a 10 year Food and Nutrition Policy and Strategy (2007 – 2017). As a response to 
food security challenges in Egypt, the government spends large amounts on subsidy and social safety 
net programmes. The Food ration and subsidy programme, for instance, aimed at improving 
household food security and prevent malnutrition and chronic energy deficiency through a monthly 
ration of sugar, tea, oil, lentils, broad beans, rice and macaroni that meets a significant proportion of 
the family’s needs.  
There are also programs designed to improve the nutritional status and prevent diet-related 
7.
NCDs using multiple strategies such as through the use of health facilities, schools, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and the media with the aims of increasing the population’s 
awareness of the programme, enhancing its knowledge and modifying its nutritional behaviors; 
nutrition capacity building for health providers, physicians, nurses and community workers’ specialized 
clinics for nutrition referrals. The national programme for supporting breastfeeding practices 
addresses exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of age, continuing breastfeeding up to two 
years of age, and healthy complementary feeding practices.  
There is also a national programme for improving the nutritional status of school-age children 
8.
which implemented school feeding programmes to enhance schoolchildren’s physical and mental 
development. The program provides Iron-fortified biscuits, Pie Programme, cooked meals, and 
cold/dry meals for different target groups. The MOHP has a program of vitamin A supplementation for 
new mothers and for babies through Primary Health Care Facilities. 
9.
In addition to the main government programs and strategies, some international organizations 
and NGOs implement their own framework supporting the government efforts. For example, WHO is 
working with the government of Egypt to address major challenges in nutrition through implementing 
strategic interventions, such as flour fortification, salt reduction, harmful fat replacement, and 
implementing an iodine national assessment survey (WHO, 2017). UNICEF’s nutrition interventions 
focus primarily on the first 1,000 days window of opportunity starting from the time of conception until 
a child’s second birthday. The Ministry of Health and Population (MoHP) developed an operational 
model for implementing the first 1,000 days protocol for early detection and prevention of child 
malnutrition. World Food Programme has contributed to improving nutritional status through capacity 
building in a form of Training of Trainers (TOT) for professionals from selected line ministries. 
Integrated Nutrition-Sensitive Investment 
Detailed description of nutrition objectives, key activities and approaches 
  The component 2 of the project entirely devoted to promote integrated nutrition-sensitive 
10.
investments (US$ 31.52) through a comprehensive package which includes access to domestic water 
and sanitation and access to basic social sector and income generating opportunities for women for 
improving nutrition. The nutrition-sensitive interventions (US$ 7.631Million) integrated in the three 
sub-components are: (i) Water and sanitation for good nutrition and health (ii) Empowerment of 
Women for Nutritional Change, and (iii) Social Infrastructure. 
i)  Water and sanitation for good nutrition and health 
11.
  The objective of this intervention is to improve nutrition through availability/access of safe 
drinking water and sanitation. One of the most critical problems in Egypt in general and in Matrouh 
Governorate in particular, is water for both animals and humans. The fact that mobility of women and 
girls in the project areas are highly restricted to the homestead, except to collect water and firewood, 
improving access to water at household level will have significant positive implications to themselves 
and their families. According to UNICEF, malnutrition in children is partly a function of infection mainly 
resulting from unsafe drinking water.  
168 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
  Under an integrated nutrition sensitive investment, focus should be on increasing availability 
12.
and accessibility of safe drinking water. With closer water supplies, women will have more time in the 
domestic setting, the extra time allowing them to better improve the overall health and nutrition of their 
families; and gives them more opportunities to engage in other work for extra income to improve 
livelihood of their families. 
  This intervention included three key activities, namely, rehabilitation of Roman Cisterns 
13.
(between 500 to 1000 cm3) for both humans and livestock; construction of new cisterns (120 cm3) at 
household level; provision of water reservoirs at the homesteads for the harvesting rainwater. The 
benefits will be maximized through provision of sanitation infrastructure to reduce risk of waterborne 
and vector-borne disease. In the context of resource poor communities, water and sanitation 
interventions prevent and reduce malnutrition by reducing faecal ingestion, which causes intestinal 
infections.  
  The key messages in the Behavoiur Change Campaign/Communication will focus on health 
14.
behavior, especially the danger of deadly faecal-oral diseases leading to malnutrition and child 
mortality; safe disposal of human faces; protect children from soil and animal faces; safe storage and 
treatment of water. At household level, more emphasis should be given to optimal hand washing, 
household level treatment and storage of safe drinking water, sanitation and food safety issues. 
Households will be reached through household visits. 
ii)  Empowerment of Women for Nutritional Change 
  Food and nutrition security has become the top on the agenda of the Egyptian government after 
15.
the 2011 revolution (WFP, 2016). The objective of this intervention is to improve the nutritional status 
of households, particularly women and children. 
  The implementation plan for this nutrition intervention includes four separate, but interrelated, 
16.
activities: 
Support on the production of nutritious foods (Moringa tree) for home 
 
consumption and sale: The main purpose of this activity is to promote improved, diverse and 
culturally acceptable nutritious family diets. Households, women in particular, will have access 
to nutrient rich food at household level. The activity will involve promotion of an important plant, 
Moringa tree (rich in micronutrient) for household consumption and for income generation. The 
field experiences of the design team suggest that there are limited options for home gardening 
due to chronic water shortages in the project area. Moringa tree is the suitable option for 
homestead food production with its advantages of growing in water deficit areas.  
While efforts should be made to assess other additional trees/plants with nutritional 
 
values, the production of Moringa should continually be supported by regular extension 
services and incentives. The extension activities, among other things, will entail provision of 
moringa seedling, training on planting techniques and other related assistances.  
 
Aligned to the above production intervention, other household level activities will be 
undertaken which includes food demonstration and new recipe development using moringa and 
animal proteins; establishing mother-to-mother support groups on feeding and care practices: 
equipping mothers with the tools to prepare recipe from available sources for adequate nutrition 
at home; build on indigenous knowledge; integrate nutrition messaging: increase the role of 
women and children in decisions concerning household meal planning and consumption.  
Nutrition packages for poor households: Provision of pigeon towers, poultry and goat 
 
packages (only for Siwa Oasis) has the potential to address household and individual nutrition if 
they are accompanied by regular extension services. The assumption here is that women/ 
households will get the opportunity to consume some of it, and sell the remaining to generate 
their own income and purchase vegetable and fruits from the market. This is one of the best 
ways available in the project area to enable households to diversify their diet. 
169 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
 
Provide skill training for women (in hand crafts, poultry) : This activity primarily aims 
at enabling women to generate income and build assets, enhance their decision making power 
over household resources. With the integration of nutrition messaging, this activity aims to 
substantially improve–increasing purchasing power for nutritious food and ultimately better 
consumption at individual and household levels.  
Conduct a KAP survey on household and women empowerment and nutritional 
 
issues: The baseline survey will be conducted to ascertain information on prevailing nutrition 
knowledge, attitudes and practices (KAP), to guide nutrition messaging/education, nutrition-
sensitive interventions and benchmark data for tracking progress on nutrition outcomes. Also, 
the baseline information will provide the space to reaching out to the vulnerable groups as well 
as appropriate selection of nutrition message and food commodities during designing BCC 
strategy. Some of the core issues the KAP survey will address includes, but not limited to, level 
of knowledge on food preparation, benefits of good nutrition, consequences of malnutrition, 
food safety, personal hygiene, water and sanitation, attitudes such as food habits, food taboos 
and cultural constraints, community perceptions and deviant behaviours on food consumptions; 
practices such as child feeding practices, dietary practices using the standard FAO measuring 
tools, child meal frequency. The KAP survey should be conducted by well-experienced NGOs 
or consultants during the project baseline study before PRIDE implementation. 
iii)  Social Infrastructure 
  The objective of this intervention is to improve nutrition through provision of basic services, 
17.
livelihood packages and promotion of technological innovations. There are three key nutrition 
sensitive activities proposed to be integrated in this intervention:  
  Activities to improve nutrition in schools: The successive DHS data for Egypt show that 
18.
both under and over nutrition (obesity) are prevalent among school children in Egypt. Young adults 
tend to be affected largely by over nutrition. It’s well established that obesity is a risk factor for many 
diet related disorders (non-communicable diseases, NCDs) which accounts for significant deaths. 
School based nutrition interventions such as nutrition messages are expected to contribute to the 
overall efforts of promoting optimal nutrition among children and youth. The selection of target schools 
would give consideration to prevalence of malnourished and poor children and poor school 
attendance. 
  To meet this objective, approaches to be used may include, nutrition education and awareness-
19.
raising, partnering with mothers to provide their children with adequate nutrition at home Classroom 
lessons on nutrition can be supported by asking parents to send healthy snacks to school; offer 
nutrition education and seminars, assign nutrition homework that students can do with their families. 
  For more effective implementation of the aforementioned activities, the key implementers and 
20.
other partners (see Table A) should begin with conducting a situation analysis and reviewing existing 
guidelines followed by review, develop and implement nutritional guidelines for the target schools. 
Mobilize nutrition stakeholders’ (such as FAO and relevant government ministries) commitment 
towards sustaining the programmes and mainstream basic nutrition training in these schools.  
21.
  The project planned to construct schools, health units and latrines targeting 3000 households, 
and support the provision of literacy classes to women (Targeting 2000 women). Nutrition and health 
messages will be an integral part of the health, school and latrine facilities. Some possible ways to 
address nutrition issues using these facilities is through establishing a WASH program hygiene 
committee or health clubs to connect community and schools: apply interactive approaches using 
diverse and informal, but interactive approaches, such as drama and songs at village gatherings. 
Critical WASH interventions in conditions of poor sanitation that will improve nutrition status are those 
that remove faeces from the domestic environment and support and promote hand washing with 
soap. In conditions of good sanitation, the availability of improved water becomes more important.  
170 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
22.
Literacy with health-nutrition components allows women to improve their futures and the future 
of their communities. According to the World Bank (2016) , such program is essential in "the reduction 
of child and maternal mortality, improvement of child nutrition and health. The women’s literacy 
program, planned for 2000 women, should start with identification of non-literates through a snap shot 
survey and their learning needs followed by provision of instructional training for trainers in functional 
Literacy, integration of certain nutrition messages using tablets or other technological innovations will 
have added values.  
  The planned literacy classroom lessons will contain visual nutrition messages and assign 
23.
nutrition homework that women can do with their families. Successful completion of the training 
should enable learner to read and comprehend texts (such as newspaper headings, road signs, etc). 
It also enables them to apply writing skills and do simple computation. A certificate should be issued to 
every learner at the end of the program. In order to make such program more effective in motivating 
parents to go through a literacy class is to have their child teach them to read and write.  
24.
Improve nutrition through support on the youth livelihood: The nutrition component of the 
project included support of youth training in the construction of cisterns, reservoirs, pruning of olives, 
date palms and figs, production of saplings and nursery management, watershed management and 
rangeland development) for 1000 youth. The implementation of this intervention will make use of 
several approaches. Integration of nutrition awareness and messages during the capacity building for 
service providers. As the service provider would be responsible for the implementation of some 
nutrition activities, the group should benefit from nutrition training. The group need to be composed of 
women and youth. Target selection will take into consideration the gender-age mix and will be done by 
DRC in consultation with PMU. The implementing body (NGOs) will present a detail work plan at the 
planning stage.  
25.
Integrating short, simple and tailored nutrition messages should involve context specific 
messaging to meet individual participant's learning needs. This approach can also include community 
level awareness campaign for sensitization and behaviour change communication through radio/TV 
program, drama, and songs.  
  Promotion of technological innovations for improved nutrition: A variety of apps relating to 
26.
diet, nutrition, and weight control are available from major smartphone platforms such as iPhone, 
Android, Nokia, and BlackBerry. Common techniques include providing feedback, goal-setting for 
healthy eating, healthy cooking, grocery or restaurant decision making, self-monitoring of energy and 
nutrient intake, weight tracking, and planning social support and change (Azar et al, 2013). PRIDE 
proposed android based system for tracking water quality for improved health and nutrition; (6000 
households).  
  Taking into consideration the fact that large proportion of women in the Matrouh governorate 
27.
are not able to read and write, it is important to use more visual and simple nutrition focused 
communication messages. Tablet applications should be made available for literate women in Arabic 
languages which are widely spoken in the governorate. Topics may include health eating, the value of 
nutrition, feeding practice, proper hygiene practices, low cost nutritious food preparation, the 
importance of using sanitary and the preparation of safe drinking water and preventive healthcare 
measures like maintenance of personal hygiene, and other related nutrition-health based information. 
These apps can also be used in the women literacy program for promoting health eating.  
  As transmitting nutrition messages through such technologies need care and a certain standard 
28.
of expertise, the PMU should arrange experienced research centers around the world working on 
similar interventions. For example, there are some successful experiences from Pakistan (White Rice 
Communication) which is a specialized behaviour centred design and communication agency focusing 
on changing human behaviour in traditional communities. 
171 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Operational plans 
Implementing partners and actors: As the integrated nutrition sensitive investments are 
29.
multisectoral, the nutrition sensitive activities described above will be implemented in collaboration 
with a number of potential partners and actors under the coordination of a dedicated nutrition expert at 
Programme level if possible. Alternatively, TA or consultancy can be engaged for facilitation and 
coordination of nutrition-sensitive interventions in PRIDE. All effort will be made to bring on board 
relevant partners (both government and NGOs ) for each core nutrition sensitive intervention. For 
effective implementation of the integrated nutrition interventions, a stakeholder’s consultative meeting 
will be arranged on coordination of activities, defining roles and responsibilities, and sharing best 
practices.  
  The implementation will begin with capacity building training of the extension workers and other 
30.
implementers focusing on how all dimensions of the implementation including target selection of 
vulnerable groups, service provision, appropriate selection of nutrition messages for a particular 
circumstances, reporting and M & E of progresses. There will be at least one nutrition focal person in 
the implementing NGOs who will be tasked with the responsibilities of regular tracking and 
documentation of progress on nutrition in order to integrate mitigation measures. The expert will also 
ensure that documentations on nutrition outcomes are well linked to the program progress report. The 
M & E personnel at PMU and DRC will be tasked to report on the progresses on the implementation 
of nutrition interventions by monitoring the periodic reporting of the focal persons in the respective 
NGOs.  
  Making Behavioural Change Communication (BCC) a prime strategy: Behavior change 
31.
communication (BCC) is an interactive process with community members to develop tailored 
messages and approaches using a variety of communication channels to develop positive behaviors; 
promote and sustain individual, community and societal behavior change; and maintain appropriate 
behaviors. Effective BCC can increase nutrition knowledge, stimulate community dialogue (such as 
malnutrition risk factors, marginalized practices, cultural practices pertaining to feeding and nutrition), 
promote essential attitude changes, and improve skills and self-efficacy. In this integrated nutrition 
sensitive investment, the BCC may follow the following key steps: 
Defining Target Group for nutrition sensitive interventions: Given the clear project 
 
goal of PRIDE, accurate selection of the target groups is a priority. One way of doing this may 
require stakeholders’ meeting to be held at the planning stage to obtain guidance and 
commitments to the process and to develop coordination mechanisms. The primary targets for 
PRIDE nutrition component are women, children under five and youth. The secondary target 
population could include school teachers, health workers, service providers and other 
implementers of the nutrition sensitive investment.  
Conduct situational analysis: The use of Behavioral Change Communication (BCC) 
 
should start from a snap shot situation analysis (see KAP baseline survey under objective 2) to 
effectively identify positive and negative nutrition, the locally available resources for addressing 
the problems, barriers to and facilitators of improved behavior adoption, and the 
communications channels for reaching the target. Methods for conducting such formative 
research may include reviews of existing data, in-depth interviews, focus group discussions, 
observations, dietary recalls, recipe trials, market surveys, trials of improved practices, and 
positive deviance inquiry. Messages to be promoted should be specific, with clear and practical 
instructions; should be based on a few recommendations rather than too much information; 
promote behaviors that are culturally acceptable and feasible; promote locally available and 
affordable foods; be motivating and show the benefits of adopting behaviors; and suggest ways 
of overcoming constraints. Messages and communications materials and channels should be 
developed in collaboration with beneficiaries during formative research. Influential community 
members and family decision-makers should be considered when developing messages, as 
caregivers will be more likely to accept and use practices if they are supported at the 
community and household levels.  
172 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Setting communication objectives: is an important step in planning nutrition education 
 
and communication programmes. According to Valdecanas (1991), the objectives should be 
stated in terms of the participants' desired behavioural outcomes, that is, there must be 
agreement among the participants on the problem to be addressed, the need for change, the 
need to take action to prevent or reduce the problem, the strategy by which the change can 
take place, and the indicators by which such change could be recognized. The following are 
some common behavior change objectives: 
i) 
Increase  knowledge  of  nutritious  food,  their  sources  and  benefits  to  the  health  and 
wellbeing  
ii) 
Improve attitudes about feeding and diet through changes in food customs and habits.  
iii)  Increase demand for information and services pertaining to nutrition and health eating.  
iv)  Increase  household  preparation  of  acceptable  diet  using  either  kitchen  garden  or 
purchase.  
Develop a socially and culturally appropriate communication strategy (messages 
 
and themes): consisting of approaches, messages, and methods. Approaches chosen are 
those appropriate for each group. These could be a combination of any of the 
following: individual, group, or mass approaches using information, education/training, 
motivation, entertainment or advocacy. Messages vary according to the kinds of behaviour-
change specified in the objectives, the available resources and services, technologies, other 
relevant information, participant needs, and method of delivery. The nutrition message should 
consist of carefully crafted information that is targeted at specific population groups, and 
designed in such a way that it meets BCC objectives and to stimulate discussion and action. 
The BCC uses all available and potential communication approaches, resources, techniques, 
channels and methods. As the BCC is not a mere information campaign, it should establish 
itself around a long-term programme using several IEC tools such as appropriate printed 
materials like brochures, pamphlets, posters, leaflets, and flyers; radio spots; video and other 
audio-visual materials. It is important to think about how particular channels can help achieve 
particular goals. Each medium has its own advantages and disadvantages, so that each may 
be best suited to a particular circumstance. For this, training of key implementers to enable 
them acquires the necessary skills for the delivery of services is a prerequisite. This may be 
followed by a pretest before using the nutrition message/ materials.  
 
M & E: The monitoring and evaluation will be the integral part of the BCC. Monitoring will 
be an integral part of the ongoing management of communication which focuses on the process 
of implementation. For effective monitoring of the BCC strategy, it is necessary to establish 
effective information-gathering systems including reports, site visits and reviews of materials, 
conducting periodic focus-group discussions and in-depth interviews can also help checking 
effective BCC programmers. 
Indicators: Measurable indicators will be selected for tracking progress along the impact 
 
pathways. 
i)  Goal:  %  of  HHs  reporting  increased  food  security  as  measured  by  Food  Insecurity 
Experience Scale (FIES)148. (baseline-0, midterm-30%, at completion-60%) 
ii)  Development  Objective:  %  of  HHs  reporting  improved  meal  frequency  (baseline-0, 
midterm-30%, at completion-60%) 
iii)  Outcome indicators:  
148 FIES consists of eight questions regarding people's access to adequate food: 1) You were worried you would not 
have enough food to eat?; 2) You were unable to eat healthy and nutritious food?; 3) You ate only a few kinds of 
foods?; 4) You had to skip a meal?; 5) You ate less than you thought you should?; 6) Your household ran out of food?; 
7) You were hungry but did not eat?; 8) You went without eating for a whole day? 
173 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
1) % of households reporting good dietary diversity (≥5 food groups out of 12). Baseline (0); 
midterm (20% increase) and at completion (50 % increase);  
2)  %  of  women  reporting  good  dietary  diversity  (≥5  food  groups  out  of  10)  (baseline-0, 
midterm-20% increase, at completion-50% increase). 
3) % of children under five with good diet diversity score (≥4food groups out of 7). (baseline-
0, midterm-20% increase, at completion-50% increase). 
iv)  Output indicators:  
1)  #  of  Household  receiving  WASH  messages  Baseline  (0);  midterm  (5000)  and  at 
completion (10,000);  
2) # of women provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition (nutrition packages): 
Baseline-0, midterm -1,600 and at completion- 4000 women 
3)  #  of  school  receiving  nutrition  message  (Baseline  0,  midterm  12  and  at  completion  18 
schools).  
4) # of women receiving nutrition messages through tablet device (baseline-0, midterm-20, 
at completion-40%). 
Description of the nutrition outcome pathways 
  The pathways indicated in fig 1 below is developed based on the theory of change for nutrition 
32.
outcomes, and contains three main pathways through which PRIDE nutrition sensitive interventions 
can influence nutrition outcomes (i.e. improving the nutritional profiles of women, children and youth).  
  The first pathway (Water, hygiene and sanitation-WASH) follows the assumption that women 
33.
are responsible for fetching water, and are also in-charge of preparing family meals. Also the move 
towards improved nutrition is achieved through making visible the existing burden of diseases, such 
as the deadly faecal-oral diseases causing malnutrition and child mortality relates to the domain of 
water, hygiene and sanitation (WASH). The hypothesis is that when community members, particularly 
children, have lower exposure to diseases, their requirement for nutrients goes down. Along with the 
provision of safe water, community and household level WASH campaigns on safe disposal of human 
faces, safe storage and treatment of water, hand washing. etc. will help in addressing the problem. 
Further, the investment in school will create opportunities for more girls to get access to education, 
thereby improve their life style including health and nutrition. Access to the latrine and health facilities 
add up to the personal hygiene and well-being of women and children which in turn results in 
improved nutrition outcomes.  
  The second pathway (women empowerment-income) assumes that providing women with the 
34.
opportunity and access to clean water is not sufficient. They also need to be able to make decisions 
about the use and management of resources. This pathway therefore stretches to address household 
income using livelihood packages, skill training, decision-making within households, which may 
contribute to improved health and nutrition status indirectly. Also, women access to income will 
increase purchasing power for nutritious food and ultimately better consumption at individual and 
household levels. With regards to accessibility, both men and women ought to decide how much 
household income is to be spent on food and non-food items; and how much to be sold and kept for 
home consumption. These decisions are directly influenced by the roles they are expected to perform, 
availability of food items on the market, which household member decides how income is spend? 
What percentage of income is spent on food and on non-food items? 
  The third pathway ( production-consumption) combines the food availability and accessibility of 
35.
nutritious food. In order to prepare nutritious meals, the food needs to be available in the household at 
affordable prices in local markets. This pathway also involves the preparation and utilization/ 
consumption of food. It is mainly influenced by current customs, beliefs around the meaning of what 
constitutes nutritious foods; building awareness regarding dietary diversity. The challenges here is 
poor intra household distribution of food where those who prepare the food (women), need the power 
to make decisions about food choices, how they prepare it and how to divide the food among 
household members. Therefore, adequate BCC combined with the capacity building of women will 
174 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
bring about improved KAP, the preparation, distribution and consumption of the available nutritious 
food. 
T
C
E
J
O
R
P
L
A
O
G
T
C
A
P
M
I
To overcome poverty and achieve food 
security through remunerative, sustainable 
and resilient livelihoods 
Nutrition Outcomes 
Improved meal frequency/Diet diversity/Sanitation  
l
i
i
a
u
d
v
d
n
E
M
O
C
T
U
O
 Cross cutting  
 Nutrition messaging  
 Gender and climate mainstreaming  
I
Improved dietary intake  
  Minimum Dietary Diversity for women 
  Minimum Dietary Diversity for Children 
*
B
C
C 
E
M
O
C
T
U
O
l
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
H
Food security 
Availability & 
access to nutritious 
foods 
Care giving 
Women’s time and 
labor  
Healthy Environment 
Safe drinking water  
Hygiene and 
sanitation 
 Cross cutting  
 Nutrition messaging  
 Gender and climate mainstreaming  
T
U
P
T
U
O
l
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
H
T
U
P
N
I
Production Growth & 
Diversification 
  Poultry/ small ruminants  
  Moringa tree planting 
Income Growth 
 
Livelihood packages-poultry, small 
remnant,  
  Skill training- handicraft, animal 
husbandry  
 Integrated Nutrition sensitive Investments  
-  Water & toilet facilities 
-  Women empowerment 
- 
-  Nutrition education 
Schools & technological innovations 
*BCC (Behaviour Change Communication) is the prime strategy in this intervention to increase nutrition knowledge and 
promote essential attitude changes for good nutrition 
175 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Table: Implementation plan for Integrated Nutrition Investments - (component 2) PRIDE, Egypt: Strategic areas of focus, key interventions/ actions, 
indicators and targets (USD 24.18 mn) 
Integrated 
Nutrition 
Investments 
Nutrition 
Objectives  
Interventions 
Nutrition 
focused 
Indicator  
 Indicator target 
Implementers  
Nutrition 
Activities 
implementation approach 
and 
Cost  per 
sub 
compone
nt  
Water 
sanitation 
good 
and health  
and 
for 
nutrition 
improve 
through 
1.1  
To 
nutrition 
availability/access 
of 
water 
sanitation 
safe  drinking 
and 
Baseline 
Mid 
term 
of 
0 
Rehabilitation  of  Roman 
Cisterns  (between  500  to 
1000 cm3) for both humans 
and livestock  
# 
community 
receiving 
nutrition 
message  
End 
Lead  
Other 
100  MALR 
sessions 
faecal-oral  diseases 
NGOs  Conduct  nutrition  messaging  and 
sensitization 
through 
regular  community  campaign.  The 
key messages should focus on health 
behavior,  especially  the  danger  of 
deadly 
for 
malnutrition  and  child  mortality.: 
(Safe  disposal  of  human  faces; 
protect children from soil and animal 
faces ; safe storage and treatment of 
water)  
Promotion of optimal hand washing, 
and 
household 
storage  of  Safe  drinking  water, 
sanitation  and  food  safety  issues. 
Approaches  ranges  from  house  to 
house visit to individual counselling.  
treatment 
NGOs 
level 
Providing new cisterns (120 
cm3) at household level  
# 
household 
receiving 
nutrition 
message 
of 
0 
6000  MALR 
Provide  water  reservoirs  at 
the  homesteads 
the 
harvesting rainwater  
for 
Provide 
sanitation 
infrastructure  at  schools  to 
reduce  risk  of  waterborne 
and vector-borne disease; 
0 
0 
of 
# 
household 
receiving 
nutrition  and 
health 
message 
#  of  schools 
receiving 
nutrition 
messages  
700  MALR 
NGOs  The same as above 
30  MALR 
NGOs 
Provide  WASH  messages;  Life 
skills-based  hygiene  education  and 
child  participation:  use  children  as 
vehicle  to  transmit  information  to 
families  and 
parents:  Engaging 
communities  ensures  that  children 
apply their knowledge at home. 
176 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Empowerment  of 
Women 
for 
Nutritional 
Change 
2.1 
To 
the 
improve 
nutritional status of 
households, 
particularly  women 
and children  
Support  on  backyard  and 
community gardening  
for 
of 
production 
nutritious  foods  for  home 
consumption and sale  
the 
#  of  women 
engaged 
in 
home 
gardening  
#  of  women 
and  children 
reporting 
minimum 
dietary 
diversity 
new 
# 
of 
recipes 
developed  
inputs 
services 
for 
Provide  women  access  to 
and 
agricultural 
extension 
as 
incentive 
growing 
Moringa tree  
livelihood 
Provide 
packages  (  pigeon  towers, 
poultry,  goat  packages)  for 
poor households  
#  of  nutrient 
rich 
food 
commodity 
being 
promoted  
# 
households 
involved 
the package  
of 
in 
Provide  skill  training  for 
(in  hand  crafts, 
women 
poultry 
animal 
husbandry..) 
, 
#  of  women 
involved  and 
certified  with 
skill(s)  
Conduct  a  KAP  survey  on 
and  women 
household 
#  of  women 
in 
involved 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
177 
5000 
MALR 
. 
5000 
10 
5 
MALR 
3000  MALR 
400  MALR 
1500  MALR 
take 
food 
acceptable 
commodities 
would 
improved  diverse  and 
nutritious 
to  be 
The 
promoted 
into 
consideration  the  nutritional  gaps 
such  as  micronutrient  deficiency 
eg.Introduction  of  Moringa  tree  and 
traditional nutrient dense foods.  
Promote 
culturally 
family diets;  
Food  demonstration  and  new  recipe 
development;  establishing  mother-
to-mother support groups on feeding 
and  care  practices, 
:  equipping 
mothers  with  the  tools  to  prepare 
recipe  for  adequate  nutrition  at 
home. 
 Build  on  indigenous  knowledge; 
and practical nutrition education;  
NGOs  Use 
agricultural 
extension  and 
communication  approaches  coupled 
with nutrition education.  
NGOs 
and 
local 
consul
tants 
NGOs 
and 
local 
consul
tants 
NGOs 
and 
Approach  could  include  Capacity 
building  for  service  providers  and 
beneficiaries  on  nutrition,  including 
communication and advocacy skills 
Same as above 
Nutrition 
and 
awareness  raising  sessions  towards 
participants 
sensitization 
Promote  nutrition  education  to  be 
informed  by  results  of  KAP  survey 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
3.1  
To 
promote 
nutrition in schools  
empowerment 
nutritional issues.  
and 
the survey  
consul
atnts  
(women and households)  
Social 
Infrastructure  to 
promote SDGs 
Promote nutrition education 
in  schools 
influence 
health  eating  among  youth 
(girls and boys)  
to 
#  of  youth 
involved 
in 
the  nutrition 
education 
program 
3.2 
improve 
To 
nutrition 
through 
access to health and 
education, 
particularly 
women 
children 
for 
and 
on 
access 
Support 
to 
latrines,  health  units,  and 
schools.  
 #  of  women 
and  children 
involved  
Support  the  provision  of 
literacy classes to women  
#  of  women 
participated in 
the program 
3000  MALR 
3000  MALR 
2000  MALR 
0 
0 
0 
178 
of 
and 
NGOs 
exhibitions 
classroom  lessons  on  nutrition  can 
be  supported  by  asking  parents  to 
send healthy snacks to school; invite 
parents and other family members to 
periodically  eat  with  their  children 
,attend 
student 
nutrition  projects  ,  offer  nutrition 
messages 
assign  nutrition 
education  homework  that  students 
can do with their families. 
NGOs  Establish a WASH program hygiene 
committee or health clubs to connect 
community  and  schools:  apply  an 
interactive  approaches  using  diverse 
informal, but interactive approaches, 
such as drama, songs, street shows.. 
Provide  literacy  classroom  lessons 
containing visual nutrition messages; 
assign nutrition education homework 
their 
that  women  can  do  with 
families. 
NGOs 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Provide 
livelihood 
packages  (  pigeon  towers, 
poultry,  goat  packages)  for 
poor households  
# 
households 
involved 
the package  
of 
in 
Provide  skill  training  for 
(in  hand  crafts, 
women 
poultry 
animal 
husbandry..) 
, 
#  of  women 
involved  and 
certified  with 
skill(s)  
of 
#  of  women 
and 
men 
having  access 
to 
mobile 
banking  and 
marketing 
facility.  
# 
households 
owning 
electronic 
tablets.  
# 
households 
owning 
facility. 
#  of  women 
and 
youth 
involved  
the 
of 
3.3 
To 
nutrition 
promotion 
technological 
innovations  
improve 
through 
of 
Support  of  mobile  banking 
and  mobile  marketing 
technologies  for  the  newly 
reclaimed lands 
the use of electronic  tablets 
for 
the  dissemination  of 
messages  for  women  for 
behaviour change 
improve 
3.4  To 
nutrition 
through 
gender  issues  and 
resilience 
climate 
behavior.  
Safeguarding 
control 
and 
An  android  based  system 
for  tracking  water  quality 
for  improved  health  and 
nutrition; 
- 
and 
increasing  women’s  access 
over, 
to, 
and 
other 
incomes 
resources  
-Increasing 
involvement 
making 
in 
process.  
- 
participation 
production and assets  
Increasing  women’s 
livestock 
in 
women’s 
in  decision 
production 
3000  MALR 
400  MALR 
10,000  MALR 
NGOs 
and 
local 
consul
tants 
NGOs 
and 
local 
consul
tants 
NGOs 
Approach  could  include  Capacity 
building  for  service  providers  and 
beneficiaries  on  nutrition,  including 
communication and advocacy skills 
Same as above 
Nutrition 
and 
awareness  raising  sessions  towards 
participants 
sensitization 
,  simple  and 
Integrating  short 
tailored  nutrition  messages  which 
involves  context  specific  messaging 
to  meet 
individual  participant's 
learning needs,  
6000  MALR 
NGOs 
Similar  to  the  above  but  related  to 
electronic  tablets.  Include  survey  to 
track progress on nutrition outcomes  
6000  MALR 
NGOs 
Similar  to  the  above  but  related  to 
water issues. Include survey to track 
progress on nutrition outcomes 
6000  MALR 
NGOs  Use gender focused behavior change 
community 
and 
communication 
reflection methods  
;  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
179 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Annex 6: List of People Met 
PRIDE Final Design Mission 
12 – 27 July 2017 
Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation 
Mr. Reda Bibers, Chief of International Finance Section 
Eng. Khaled Rashad, General Manager, Regional Financial Institutions & IFAD Focal Point 
Ms. Randa Mahmoud Hamza, Senior Adviser, Policy/Thematic/Sectoral Evaluation 
Ms. Sally George, Senior Adviser, Projects/Programme, MOE 
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation 
Eng. Sayed Hussein, Director of International Funding Department 
Dr. Yousseif Khamis, Assistant of Foreign Agriculture Relations 
Ms. Fatma El Zahraa, International Funding Department 
Mr. Sharif Aleithi – Head of finance and administration Sector 
Mr. Ahmed Mustafa – GM for local and international financing  
Mr. AbdulMoneam Ramzi Atia – head of Central Administration of Financial Affairs 
Ms. Safa – General Manager of Accounting Unit of MoALR (MoF Controller)  
Ministry of Finance 
Mr. Emad Awad – First Deputy Minister and Head of Accounting Sector and Accounting Units 
State Accountability Authority  
Ms. Amani Abdulwahed – Head of SAS office in MoALR 
World Bank 
Mr. Mohamed Yahya Abdulkarim – Financial Management Specialist (through phone call) 
African Development Bank 
Dr. Yasser H. Elwan, Senior Engineer (Water/Irrigation) 
WHO 
Dr. Ayoub Aljawaldeh, Regional Adviser, Nutrition Health Protection and Promotion 
FAO 
Mr. John Rhodes, Consultant 
UNICEF 
Ms. Aliaa Hafiz, Head of Nutrition Unit 
World Food Programme (WFP) 
Ms. Nourane Khaled, Business Support Assistant 
Ms. Ithar Khalil 
ILO 
Mr. Peter Van Rooij, Irector, Director 
Ms. Amal Mowafy, Chief Technical Advisor  
Desert Research Center (DRC) 
Dr. Naiim Moselhy, President of the DRC 
Dr. Abdalla Zaghloul, Vice President of the DRC 
180 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Gamal Ezzaldin – General Secretary of the DRC 
Mahmoud AbdulAmir- General Manager for the DRC Affairs  
Wajeeh Nosir – MoF Controller and Head of the DRC Accounting Unit 
Egyptian Countryside Development Company (ECDC) 
Eng. Atter Ezzat Hannoura, Chairman, CEO 
Mr. Tarek Abdou, Chief Operations Officer 
Dr. Ahmed El Ezaby, Technical Director 
Eng. Acer Zaghloul, Project Director 
Group of Youth 
6 Group of Youth (13 person) 
Misr El Kheir Association (NGO) 
Mr. Moustafa Morgan, Senior Officer Formal Education 
Ms. Suzan Bibawi, TVET Education 
Mr. Osama Zain 
Mr. Ahmed Ali, Income Generating Projects Manager 
Ms. Reham Ellaithy, Senior International Organizations Officer 
Mr. Aly Fathy, Integrated Projects & Social Survey Senior Manager 
Mr. Walid Ahmed, Senior Manager Education Quality Assurance and Access 
Ms. Perihan Abou El Ela Senior External Relations Manager 
National Nutrition Institute  
Prof. Afaf Abdelfatah Tawfik, Director 
Cultivating New Frontiers in Agriculture (CNFA)  
Mr. Luke Ryba, Program Development Officer 
Ms. Azza Kandel, Consultant 
Matrouh Governorate: 
Marsa Matrouh City 
Maj. Gen. Alaa Fathi Abu Zaid, Governor of Matrouh 
Dr. Hamdi Abdelaziz, Coordinator of the International Projects in Matrouh 
Dr. Ahmed El Kot, Director of SDCMR 
Dr. Ashraf El Sadek, Director of the Applied Research Center 
Mr. Gomaa Anwar, Head of the monitoring and evaluation unit 
Ms. Kariman Anas, Manager of Gender unit 
Mr. Sherif Soliman, Financial Department 
The Accounting Unit Team (7 persons) 
Ms. Sabra – MoF Controller and Head of SDC Accounting Unit  
Eng. Mohamed Ahmed El Ashry, Director of Roads and Transport Directorate 
Eng. Saber Arafa Ahmed, Roads and Transport Directorate 
Eng. Waleed El Sayed, Horticulture Specialist 
Eng. Fouad Sawar, Head of the Horticulture Research Unit 
Eng. Araby Mansour, Head of the Soil and Water Unit 
Eng. Abdel hameed Israfel, Head of the Rangeland Research Unit 
Dr. Abdel-Samad El Dabaa, Head of the GIS unit 
181 
Arab Republic of Egypt 
Promoting Resilience in Desert Environments (PRIDE) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Dr. Ahmed Imam, Head of the Biological Agriculture Unit 
Mr. Hussein Moftah Abdelsalam, General Manager, Agricultural Directorate 
Mr. Essam Mahmoud, Procurement Manager, DRC 
Mr. Hamdy Abdel Aziz, Project Coordinator 
Mr. Mostafa Mousa Rashid, CEO of Rams Community Development  
Mr. Mohamed Mashry Hemida, Livestock Breeder in Negila 
Mr. Bashier Nagy Soliman, Livestock Breeder in Negila 
Ms. Asmaa Abdall Ragab, Vet Researcher, DRC 
Dr. Ibrahim Mohamed El Demirdash, Manager, Primary Health Care 
Misr El Kheir Association (NGO) 
Eng. Mohamed Hegazy, Matrouh Executive Manager 
Ms. Reem Mostafa Mohamed, Administrative Officer 
Moghra City 
Mr. Reda Elsayed Mohamed Gaballah, Head of Alamein District 
Mr. Esmail M. Ahmed, Chairman, Elmasriah Elkhaliefia Co., for Desert Soils Reclamation 
Mr. Elsayed Hegazy, Vice President, Elmasriah Elkhaliefia Co., for Desert Soils Reclamation 
Mr. Amr Saad, Chairman, GOgreen for Agricultural Investment and Development Company 
Mr. Mohamed Nabil, Marketing Manager, GOgreen for Agricultural Investment and Development 
Company 
Eng. Hassan Aly Hussein Omara, Manager of the Agricultural Department, Alamein 
Eng. Morkek Abdelsalam Morkek, Agricultural Directorate, Alamein 
Sheikh Salah Sowaied, Leader of Trips 
182 
