The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Post negotiation version 
Document Date: 12/11/2019 
Project No. 2000002344 
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme  Management  Department 
ii 
iii 
1 
4 
4 
4 
5 
7 
8 
9 
9 
11 
14 
15 
16 
16 
19 
19 
20 
21 
22 
22 
24 
25 
25 
25 
25 
26 
28 
28 
29 
30 
30 
30 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Table of contents 
Map of the project area 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Executive Summary 
1. Context 
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
a. National Context 
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities 
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement 
B. Lessons learned 
2. Project Description 
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups 
D. Components/outcomes and activities 
E. Theory of Change 
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships 
G. Costs, benefits and financing 
a. Project costs 
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan 
c. Disbursement 
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis 
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability 
3. Risks 
H. Project risks and mitigation measures 
I. Environment and Social category 
J. Climate Risk classification 
4. Implementation 
K. Organizational Framework 
a. Project management and coordination 
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance 
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication 
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication 
b. Innovation and scaling up 
M. Implementation plans 
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans 
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans 
Annexes 
Annex 1 
Annex 2 
Annex 3 
Annex 4 
Annex 5 
Annex 6 
Annex 7 
Annex 8 
Annex 9 
Annex 10 
Annex 11 
Annex 12 
Annex 13 
Annex 14 
Annex 15 
Annex 16 
Annex 17 
Logical Framework 
Theory of change 
Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Integrated Risk Framework 
Exit strategy 
Assessment of Demand for Financial Services 
Guarantee fund Facility  
Insurance product mainstreaming strategy 
Line of Credit  - eligibility criteria 
Note on Impact of RUFIP on Lines of Credit 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Financial Management Manual 
Working papers 
Component 1  Building Capacity of Institutions and Clients 
Component 2  Improving regulation, Supervision and institutional discipline 
i 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Map of the project area 
ii 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
ACSI 
AEMFI 
AfDB 
AGRA 
AIP 
AOS 
ATA 
AVCF 
AWPB 
BADEA 
BCR 
CBE 
COSOP 
DBE 
DBMS 
DFID 
EFA 
EFCMD 
EIA 
EIB 
EIC 
EIRR 
ERR 
ESMF 
ESMP 
ETB 
EU 
FAIR 
FAO 
FAR 
FCA 
FIRR 
FRR 
GDP 
GoE 
GTP 
HDI 
IA 
ICB 
IFAD 
IGA 
ILCUF 
ILO 
IPSAS 
IRR 
IT 
Amhara Credit and Saving Institution 
Association of Ethiopian Micro Finance Institutions 
African Development Bank 
Alliance for Green Revolution Africa 
Agro-Industrial Park 
Annual Outcome Survey 
Agricultural Transformation Agency 
Agricultural Value Chain Financing 
Annual Work Programme and Budget 
Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa 
Benefit-Cost Ratio 
Commerical Bank of Ethiopia 
Country Strategy and Opportunities Paper 
Development Bank of Ethiopia 
Database Management System 
Department for International Development 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
External Fund and Credit Management Directorate 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
European Investment Bank 
Ethiopian Insurance Corporation 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
Economic Rate of Return 
Earth System Modeling Framework 
Environmental Social Management Plan 
Ethiopian Birr 
European Union 
Fixed Asset Issue Registry 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Fixed Assets Registry 
Federal Cooperative Agency 
Financial Internal Rate of Return 
Financial Rate of Return 
Gross Domestic Product 
Government of Ethiopia 
Growth and Transformation Plan 
Human Development Index 
Implementing Agency 
International Competitive Bidding 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Income Generating Activity 
Irish Leauge for Credit Unions Federation 
International Labour Organization 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
Internal Rate of Return 
Information Technology 
iii 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Knowledge Management 
Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project 
Line of Credit 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Millennium Development Goal 
Micro Finance Institution 
Management Information System 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
Microsoft Excel application 
Mid-Term Review 
National Bank of Ethiopia 
Net Present Value 
Pastoral and Agro-Pastoral 
Portfolio at Risk 
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development Project 
Pastoral Community Development Programme 
Project Coordinaiton and Management Unit 
Project Completion Report 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Public Financial Management Assessment 
Project Implementation Manual 
Procurement Plan 
Poverty Probability Index 
Purchasing Power Parity 
M&E Training and Certification programme 
KM 
LLRP 
LOC 
M&E 
MDG 
MFI 
MIS 
MoFEC 
MS Excel 
MTR 
NBE 
NPV 
PAP 
PaR 
PASIDP 
PCDP 
PCMU 
PCR 
PEFA 
PFM 
PIM 
PP 
PPI 
PPP 
PriME 
PROSEAD  Promotion of Sustainable Ethiopian Agroindustrial Development 
PSC 
PSNP 
RCPB 
RFI 
RJOCS 
RUFIP 
RuSACCO  Rural Savings and Credit Cooperative 
SDG 
SECAP 
SNNPR 
SO 
TA 
TNA 
TOC 
UNCDF 
UNDP 
UNIDO 
USD 
WA 
WFP 
WWB 
YS 
Sustainable Development Goal 
Social Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples' Region 
Strategic Objective 
Technical Assistance 
Training Needs Assessment 
Theory of Change 
United Nations Capital Development Fund 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
United States Dollar 
Withdrawal Application 
World Food Programme 
Women’s World Banking 
Youth Start programme 
Project Steering Committee 
Productive Safety Nets Programme 
Regional Cooperative Promotion Bureau 
Rural Financial Institution 
The Rural Job Opportunity Creation Strategy 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme 
iv 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Executive Summary  
Context: Ethiopia had one of the highest poverty rates in the world in 2000[1] with 56% of the 
1. 
population living below US$1.25 per day Purchasing Power Parity (PPP), but by 2011, this 
percentage declined to a much lower level of 31%. Ethiopia successfully achieved six of the eight 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)[2], by halving the proportion of people below the poverty line 
and making advancements in education, reduction of hunger and malnutrition, control of chronic 
diseases, reducing child mortality, etc. While the pace of poverty reduction over the years is 
impressive, Ethiopia still has some way to go in poverty eradication. 
The agriculture sector, which supports 80% of Ethiopia’s population suffers from frequent 
2. 
droughts aggravated by climate change. Poverty remains higher in vulnerable, drought-prone regions. 
Prolonged droughts and floods due to unexpected excess rains are the most important factors for 
crop loss. The Pastoral and agro-pastoral (PAP) communities, living in the arid and semi-arid low-
lands that account 12 to 14 percent of population lag behind in most of the social and economic 
indicators. Their livelihoods are highly vulnerable to multitude of shocks. 
Relevant national strategies, policies: Ethiopia’s main development objectives are poverty 
3. 
alleviation and eliminating dependence on food aid. The country’s policy, strategy and development 
programmes are geared towards meeting these objectives. The government’s second phase of its 
Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II: sets a long-term goal for Ethiopia to become a middle-
income country by 2025, with growth rates of at least 11.2% per year), as well as the National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy (five year strategy [2017 – 2022] to reach out to a vast majority of 
unbanked communities across the country) recognize the role of access to finance in contributing to 
rapid economic growth and poverty reduction. 
Aspects relating to IFAD’s mainstreaming priorities: 
Multiple Gender inequalities compound an adverse environment for women farmers that 
4. 
results in productivity losses and negative effects on the household and nutrition. The gender 
imbalances should be dealt with make the household and national economy more productive. 
5. 
Youth are largely unemployed, underemployed, underpaid and are among the working poor. 
Youths rarely own any productive assets that would enable them to become self-employed or provide 
collateral for accessing credit. Enhancing the capacity of rural youth and supporting them to access 
financial services is an important national priority. 
Nutrition: Malnourished people more than halved to 21.4 % of population in the triennium 
6. 
2015-17 from 49% in 2000-202[3]. Although child malnutrition rates have decreased, the country still 
has one of the highest malnutrition rates in Sub-Saharan Africa. Child nutrition should be prioritized to 
prepare future generation for productive employment. 
Social Inclusion: The inclusion of women, youth and marginalized people in Ethiopia, 
7. 
particularly in resource poor areas is limited. The common problem for these categories is that of 
limited access to markets and resources, especially financial resources. The targeting strategy for 
FUFIPIII will ensure that the RFIs proactively seek out clients in these categories and bring them into 
financial system. 
Development challenges – Ethiopia continues to work on reduction of poverty, vulnerability 
8. 
of livelihoods and people, limited to access to finance and relatively weak Rural Finance Institutions 
(RFI). Despite impressive achievements in reducing poverty, more than one in five people continue to 
be poor. Many poor households that have been lifted above the poverty line, slide back to poverty if 
faced with shocks that disturbs either the person or the livelihood. Inadequate access to financial 
services remains one of the major bottlenecks impeding economic growth and household incomes 
particularly in rural areas where there is still a significant demand-supply gap. The percentage of 
adults with an account rose from 22% in 2014, to 35% in 2017 leaving 65% not included. Only 18% of 
adults reported being able to raise emergency funds from savings; others would turn to family and 
friends or sell their assets. With more than 13 million clients to be served by 2025, the RFIs should be 
sound, stable and offer relevant financial services to the clients. Barring the top five MFIs, others are 
still classified as small or medium sized and most have not reached operational and financial stability. 
The 11000+ RUSACCOs are at different stages of institutional maturity. A number of them are still too 
small with insufficient business volumes. 
1 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
IFAD’s comparative advantage 
9. 
IFAD understands the RFIs in Ethiopia through its sustained engagement over the last 15 
years. RUFIP I and II have played a pivotal role in supporting the expansion and outreach of MFIs 
and RUSACCOs. MFIs grew from a handful when first phase of RUFIP became operational, to 38 to 
date with a significant share benefitting from debt finance and technical skills development offered 
through the RUFIP Programmes. Likewise, the number of RUSACCOs increased from 134 during 
RUFIP I start-up to about 11,200 in December 2018. IFAD has a number of lessons from its 
continuing engagement with Ethiopia over several years. A sound financial sector focused on poor, 
vulnerable and underserved areas can make a difference to livelihoods and economic growth. RFIs 
require not just technical capacities, but also financial resources in the initial stages to lend. 
Regulators of financial sector should be supported to develop the RFIs as sound and sustainable 
institutions. RFIs should focus on targeting poor and vulnerable and social performance management 
apart from protecting customers. 
Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups  
The overall goal of RUFIP III is improved livelihoods and reduced vulnerability and 
10. 
poverty in Ethiopia. The objective of the programme is improved livelihoods and reduced 
vulnerability and poverty through increased incomes and better ability to manage risks at household 
level. RUFIP III will be achieved through a nationwide network of 11000+ RUFIP supported 
RUSACCOs and their secondary structure (the Unions) and 38 MFIs. Improved access to finance will 
also include targeting beneficiaries of other IFAD funded projects. RUFIP will cover 13.5 million clients 
of which more than 75% will be poor in different strata and includes about 6.5 million new clients to be 
acquired during the programme period. The key outcomes planned are (i) strong rural financial 
institutions with sound operating performance that offer better Financial access to vulnerable people, 
(ii) Wider offer of services and products responsive to customer needs from RFIs that are supported 
to diversify and expand business and (iii) Effective Financial inclusion for marginalised people and 
regions. RUFIP III, will continue to be a nationwide initiative with increased focus on least developed 
areas. The proposed target group consists of rural poor (3.25 million very poor, 7 million moderately 
poor and 3.25 million other categories) people with financial services requirements (savings, credit 
and insurance) for asset build up and loans for agricultural and other rural enterprises, especially 
youth-led and women-led. People in least developed areas would be served in a manner designed to 
improve their resilience through savings, credit and insurance products. Beneficiaries of other IFAD 
supported investment projects – PASDIP II, PCDP III, LLRP – will be targeted as well. 
Components and Theory of Change  
The proposed Programme will be implemented over a 6-year period and consist of four 
11. 
components: (1) Building capacity of institutions and clients; (2) Improving regulation, supervision and 
institutional discipline (3) Facilitating funds flow and diversification of RFI business, and (4) 
Programme Management. Component 1 focuses on building the capacity of RFIs (RUSACCOs and 
MFIs) and more importantly their clients. The objective of this component is to strengthen the 
institutional capacity of RFIs to better serve the programme’s target groups. Component 2 will deal 
with regulatory capacities for ensuring best performance outputs from RFIs and improved client 
protection leading to higher client confidence in financial services and better protection from risks and 
losses in use of RFIs’ services. Component 3 will support the RFIs in securing resources required to 
meet the credit demand. Apart from the line of credit from IFAD, EU and others, domestic funds from 
Government of Ethiopia, Development Bank of Ethiopia, commercial banks and financial institutions is 
envisaged. Component 4 deals with management of the project implementation through a Programme 
Coordination and Management Unit (PCMU) in DBE and ensuring adequate governance by a 
Programme Steering Committee. The theory of change is based on the assumption that by increasing 
the access of rural poor faced with development challenges to a range of financial services and 
products better tailored to their needs, they will be able to invest in income generating activities, 
augment and diversify their income, insure against risks and improve their quality of life. Further, by 
strengthening MFIs and RuSACCOs/unions (RFIS) to deliver an expanded range of financial products 
and services to a larger number of clients, primarily targeted by the project’s targeting and social 
inclusion strategy, the rural financial sector will become more stable and inclusive. 
2 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Alignment, ownership, and partnerships  
RUFIP III is aligned to SDGs (SDG1: Poverty; SDG2: food security in smallholder agricultural 
12. 
and rural development context; and SDG5: gender equality and empowerment), national policy 
priorities of poverty reduction through rural and financial sector interventions, gender responsiveness 
and beneficiary participations. RUFIP programmes have seen high level of ownership by Government 
and its implementation partners. Government had allowed the RFIs use LOC for a sustained period of 
time (12 years) in the first instance and is ready to utilize reflows of RUFIP loans for redeployment in 
RFIs. EIB has agreed to partner the programme with a loan of US$ 112 million. The European Union 
has committed the equivalent of US$19.4 million as co-financing. AGRA has committed USD 1.5 
million for setting up a guarantee facility to support RFIs in their quest to borrow from banks and 
financial institutions. There is interest from both international organizations, domestic institutions to 
partner the project.   RUFIP III is designed to work in harmony with other projects of other agencies 
and serve their clients in accessing financial services. 
Costs and financing and economic analysis 
RUFIP III will enable access to financial services to 13.55 million savers (including 11.25 
13. 
million borrowers) by 2025 (from estimated 7.6 million households in 2019). MFI sector would serve 
10.25 million clients, RuSACCOs (and Unions) would cover 3.3 million clients. The amount of savings 
and individual loans which many of the client households take, would substantially increase per 
household, raising the penetration of rural finance by 2025. The total outlay of the programme is 
estimated at USD 305.7 million over a six year period. About USD 40 million will be initially financed 
by IFAD. EIB has committed $112 million with part of the funds earmarked for developing leasing 
products for rural areas. A US$19.4 million contribution has been earmarked by the European Union. 
AGRA has committed US$ 1.5 million towards a guarantee fund. USD50 million will be financed by 
the Government of Ethiopia.[4] Participation from DBE, CBE and Ethiopian Insurance Corporation is 
also envisaged at US$ 60 million. Beneficiary contribution from the clients will be in the form of 
Savings with RFIs (which is utilized to provide loans to clients) and also share capital contributions in 
case of members of RUSACCOs. 
The flow of benefits over a 18 year period returns a FIRR of 27 percent and EIRR of 28.2 
14. 
percent. The financial analysis, at a discount rate of 12% returns an NPV of USD 89.5 million and a 
BCR of 3.8. Sensitivity analysis projects that the programme can comfortably weather 20% increase 
in costs, 10% drop in yield and 100% increase in provisions for defaults with FRR and ERR exceeding 
20% in all cases. Switching value analysis concludes that an increase of 238% in operating costs or 
reduction of 74% in benefits can be absorbed. 
Sustainability and risks 
15. 
Sustained provision of appropriate financial products and services to the target clients by 
RFIs without dependence on external support is the final outcome that would produce the desired 
impacts of continuing poverty reduction and livelihood risk mitigation. The project interventions 
operate at three levels (Macro- NBE, FCA; Meso –RFIs, to secure this most desired outcome. A key 
requirement for sustainability of RFIs is the availability of domestic funds for their on-lending. The 
guarantee facility and continuing robust savings performance would supplement the resources of 
RFIs. The RFIs are not built up as project institutions, but as commercial institutions that are market 
savvy, which is the key for their sustainability. 
The programme carries political, economic, regulatory, climate and fiduciary risks, most of 
16. 
which can be mitigated. Appropriate control systems and mitigation mechanisms have been built in to 
the design. The project is categorized B from Environmental and Social point of view. The climate risk 
is classified as moderate. The adverse effects if any are expected to be minimal and remediable. 
Programme Management 
While mostly continuing the RUFIP II management arrangements, staffing for critical aspects 
17. 
in targeting, social performance and partnerships is to be strengthened. Some streamlining of process 
for RuSACCOs’ access to programme funds has been envisaged. NBE, FCA and AEMFI would play 
key roles in implementing components 1 and 2. Governance structures to operate a guarantee fund 
3 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
and insurance agent partnerships for RFIs would be set up. Monitoring and evaluation function will be 
strengthened with focus on measuring results and impact. MIS would be improved, both in terms of 
technology and content. Annual Outcome Surveys will be introduced to provide data for measuring 
progress on goal, impact and outcome indicators. 
Innovations 
The four critical innovations brought in RUFIP III are: 1) institution of a guarantee facility 
18. 
which will help RFIs to access financial resources from banks and financial institutions for on-lending; 
2) capacitation of RFIs to become agents of insurance companies and market their products to rural 
clients; 3) positioning of the programme as financing hub for clients of all other projects of different 
agencies to access financial services and 4) introducing leasing finance in rural areas through RFIs. 
Implementation plan  
19. 
As it continues from an earlier phase, the programme is implementation ready, with few prior 
actions to be taken. The PIM provides a detailed account of what and how of the implementation and 
operational details. 
1. Context  
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement  
a. National Context  
Political and economic context. The current Government of Ethiopia (GoE) came to power 
1. 
in April 2018 with a vision to liberalize the country, both politically and economically. The government 
is pursuing a raft of political and economic reform, persisting with efforts to transform the country from 
agricultural based economy into a manufacturing hub.[5] Ethiopia had one of the highest poverty rates 
in the world in 2000[6] with 56% of the population living below US$1.25 per day Purchasing Power 
Parity (PPP), but by 2011, this percentage declined to a much lower level of 31%. Ethiopia 
successfully achieved six of the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)[7]. The proportion of 
people below the poverty line has been halved; the prevalence of hunger and undernourishment has 
been reduced; access to education has expanded; the gap in school enrollment between boys and 
girls has narrowed; mortality of children under-five has been reduced by two-thirds; and good 
progress was recorded in reducing HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other diseases. While this 
notable progress made toward eliminating extreme poverty with an impressive pace of poverty 
reduction over the years, Ethiopia still has some way to go to emerge from being one of the poorest 
countries in the world. 
GDP growth in Ethiopia ranged between 15.3 to 45.1% in the last ten years[8] (2009 to 2018) 
2. 
making it one of the best performing economies in sub-Saharan Africa. In 2017/18, GDP growth 
slowed to 7.7% due to political uncertainty and restrictive macroeconomic policies[9]. The high and 
consistent economic growth over the past decade has been driven by high levels of public investment 
and growth in services and agriculture. Ethiopia pursued the objective of reducing poverty by 
assigning a strong role for the GoE in the economy to encourage growth and improve access to basic 
services. Agricultural Development-Led Industrialization is emphasized for economic transformation. 
GOE had committed 60% of its total expenditure over the last seven years to poverty-oriented sectors 
– such as agriculture, education, health, water, and road development – to bring about pro-poor 
economic growth. The government is implementing a programme of setting up agro-industrial parks 
(AIPs) based on geographical catchment areas for diversified crops with potential for developing in to 
high quality value chains. Share of agriculture to GDP has fallen from 45.88% in 2006 to 34.9% in 
2017-18. Industry and service sectors have increased their contribution from 54.13% share of GDP in 
2006 to 66.2% in 2018). The public spending has come out of domestic and high levels of foreign 
debt; IMF had observed that foreign debt levels are high and the country “remains at high risk of debt 
distress, owing to its small export base”[10]Reducing fiscal deficit and current account deficit are 
priorities and private capital inflows can stabilize the macro situation. The recent opening of the 
economy to private sector and increasing market orientation are laudable steps. 
4 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Stage in transition and vulnerability - The agriculture sector, which supports 80% of 
3. 
Ethiopia’s population still suffers from frequent droughts, aggravated by climate change. Poverty 
remains higher in vulnerable, drought-prone regions. According to a study by WFP[11], percentage of 
households in the poorest wealth quintile in SNNPR (35%), Somali (28%) and Afar (36%) regions are 
higher than national average (25%). Prolonged droughts and excess rains result in crop loss leading 
to food shortage in some households; and they have to rely partly on food assistance. The Pastoral 
and agro-pastoral (PAP) communities that are vulnerable to shocks, (account for 60 percent of land 
and 12 to 14 percent of population) lag behind in most social and economic indicators. The country’s 
economic growth has not adequately trickled down to PAP communities. The Government, with 
support from IFAD and World Bank, is launching a project to enhance livelihoods resilience of 
pastoralists and agro-pastoralists through productivity and diversification of value chains. 
Poverty (SDG1), food security in smallholder agricultural and rural development 
4. 
context (SDG2), and gender equality and empowerment (SDG5): Ethiopia's most recent poverty 
analysis report[12] notes the marked decline in poverty over the last two decades. The poverty 
headcount ratio fell from 45.5% in 1996 to 23.5% in 2016. Ethiopia’s Human Development Index 
(HDI)[13] value for 2013 was 0.463 with a ranking of 173 out of 189 countries. However the Poverty 
reduction in the rural areas has not been commensurate with the macroeconomic growth achieved. 
There are still 21.4 million people in Ethiopia living below the poverty line (less than US 250; ETB 
7184) per annum, who are unable to meet their basic consumption needs. As measured by the 
poverty head count index in 2015/16, rural poverty at 27% is nearly two times higher than urban 
poverty at 15%.  Across regions Tigray, Amhara and Benishangul report higher poverty head count 
ratios while Harari region reported the lowest poverty ratio at 7.1%. 
5. 
Relevant national strategies, policies and/or programmes on smallholder agriculture, 
rural poverty reduction and enhanced food security: Ethiopia’s policy, strategy and development 
programmes are geared towards meeting the objectives poverty alleviation and improving livelihoods. 
The government’s second phase of its Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II: 2015/16 to 
2019/20), as well as the National Financial Inclusion Strategy recognize the role of access to 
finance in contributing to rapid economic growth and poverty reduction. Some of the development 
initiatives of the Government of Ethiopia (GoE), with the support of its external multilateral partners, 
are highlighted below. 
GTP II – is primarily built on sectoral policies, strategies and programmes, lessons drawn 
6. 
from the implementation of GTP I and the post-2015 sustainable development goals (SDGs). GTP II 
has nine strategic pillars, three of which have direct relevance for the Ethiopia-IFAD partnership: (i) 
Sustaining rapid, sustainable, broad–based and equitable economic growth and development; (ii) 
Increasing productive capacity and efficiency through improving quality, productivity and 
competitiveness of agriculture and manufacturing industries; and (iii) Promoting women and youth 
empowerment. GTP II sets a long-term goal for Ethiopia to become a middle-income country by 2025, 
with growth rates of at least 11.2% per year during the plan period. It highlights the promotion of 
financial inclusion, specifically increasing outreach and domestic savings. Greater emphasis is also 
placed on strengthening modern payment systems and developing regulations based on international 
standards. 
7. 
National Financial Inclusion Strategy – With support of The World Bank, a five year 
strategy (2017 – 2022) has been developed with the vision of “achieving universal access to and use 
of range of affordable and high-quality financial products and services by 2025”. The four strategies 
are: 1) Strengthen financial and other infrastructure, Ensure supply of a range of suitable products, 
services and access points 3) build a strong financial consumer protection framework, and 4) Improve 
financial capability of clients. RUFIP is designed to contribute the vision and be a part of all the four 
strategies. 
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities  
Gender: Unequal gender norms limit Ethiopian women’s ability to own land, control resources 
8. 
and income, secure equitable wages, access credit, and engage in leisure pursuits. An estimated 46 
percent of all working women (aged 15-49) are engaged in agriculture. (57%in rural areas)[14]. 
Gender inequalities compound an adverse environment for women farmers that results in productivity 
losses and negative effects on the household economy. The gender inequality index ranking Ethiopia 
at 121 out of 189 countries[15], highlights the challenge. With its gender sensitive approach RUFIP II 
had about 45% women as clients which will be targeted to increase in RUFIP III. 
5 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Youth: Youth in Ethiopia (15 to 29 years old) are largely unemployed, underemployed, 
9. 
underpaid. Youth unemployment rate in Ethiopia is 7.59% among the youth between 15 and 24 years 
old[16]. Most of them are landless, without options for farm based livelihoods and without jobs. Youths 
rarely own productive assets that help them become self-employed or provide collateral for accessing 
credit. RFIS financed youth under RUFIP III though in general financial institutions consider youth 
(who are without skills and experience) as higher credit risk. PEACE Microfinance had 68% youth 
clients and ACSI had 17% youth out of its 2.9 million clients under Youth start project of UNDP. The 
Rural Job Opportunity Creation Strategy (RJOCS) (2017) focuses on activities at both federal and 
regional levels in Ethiopia to create rural jobs. Enhancing the capacity of rural youth and providing 
them finance are critical in attaining the goal of sustainable development. 
Nutrition: Although child malnutrition rates have decreased, Ethiopia still has relatively high 
10. 
malnutrition rates in Sub-Saharan Africa. According to the 2011 Ethiopia Demographic Health Survey 
data, the percentage of chronically malnourished or stunted children dropped from 58% in 2000 to 
44% in 2011 (5.1 million stunted children with 21% severely stunted). The highest rates were in the 
regions with high levels of food poverty. The proportion of underweight children fell from 41% in 2000 
to 29% in 2011. The prevalence was highest in the Afar region (40%) followed by Amhara, 
Benishangul-Gumuz, Somali and Tigray. Acute malnutrition or wasting stood at 10% (1.1 million 
children). Malnourished people declined to 21.4% of population in the triennium 2015-17, a steep 
decline from 49% in 2000-2002. Nutrition should be prioritized with focus on reduction of stunting 
incidences among children to achieve GTP’s long term goals. 
Social Inclusion: Women, youth and marginalized people in Ethiopia, particularly in resource 
11. 
poor areas are challenged by limited access to technology, finance and markets. The targeting 
strategy for RUFIP III will ensure that the RFIs seek out such marginalized people and bring them into 
the financial system for savings, credit and insurance services. 
12. 
Environment and Climate Change: Land degradation in the form of soil erosion, 
sedimentation, depletion of nutrients, deforestation and overgrazing, is one of the environmental 
challenges faced by farmers, particularly in the Ethiopian highlands. It is one of the major causes of 
low and declining agricultural productivity and continuing food insecurity and rural poverty. 
Degradation of water resources as well as loss of biodiversity are other key challenges linked with 
deforestation, overgrazing, over cultivation, inappropriate farming practices and increasing human 
population. Removal of vegetative cover on steep slopes for agricultural expansion, firewood and 
construction timber as well as for grazing space contributes to extensive soil erosion. Topography, 
soil types and agro-ecological parameters are also drivers of environmental degradation processes 
influenced by natural resource exploitation and sub-optimal agricultural practices. 
Ethiopia's Environmental Policy (1997) aims to improve and enhance the health and quality of 
13. 
life of the population and promote sustainable social and economic development through sound 
management and use of natural resources to meet the needs of the present generation without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The policy seeks to ensure 
the empowerment and participation of the people and their organizations at all levels in environmental 
management activities, raise public awareness and promote understanding of the essential linkage 
between environment and development National Growth and Transformation Plan. 
Achievement of the goal to improve livelihoods and reduce vulnerability to poverty for rural 
14. 
communities and thus RUFIP III beneficiaries will be impacted by climate change. The main 
anticipated risks due to climate change include the following: (i) increase in frequency and extent of 
drought episodes and intermittent floods;(ii) food insecurity due to loss of crops and animals due to 
either droughts or floods (iii) increase outbreak of pests and diseases; (iv) increase in temperature; (v) 
irregularity in rainfall and prolonged dry spells; (iv) shortage of water for humans and animals. Given 
that smallholders are already being adversely affected by the changing climate, they are taking some 
measures to adapt. However their actions are usually not sufficient and they require further support to 
adopt improved technologies and practices and build their resilience. Pastoralists are adopting a 
variety of coping mechanisms. In the farming areas, many are shifting to more drought tolerant crops 
and varieties, improved forest management practices, diversified energy sources, and alternative 
means of income from off-farm activities. Pastoralists have also divided pasture into wet and dry 
season grazing areas to better manage risk, while others have changed the composition of their 
heard from cattle to camels and goats, which can better tolerate dry, hot weather. 
6 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
GoE has planned a climate-resilient green economy as a development strategy. This development 
direction promotes environmental protection, reducing fossil fuel consumption which releases 
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. In line with the climate resilient green economic plan, 
innovative financial mechanisms in green and climate finance (off grid systems, renewables and 
energy efficiency) can contribute to lessening the adverse effects of climate change in rural 
environments and reduce climate induced vulnerability. 
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement  
15. 
IFAD understands rural areas and rural finance sector in Ethiopia through its sustained 
engagement over the last 15 years. RUFIP I and II have played a pivotal role in supporting the 
expansion and outreach of MFIs and RUSACCOs. MFIs grew from a handful at the start of RUFIP to 
38 (in 2018) of which 22 access debt finance and capacity development offered by RUFIP II. 
Likewise, the number of RUSACCOs increased from 134 during RUFIP I start-up to about 11,260 in 
December 2018. While other IFI funders have from time to time supported Ethiopian MFIs, IFAD 
remains the only major development partner supporting the large RUSACCOs network. The credit 
lines and the accompanying technical capacity building measures have ensured that most RFIs are 
able to function well even while serving about 7 million clients. Successful past interventions that 
nurtured the sector form its infancy, provide a strong base from which IFAD will be able to support the 
RFIs in their quest for scale and stability. As per the demand and supply analysis (Annex 11), during 
RUFIP III, total loans of the RFIs are projected to touch 19,635 million ETB, for which the institutions 
will have to raise resources by way of savings, capital funds and borrowings. Despite a healthy growth 
in savings and capital, the analysis reveals a shortfall of 31,703 million ETBs which the institutions will 
have to fill by way of borrowings. While RFIs’ will have to diversify their sources of funds, , catalytic 
funding in the form LOC and accompanying capacity building measures will help the institutions 
mature faster. 
Development challenges – Poverty and Vulnerability: Despite impressive achievements in 
16. 
reducing poverty, the country has a significant number of poor (more than one in five people is poor), 
as described in the preceding sections. Very poor have not been able to cope with the lack of viable 
livelihood opportunities and access to means of securing livelihoods (such as jobs, finance of income 
generating assets). While a number of poor have been lifted above the poverty line, they are sure of 
being out of poverty permanently. Vulnerability to shocks relating to health, death in the family, 
drought, floods, a short term job-loss, etc., makes the household slide back in to poverty. This 
vulnerability needs to be dealt with so that people can achieve income stability and cope with shocks 
on their own. Vulnerability is severe in climate sensitive areas and pastoral regions. In Ethiopia nearly 
two-thirds of adults in agriculture and livestock rearing reported having experienced one bad harvest 
or significant livestock loss in the past five years According to Global Findex Survey (2017). Less than 
10% reported having received compensation for such a loss. This would imply that a large majority of 
rural people do not have risk coping mechanisms. 
Access to finance: RUFIP I and II provided financial services to almost 7 million people by 
17. 
end of 2018, exceeding the projections on amount of savings and credit. Despite this, inadequate 
access to financial services remains a major bottleneck impeding livelihood activities, particularly in 
rural areas. The country lags behind other sub-Saharan countries in financial inclusion as reflected by 
the Global Findex database, 2018. The percentage of adults with an account with a bank rose from 
22% in 2014, to 35% in 2017, but still lower than the regional level of 43% of adults having an 
account. Only 11 % adults could borrow from a financial institution. Only 18% of adults reported being 
able to raise emergency funds from savings; others would turn to family and friends or sell their 
assets. 
18. 
Making fledgling rural finance institutions more robust: The rural finance institutions are 
the key partners that have included about 7 million clients to financial services over a 15 year period. 
With 6.5 million clients to be additionally served by 2025, the RFIs should be sound, stable and be 
able to offer relevant financial services. Barring the top five MFIs[17], others are still small or medium 
sized and a sizeable number has not developed the competence required for self-driven growth. The 
RUSACCOs, created over the past years, are at different stages of maturity. Many are still too small 
with low business volumes. There is a consensus among development partners (World Bank, DFID) 
that RUFIP III should focus on consolidating the RuSACCOs, which is also the strategic direction of 
the RUSACCO sector. The regulatory capacity in terms of tools, skills and frameworks need 
strengthening both in NBE and FCA, to meet the growing demands of RFIs. 
7 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
IFAD comparative advantage: As explained earlier, IFAD has the institutional memory, set 
19. 
of tools and processes and learnings from experiences over 15 years. Its involvement in rural sector 
provides the client context which is integrated in to the development framework of RFIs to produce 
client level and RFI level outcomes. IFAD – in partnership with World Bank - has also supported 
SACCO development in pastoral areas through the Pastoral Community Development Programme 
(PCDP) II and III and Lowland Livelihood Resilience Project (LLRP) that will commence in 2019. IFAD 
has also funded PASIDP II dealing with participatory small irrigation interventions. RUFIP will act as a 
financing hub for clients served by the other IFAD financed projects/programmes in Ethiopia. 
Impact of RUFIP on IFAD's target group 
Access to financial services is a critical element in helping poor come out of poverty and improve 
their livelihoods. According to World Bank, ‘Finance is at the core of the development process. 
Backed by solid empirical evidence, development practitioners are becoming increasingly 
convinced that efficient, well-functioning financial systems are crucial in channeling funds to 
the most productive uses and in allocating risks to those who can best bear them, thus 
boosting economic growth, improving opportunities and income distribution, and reducing 
poverty’[18]. In the case of RUFIP I and II evidence from the field in the form of studies, interim 
evaluation and anecdotes brings out that clients benefited from access to financial services[19]. The 
interim evaluation of RUFIP[20] found evidence of increased incomes, higher crop yields, more 
livestock ownership, better asset build up and improved quality of housing. It reported that 
income levels were proportionally higher for those with a longer term access to financial services. 
Other studies carried out by different researchers and institutions also found significant improvement 
in the lives of clients. These include: 1) Clients with access to savings services from RFIs reported 
increased incomes, assets, higher ability to spend on education and health and higher level of 
savings (70% of households) as compared to those without such access[21]. 2) The 97% of 
members believed that the RUSACCO helps them to improve their food security and 70% of non-
members agreed that the RUSACCO improves its members’ well-being[22]. 3) Participation in the 
micro credit service of DECSI (a large MFI) had highly significant average effect on households’ 
average monthly income. It was obvious that the average monthly incomes of households that get 
access to micro credit are fairly higher[23]. 4) The households’ annual income had improved as a 
result of microfinance credit intervention. Participation in microfinance service has increased total 
annual income of participant households by ETB 2,129.7 which is 11% higher than the income of 
non-participants[24]. 5) Another study of DECSI found that access to financial services has brought 
about positive changes in the standard of living of people (50%) and assets (63%) who accessed the 
MFI services. Although a minority of the clients have not benefited, most of the clients have benefited 
positively[25]. 6) The anecdotal evidence also points to improvements in income, assets, 
employment, consumption, food security, health and education[26]. With its significant outreach 
and focus on low income households, RUFIP I and II have been able to create a poverty 
reducing impact. 
B. Lessons learned  
RUFIP and RUFIP II, together had a significant impact in improving access to financial 
20. 
services to rural population that was till then largely excluded. IFAD has lessons from RUFIP and 
other projects implemented by IFAD, other international and national agencies in Ethiopia. 
Line of credit (LOC) as an effective tool: The approach of providing credit funds to RFIs to 
21. 
widen the customer base and improve access to finance was clearly validated in RUFIP. While the 
client outreach of RFIs met targets, there was a significant increase in savings and credit well beyond 
the programme estimates (by 180% in savings and 71% in credit). The envisaged bridging function of 
the LOC leading to entry of domestic resources did not fully materialize. Shortage of liquidity due to 
macroeconomic and monetary developments and lack of readiness in financial institutions to lend to 
RFIs restricted funds flow from commercial banks. RUFIP III should have additional mechanisms 
(such as guarantees) to increase readiness among domestic funders. 
22. 
Capacity building interventions need priority and sequencing: The capacity building 
interventions were delayed, but were found to be effective in improving the RFIs’ operations. LOC 
8 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
component was utilized much faster, riding on robust demand and relative ease to operation. 
Capacity building interventions were comparatively difficult to carry out on account of slow 
procurement attributed to limited institutional capacity, scarcity of competent service providers and 
delays in justification of previous expenditure. 
Contribution to inclusive rural transformation: RUFIP programmes have contributed in 
23. 
creating the institutional basis and motivation for the continued transformation of microfinance sector. 
The RUSACCOS have been able to meet the requirements of marginalized people and least 
developed areas that have little presence of financial institutions, thereby bringing poor people into 
financial service coverage. With the experience of financing a variety of rural activities, RFIs will be 
able to finance beneficiaries of other projects (by IFAD and others agencies) in the country to facilitate 
them to take up income enhancing livelihood activities. The 2012 National Diagnostic Study for 
Implementation of Access to Financial Services for Low-Income Women Households and 
Entrepreneurs in Ethiopia (ILO) suggest that increased household incomes generated from the 
effective delivery of financial services enable the rural poor to better cope with external shocks, 
improve food security, and enhance access to health care, education and water. 
24. 
Capacity requirements at SACCO Union level: The consolidation of the RUSACCO sector 
is required to continue at greater pace, as this effort is beginning to improve the institutional capacity 
of the Unions in the delivery of technical and financial services to the primary RUSACCOs. 
Specifically, the consolidation will continue to address the significant liquidity gap and the delivery of 
technical and financial services and capacity building to the primary RUSACCOs. The creation of 
region-based apex institutions for the RUSACCO Unions, would help to enhance the operations and 
expand growth of sector in a coordinated and sustainable manner. This development will be 
strengthened and scaled-up in RUFIP III.  
Performance of RFIs 
The MFIs have shown that with support of RUFIP capacity building and LOC, well run 
25. 
institutions can expand with profitability and sustainability. The last eight years data shows that MFIs 
in all three categories (Large, Medium and Small) have been operationally sustainable, and provided 
good returns on assets and equity. In case of RuSACCOs, a similar outcome is expected at the end 
of RUFIP III as significant capacity building, enabling supervision and credit line are envisaged. 
26. 
Digital financial services can improve efficiency and outreach: RUFIP and RUFIP II have 
transformed the MFI sector in improving their liquidity, creditworthiness and in turn their outreach. The 
significant growth in outreach provides an opportunity for automating financial management, and 
continued improvement in the supervision and reporting of the entire rural finance system of 
RUSACCOs/their Unions and MFIs. Six MFIs are already offering mobile money products through 
800 branches; there is strong recognition that innovative initiatives such as digital finance/mobile 
banking can transform financial inclusion landscape. 
Programme management: Overall project management at DBE through PCMU had been 
27. 
effective in managing the LOC and financial management, but needed to improve in developing and 
utilizing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) tools. In RUFIP II, implementing partners were conducting 
procurement, without sufficient capacity, leading to slow pace of capacity building initiatives as well IT 
enablement of RFIs. The direct linkages of PCMU with RUSACCOs for accessing LoC proved 
operationally burdensome. Where Unions of RUSACCOs were utilized to channelize LoC funds, there 
was greater operational and cost efficiency and such as this would be a preferred channel in RUFIP 
III. 
2. Project Description  
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups  
28. 
RUFIP III will seek to strengthen livelihoods of rural poor, enabling them to attain higher 
income and assets required to improve the quality of life. The proposed programme will strive to 
capacitate about 13.5 million clients[27] of RFIs (of which 6.5 million would be new entrants) in 
improving their livelihoods and managing risks through financial and non-financial measures, 
including savings, credit and insurance. RUFIP III will address the constraints in availability of and 
access to financial services to poor households and least developed areas; adopt programmatic 
approach that builds on positive past experiences; introduce innovations, consolidate and scale up 
9 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
achievements and lessons learned so far. The overall goal of RUFIP III is improved livelihoods and 
reduced vulnerability and poverty through increased incomes and better ability to manage risks at 
household level. The objective of the programme is to increase access to a range of financial 
products and services to rural households through sustainable rural financial institutions. 
RUFIP III will directly contribute to achievement of the COSOP (2017-21) Strategic Objective 
29. 
1 (SO1), enhanced resilience and productivity of ecosystems and livelihoods through the provision of 
sustainable financial services and Strategic Objective 2 (SO2), improved market linkage and access 
to finance and technology, through its focus on rural and agricultural finance and the associated asset 
build up, income improvements and better and continuous market integration. It is also aligned with 
the IFAD Strategic Framework (2016-2025). RUFIP III is aligned to IFAD mainstreaming priorities 
relating to youth, women and pastoralists and also contribute to developing partnerships with public 
and private sector entities. RUFIP III will support achievement of three (3) Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) as explained in Para 4. 
30. 
RUFIP III will be achieved through a nationwide network of more than 11,000 RUSACCOs 
and their secondary structure (the Unions), and 38 MFIs that currently focus on rural communities. 
Improved access to finance will also be available to beneficiaries of other IFAD funded projects such 
as PASIDP and LLRP in order to enhance the overall impact of IFAD portfolio in Ethiopia. The 
programme will support eligible rural financial institutions (RFIs) to bridge their liquidity gaps through a 
credit fund; strengthen them through consolidation of the RUSACCO sector and to enhance their 
institutional capacity for delivery of financial services through capacity building activities; explore 
setting up a guarantee fund that would attract commercial banks and financial institutions to provide 
resources to RFIs, initiate marketing of rural client friendly insurance products through the RFIs, 
continue to support ongoing automation of RFI’s MIS systems; and strengthen the regulatory and 
supervisory capacity of regulators, National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) and the Federal Cooperative 
Agency (FCA). 
The key impacts envisaged include reduced poverty and better ability to cope with 
31. 
vulnerability arising from shocks. The programme should lead to: (i) strong rural financial institutions 
that offer financial services to vulnerable people; (ii) Wider offer of services and products responsive 
to customer needs; iii) diversified and expanded business in RFIs; and, (iv) Effective Financial 
inclusion for marginalised people and regions. 
32. 
In terms of geographic coverage, RUFIP III will continue to be a nationwide initiative with 
increased focus on least developed areas (drought prone areas, pastoral areas and areas with low 
penetration of financial services) and achieve goals of GTPII and the national financial inclusion 
strategy. 
33. 
The proposed target group consists of 13.5 million rural people (about 6.5 million would be 
new clients, 50% will be women and 10% youth) with financial services requirements for asset build 
up and productive utilization of loans for agricultural development and other rural enterprises, 
especially youth-led and women-led enterprises. People in least developed areas would be served 
through savings, credit and insurance products. Beneficiaries of other IFAD supported investment 
projects – PASDIP II, PCDP III, LLRP – will be targeted as well. RUFIP III also aims to facilitate 
access to finance by rural communities in programmes and projects financed by other development 
partners where technical capacities are being built among rural communities for improving livelihoods 
and enhancing economic performance. 
RUFIP III target groups can be classified as very poor and poor (subsistence households, 
34. 
living below the poverty and food poverty line and being often food insecure and vulnerable), 
transitory poor (households producing a surplus for marketing, being food secure but at risk from 
economic or climate shocks) and better off (commercially oriented households with secure livelihoods 
is and able to cope with shocks). RUFIP III estimates to target about 3.25 Million clients from very 
poor and poor households, 7 Million transitory poor households, and 3.25 million better off clients. 
Thus, 75% of RUFIP direct benefits are expected to reach the poorest and most vulnerable groups 
and regions in Ethiopia. 
Targeting and social inclusion strategy: While RUFIP II had a self- targeting approach 
35. 
driven by the RFIs, RUFIP III will apply a combination of self-targeting and direct targeting approach. 
While client enrolment decisions are left to the RFI, they will be capacitated and incentivised (through 
resources access criteria) to focus on the most vulnerable and marginalized groups. RFIs will be 
required to track and report coverage of clients of different categories as defined in the targeting 
strategy. Some of the capacity building interventions and LOC will be utilized for incentivizing RFIs to 
10 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
implement the programme’s targeting strategy. A key requirement for RFIs will be the preparation of a 
strategy for meeting targeting priorities relating to poor segments, gender, youth and least developed 
areas with the help of baseline data. This plan will be integrated in to the AWPB targets. As detailed in 
the PIM, the mobilization process will be conducted in close collaboration with Unions/FCA as well as 
MFIs. RUFIP III team and Region/Woreda Promotion agents will work together to bring about the 
inclusion of vulnerable households. 
36. 
Targeting criteria: To ensure that project services will serve the intended households, the 
targeting and social inclusion strategy will prioritize drought prone areas where majority of poor are 
concentrated and where smallholder farmers are highly affected by climate shocks. These will be 
identified, among others, through the presence of safety net programmes (i.e. PSNP 4) where 
communities are supported to develop alternative income generating activities (IGA) and savings 
through RUSACCOs. In addition, the available statistics on poverty and malnutrition levels across 
Woredas and Kebeles will inform the geographic targeting and the selection of priority 
areas/communities. 
Improving nutrition among food insecure households: The project recognizes that access 
37. 
to finance is a key element that can play an important role in combatting malnutrition if it is 
accompanied by awareness creation. Limited nutrition knowledge among beneficiaries may prevent 
RUFIP III target groups to translate increased production and income as a result of access to finance 
into improved diets. The project will contribute to improved nutrition by promoting awareness at 
community level, through nutrition education and demonstrations, with special focus in areas where 
higher food vulnerability is registered due to negative environmental effects (i.e. drought). 
The Gender Mainstreaming Strategy will consider scaling up of best practices which have 
38. 
been effective for women and youth inclusion and outreach, as well as promotion of suitable products 
for them. RUFIP I and II have demonstrated experiences on outreach of women and data 
disaggregation: they account cumulatively for 46% RUSACCO members, whose board of directors 
include 40% women representatives (exceeding the minimum required at 30%) and 44% of MFIs 
clients. RUFIP III will require implementing partners to reach a level of at least 50% women clients 
and in RuSACCO boards. The performance of RFIs’ in gender coverage will be tracked.   
39. 
The youth mainstreaming strategy recognizes the relevance to scale up successful 
interventions and results such as the UNCDF supported Youth Start (YS) programme. It constitutes a 
source of evidence-based achievements for increased growth rate of youth clients (up to 70%) and 
good practices and training modules to be taken up for replication regarding young men and women 
access to finance. RUFIP III will consider the existing surveys as well as methodologies/training 
modules developed with support of YS programme and Women’s World Banking (WWB)[28], to be 
adapted to the different regional contexts and trainings for MFIs/FCAs staff at all levels. This 
intervention is expected to expand finance education among youth, catalyse the growth of young 
clientele of RFIs and enhance investment in viable enterprises. 
D. Components/outcomes and activities  
The proposed Programme will be implemented over a 6-year period and consist of four 
40. 
components: (i) Building capacity of institutions and clients; (ii) Improving regulation, supervision and 
institutional discipline (iii) Facilitating funds flow and diversification of RFI business, and (iv) 
Programme Management. 
Component 1: Building capacity of institutions and clients. Component 1 focuses on 
41. 
building the capacity of RFIs (RUSACCOs and MFIs) and more importantly their clients, resulting in 
an inclusive and sustainable rural financial sector. The objectives of this component are to enhance 
financial literacy among the rural population to enhance uptake of financial products and to strengthen 
the institutional capacity of RFIs to better serve the target groups. The anticipated outcome is an 
operationally and financially sustainable rural financial sector and network of MFIs and RUSSACOs to 
serve poor. In particular, the focus of RFIs business strategies will be oriented towards savings 
mobilization through product development and marketing initiatives. To accelerate the movement 
away from LOC and encourage raising of resources elsewhere certain measures have been provided 
in design. The conditions for availing LOC stipulate that the large MFIs that have financial strength for 
raising resources will get funds only to the extent of repayment of past loans compelling them to raise 
resources from elsewhere for their growth and expansion. Supporting this effort will be the guarantee 
mechanism that would be in place. The capacity building effort will work on newer instruments (for the 
11 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Ethiopian market) such as financial products that meet the needs of the poor, securitisation, bonds 
and debentures. The savings mobilisation effort will be strengthened. The participation of Ethiopian 
Insurance Corporation will be taken as an example to bring on board other insurers for deploying their 
insurance funds in RFI sector. Linking of LOC with level of savings mobilised is a condition that can 
be considered after the first two years of project performance and taking stock of ground conditions. 
During Mid-term review, further actions possible are focusing LOC only on marginalised areas and 
targeted clientele, leaving other general business to be funded by other sources of funds. 
42. 
Training in financial literacy in more remote Woredas of the country is of critical importance. 
Client capacity to use financial products and services will be built up through structured courses, and 
delivered by the RFIs. Greater financial literacy, combined with wider institutional presence, will 
increase membership in RFIs, enhance uptake of financial products and services, strengthen client 
relationship and improve consumer protection. IFAD's experience with promoting financial literacy 
trainings of immediate use to low income rural people will be drawn upon from IFAD-supported 
SACCO development programmes in Uganda and other countries in the region. Client training will 
also consider investment aspects, especially for youths to enhance their ability to invest in productive 
enterprises. The IFAD financed trainings will be embedded in the annual training calendars of MFIs 
and RUSACCOs and will utilize training materials developed under RUFIP II. 
The technical and operational capacities of the RFIs would be strengthened through training 
43. 
and exposure to good practices/institutions. High level training courses would be carried out for senior 
management of RFIs with involvement of AEMFI and other competent service providers. Training of 
trainers from the RFIs would be carried out on key operational aspects which would then be used by 
RFIs to train mid and junior level staff. Training on supervisory and regulatory subjects specified by 
the regulators (NBE and FCA) would be provided from time to time to address emerging needs. RFIs 
will be supported for improved internal systems and processes, higher levels of information 
technology adoption, introduction new products, services and financial sector partnerships. Some of 
the IT adoption related work that commenced during RUFIP II (Enabling RFIs to acquire IT systems 
and customized software) would be continued and brought to a fruitful conclusion. 
Component 2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline. This 
44. 
component will deal with regulatory capacities for ensuring best performance outputs from RFIs and 
improved client protection.   The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacities of NBE 
and the FCA in their mandates to supervise and regulate MFIs and RUSSACCOs (and their Unions), 
respectively in a manner that improves client confidence in financial services and affords protection 
from risks and losses in use of RFIs’ services. The primary driver of regulation of RFIs in emerging 
economies should the achievement of effective financial inclusion of people that are not participating 
in the financial sector, through a combination of stable and viable financial institutions that offer 
customer responsive products and services. The regulatory principles that should govern NBE and 
FCA in their oversight of RFIs should be promotion of autonomy of operations, good governance that 
ensures that RFIs take care of all stakeholder’s interests, investments in technology and processes 
the result in customer protection, social performance and transparency and orientation of the RFIs 
towards quality financial inclusion on market based approaches. The supervision should be risk-
based, requiring the RFIs to understand and map their different risks and have systems and 
mechanisms in place to deal with the risks. Creation of enabling conditions for RFIs to form, thrive 
and expand, provision of a level playing field for all RFIs regardless of their ownership or size should 
be key objectives of the regulatory regimes. 
The GoE is considering major political and economic reforms (i.e., more open market 
45. 
economy) including financial sector reforms. As part of these reforms, RUFIP III envisages several 
opportunities for policy dialogue in: 1) setting up credit bureau; 2) institution of depositor protection 
mechanism for RFI clients; 3) enabling regulations for agent networks in financial sector; 4) easier 
entry norms for RFIs in to the national payment systems; and, 5) developing protocols to facilitate 
rural and micro-leasing markets through the agency of RFIs. IFAD’s explicit contribution in these 
identified opportunistic areas for policy dialogue is envisaged through facilitation of periodic 
events/workshops and discussions. 
Regulatory and supervisory support under this component will directly enhance the 
46. 
operational and financial sustainability of MFIs and RUSACCOs. With RUFIP support, NBE has 
implemented a number of measures to strengthen its supervision over MFIs, including capacity 
building of staff, development of policy framework, covering areas such as micro-insurance, and 
consolidation of MFI sector through mergers, acquisitions and liquidation, agent banking and leasing 
for rural areas. NBE will continue to be supported for policy development for RFIs, in aspects such as 
12 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
fit and proper criteria for diversification of business, governance, advanced risk management, 
customer protection and social performance practices. Need based support for improving MIS at NBE 
to enhance supervision rigor will continue. 
47. 
FCA for RuSACCOs: The process of separating the legal, as well as regulatory and 
supervisory responsibilities between financial and non-financial cooperatives and setting up dedicated 
financial cooperatives regulation wing in FCA will be supported. A twinning arrangement as well as an 
IFAD-financed technical assistance from ILCUF has produced useful recommendations that will be 
the basis of a roadmap for orderly separation of these functions between financial and non-financial 
cooperatives. Supervision and regulation capacity of FCA will be developed further as tiered 
regulation/ inspection is rolled out by FCA following the receipt of approval from the appropriate 
Ministry. Further, FCA will be enabled to initiate suitable action to guide the establishment of Regional 
Apex financial institutions, ultimately an apex organization at a national level that will support the 
RUSACCOs through their unions. 
48. 
Component 3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business. The objective of 
this component is to improve financial support mechanisms and increase the range of products and 
services to meet the requirement of IFAD target groups. By doing so, build resilience and 
sustainability in the rural financial sector. The anticipated outcome is increased availability of lendable 
resources, capital and savings for MFIs and RUSSACOs, insurance products and leasing products for 
the target groups. The Component envisages a line of credit for RFIs, a guarantee fund to enable 
RFIs borrow from other sources, diversification of products to include agriculture value chain 
financing, an insurance marketing mechanism through RFIs for better risk mitigation at households’ 
level and introduction of a leasing product to meet rural requirements for investment in equipment and 
assets. 
Initiative 
Objective 
Implementing partners 
Line of Credit 
Agricultural value chain financing 
Guarantee Fund 
Insurance Marketing 
Leasing 
Catalytic support for loan funds, 
coverage of target groups and least 
developed areas with financial 
services 
Loan funds for improving credit flow 
for value chain activities in AIP 
areas 
Diversification of sources of funding, 
introduction of different borrowing 
instruments 
Access to risk mitigation products for 
rural households 
Increasing range of options for rural 
households for investment in 
equipment 
MFIs and RUSACCOs 
MFIs and RUSACCOs, PROSEAD 
AGRA, DBE 
Insurance Companies, RFIs as 
agents 
Leasing companies, RFIs as agents 
49. 
The steering committee will have representation appropriate for oversight of the project with 
these varied sub-components. Each initiative will have a sub-committee, including technical experts 
from the implementing partners, under PCMU to steer the specific sub-component. In the PCMU, an 
expert with experience in financial sector will backstop the management of partnerships with financial 
institutions under guarantee fund, insurance and leasing. 
To attract interest of commercial banks and other financial institutions in funding of RFIs, a 
50. 
guarantee fund in collaboration with AGRA and other partner institutions is envisaged. The guarantee 
fund will make access to loan resources easy from commercial banks for small and medium MFIs, 
Cooperative Unions and also reduce the cost of borrowing. The guarantee fund would examine 
different alternatives for guaranteeing different instruments issued by RFIs and expand the range of 
possibilities. A clear objective of the component is also to utilize the guarantee facility and the 
capacity building measures in component 1 and 2 attract a diversified base of institutions and 
instruments from which RFIs can access resources and thereby reduce dependence on external 
credit lines. 
In view of the multitude of different lines of credit currently in the market and also the need to 
51. 
put domestic support funds under a unified and professional management, stakeholders expressed 
the desire to IFAD for creating a more sustainable loan fund structure and use RUFIP III as an anchor 
and launch platform. To achieve this, RUFIP III will provide linkages and access to finance for clients 
13 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
of other development projects that need credit, savings or insurance products. The LOC will be used 
by RFIs for on-lending to clients of other projects for which linkage protocols will be in place. 
In a bid to improve risk mitigation capacity of clients, initiatives on marketing of rural insurance 
52. 
products to the clients of RFIs will be taken. The MFIs and RUSACCO Unions would be linked to 
willing insurance companies to train their staff to market insurance products (life, health, crop, 
livestock, etc.) that are suitable to their clients. In collaboration with EU supported PROSEAD project, 
access to finance for farmers, primary cooperatives and Unions operating in the catchment areas of 
Agro Industrial Parks (AIP) promoted by the GoE will be supported. 
Component 4: Programme Management: This component will support the management of 
53. 
the project implementation through Programme Steering Committee and Programme Coordination 
and Management Unit (PCMU) in DBE. The PCMU will be strengthened with appropriate expertise to 
address the technical needs of RUFIP III, such as expertise in social performance, customer 
protection and poverty tracking to fully reflect the focus of RUFIP III on poverty outcomes and also 
mainstreaming IFAD priorities. Based on experiences from RUFIP II's PCMU capacity on financial 
management, procurement, MIS and core banking system, as well as product development will be 
strengthened. The weaknesses in MIS and Monitoring and evaluation, information flow and quarterly 
reporting experienced during RUFIP II will also be addressed under RUFIP III, with appropriate 
training, staffing and systems. Given the two decades involvement in RUFIP by 2025, knowledge 
management will be a key part of programme management. The lessons would be documented in the 
form of cases, best practices and tools utilized and made available in public domain. 
E. Theory of Change  
Poverty and vulnerability to shocks that make households slide back to poverty are key and 
54. 
chronic problems facing rural Ethiopia. The problems arise from a number of constraints, faced by 
smallholder farmers including: high dependence on rainfall for their agricultural activities; limited 
access to land and/or small-scale landholdings; limited mechanization; insufficient access to inputs; 
low technical know-how for income generating activities and inadequate access to markets and 
finance. 
RUFIP III theory of change (TOC) is based on the assumption that by increasing the access 
55. 
of rural poor faced with development challenges to a range of financial services and products better 
tailored to their needs, they will in turn be able to invest in their farming activities (and thus in their 
enhanced productivity and competitiveness) and/or diversify their income through off farm activities 
and gradually improve their livelihood and their resilience to climate change related shocks. As such, 
the RUFIP III is designed to address the problem of limited access to finance by the rural poor 
associated with lack of collaterals to access credit; limited culture of savings and low level of financial 
inclusion arising from limited financial institution presence, dearth of products and services suited to 
rural poor and lack of financial literacy. The TOC also recognizes that RFIs, which have the potential 
to improve access to services for rural poor suffer from paucity of funds, comparatively low technology 
and skill levels and absence of systems and processes geared towards customer protection and 
social performance. The regulators face challenges of continuously developing regulatory capacity 
(both technical and procedural) to meet the rapidly growing industry demands. In order to further 
improve access to finance interventions at macro (NBE, FCA), meso (MFI< RUSACO/Unions) and 
micro levels (Clients) are needed. 
 RUFIP III entry point will be the strengthening of MFIs and RuSACCOs/unions (RFIS) to 
56. 
deliver an expanded range of financial products and services to a larger number of clients, primarily 
targeted by the project’s targeting and social inclusion strategy (as defined above). By doing so, the 
rural financial sector will become more stable and inclusive. To ensure soundness of the RFIs, the 
capacity of regulating and supervising agencies, NBE and FCA will be strengthened. The programme 
will also deal with the core problems in financial services to the poor, the lack of financial resources in 
RFIs to fully meet the credit demand. A line of credit, co-financing by other international and domestic 
funders, a guarantee fund to attract funds for RFIs, an insurance marketing arrangement through 
insurer-RFI partnership are all envisaged to meet liquidity shortages in RFIs. These interventions will 
culminate to poor and vulnerable benefitting from an expanded RFI presence that can expand 
clientele over the programme period; a basket of diverse products and services that are friendly and 
responsive to client needs; a higher level of institutional discipline and fair market conduct to protect 
clients and a sound microfinance sector that offers stability, inclusiveness, and certainty; ensure that 
people are able to find avenues to save, borrow for investing and insure their risks to ultimately 
14 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
improve livelihoods and reduced vulnerability and poverty in Ethiopia through increased incomes and 
better ability to manage risks at household level. Annexes 1 and 2 present the Logical Framework and 
schematic summary of the ToC, which present the outcomes as a result of RUFIP III interventions 
and the higher order development impacts. 
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships  
RUFIP III will contribute to achievement of SDGs (SDG1: Poverty; SDG2: food security in 
57. 
smallholder agricultural and rural development context; and SDG5: gender equality and 
empowerment), national policy priorities of poverty reduction through rural and financial sector 
interventions, gender responsiveness and beneficiary participations. RUFIP III is fully aligned to 
national priorities contained in Growth and Transformation Plan II and the National Financial Inclusion 
Strategy. RUFIP III continues most of the positive features from the past and the changes in design 
conform to the IFAD's Rural Finance Policy[1]. In particular, poverty impact tracking, social 
performance and client protection principles are built in to design of RUFIP III. The mainstreaming of 
cross cutting priorities of IFAD relating to youth, gender, climate change, environmental sensitivity 
have been integrated in the design. 
RUFIP III is aligned to Government's aims in terms of targeting marginal regions, as well as 
58. 
the target groups and youth employment. A notable feature of the RUFIP programmes has been the 
high level of ownership by Government and its implementation partners. The willingness of the 
Government to allow the RFIs use LOC for a sustained period of time (12 years) in the first instance 
and agreeing to utilize reflows of RUFIP loans About $ 45 million) as part of LOC in RUFIP III is a 
positive reflection of how much the GOE has valued RUFIP. Further, GOE encouraged DBE to deploy 
its own resources to supplement the LOC. While the innovative use of long term credit by RFIs for 
continuous recycling is now recognized internationally, among domestic policy makers, RUFIP has for 
long enjoyed a sound reputation as an example of successful financial sector programme. The results 
oriented collaboration with the GOE and different implementing agencies, (NBE, FCA and the 
cooperative structure and AEMFI) has been the basis for ownership and partnership. 
IFAD is partnering with EU, AfDB, FAO, UNIDO, EIB, and bilateral support from Italy and 
59. 
other European countries in the PROSEAD project, resulting in synergies and opportunities to create 
a private sector driven development model for the rural areas in Ethiopia. Further an IFAD grant-
financed Project, "Managing risks for rural development: promoting micro-insurance innovations in 
China, Ethiopia and Georgia" implemented by the Micro-Insurance Center, will develop suitable 
weather index based insurance products during the period 2017 –2021.  An IFAD grant funded 
Project "Improving rural financial inclusion through co-operatives in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Malawi" 
implemented in Ethiopia by the Irish League of Credit Unions Foundation (ILCUF), 2017-2020 is 
supporting RUSACCOs to establish Regional apex federations and associated Central Financing 
Facility instruments for accessing wholesale loans for on-lending in the RUSACCO sector, although 
the effort is currently focused on establishing one Regional apex federation. The ILCUF is also 
providing technical support in FCA’s effort to develop Tiered regulation/inspection of the RUSACCO 
sector. 
In RUFIP, financial partnerships have been secured. The EIB has committed US$ 112 million 
60. 
towards the credit line, part of which will be utilized for developing leasing and lease finance options 
for agri and rural enterprises. The European Union has committed about US$19 million as co-
financing. AGRA has committed USD 1.5 million for setting up a guarantee facility to support RFIs in 
their quest to borrow from commercial banks and financial institutions. There are indications of 
interest from both international organizations, domestic banks and insurers to partner the project. 
RUFIP III is designed to work in harmony with other projects of other agencies. In particular, the 
programme provides for establishing access to credit for clients of other projects, where income 
generating livelihoods are technically supported by projects, but access to finance is not part of the 
project components. 
15 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
G. Costs, benefits and financing  
a. Project costs  
RUFIP III will enable 13.5 million clients to access financial services by 2025 (from about 7 
61. 
million households in 2018). MFIs and RuSACCOs would account for 10.2 million clients, and 3.3 
million clients respectively. Apart from increasing savings and loans of clients, RUFIP III would 
improve access of agricultural value chain farmers to new credit products and agri-enterprises to 
equipment leasing and lease finance, raising the penetration of finance to rural households by 2025.   
RUFIP III mainstreams climate change and a substantial part of the credit it provides is likely 
62. 
to help beneficiaries adapt to climate change and enhance household resilience to weather-related 
shocks. However, as no resources are specifically ring-fenced for investment in climate change 
adaptation at this time, IFAD climate finance will be monitored during implementation rather than by 
providing an estimate at design. 
16 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Table 1: Summary Table of costs by component and financier (US dollars 000) 
Component 
1. C1: Building capacity of 
institutions and customers 
2. C2: Improving regulation, 
supervision and institutional 
discipline 
3. C3: Facilitating funds flow and 
diversification of business 
4.C4: Programme management 
Borrower/counterpart  IFAD loan 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
IFAD Grant 
Amount  % 
Other cofinanciers  Beneficiaries 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
Total 
Amount 
% 
2,517.5 
12.9 
1,908.5 
13.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
12,727.4  87.0 
- 
- 
14,437.2  74.0 
1,599.6 
8.2 
951.4 
4.9 
19,505.7 
6.4 
45,000.0 
17.2 
4,900.0 
1.9 
3,993.8 
1.5 
209,900.0  79.6 
2,521.2 
51,947.2 
32.1 
17.0 
- 
4,900.0 
- 
1.6 
3,941.6 
50.1 
35,100.0  11.5 
1,400.4 
17.8 
212,900.0  69.6 
- 
951.4 
- 
0.3 
7,863.2 
305,796.6 
2.6 
100.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14,635.9 
4.8 
263,793.8 
86.3 
Table 2: Programme costs by expenditure category and financier (US dollars 000) 
 Category 
Borrower/counterpart 
IFAD Loan 
IFAD Grant 
Amount 
45,000.0 
1. Consultancies_DA  3,477.0 
2. Credit Guarantee 
Fund 
3. Equipment & 
Materials 
4. Training 
5. Salaries & 
Allowances 
6. Operating 
Costs_DA 
1,205.5 
400.6 
879.8 
984.3 
% 
12.9 
17.1 
13.0 
13.0 
47.8 
100.0 
Other 
Cofinanciers 
Amount  % 
Amount  %  Amount  % 
- 
- 
20,624.6  76.8  2,762.4 
10.3 
4,900.0 
1.9  3,993.8 
1.5 
209,900.0  79.6 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
- 
- 
- 
- 
26,864.0 
8.8 
263,793.8  86.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2,645.2 
86.1  10.5 
0.3 
15.6 
0.5 
3,071.8 
6,876.4 
74.4  227.1 
2.5 
935.9 
10.1  9,244.9 
960.0 
52.2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,839.8 
984.3 
1.0 
3.0 
0.6 
0.3 
51,947.2 
17.0 
4,900.0 
1.6  35,100.0  11.5  212,900.0  69.6  951.4 
0.3 
305,798.6  100.0 
17 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Table 3: Programme/project costs by component and year (US dollars 000) 
Component 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Total 
5,359.9 
1. C1: Building capacity of 
institutions and customers 
2. C2: Improving regulation, 
supervision and institutional 
discipline 
3. C3: Facilitating funds flow and 
diversification of business 
4. C4: Programme management  2,508.9 
2,533.3 
60,115.1  60,115.1  60,115.1  60,115.1 
1,339.2  1,336.1 
70,517.1  68,901.3  68,739.4  66,224.1 
874.3 
3,959.9  4,063.0 
2,833.7 
2,115.1  1,174.1 
19,505.7 
3,487.0  3,225.2 
2,401.0 
2,216.5  772.9 
14,635.9 
11,666.7  11,666.7  263,793.8 
937.5 
16,935.7  14,480.8  305,798.6 
7,863.2 
867.2 
18 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan  
The total cost of the proposed programme is estimated at approximately US$305.7 million 
63. 
over a six year implementation period. About USD 40 million will be initially financed by IFAD. EIB has 
committed USD 112 million towards the programme of which a part would be utilized for promoting 
lease financing among rural businesses and enterprises. European Union has finalized a contribution 
of USD19 million. AGRA has committed USD 1.5 million towards a guarantee fund. GoE will 
contribute USD 51.9 million of which USD 45 million will be in cash for incremental credit from inflows 
of previous lines of credit under RUFIP programmes; and USD 6.9 million to cover duties and taxes. 
In addition, discussions are ongoing with BADEA (Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa) for 
funding of USD 20 million (If the discussions do not fructify, there will be a gap of USD 20 million, 
which can be filled by: (i) possible additional resources that become available in IFAD during the 
IFAD11 cycle; and (ii) co-financing and lines of credit provided by other development partners 
(domestic and foreign), and as and when they emerge). In terms of local partnerships, the DBE, 
Commercial Bank of Ethiopia and Ethiopian Insurance Corporation are likely to cofinance USD 25 
million, 20 million and USD 15 million, respectively. An estimated 63.7% of programme outlay will be 
funded from external resources and 36.3% from domestic resources. 
Financiers of RUFIP III (USD ‘000) (*In addition, taxes will be borne by the Government of 
Ethiopia) 
IFAD 
External cofinanciers 
EU 
AGRA 
EIB 
BADEA (to be confirmed) 
Sub-total 
Domestic cofinanciers 
Government of Ethiopia 
DBE 
Commercial Bank of Ethiopia 
Ethiopian Insurance Company 
Sub-total 
Total 
40,000 
19,400 
1,500 
112,000 
20,000 
152,900 
50,000* 
25,000 
20,000 
15,000 
110,000 
302,900* 
Beneficiary contribution from the clients will be in the form of Savings with RFIs (which is 
64. 
utilized to provide loans to clients) and also share capital contributions in case of members of 
RUSACCOs. MFI clients had saved to the extent of 67% of loans availed by them by end December 
2018. RUSACCO members had brought in their funds in the form of share capital and savings to the 
tune of 77% of loans availed by end December 2018. The savings and share capital contributions will 
continue to increase and will constitute a significant resource for RFIs. These are not reckoned in the 
cost and financing tables as beneficiary contributions as the volume of savings would be about 25 
times of the project outlay. RUFIP seeks to fill about 23.3 % of the resource gap of RFIs to meet the 
credit demand. The data on savings and share capital will be collected and reported quarterly by the 
PCMU. RFIs will be required to contribute a part of the costs of training and capacity building 
measures; this would be 20% of costs in case of MFIs and 5% of costs in case of RUSACCOs/Unions 
amounting in all to 0.3% of project outlay. 
c. Disbursement  
Nature of project eligible expenditures – RUFIP III expenditure categories have been 
65. 
assigned in accordance with the standard flexcube expenditure categories. Eligible expenditures 
include the following expenditure categories: (i) credit/guarantee funds, (ii) equipment and materials, 
(iii) consultancies, (iv) training (including workshops), and, (v) salaries, allowances, and operating 
costs. The summary costs and financing plan are shown in cost tables presented in project costs. 
Most of project funds (83.5%) are allocated for the credit line. 
19 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Funds Flow and Disbursement arrangements. Unless required by cofinanciers, the funds 
66. 
from different co-financiers would flow through the PCMU under the uniform terms and conditions, 
criteria and funds flows mechanisms finalized for RUFIP III. Based on lessons from ongoing RUFIP II, 
disbursement arrangements have been streamlined in case of RuSACCOs to cut delays and improve 
accountability. To improve efficiency in the funds flow, while cognizant of the need to reduce the high 
operating cost, some cost centres have been given more financial management responsibility and 
others removed from direct implementation. 
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis  
67. 
The methodology used for the analysis is based on the ‘with-project’ increase in revenue of 
rural finance institutions by subsector, in this case microfinance institutions (MFIs) and rural savings 
and credit cooperatives (RUSSACOs), as per IFAD Internal Guidelines on Economic and Financial 
Analysis. 
68. 
Outreach: The analysis builds on the achievements of RUFIP II, with the number of 
borrowers for MFIs is expected to grow from just over 5 million in 2018 to 10 million in 2025 and for 
RUSSACOs the number of new members is expected to grow from 1.9 million in 2018 to 3.3 million in 
2025, under RUFIP III over the six year period. 3.5 million clients will be from among very poor and 
poor, 7 million from moderately poor, but vulnerable and 3.5 million from other categories. Of the 
clients 50 % will be women and 10% youth. The coverage of household members will be a minimum 
of about 43 million and a maximum of about 62 million[30]. At the estimated minimum coverage of 43 
million people, RUFIP will influence about 40% of the population in the country. This is a significant 
level of outreach and it would encompass most of the very poor and poor people in Ethiopia. 
69. 
Financial and economic rate of returns: The financial discount rate used is 12 percent, a 
rate used by successive World Bank projects in Ethiopia over the past year (2018).[31] Although the 
deposit rate on savings as per RUFIP III is at 8 percent, a more conservative value is used as the 
opportunity cost of capital. The social discount rate used in the analysis is rounded up to 7.0 percent, 
based on Ethiopian sovereign bond yields.[32] 
Key indicators of financial and economic returns 
Indicator 
IRR % 
NPV (USD mn) 
BCR 
Switching Value- 
Benefit % 
Switching value –cost 
% 
Benefit flow over 18 years 
FRR @12% 
27.0 
89.5 
3.8 
ERR @7% 
28.2 
197.8 
7.3 
-74% 
238% 
- 
- 
Overall, the MFI subsector and the RUSSACOs subsector produce positive returns under the 
70. 
microfinance sector. The microfinance subsector returns over an 18-year period an NPV of USD 
3,279 million and a FIRR of 65.5%, using the line of credit. Calculations of the RUSSACO subsector 
return NPV of USD 111 million over an 18-year period and an FIRR of 20%. The returns between 
MFIs and RUSSACO differ since MFIs are profit driven while RUSSACOs are membership-driven. 
The latter is governed by its members and decide on lending rates to their own members, while MFIs 
lend to maximize profit – within the limits of regulatory oversight. Being community owned institutions 
the interest charged by RUSACCOs is always lower, reflecting the client focus. The lower interest in 
RUSACCOs has a positive client level impact in the form of higher retained earnings. The unique 
financial design that allows the RFIs to utilize the credit funds over a twelve year period, ensures that 
recipient RFIs have adequate time to become sustainable. RUSACCO segment is important for 
clients in least developed pastoral areas and remote rural locations. 
71. 
Other assumptions included in the analysis include a staggered model of lending to RFIs over 
a six-year period, a grace period of seven years followed by a five year repayment period. During the 
programme there would be no repayment of LOC on account of the grace period. A similar 
dispensation is envisaged for RUSACCOs under RUFIP III. The period taken for benefits flow for EFA 
20 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
is 18 years based on the fact substantial part of funds (externally contributed) will be disbursed in the 
first four years of the programme and these funds (including reflows) would be utilised by the RFIs for 
the next twelve years. 
Sensitivity and switching value analysis 
72. 
The sensitivity tested for increases in cost by 10 percent and 20 percent and a decrease in 
yield by 10 percent over an 18-year period. The results remain robust for the 18-year period in the 
tables below. Since the market for financial services remains early-stage, the combination of an 18-
year discount period and continued appetite for micro-financial services suggests that high growth is 
more than likely matched by high appetite, willingness and ability to repay loans in the near future. 
Sensitivity Analysis 
FIRR % 
Increase in operating costs by 10% 
Reduction in yield by 10% 
Increase in risk provision by 100% 
27.0 
21.0 
23.0 
NPV  
USD Mn 
89.5 
45.6 
55.4 
BCR 
ERR % 
5.7 
2.4 
2.8 
27.1 
22.9 
24.4 
Switching values benefit and cost under the 12 percent financial discount rate and 18-year 
73. 
discount period is -74% for benefits and 283% for costs, suggesting significant resilience to volatility in 
costs and benefits. 
Benefit stream taken in to consideration for the EFA is that of surpluses generated by the 
74. 
RFIs utilizing the line of credit and the institution and client building support from RUFIP III. Further 
benefit streams arise from the application of loans taken by more than 11 million borrowers in their 
income generating enterprises. Given the diversity of income generating activities and the multiple 
crops and enterprises, these benefits have not been quantified at present (as the benefit stream from 
RFIs provides sufficient justification at this stage for the investments). At the macro level too benefits 
accrue to the country from financially included poor and vulnerable people. A strong RFI network with 
a majority of households included creates a financial highway that creates enabling conditions for 
businesses and government to reach out to and transact with the poor households. The benefits 
arising from this are tangible, though difficult to quantify. 
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability  
75. 
Sustained provision of appropriate financial products and services to the target clients by 
RFIs without dependence on external support is the final outcome that would produce the desired 
impacts of continuing poverty reduction and livelihood risk mitigation. The project interventions 
operate at three levels to secure this most desired outcome. At the Macro level policy and regulatory 
institutions are engaged in providing a set of enabling conditions in which RFIs can operate efficiently 
and secure the confidence of clients. RUFIP III will continue to support the NBE and FCA to enhance 
their technical capacities for policy making, regulation and supervision. At the Meso level RUFIP 
provides a line of credit to supplement resources and influences other financiers to fund LOC, by 
setting up guarantee facilities and introducing RFIs as an eligible asset class for lenders. In addition, 
the RFIs’ technical and operational capacities to offer unhindered services would be augmented 
through capacity building, IT upgradation and systems improvements. The resulting RFI institutional 
structure would be in a position to perform at high standards of efficiency and productivity; and be 
able to take informed decisions of accessing financial resources and technical services from the 
market. At the micro level, the clients are capacitated to access financial services optimally to improve 
their livelihoods and reduce risks. This is done through financial literacy training and making financial 
services available nearer the clients’ locations. Further to help clients manage their vulnerability, 
access to insurance services would be facilitated so that within a basket of savings, credit and 
insurance livelihood risks of different kinds can be mitigated. Financial analysis brings out that 
RUSACCOs take longer to achieve sustainability. While some RUSACCOs had been supported in 
RUFIP I, about 5000 RUSACCOs have been supported in RUFIP II. RUFIP will thus provide 
continuing support to RUSACCOs, as that is critical for their maturation into sound financial 
institutions. 
76. 
sustainability and financial sustainability for the RFIs, relevance and adequacy of regulatory practice 
Four key aspects of sustainability are addressed as part of the exit strategy. Resource 
21 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
and customer comfort with products and services offered by RFIs. In essence the project should 
deliver effective access to finance that makes customer livelihoods sustainable, support RFIs in 
becoming financial sound institutions that have access to a diversified resource base and strengthen 
regulators to establish oversight benchmarks and practices that ensure clients and RFIs get best 
outcomes. The design provides for initiatives that address all the foregoing requirements as explained 
the preceding paragraph. RFIs are not built up as project institutions, but as perpetual commercial 
institutions which will last beyond the project period. Appropriate regulation (strengthened by the 
project) will ensure their relevance and efficiency. RFIs with the capacity built during the project period 
for financial, operational and risk management would be able to sustain themselves at the end of 
RUFIP III. Financially literate clients, with the experience dealing with RFIs during the project period 
will be able to take informed decisions in future regarding the nature of products and services required 
by them. 
3. Risks  
H. Project risks and mitigation measures  
The programme carries political, economic, regulatory, operational, climate and fiduciary risks: 
Risk category 
Comments 
Political risks: The ongoing reform programme 
of a new government, involving reorganization of 
public sector and regional – federal government 
relations can lead to internal disagreements and 
hinder smooth implementation. 
Continuous communications between IFAD and 
GOE and strengthening of programme institutions 
to be self-reliant. Focus on poor, women and 
youth can have an important alleviating effect on 
account of favourable public opinion. 
Economic risks: Macro-economic and financial 
instability, fluctuating exchange rate and inflation 
can impair implementation. Domestic funding 
availability can be impacted on account of the 
economic policies adopted that can suck out 
liquidity. 
Policy and regulatory risks: Changes in policies 
on privatization, market orientation and 
profitability can affect the MFIs that work on 
private sector principles. Any policies that crowd 
out private sector investments can lead to losses, 
loan defaults and enterprise failure in MFIs. The 
uneven playing field between private sector MFIs 
and those in public sector ownership of Regional 
Governments is a challenge. Lack of regulatory 
capacity and delayed response to dynamic 
requirements of fast growing RFI sector can 
increase risks. 
Proposal for reform of DBE can impact the 
programme. Weaknesses in DBE’s non-RUFIP 
business operations can hinder smooth 
implementation. 
Since the loans to RFIs are ETB denominated, 
the risks will be moderate. With about 80 % of 
funds for the LOC are from secure sources, 
liquidity constraints for RUFIP will be low. 
The risk that privatization policies will be reversed 
seems low; so is the probability of risk significantly 
affecting the sector. Periodic dialogue between 
AEMFI, NBE, FCA and Regional governments 
required to ensure a level playing field. 
Component I aims at strengthening regulatory 
capacity to minimize risks. 
Since the reform of DBE has involvement of 
multilaterals such as World Bank, the actions are 
expected to be calibrated to ensure seamless 
transition. RUFIP has been ring-fenced and has a 
dedicated implementation machinery; hence risk 
impact is expected to be minimal 
22 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Operational Risks: Institutional weaknesses and 
lack of capacities of RFIs (especially for 
RUSACCOs and their Unions) may affect 
deepening and widening of financial services. 
New products may fail to perform as can the 
agency arrangements for insurance marketing. 
The RUSACCOs and Unions may encounter 
governance risks on account of weak leadership 
and low skills in governance. Fraud, 
embezzlement and losses out of negligence are 
inherent to financial services business. 
Failure to attain operational and financial 
sustainability of the MFIs and RUSACCOs can 
impact clients and is a significant risk. 
Social and environmental risks: Inappropriate 
targeting and financing of environmentally 
sensitive activities can put the programme in 
jeopardy. 
Climate change resulting droughts can impact 
livelihoods and loan repayment by clients and 
cause higher provisioning costs for RFIs. 
The capacity building interventions are expected 
to specifically address operational risks.   Given 
the commercial interests on the part of both 
insurance companies and RFIs, risks in agency 
arrangements will be resolved quickly. FCA, 
through capacity building measures and rigorous 
supervision can minimize the governance risks in 
cooperatives. There are risk mitigation products 
available with insurance companies to control and 
manage fiduciary risks arising from operations. 
The role of regulators and PCMY would be critical 
in controlling these risks. 
In case of existing MFIs, the ROA and OSS levels 
have been high. While fluctuations in profitability 
may occur, the institutions are unlikely to make 
losses and exhibit financial weakness. In case of 
RUSACCOs, adequate data is not available to 
make trend projections. FCA has introduced the 
necessary MIS and will monitor performance, to 
guide the RUSACCOs for sustainable operations. 
A comprehensive assessment has been carried 
out (SECAP) of environment and social factors 
and ways of mitigating associated risks. Through 
adoption of the suggested measures in SECAP, 
these risks can be managed. 
The sensitivity of RFIs to a doubling of provision 
against loan defaults shows that they can still be 
resilient. 
The proposed introduction of insurance products 
is likely to increase the risk absorption capacity of 
clients, thus providing them financial security. This 
in turn will reduce default risks. 
Project implementing partners (MFIs and 
RUSACCOs) will be trained during start-up to 
ensure that the environmental and social impacts 
of lending activities are addressed at the planning, 
preparation and loan approval process. PIM will 
incorporate these safeguards for adherence 
during loan sanction and monitoring processes. 
Risks at different levels have also been analyzed and dealt with to ensure that the programme 
77. 
delivers on its intended outcomes and impact. At the micro level clients face vulnerabilities arising 
from livelihood shocks and weather risks. Apart from providing advisory on coping behaviours during 
such periods, the clients would be encouraged to take insurance cover of an appropriate nature to 
counter the shocks. At institutional levels, competition and fiduciary risks can erode sustainability and 
reduce pace of growth. Utilising the capacity building support of the programme, RFIs should 
introduce systems to compete with peers as also minimize fraud risks. At the macro level, NBE and 
FCA would be acutely aware of systemic risks and the mitigation for the same. The key officials 
should be trained to foresee risks, and act with promptitude. Stakeholder consultations during policy 
development can reduce policy risks. NBE and FCA should guide the RFIs to adopt sound risk 
management policies and risk control systems. RFIs failing to sustain their profitability, thereby 
weakening ability to service savers appropriately is a risk possibility that the project has to address 
from the beginning. In case of RUSACCOs the risk is higher on this score. The measures outlined in 
the design and the partnership of the sector regulators, improve the ability to deal with these risks and 
also take prompt action. 
23 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Fiduciary risks: The overarching inherent risk is high as measured by Transparency 
78. 
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) for 2018 and the most recent, published Public 
Financial Management (PFM) Assessment was undertaken under the Public Expenditure and 
Financial Accountability (PEFA) Program in 2014, among other areas indicated weak accounting and 
internal audit exacerbated by capacity constraints associated with high staff turnover.   Whereas 
financial management arrangements currently in place in the RUFIP II complimented with the some 
country's national financial management systems meet IFAD's minimum requirements, these are aa 
number of risks that IFAD will have to bear with during RUFIP III implementation. 
PEFA assessment. According to the most recent PEFA assessment of 2014, which covered 
79. 
the Federal Government budgetary and extra-budgetary institutions, and all autonomous government 
agencies at federal level, the legal framework is observed to be consistent with international 
standards and is seen to be widely understood by budget institutions. Overall, the major challenge 
observed by PEFA was staff turnover of procurement officers, mainly due to low salaries. This 
resulted in a high demand for training of newly recruited staff by PPPAA, but again this is still 
persistent until today since the salary structures of government staff have not been revised. 
Financial management risk 
· Use of MS Excel for accounting data 
processing and reporting poses a risk of data 
loss, delays in reporting, errors and fraud. 
· Many implementing agencies with wide 
geographical spread and limited capacities 
posing a risk low disbursement as a result of 
delays in justification and potential ineligible 
expenditure. 
· Poor quality AWPB often submitted late. 
· Poor quality audit reports characterised by 
insufficient disclosures, failure to follow 
financial reporting standards and absence of 
management letters. 
Mitigation 
· Procure and install an off the self -accounting software with a 
modified chart of accounts coded to accommodate accounting 
and reporting needs of RUFIP III has and this will be one of 
the financing covenants. 
· Funds flow arrangements for the financial cooperative sector 
aligned to the proposed role of FCA in the implementation 
arrangements and last point of receipt of funds in the sector 
put at Financial Cooperative Union rather than Woreda level. 
· A full time, dedicated accountant for RUFIP III, recruited 
competitively and on fixed contract provided for to boost 
financial management capacity at FCA. 
· RUFIP III M & E officer will take the lead in AWPB 
preparations and consolidations in consultation with finance 
staff. 
· Common coding of chart of accounts and M & E system to 
facilitate common reporting and comparison of financial and 
physical progress 
· IFAD will support training on AWPB preparation as part of 
the start-up activities to improve quality of AWPBs 
· PCMU will have to consolidate and provide the auditors with 
complete set of financial statements with all the disclosures in 
compliance with International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards (IPSAS) at least three months following end of 
fiscal year to facilitate audit report submission no later than six 
months following end of the fiscal year. 
· Terms of Reference for audit will clearly specify IFAD audit 
requirements and will be subject to IFAD No objection. 
I. Environment and Social category  
RUFIP III may have some adverse environmental and/or social impacts on human 
80. 
populations or environmentally significant areas, but the likely impacts: (i) are less adverse than those 
for category A; (ii) are site specific and mostly reversible in nature; and (iii) can be readily remedied by 
appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. Based on the justification above and the 
National EIA Guideline and the SECAP, the programme falls under Category B. It is not expected to 
24 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
have any significant irreversible adverse environmental or social implications. The project will support 
access to financial products which are adapted to the needs of vulnerable populations and do not 
engender major adverse environmental and social impact. Category B projects require an ESMP, 
which is incorporated in the SECAP review note in the form of a matrix, showing the output from the 
environmental and social Management Framework analysis. As the specific investments that will be 
made by the RUFIP III beneficiaries are currently unknown an ESMF has been developed during the 
design phase. The ESMF includes guidance and screening criteria for the selection of sub-projects for 
the cases that necessitate an ESMP to be developed during project implementation phase. 
J. Climate Risk classification  
Based on the preliminary design of RUFIP III and the agreed project activities in the design, 
81. 
basic climate risk analysis of the project has been done. According to this analysis RUFIP III has 
moderate climate risk. The risk classification is based on the typology of investments that will be 
made by the RUFIP III beneficiaries. Given that most of the beneficiaries are smallholder framers and 
pastoralists their livelihoods and hence investments made are exposed and sensitive to climate 
shocks. However, the resources accessed through RUFIP III can also be utilized for investments that 
can build the resilience of the beneficiaries and support the recovery following climate related shocks. 
82. 
Climate change: The key trends and shocks the project beneficiaries should anticipate due 
to climate change during project implementation include the following: (i) increase in frequency and 
extent of drought episodes, famines and outbreaks of diseases;(ii) Famine due to Loss of crops, 
animalsl (iii) Increase in the frequent flood hazards; (iv) Decline in precipitation and increase in 
temperature; (v) Irregularity in rainfall and droughts; (iv) Shortage of water for human and animals. 
Pastoralists are adopting a variety of coping mechanisms, including more drought tolerant crops and 
varieties, improved forest management, diversified energy sources, and off-farm activities. 
Pastoralists have also divided pasture into wet and dry season grazing areas to better manage risk, 
and changed their herd from cattle to camels and goats, that are drought tolerant. 
Government of Ethiopia has planned a climate-resilient green economy as a development strategy. 
This development direction promotes environmental protection, reducing fossil fuel consumption 
which releases greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. In line with the climate resilient green 
economic plan, innovative financial mechanisms in green and climate finance (off grid systems, 
renewables and energy efficiency) can contribute to lessening the adverse effects of climate change 
in rural environments and reduce climate induced vulnerability. 
4. Implementation  
K. Organizational Framework  
a. Project management and coordination  
The implementation arrangements of RUFIP II will be largely continued and strengthened 
83. 
based on lessons learned. MOF will be the representative of the GOE. The project Steering 
Committee provide policy and strategic leadership/guidance and oversight to the programme. The 
project Steering Committee will have key institutions such as MOF, NBE, FCA, DBE, One insurance 
Company, One Commercial Bank, as members. The Project director will provide support to the PSC 
for its functioning. 
DBE as the Lead Implementing Agency, will establish a PCMU to coordinate and manage 
84. 
implementation of all the proposed programme activities. The main partners will include the NBE, the 
FCA, and AEMFI. The PCMU, hosted by DBE will take care of operational aspects relating to 
consolidation of AWPBs, release of funds under the plans, collection, analysis and reporting of 
information on periodically. NBE and FCA will undertake regulation and supervision and guide the 
RFIs. The RFIs (MFIs and RUSACCOs) will expand financial services and widen/deepen product 
offering to clients. MFIs and RUSACCO Unions (on behalf of RUSACCOs) will be able to access line 
of credit from DBE through application to the PCMU as per the procedures established. 
85. 
Two sub-committees of the PCMU would be established, one for the guarantee facility and 
another for managing the Insurer – RFI agent partnerships. The guarantee facility will be set up in 
25 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
DBE and managed by qualified experts. AGRA and other partners would provide TA for initial set up 
as also framing operational procedures and guidelines for the guarantee facility. To coordinate the 
interventions relating to targeting, social performance and customer protection, suitable expertise will 
be placed within the PCMU. The expert concerned will dialogue with the RFIs and FCA and offer 
guidance on planning, monitoring, reviewing and reporting based on data. A person with experience 
of financial sector would be in position in PCMU to drive the guarantee fund, insurance marketing 
through RFIs and managing financial sector partnerships with RUFIP. The M&E function in the PCMU 
will integrate data collection and studies relating to targeting, social performance and customer 
protection in to normal MIS and M&E processes as well as periodic reporting. 
MFIs that satisfy qualifying criteria[33] will become implementing agencies and be able to 
86. 
avail line of credit and capacity building support. RUSACCOS will be able to access RUFIP support 
through their Unions (about 140 them, which will be the implementing agencies) which will make 
applications for credit and capacity building support to FCA. FCA will in turn send the applications to 
the PCMU. The routing of RUSACCO support through their unions has been done with a view to 
streamline programme coordination and management. 
The positioning of RUFIP as a hub for financing other projects will be achieved through 
87. 
identification of areas of operation of other participating projects and making arrangements with RFIs 
in those areas to establish standard protocols for financing. The protocols will specify the 
requirements for selection of eligible clients and forwarding their applications to a nodal officer in the 
local RFI, who will then take responsibility for further processing of the credit applications. The training 
of clients from a financial literacy point of view will be taken up jointly by the RFI and the participating 
project. The participating projects will be encouraged to hire or designate a rural finance professional 
for maintaining the relationship with the local RFIs. 
Partnerships with technical advisory institutions will be required for progress out of poverty 
88. 
tracking, social performance and customer protection mainstreaming, operations of guarantee facility 
and managing the insurance product marketing through RFI agents. Building capacities in the RFIs 
will also require partnerships and training arrangements. 
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance  
Financial Management 
89. 
Organization and Staffing The MoF, as representative of the Borrower, will represent GoE 
on all matters pertaining to RUFIP III. DBE is assigned the responsibility of Lead Executing Agency 
and will ensure the overall oversight for the implementation of Programme at National level with its 
roles reflected at Regional level. This includes the provision of general policy directions for the 
implementation, coordinating, implementing and ensuring coordination with other relevant agencies. 
As a disbursement condition and as part of the PCMU, a full time Finance Manager and at least two 
accountants must have been assigned. IFAD No Objection will be needed for the hiring of the Finance 
Manager. As these are full time staff of DBE, counterpart funds shall be used to cover their salary 
costs. 
FCA has been designated as a key implementing agency for the financial cooperative sector. 
90. 
This will involve coordinating budgeting, release of funds, justification and reporting for all Regional 
Bureaus as well as FCA itself. Given the current low capacity at FCA’s finance directorate, a 
dedicated accountant will be recruited competitively on fixed term contract basis to join the finance 
team for purposes of RUFIP III financial management. For each of the other implementing agencies, 
focal staff will be assigned to handle RUFIP III day to day financial management requirements. As 
there will be a small volume of transactions, these do not need to be fully dedicated. The Regional 
Cooperative Promotion Bureaus will collate financial reports from Unions and report to FCA, which in 
turn will report to PCMU. Detailed financial reporting and audit arrangements will be documented in 
the relevant contracts/MoUs. 
Budgeting. RUFIP III M&E officer will take the lead in AWPB preparations and consolidations 
91. 
in consultation with finance staff. IFAD will support training on AWPB preparation as part of the start-
up activities. As part of the budget calendar and one of the financing covenants, the AWPB will be 
submitted to IFAD for No Objection no later than 07 May, each year. 
26 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
Internal Controls. The financial control environment in Ethiopia is relatively strong albeit with 
92. 
some challenges. As assessed by PEFA, there is high compliance to the strong internal controls and 
improvement in external audit and related oversight. Under RUFIP II, some control gaps have been 
identified by statutory audits and supervision missions including; absence of accounting software, 
weak PIM, delays in justifications by implementing agencies, irregular reconciliations among others. 
These controls are strengthened in the PIM. 
Accounting Systems, Policies and Procedures. Use of MS Excel limited RUFIP II reporting 
93. 
to programme components, sub-components, and expenditure categories leaving out individual 
activity level. MS Excel is time consuming and prone to errors and fraud and limits budget control. As 
critical start-up activity, an off the shelf accounting software will be procured, installed and the chart of 
accounts coded and tailored to accommodate project needs. 
Reporting and monitoring. Financial reporting under RUFIP II focused on the annual 
94. 
financial statements for presentation to statutory auditors. Interim financial reporting internally and 
even to IFAD was not done. Contributions of implementing partners were not reported. Under RUFIP 
III, quarterly reporting will be a requirement and will form part of a more comprehensive interim 
financial reporting. Details are elaborated in the PIM. 
Internal and External Audit. Given the medium fiduciary risk, DBE internal auditors will 
95. 
undertake internal audits of RUFIP II. The quality of the submissions made have sometimes been 
wanting with inadequate disclosures, absence of management letters and use of inappropriate 
standards. PCMU will have to consolidate and provide the auditors with complete set of financial 
statements with all the disclosures in compliance with International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards (IPSAS). 
Procurement arrangements. As per the Federal procurement proclamation, directive and 
96. 
manual, the actual practice of procurement is decentralized to public bodies or procuring entities that 
poses a structure that will ensure internal control in the decision-making process. In this case, the 
Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) is the public body under which RUFIP III will operate and will 
therefore be responsible for the overall procurement function. At regional level, although procurement 
is governed by the Public Procurement and Property Administration Proclamation, each region has 
specific procurement directives. 
For the ongoing RUFIP II, there is no dedicated procurement unit/specialist for the PCMU. 
97. 
The procurement function is undertaken by the DBE directorate of property facility management. 
Apart from AEMFI, the other implementing agencies, namely; FCA and NBE, are also public bodies 
that ensure internal control in the procurement decision-making process. AEMFI does not have a 
procurement unit. A procurement committee has been set up to prepare the necessary procurement 
related documents and evaluate offers. The challenges associated with procurement arrangements 
are: 
The PCMU will not be a procurement entity per se, but to effectively mitigate the challenges 
98. 
observed above, there is need for the PCMU to have a fulltime procurement specialist dedicated to 
the project. The procurement specialist, in partnership with the DBE procurement unit will be 
responsible for; (i) Consolidating the procurement plans from IAs in the IFAD format, and monitor and 
report on their implementation (ii) Review procurement processes by IAs and ensure that they 
conform to both government and IFAD requirements and (iii) Follow up on procurement processes 
with DBE procurement unit and ensure that the entire procurement processes are sped up and 
carried out in accordance with the law. 
Procurement methods and prior review amounts. Procurement will be undertaken using 
99. 
the general methods as set out in the Public Procurement and Property Administration Proclamation. 
Despite the thresholds set out in the proclamation, according to IFAD handbook on procurement, 
international competitive bidding (ICB) will be used for contracts above the following values: (i) Works: 
above USD 1 million equivalent, (ii) Goods: above USD 250,000 equivalent; and (iii) Services:” above 
USD 250,000 equivalent. The prior review thresholds are initially set at; (i) Award of any contract for 
goods and works estimated to cost USD 100,000 equivalent and any contract awarded through direct 
contracting; and (ii) Award of any contract for services estimated to cost USD 50,000 equivalent or 
more and any contract awarded through direct contracting. 
100.  Governance. All participating institutions are legal entities with clear management and 
governance structures. At PCMU level, the Programme Steering Committee will take the overall 
project governance responsibility. IFAD’s anti-corruption policy and whistle blowing procedures will be 
27 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
mainstreamed in the PIM and elaborated at start up to mitigate the risk of corruption and promote 
effective utilisation of RUFIP III resources. 
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication  
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication  
101.  RUFIP III AWPB process for each year will start in December of the previous year. It will be 
prepared in a participatory manner from the ground up based on PCMU orientations and an agreed 
upon template. The process will start with the MFIs and RuSACCOs. The Financial Institutions will 
plan their annual activities under the programme and incorporate them in their respective institutional 
and business development plans. While MFI will transmit their budget proposals directly to DBE for 
review and consolidation, RuSACCOs needs will be consolidated by their respective Unions, which in 
turn will submit them to FCA (through the RCPB if so desired by FCA). FCA will consolidate the plans 
of all Unions in to an AWPB and forward the same to PCMU. A key requirement will be the 
preparation of a strategy for meeting targeting requirements relating to poor segments, gender, youth 
and marginalised areas with the help of baseline data by the MFIs and the Unions. A nodal officer in 
each MFI will prepare a strategic plan that will outline the local context of coverage of vulnerable 
customers and marginalised woredas and how these would be covered to meet the targeting 
requirements of the project over the six-year project period. This plan would be integrated in to the 
AWPB business targets from year to year so that tracking of targeting gets integrated in the AWPB 
process.FCA, AEMFI and NBE will prepare their respective AWPB. As AEMFI and FCA will be in 
charge of Capacity Building for their respective sectors, their AWPB will be prepared in consultation 
with the MFIs (AEMFI) and the RCPB and Unions of RuSACCOs (FCA). 
AWPB will be consolidated PCMU, validated by the National Steering Committee and sent to 
102. 
IFAD no later than 90 days before the start of the implementation year (July 1st). Each AWPB will 
also include a procurement plan and, a disbursement plan. The AWPB might be revised at least once 
during the implementation year, upon request by the PCMU to IFAD, or following orientations by a 
joint supervision mission. 
RUFIP III implementing partners will be required to report implementation progress on a quarterly 
basis. PCMU will integrate their inputs in its quarterly report and submit the comprehensive progress 
report of the programme to DBE management and IFAD. 
103.  RUFIP III will develop a Results Based Management Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
System aligned to the Government of Ethiopia and IFAD requirements. The M&E will be built around 
the programme’s Logical Framework (Log-Frame), which will be informed and updated throughout the 
programme’s lifetime. The M&E system will be used as a decision tool throughout the programme’s 
life cycle, from inception to completion. 
104. 
As the PCMU will be fully integrated in DBE’s External Fund and Credit Management 
Directorate (EFCMD), RUFIP III M&E will be under the responsibility of the EFCMD’s Director. RUFIP 
III will maintain the multi-level project monitoring and evaluation system of RUFIP II, with a 
hierarchical pyramid from the beneficiary RFIs to the PCMU, with clear roles and responsibilities of 
the various actors at each level. 
105.  Monitoring of project outcomes and output indicator. A baseline survey of the MFI and 
RuSACCOs and their Unions as well as their respective customers will be carried out during the first 
year of implementation to provide benchmark data for later impact assessments. Due to the limited 
capacity to collect data and keep records on their customers, the RFI were only required under RUFIP 
II to at least track outreach and repayment indicators. Data collection is set to improve with the 
scaling-up of the Management Information System (MIS) activities currently piloted by AEMFI and 
FCA. 
Additional information will be collected periodically using thematic and follow-up studies. 
106. 
Annual Outcome Surveys (AOS) will be conducted in the target area every year starting from the 2nd 
year of implementation, in order to: (i) measure changes happening at the household level in terms of 
livelihoods and food security during the project life; (ii) assess targeting efficiency; (iii) provide 
evidence of project success or failure; (iv) quantify outcomes at client level to the extent feasible and 
28 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
(v) provide timely performance information necessary to undertake corrective actions. RUFIP III will 
also take advantage of studies conducted by its implementation partners. 
107.  RUFIP II had limited M&E capacity, with a high turnover of staff at all levels of the system. As 
a result, RUFIP was only able to fulfil one of the three expected functions of a project M&E system. 
The M&E team capacity will be strengthened to collect and analyze data, identify key trends in 
progress and advise management on adjustments needed in project implementation. In the first year 
of programme implementation, team in charge of RUFIP III, M&E officers will be certified through 
PriME, the new M&E Training and Certification programme mandatory for IFAD-funded projects. 
108.  RUFIP III will upgrade RUFIP II M&E system. A database management system (DBMS) that 
will allow to monitor the Log-Frame indicators and implementation progress of the Annual Work 
Programs and Budget (AWPB) will be introduced in the first year of project implementation. The 
DBMS will be linked to the Accounting Software and customized to allow for simultaneous monitoring 
of both Physical and Financial execution. The DBMS will be administered by the PCMU; it will be 
informed by data collected at the grass-roots level following the hierarchical organizational structure 
outlined above and using instruments developed in collaboration with the various stakeholders. For 
more efficiency and to foster more ownership from the RFIs, RUFIP will incorporate data collection 
tools commonly used by RFIs into the design of its own tools. The flow of data and information on the 
RuSACCOs side will be simplified to reduce the number of actors involved in the chain of 
transmission and allow for easier interactions between the RuSACCOs Unions and their members 
with the PCMU. 
109.  Knowledge Management and Communication. RUFIPIII implementation strategy will 
include a process of learning and capitalization of lessons learned in order to build a critical mass of 
knowledge all on all aspects of the programme (technical, administrative, financial and fiduciary). 
Knowledge accumulated will be used throughout the project life to inform decisions and help improve 
the performance of the project as well as informing other IFAD operations in Ethiopia and across the 
division, and other technical and financial partners’ initiatives. 
110.  RUFIP III Knowledge Management Strategy will aim at building the capacity of the 
implementing partners i.e. by supporting these actors in elaborating their own KM Strategies, 
acquiring the necessary tools for implementing them, access knowledge outside of their institutions 
and disseminating knowledge. RUFIP III approach will promote peer-to-peer exchanges, networking 
of RFIs, organising workshops, sponsoring thematic studies and impact studies. Case studies, short 
videos and information brochures on various themes relating to financial literacy, customer protection, 
use of different financial products and services will be prepared. Suitable means and forums will be 
used for dissemination. Based on the past experiences and the ongoing activities during RUFIP III 
successful practices realting to products, processes, institutions will be documented and made use of 
during the capacity building courses under component I and II. RFIs, their associations and Unions, 
as well as the supervisory structures (NBE and FCA) will be invited to play a lead role in the 
identification of opportunities to build partnerships to further their access to knowledge, within the 
target area and beyond. The results of annual outcome surveys and Poverty tracking measurements 
will be documented and used to inform all concerned and interested on the poverty impact of 
microfinance. In particular AEMFI will be encouraged to utilise the knowledge products in 
dissemination to wider audiences through African Microfinance Network. 
111.  Opportunities for policy dialogue have been identified in the areas of customer protection, 
social performance aspects in to RFIs working. A number of studies and actions have been proposed 
in the areas of risk based supervision, setting up credit bureau, depositor protection in RuSACCOs in 
component 1 and 2 for implementation by NBE and FCA. With both the sector regulators as partners 
and Ministry of Finance as the nodal ministry, policy dialogue on key aspects of financial inclusion for 
improved livelihoods can be facilitated through periodic events and discussions. 
b. Innovation and scaling up  
112.  RUFIP III will bring in three critical innovations in the financial sector. The first is the institution 
of a guarantee facility which will help RFIs to access financial resources from banks and financial 
institutions. This facility will induce a steady flow of domestic funds, and will be part of the exit strategy 
for securing resources for RFIs. The facility will be structured to offer guarantees and indemnities of a 
wide range that would help RFIs to issue a variety of financial instruments and diverse borrowing 
arrangements – such as loans, bonds and debentures, securitization and sale of portfolio, etc. 
29 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
The second innovation is that of facilitating access to insurance products to rural clients in 
113. 
scale[34]. RFIs will be capacitated to become agents of insurance companies and market their 
products. Other country experiences show that all the three parties, the clients, RFIs and insurance 
companies will post significant gains. Given favourable conditions, the potential for scaling up 
insurance penetration in rural areas through this model is high and the client level impact in 
vulnerability reduction is very high. 
The third innovative aspect of RUFIP is the positioning of the programme as financing hub for 
114. 
all other projects of different agencies where livelihood strengthening takes place, but access to 
finance remains a constraint. RUFIP III will establish easy procedures to be able to serve clients of 
other projects to access financial services from the RFIs. The RFIs will be able to utilize the LOC and 
capacity building initiatives of RUFIP to serve the clients of other projects. Some of these clients will 
also be targeted under IFAD’s mainstreaming priorities. 
There are some procedural innovations envisaged that would help in improving targeting, 
115. 
tracking and measurement of results. Nodal officers are to be identified in the MFIs and FCA that 
would focus on targeting programme interventions on youth, women and underserved areas right 
from the planning process. The nodal officers would also generate information from the respective 
organisations’ MIS and review performance on mainstreaming priorities every quarter. Tracking of 
clients’ progress in their livelihoods using tools such as Progress out of Poverty Index will enable to 
measure outcomes and impact over the programme duration. RFIs would be trained in use of such 
tools, collection of data and data based analytical review of outcomes. 
M. Implementation plans  
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.  
Since this would be third phase of a well-functioning programme, the state of readiness for 
116. 
implementation is assessed to be high. Some aspects that need to be worked upon before start up 
are: i) the finalisation of guarantee facility in consultation with other collaborating agencies; ii) the 
development of the insurance agency business framework involving RFIs and insurance companies; 
iii) baseline studies to arrive at RFI specific targeting strategies; iv) the identification of TA providers 
for tracking client level progress out of poverty (such as Grameen Foundation, key member of PPI 
alliance); v) the procurement of an off the shelf accounting software by the PCMU, installed with 
customization. At present no expenditures are expected to be incurred before start of the programme, 
on account of continuation of existing RUFIP II. 
At the start of the programme, it would be essential that the PCMU has the full complement of 
117. 
staff and the critical experts to handle the new elements introduced in RUFIP III, namely social 
performance, customer protection, targeting strategy for mainstreaming IFAD priorities, guarantee 
fund, insurance marketing partnerships between insurers and RFIs. A campaign to inform all MFIs 
and RUSACCO unions of the eligibility criteria to avail support from RUFIP III and the procedural 
aspects should be carried out. If necessary a training for potential new implementing partners (MFIs 
and Unions) should be conducted within the first two months of commencement. 
To commence implementation a first Work Plan and Budget for 18 months has been prepared 
118. 
that would enable the programme to smoothly deal with teething problems. The PIM is part of the 
design documents. Training of staff in understanding PIM and its usage should be provided within the 
first three months of programme become operational. A start up workshop will help the project staff 
and other stakeholders understand the features of programme design, become aware of the 
implementation strategies and operational procedures. Clarity on the quality and type of MIS required 
to analyse and report on impact and outcomes will be provided in the start-up workshop. 
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.  
119. 
In the first year of implementation, the supervision plan will include visits to the implementers. 
This will be complemented by desk review of progress and financial reports, internal audit reports and 
annual statutory audit reports and ongoing support from IFAD. IFAD and DBE will jointly undertake 
periodic supervision and implementation support missions with the Country Director of IFAD having 
oversight of the supervision. While EIB will administer the EIB financing and the EU grant, both 
institutions will be invited to join these supervision missions, in view of enhancing partnership and 
30 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
minimizing transaction cost for the Borrower. The frequency, length and team composition will be 
based on programme's support needs at a given time. Further co-financiers of the project may carry 
out reviews/studies of their own, based on prior agreement. While the joint supervision missions carry 
out comprehensive annual reviews of project performance, the periodic Implementation Support 
would be more frequent focusing on specific areas, components and themes as may be necessary. 
The Mid Tern Review of RUFIP III will be jointly done by GoE and IFAD in accordance with IFAD 
requirements and no later than mid-point of project implementation; and Project completion review will 
be a responsibility of GoE with support from IFAD, as needed, in accordance with the PCR guidelines. 
Footnotes  
[1]Ethiopia Poverty Assessment; World Bank, January 2015 
[2]Ethiopia Progress towards the MDGs, 2014 
[3] FAOSTAT – Ethiopia. http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#country/238 
[4] In addition to taxes, salaries and logistics, the Government has agreed to place the reflows of past 
RUFIP loans to the tune of USD 45 million with RUFIP for LOC. 
[5] Ethiopia: Economist Intelligence Unit, 2 Quarter 2019 Report 
[6] Ethiopia Poverty Assessment; World Bank, January 2015 
[7] Ethiopia Progress towards the MDGs, 2014 
[8] National Bank of Ethiopia, Fourth Quarterly Bulletin, Volume 34, 4, 2018. 
[9] IMF Country Report, December 2018 
[10] Article IV consultation 2018 Staff report – IMF December 2018 
[11] Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis, WFP and Ethiopia Central Statistical 
Agency 2014. 
[12] Ethiopia’s Progress Towards Eradicating Poverty: An interim Report on 2015-16 Poverty Analysis 
Study, by National Planning Commission, Ethiopia. 
[13] Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update Briefing note for countries 
on the 2018 Statistical Update Ethiopia. - UNDP 
[14] Central Statistical Agency [Ethiopia] and ICF International (2012). Ethiopia Demographic and 
Health Survey 2011. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 
[15] Human Development Report 2017, UNDP. 
[16] World bank Report, 2018 
[17] Amhara Credit & Saving Institution, Dedebit Credit and Saving Institution S.C, Omo Micro 
Financing s.c, Oromia Credit and Saving S.C, Addis Credit & Saving Institution S.C 
[18] Access to Finance and Development: Theory and Measurement, Chapter 1; Finance For All, A 
World Bank Policy Research Report- siteresources.worldbank.org/INTFINFORALL/ Resources / 
4099583.../FFA_ch01.pdf  
[19] Please see Note on Impact of RUFIP on Lives of Clients, Annex 15 to PDR 
31 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design Report (post negotiations) 
[20] Rural Financial Intermediation Programme, Interim Evaluation, March 2011- Independent Office 
of Evaluation, IFAD 
[21] The Impact of Microfinance on Household Saving: The Case of Amhara Credit and Saving 
Institution, Degadamot Woreda - Journal of Poverty, Investment and Development - www.iiste.org 
[22] The impact of saving and credit cooperatives on food security in the West Amhara Region of 
Ethiopia, Ayele, Zemen Ayalew, University College of Cork, Ireland 
[23] Impact of Micro Credit on the Livelihood of Borrowers: Evidence from Mekelle City, Ethiopia 
1*Bekele Abraham Diro, 2Dereje Getachew Regasa, Aksum University, Ethiopia, 2. Mekelle 
University, Ethiopia 
[24] Analysing the Impact of Credit on Rural Households’ Income in the Case of Cheliya District, West 
Shoa Zone, Oromia National Regional State - Tadele Erena Geleta1, Alelign Ademe 
Mengistu1 and Solomon Amsalu Gesese, Journal of Global Economics. 2018, Vol 6(3): 304. 
[25] The role of microfinance institutions on poverty alleviation in Ethiopia - Dr. D. Guruswamy 
Assistant Professor, Mekelle University, Ethiopia - Indian Journal of Commerce & Management 
Studies January 2012 
[26] a) Women entrepreneurs in Ethiopia lead the way from poverty to empowerment ; b) Women’s 
cooperatives boost agriculture and savings in rural Ethiopia – UN Women - 
http://www.unwomen.org/en/search-results?keywords=ethiopia 
[27] Based on projections and credit demand estimates made during design. 
[28] A US based non-profit, working for financial inclusion of poor-women, through a network of 49 
partners across the world 
[29] Rural Finance Policy, International Fund for Agricultural Development, Rome 
[30] The actual number of people covered cannot be precisely estimated on account of overlaps 
arising from multiple loan accounts in the name of one person (especially in towns and cities with 
heavy competition), and multiple clients from the same household. Assuming that multiple accounts 
cover 30% of the total, then the coverage would about 43.4 million, which is assumed as the minimum 
coverage. 
[31] Resilient landscapes and livelihoods project (October 2018) and Urban Institutional and 
Infrastructure Development Project (March 2018). 
[32]http://cbonds.com/emissions/issue/99509 
[33] Provided in the PIM 
[34] While small scale pilots in crop and livestock insurance have been implemented in the last few 
years using RFIs as agents, these have not been done on scale. IFAD has supported the 
MicroInsurance Centre to design a weather index insurance product with local insurers for rain-fed 
production of PASIDP II supported farmers, thus expanding the previous activities supported by WFP 
with focus on viability and sustainability. 
32 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 1 – Logical Framework 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 2 – Theory of change 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 2 
Annex 2: Theory of Change  
1 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 3 – Project cost and financing: Detailed cost tables 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
1. 
Project  costs  for  RUFIP3  were  based  on  estimates  obtained  during  an  in-country 
mission  to  Ethiopia  in  February/March  2019.  Key  summary  tables  are  available  below 
with  a  full  set  available  in  the  appendix.  Supporting  footnotes  are  available  in  each 
detailed table.  
2. 
Project Period: The proposed programme is financed over a six-year period. 
3. 
Price  contingencies:  A  contingency  of  US$  0.32  million  is  provided  to 
compensate  for  inflation  of  one  percent  on  the  US$.  Given  that  most  of  the  funds  are 
allocated to the credit line this amount is considered sufficient. No inflation rate was used 
for  local  currency  to  ensure  all  allocated  funds  are  utilized  without  deviation.  At 
implementation  the  PCMU  may  revise  quantities  at  the  time  of  spending  if  additional 
funding becomes available due to foreign currency gains. No forecast was made on local 
currency values.  
Inflation and Exchange rates 
Taxes and Duties. Most items procured under the programme will be purchased 
4. 
locally.  VAT  (15%)  will  be  financed  by  the  government  and  all  other  identifiable  taxes 
and duties, in line with the practice of externally financed projects in Ethiopia.  
5. 
Basis for Cost Estimates. Project costs are estimated as of March 2019 prices. 
Estimates  for  costs  of  works,  equipment,  salaries,  local  technical  assistance,  operation 
and maintenance were based on recent data provided by the DBE, FCA, NBE and AEMFI. 
Professional staff at the PCMU will be either seconded by the Government or contracted 
on  an  annual  basis.  All  prices  are  VAT  included,  using  13.04%  as  used.  Various  import 
and  excise  duties  apply  for  imported  goods  and  services.  International  technical 
assistance is assumed to be free of tax.  
1 
Up toProjectStart202020212022202320242025Inflation (in %'s) /a ALL Annual rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.01.01.01.01.01.01.0Compounded rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.51.52.53.54.65.6NONE Annual rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Compounded rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Exchange rates (Local/Foreign) /b ALL Rates actually used 28.228.228.228.228.228.228.2Constant purchasing parity rates 28.228.127.827.527.227.026.7% deviation 0.00.51.52.53.54.65.6NONE Rates actually used 28.228.228.228.228.228.228.2Constant purchasing parity rates 28.228.228.228.228.228.228.2% deviation 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
A.  Programme Costs 
6. 
The  total  investment  and  incremental  recurrent  programme  costs,  including 
contingencies,  is  estimated  at  US$  304  million.  The  programme  has  four  components, 
their full names are as follows:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Building Capacity of Institutions and Clients 
Improving Regulation, Supervision and Institutional Discipline  
Facilitating Funds Flow and Diversification of Business 
Programme Management 
7. 
The  fund  reflows  and  line  of  credit  amount  to  86  percent  of  total  funding  under 
component  3,  it  being  the  largest  share,  while  capacity  building  activities  of  RFIs  and 
regulatory  bodies  under  components  1  and  2  amount  to  11  percent,  with  programme 
management  amounting  to  only  3  percent.  The  relatively  small  proportion  of  funding to 
component 4 is made possible because of the nature of the large line of credit.  
Note: Staff under the PCMU are fully funded by the government as a counterpart 
8. 
contribution to the programme, signifying considerable ownership of the investments. 
Programme Costs by Component (USD ‘000) 
9. 
External financing of the line of credit is staggered evenly over the first four years 
to  allow  for  good  practice  and  management  of  funds  throughout  the  programme’s 
lifespan,  while  domestic  funds  will  continue  lending  throughout  the  six  years  of  the 
programme, going through several cycles, as per the table below.  
Programme Components by Year, including contingencies (USD ‘000) 
Expenditure accounts by Year, including contingencies (USD ‘000) 
2 
%% Total(ETB '000)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts1. C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers 383,724.1162,036.0545,760.213,607.25,746.019,353.23062. C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline 286,379.1122,733.9409,113.010,155.34,352.314,507.63053. C3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business 7,438,985.2-7,438,985.2263,793.8-263,793.8-864. C4: Programme management 173,150.647,488.8220,639.46,140.11,684.07,824.1223Total BASELINE COSTS 8,282,239.0332,258.88,614,497.7293,696.411,782.2305,478.64100Physical Contingencies --------Price Contingencies 1,176.77,847.09,023.641.7278.3320.087-Total PROJECT COSTS 8,283,415.7340,105.78,623,521.4293,738.112,060.5305,798.64100Totals Including Contingencies202020212022202320242025Total1. C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers 5,359.93,959.94,063.02,833.72,115.11,174.119,505.72. C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline 2,533.33,487.03,225.22,401.02,216.5772.914,635.93. C3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business 60,115.160,115.160,115.160,115.111,666.711,666.7263,793.84. C4: Programme management 2,508.91,339.21,336.1874.3937.5867.27,863.2Total PROJECT COSTS 70,517.168,901.368,739.466,224.116,935.814,480.9305,798.6Totals Including Contingencies202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Consultancies 6,320.65,849.75,375.94,133.53,328.62,072.927,081.2B. Credit, Guarantee Funds 60,155.160,155.160,155.160,155.111,706.711,666.7263,993.8C. Equipment and Materials 1,596.4188.6482.854.354.554.72,431.3D. Training 1,974.32,237.12,254.91,410.61,375.4216.09,468.3Total Investment Costs 70,046.468,430.668,268.765,753.516,465.114,010.2302,974.5II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 306.6306.6306.6306.6306.6306.61,839.8B. Operating costs 164.1164.1164.1164.1164.1164.1984.3Total Recurrent Costs 470.7470.7470.7470.7470.7470.72,824.1Total PROJECT COSTS 70,517.168,901.368,739.466,224.116,935.814,480.9305,798.6 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
10. 
Counterpart  contributions  by  MFIs  and  RUSACCO/Unions  is  anticipated  at  20 
percent  and  10  percent,  respectively,  for  training  and  working  related  activities.  These 
are factored in the beneficiary contribution in the table, overleaf. Domestic and external 
financiers, excluding IFAD, fall under co-financiers, such as AGRA, BADEA, EIB and EU for 
external financiers, and Commercial Bank of Ethiopia, Ethiopian Insurance Company, DBE 
and the GoR as domestic sources of finance. All contributions from external financiers go 
towards the Line of Credit under Component 3, all except for USD 3 million from the EU 
for TA.  
3 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Components by Financiers, (USD ‘000) 
4 
Borrower/counterpartIFAD LoanIFAD GrantOther CofinanciersBeneficiariesTotalLocal (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%For. Exch.Taxes)Taxes1. C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers 2,517.512.9--14,437.274.01,599.68.2951.44.919,505.76.45,878.611,109.72,517.52. C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline 1,908.513.0--12,727.487.0----14,635.94.84,463.98,263.51,908.53. C3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business 45,000.017.14,900.01.93,993.81.5209,900.079.6--263,793.886.3-263,793.8-4. C4: Programme management 2,521.232.1--3,941.650.11,400.417.8--7,863.22.61,718.05,488.1657.1Total PROJECT COSTS 51,947.217.04,900.01.635,100.011.5212,900.069.6951.40.3305,798.6100.012,060.5288,655.15,083.1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Detailed Cost Tables (USD ‘000) 
Component 1: Building Capacity of Institutions and Clients – MFIs 
5 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. MIS improvement of MFIs and NBE MIS-Project shared hardware infrastructure /a lumpsum1-----1997,377999.1-----999.1Trainings and capacity building for project team /b lumpsum1-----189,28689.4-----89.4Software Upgrades for Shared Data Center and DR lumpsum89.444.945.045.245.445.5315.4Subtotal 1,178.044.945.045.245.445.51,404.0B. Human resources development at MFIs Trainings to MFIs staffs/management/board /c Training25303030302517016,000400.7482.5484.2485.9487.6407.82,748.6TOTs for MFI staff /d Training11111-520,00020.020.120.220.220.3-100.9Pastorialist MFIs-Trainings to MFI staffs/management/board /e Training1515151515-7516,000240.4241.2242.1242.9243.8-1,210.5Modules preparations/consultants payment /f Training1010101010-506,25062.662.863.063.363.5-315.2Workshops and seminars /g Training11-11-47,1007.17.1-7.27.2-28.6Subtotal 730.9813.8809.5819.5822.4407.84,403.8C. Research & Knowledge Management for MFI sector Research and Knowledge Management /h lumpsum111-1-450,00050.150.350.4-50.8-201.6D. Exposure visits Exposure visits to board of directors and general managers of MFIs lumpsum2-2---445,00090.2-90.8---180.9Pastorialist area MFIs-exposure visit for board and management lumpsum2-2---445,00090.2-90.8---180.9Subtotal 180.3-181.6---361.9E. Social perfomance management /i lumpsum1-----150,00050.1-----50.1F. Knowledge management Financial literacy and education Training11111-560,00060.160.360.560.760.9-302.6Knowledge Management/documentation/conferences /j lumpsum1-1-1-350,00050.1-50.4-50.8-151.3Subtotal 110.260.3111.060.7111.7-453.9G. Strengthening AEMFI Strengthening AEMFI-Launching EFTRI's certification programmes lumpsum30.130.230.317.217.3-124.9Study for transforming AEMFI into apex level organisation study-1----115,000-15.1----15.1Staff Development/Trainings /k number3332--116,00018.018.118.212.1--66.4TNA for developing training programmes by AEMFI and EFTRI study--1---118,000--18.2---18.2Institutional development/ furniture and computers/stationary set0.20.20.150.150.150.15160,00012.012.19.19.19.19.260.6Upgrading and maintaining websites of AEMFI and EIFTRI lumpsum11111165,0005.05.05.05.15.15.130.3Mobility / travel lumpsum0.20.20.20.20.10.1175,00015.015.115.115.27.67.675.7Shorter term local consultant /l lumpsum1111--415,00015.015.115.115.2--60.4AEMFI Staff Salary (Long Term High Level local consultant) /m number2222221245,00090.290.590.891.191.491.7545.7Subtotal 185.3201.0201.7165.0130.5113.7997.3Total 2,484.81,170.31,399.21,090.41,160.8566.97,872.5 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
6 
_________________________________\a EU financing\b Nb of Woredas, zonal and regional offices.\c Nb of trainings\d Nb of ToTs\e Nb of trainings\f Nb of modules\g Nb of workshops\h Nb of research studies; EU Financing\i EU Financing\j EU financing\k Nb of staff\l per person\m Nb of project staff 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Component 1: Building Capacity of Institutions and Clients - RUSACCOs 
7 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Capacity Building of RUSACCOs/ Unions /a Training of Trainers (ToT) /b number27-26---531794.8-4.7---9.5Exposure Visits /c number500500500500--2,0007236.136.236.336.4--145.0Refresher training /d number-1,0001,0001,0001,0001,0005,00027-27.127.227.327.427.5136.7Subtotal 40.963.368.263.827.427.5291.2B. Member Level development Financial Literacy /e number1,0001,0001,0005005005004,5005454.154.354.527.327.427.5245.1Grievance Redressal /f number25.025.125.225.320.320.4141.4Customer Protection  Measures /g lumpsum50.150.350.450.640.640.8282.8Social Performance management lumpsum17.025.125.22.217.317.3104.2Impact Assessment  studies of benefits -Documentation of success stories unit1-----1150,000150.3-----150.3Subtotal 296.5154.8155.3105.5105.6106.0923.8C. Policy Makers Development Programmes Exposure Visits- Overseas /h number-1515---305,357-80.881.1---161.8Exposure  Visits- Internal /i number3030303030-1501,50045.145.245.445.645.7-227.0Conferences /workshops /j number5050505050503001799.09.09.09.19.19.154.3Subtotal 54.0135.0135.554.654.89.1443.1D. Policy and product Development Interventions Studies on new financial  services/products /k lumpsum17.9-30.690.490.7-229.6Linkage with digital financial  Services /l lumpsum17.010.130.370.971.1-199.3Deposit guarantee system lumpsum11111-540,00040.040.040.040.040.0-200.0Subtotal 74.950.1100.9201.2201.8-628.9E. Financial integration Support for IT infratructure (hardware, software) for RUSACCOs /m number45759045--25517,857805.01,346.21,621.1813.4--4,585.7Institutional Development- Setting up 2 Apex level national/regional Bodies /n number2-----23,5007.0-----7.0Linking RUSACCOs to Unions /o lumpsum1,0003,0003,0002,0002,0001,00012,00044.012.112.18.18.14.148.5Setting up a training Institution of excellence at the National Level /p unit-1----1500,000-502.6----502.6Developing  Training Institutions at Regional level for Financial Coperatives-  infrastructure  Development /q lumpsum22----425,00050.150.3----100.3Setting up Certification System for ptofessional and institutional excellence lumpsum1-----1200,000200.3-----200.3Pilot testing new products lumpsum1-1-1-375,00075.1-75.7-76.2-227.0Training Need Assesment lumpsum1-----1200,000200.3-----200.3Viability and Transformation Impact Study lumpsum1-----150,00050.1-----50.1Integrating Financial Cooperatives with Financial Inclusion Programme lumpsum28.018.118.218.218.318.3119.2Integrating SACCOs/Unions with Payment Systems /r lumpsum8.58.58.68.68.65.248.1Integrating Unions/ SACCOs with Credit Information system lumpsum14.317.936.036.218.1-122.6Mobility Support for  Union/ RUSACCO staff /s motorbike150-----1503,571536.6-----536.6Technical Staff Support for Unions /t person Year1001001001001001006004,285429.2430.7432.2433.7435.3436.82,598.0Subtotal 2,408.62,386.52,203.81,318.2564.6464.49,346.2Total 2,875.02,789.62,663.81,743.3954.3607.111,633.2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
8 
_________________________________\a Other Cofin equal to EU financing\b 53 participants from FCAs and regions\c Committee Members from RUSACCOs; 400 RUSACCOs with 5 participants each , 5 days\d 457 URSACCOs with 10 participants each, 2 day efresher program\e 4,500 members, 3-day program\f RUSCACCO members\g RUSACCO members\h 30 experts from FCA and RCPA\i 150 staff of FCA and RCPA\j 6 conferences, with 50 participants, 1 each year\k Financial products, e.g. micro –insurance  products- credit life\l e.g. vouchers, e.pinayments ,e.insurance\m Support to 245 RUSACCOs\n APEX Regional Bodies; EU financing\o RUSSACOs: 12,000 RUSACCOs covered - communication expense (non-consulting services)\p National training institute: may include works and non-consulting services\q 4 x training institutions\r For study and technology development\s 150 motor cycles to Unions/ RUSACCOs based on performance criteria\t 1 technical staff recruited on contract for each of the 100 unions 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Component 2: Improving Regulation, Supervision and Institutional Discipline – of MFIs by NBE and AEMFI  
9 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Financial and Digital Inclusion Framework Financial and Digital literacy programmes for MFI clients , especially in pastoral regions lumpsum111111675,00075.175.475.775.976.276.5454.7Support for Technology Innovation lumpsum111111650,00050.150.350.450.650.851.0303.2Policy and Strategic Interventions lumpsum111111625,00025.025.125.225.325.425.5151.6Subtotal 150.3150.8151.3151.8152.4152.9909.5B. Capacity Building Training for personnel Training and sensitization on the operationalization and implementation of movable asset collateral registration system by MFIs. lumpsum8-8---163,20025.6-25.8---51.5Risk Management and Risk Based Supervision for MFIs. lumpsum1010101010-504,30043.143.243.443.543.7-216.9Regulation and supervision of Islamic financial service lumpsum810989-444,00032.140.236.332.436.6-177.5Boulder Microfinance Training lumpsum44444-208,00032.132.232.332.432.5-161.4Portfolio Quality and Delinquency management lumpsum55----101,0005.05.0----10.0Troubled assets relief programme lumpsum888---244,00032.132.232.3---96.5Subtotal 169.9152.8170.1108.3112.8-713.8C. Exposure Visits for Policy Exploration/ New Learning Operation and regulation of digital financial service  cyber security and digitisation of groups number88888-403,30026.426.526.626.726.8-133.2Establishment and operation of Deposit Insurance Scheme for MFI savers number99----184,80043.343.4----86.7Lease Financing regulation and Operation number1010101010-503,60036.136.236.336.436.6-181.6Linkage of MFIs - Agency banking by Commercial Banks through MFIs number1010101010-503,50035.135.235.335.435.6-176.5Development of self regulation and institution of SRO by upgrading AEMFI number-1010---203,500-35.235.3---70.5Subtotal 140.8176.5133.698.698.9-648.4D. Conferences/ Seminars/ Workshops Adoption of IFRS by MFIs and its impact from Regulatory Perspective number700-----70053.5-----3.5Annual auditors Conference number150150150150150-75050.80.80.80.80.8-3.8Annual Supervisors Conference number30303030303018050.20.20.20.20.20.20.9Implementation and operationalization of CG framework on MFIs number350350----70051.81.8----3.5Responsible financing and financial consumer protection (customer grievances, codes of standards and fair practices and improving customer centricity of MFIs) number--700---7005--3.5---3.5Supervision and regulation of MFIs in the context of financial sector liberalization. number---700--7005---3.5--3.5Assessment on the current status, challenges and future prospects of enhancing branchless banking services by MFIs including policy recommendation. number----700-7005----3.6-3.6Training and sensitization on Bank Supervision Application number700700700---2,10053.53.53.5---10.6Advanced use and application of Excel application for Supervisors number10010010010010010060050.50.50.50.50.50.53.0Conference on Social performance management number100100----20050.50.5----1.0Subtotal 10.77.28.55.05.00.736.9E. Studies related to Policy, Systems, Impact Assessment on the need and implementation modalities of commercializing Microfinance sector in Ethiopia. study1-----1125,000125.2-----125.2Assessment on the need, risks and implementation modality of transforming MFIs into other form of financial institutions including into Commercial Banks. study-1----1125,000-125.6----125.6Assessment on the adequacy and effectiveness of law enforcement instruments and actions of the National Bank on MFIs. study1-----1125,000125.2-----125.2A study on the need and modalities for setting up a Credit Reference Bureau and its functioning study1-----1125,000125.2-----125.2A study for evolving policy and system for securitisation of assets study---1--1125,000---126.5--126.5A study for developing new financial products with necessary safeguards for greening finance study--1---1125,000--126.1---126.1A study on MIS and appropriate exposure norms and reporting systems study--1---1125,000--126.1---126.1A study on Corporate Governance study1-----1125,000125.2-----125.2A study on Payment Settlement System study-1----1125,000-125.6----125.6Subtotal 500.9251.3252.2126.5--1,130.9 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Component 2: Improving Regulation, Supervision and Institutional Discipline – of MFIs by NBE and AEMFI - continued 
10 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs F. IT Tools Electronic file and management system unit--1---1125,000--126.1---126.1Automation the onsite supervision system unit-1----1125,000-125.6----125.6Developing web pages for Directorate of Mf Supervision unit--1---1300,000--302.6---302.6Subtotal -125.6428.7---554.3G. Documentation- Manual/ Guidelines Development of Policy and Procedure Manual for handling Policy formulation, licensing and offsite surveillance of MFIs lumpsum-1----1125,000-125.6----125.6Development of Crisis Management and Problem Resolution Framework for MFIs; reorganisaion and merger of MFI lumpsum----1-1125,000----127.0-127.0Development of Stress Testing Policy and Procedure for MFIs. lumpsum---1--1125,000---126.5--126.5Macro prudential Assessment  Framework and Financial System Stability lumpsum--1---1125,000--126.1---126.1Subtotal -125.6126.1126.5127.0-505.2H. Setting up of Apex Development Bank Institutional support for setting up of an Apex Development Bank lumpsum11----2125,000125.2125.6----250.9I. Setting up of Regional Office in Pastoral Region Study for setting up of Regional Office in Pastoral Region lumpsum----1-1100,000----101.6-101.6J. Long term Consultantant for overseeing NBE interventions Appointment of long term consultant for overseeing NBE interventions lumpsum111111650,00050.150.350.450.650.851.0303.2K. Development of Micro Insurance 1. Exposure Visits in Micro- Insurance: /a MI Regulatory Framework number5555--203,60018.018.118.218.2--72.5MI products and best practices number5555--203,60018.018.118.218.2--72.5Financial literacy strategy number555---153,60018.018.118.2---54.3Subtotal 54.154.354.536.4--199.32. Capacity Building / Training programmes for MI Social Performance Management  in MI number101010-1010504,00040.140.240.3-40.640.8202.0Product Development number10101010--404,00040.140.240.340.5--161.1Managing partnership between MFIs, CBs and Insurer number--101010-304,000--40.340.540.6-121.5Supervision oriented programme number--10101010404,000--40.340.540.640.8162.2Process Reingeneering for MI operations and settlements number---101010304,000---40.540.640.8121.9Training of Trainers programme in MI number10101010--403,50035.135.235.335.4--141.0NBE programmes at EIFS number2.50.80.80.80.80.86.6Subtotal 117.7116.4197.5198.2163.3123.1916.33. Studies related to MI Product Development lumpsum1-----150,00050.1-----50.1Demand Assesment lumpsum-1----150,000-50.3----50.3Subtotal 50.150.3----100.34. IT Tools for MI Development of Database/ MIS and reporting framework lumpsum-1----1300,000-301.6----301.6 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Component 2: Improving Regulation, Supervision and Institutional Discipline – of MFIs by NBE and AEMFI - continued 
11 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs 5. Documentation/ Manual/ Guidelines on MI Handbook/ Manual for Supervision lumpsum-1----150,000-50.3----50.3Manual on Prudential Regulations lumpsum--1---150,000--50.4---50.4Handbook/ Manual on tools relevant to Ethiopian MI practioners lumpsum-1----150,000-50.3----50.3Subtotal -100.550.4---151.06. Literacy Campign on Micro Insurance Consumer Education number-5005005005005002,5005-2.52.52.52.52.512.7Literature on Consumer Protection lumpsum1-----150,00050.1-----50.1Literature on how MI models products work lumpsum1-----150,00050.1-----50.1Subtotal 100.22.52.52.52.52.5112.87. Conferences and seminars Business Planning in micro insurance- Instituional Budget and Work Plan workshop-1111-47,000-7.07.17.17.1-28.3Consumer Protection tools workshop-1111-47,000-7.07.17.17.1-28.3Financial Inclusion - Insurance Products in pastoral regions workshop-1111-47,000-7.07.17.17.1-28.3Natural disasters - Protection Measures workshop-1111-47,000-7.07.17.17.1-28.3Subtotal -28.128.228.328.4-113.2Subtotal 322.1653.7333.2265.5194.3125.71,894.4Total 1,469.91,819.41,654.0932.9842.7330.27,049.1 _________________________________\a Nb of personnel 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Component 2: Improving Regulation, Supervision and Institutional Discipline – of RUSSACOs by FCA 
12 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Strengthening of Regulation and Supervision Training of Supervising Officers in FCA/ Regional/Zonal  /Woreda  levels /a Training50150118---318894.513.410.6---28.5Training of Auditors /b Training-320----32089-28.6----28.6Refresher training of auditors /c Training---150170-32036---5.56.2-11.7Training of Inspecting Officers /d Training150200----3508913.417.9----31.3Refresher programme for Inspecting Officers /e Training--150200--35036--5.47.3--12.7Training of Auditors /f Training100---160-260898.9---14.5-23.4Refresher Programme for Internal Auditors /g Training---100-16026036---3.6-5.99.5Sensitisation of Board/ Committee members on Governance /h lumpsum1,5002,0001,000---4,50089133.7178.989.8---402.4MIS Development of Unions and SACCOs /i number2550505050-22517,857447.2897.5900.6903.8907.0-4,056.0Appointment (Recruitment) of auditors /j number1001001001001001006004,285429.2430.7432.2433.7435.3436.82,598.0Engaging consultant for drafting regulaions on Financial Cooperatives and enabling adoption /k lumpsum5.0--5.8--10.8Conducting studies on prudential norms, deposit safety and customer protection /l lumpsum-111--3100,000-100.5100.9101.2--302.6Development of Codes of Conduct /m lumpsum17.9-18.07.27.3-50.4Development of Legal Framework /n lumpsum3.6-3.6-3.6-10.8Strengthening off-site Surveillance /o lumpsum--10.1---10.1Total 1,063.41,667.61,571.21,468.11,373.8442.77,586.8 _________________________________\a Nb of supervisory officers; 5 day training programme for 318 supervisory officers from FCA,Regions, Weredas at 500 BIRR /day\b Nb of auditors; Risk based audit pgme of 5 days, 320 auditors from FCA, Region , Wereda.\c Nb of auditors; 2 day experience sharing workshop - once during pgme.\d Nb of inspecting officers; Trainables 350; 5 day programme\e Nb of auditors; Refrresher programme of 2 day duration\f Trainables 260, 5 day Risk based audit programme. 100 of those trained will be recruited by the project (1.1.10). It is assumed that another 160 will berecruited by the Union themselves.\g Nb of auditors; Refresher programme of  2-days duration\h Nb of Board / Committee Members; Training 4500 Board Committee members, programme of 5 days, 3 from each Board instead of 5.Includes field visits to good performing  Unions/RUSACCOs\i 225 additional Unions will be brought under MIS (including new Unions that are formed during the course of RUFIP III) (as against a demad of 275)\j Nb of auditors; Appointment of 1 auditor at Union level, with salery of 120000 Birr/year for 6  years\k Appointing consultant for the same at a lumpsum of 300000 Birr\l Needs based studies by engaging consultants\m Appointment of consultant\n Appointment of Consultant\o Mounting a study in 2-3 Unions. 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Component 3: Facilitating Funds Flow and Diversification of Business 
13 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Line of Credit /a 1. External Cofinanciers AGRA lumpsum0.250.250.250.25--11,500,000375.0375.0375.0375.0--1,500.0BADEA lumpsum0.250.250.250.25--120,000,0005,000.05,000.05,000.05,000.0--20,000.0EIB lumpsum0.250.250.250.25--1121,400,00030,350.030,350.030,350.030,350.0--121,400.0EU - LOC lumpsum0.250.250.250.25--17,000,0001,750.01,750.01,750.01,750.0--7,000.0IFAD Grant - LoC lumpsum0.250.250.250.25--13,993,800998.5998.5998.5998.5--3,993.8IFAD Loan - LoC lumpsum0.250.250.250.25--14,900,0001,225.01,225.01,225.01,225.0--4,900.0Subtotal 39,698.539,698.539,698.539,698.5--158,793.82. Domestic Cofinanciers Government of Ethiopia lumpsum7,500.07,500.07,500.07,500.07,500.07,500.045,000.0DBE lumpsum0.16670.16670.16670.16670.16670.1667125,000,0004,166.74,166.74,166.74,166.74,166.74,166.725,000.0Commercial Bank of Ethiopia lumpsum0.250.250.250.25--120,000,0005,000.05,000.05,000.05,000.0--20,000.0Ethiopian Insurance Company lumpsum0.250.250.250.25--115,000,0003,750.03,750.03,750.03,750.0--15,000.0Subtotal 20,416.720,416.720,416.720,416.711,666.711,666.7105,000.0Total 60,115.160,115.160,115.160,115.111,666.711,666.7263,793.8 _________________________________\a Contribution to Line of Credit 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Component 4: Programme Management  
14 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025Total I. Investment Costs A. Project Management Investments Costs 1. Equipment Laptops /a unit55----101,2006.06.0----12.0Specialist IT software /b set1-----1450,000450.8-----450.8Desktop Computers and peripheral devices /c lumpsum1-----1200,000200.3-----200.3Subtotal 657.16.0----663.22. Vehicles Four-wheel Drive /d unit3-----3100,000301.2-----301.23. Studies Impact Studies lumpsum----1-1150,000----154.0-154.0Mid-term review (MTR) unit---1--190,000---91.8--91.8Project Completion Report (PCR) /e lumpsum-----1180,000-----82.682.6Subtotal ---91.8154.082.6328.44. Workshops RUFIP III Launch Workshop workshop1-----1200,000200.3-----200.3stakeholders Consultation Work shop workshop-11111530,000-30.230.330.430.530.6151.8Steering Committee and PCMU meeting workshop11111168,0008.08.08.18.18.18.248.5Financial literacy sensitization workshop workshop111111620,00020.020.120.220.220.320.4121.3Subtotal 228.458.358.558.758.959.1522.05. Training and Study Tours Staff Local (National) training /f Training202020---602,00040.140.240.3---120.6International Study tours /g Training202020---609,000180.3180.9181.6---542.8International Training Training202020---609,000180.3180.9181.6---542.8Subtotal 400.7402.1403.5---1,206.26. Technical Assistance and Operations Guarantee Facility /h lumpsum1111116250,000250.4251.3252.2253.1254.0254.91,515.8Insurance mainstreaming /i lumpsum21.51.5---5100,000200.3150.8151.3---502.4Subtotal 450.8402.1403.5253.1254.0254.92,018.2Total Investment Costs 2,038.2868.5865.5403.6466.8396.65,039.1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 3 
Component 4: Programme Management - continued
15 
QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Unit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025TotalII. Recurrent Costs A. Program Coordination Project Coordinator person Year111111611,43611.411.411.411.411.411.468.6Senior Lead Technical Staff /j person Year4444442440,000160.0160.0160.0160.0160.0160.0960.0Finance Team Manager person Year11111167,5007.57.57.57.57.57.545.0M&N Team Manager person Year11111167,5007.57.57.57.57.57.545.0Appraisal Team Manager person Year11111167,5007.57.57.57.57.57.545.0Senior Officers person Year888888486,40851.351.351.351.351.351.3307.6Senior Accountant person Year11111166,4086.46.46.46.46.46.438.4Accountant person Year222222125,28010.610.610.610.610.610.663.4Procurement Specialist person Year11111167,5007.57.57.57.57.57.545.0Secretary person Year11111165,2805.35.35.35.35.35.331.7Officers person Year666666365,28031.731.731.731.731.731.7190.1Subtotal 306.6306.6306.6306.6306.6306.61,839.8B. Operating Costs Communication /k per year111111649,16049.249.249.249.249.249.2295.0Advertisement, information and publicity per year111111617,55817.617.617.617.617.617.6105.3Office supplies & Stationery & budget for supplies per year111111652,67252.752.752.752.752.752.7316.0External Services /l per year11111163,5113.53.53.53.53.53.521.1Asset insurance and engraving per year11111167,0227.07.07.07.07.07.042.1Water and electricity per year11111161,2641.31.31.31.31.31.37.6Cleaning & Security services per year11111161,2641.31.31.31.31.31.37.6Allowances /m per year111111614,04614.014.014.014.014.014.084.3Other /n per year111111617,55717.617.617.617.617.617.6105.3Subtotal 164.1164.1164.1164.1164.1164.1984.3Total Recurrent Costs 470.7470.7470.7470.7470.7470.72,824.1Total 2,508.91,339.21,336.1874.3937.5867.27,863.2 _________________________________\a EU Financing\b Includes installation and training for (accounting) software.\c Includes printers, faxes, photocopiers, flash drives and other IT / office productivity related devices.\d Off-road capability\e EU financing\f 30 persons per session\g Exposure Visit\h EU financing\i TA and systems development\j (1) Social performance and customer protection; (2) procurement; (3) linkage with other projects and (4) Insurance-product mainstreaming\k Includes telephone, internet\l Courier, Official gazette related expenses\m Mission fees inside the country\n Miscellaneous and unallocated expenses 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 4 – Economic and financial analysis 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
I. INTRODUCTION 
1.  This  annex  details  the  economic  and  financial  (cost-benefit)  analysis  of  RUFIP3.  The 
financial  analysis  aims  at  demonstrating  the  viability  of  financial  investments  from  a 
commercial  perspective,  while  the  economic  analysis  aims  at  demonstrating  that,  from 
an economic perspective, the project is of benefit to wider society, taking into account, 
as  much  as  possible,  all  quantifiable  and  non-quantifiable  benefits  in  situations  without 
and with the programme.  
II. DATA SOURCES 
2.  The  data  used  in  the  analysis  is  from  various  sources,  including  the  Development 
Bank of Ethiopia (DBE), National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE), the Federal Cooperative Agency 
(FCA), the Association of Microfinance Institutions (AEMFI), interviews and focus groups 
meetings with direct beneficiaries made during field visits and mission estimates. 
3. Prices are in constant terms of 2019. Financial prices collected during the field visit in 
March  2019  and  their  economic  values  were  produced  using  Costab  software,  which 
removes  transfer  payments  (taxes  and  duties)  for  foreign  and  local  cost  related  items. 
This  relates  to  the  investments  made  under  components  1,  2  and  4  for  institutional 
development, capacity building and project management.  
III. METHODOLOGY 
4. The methodology used for the analysis is based on the average increase in revenue of 
rural  finance  institutions  by  subsector,  in  this  case  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs)  and 
rural  savings  and  credit  cooperatives  (RUSSACOs),  as  per  IFAD  Internal  Guidelines  on 
Economic and Financial Analysis.  
IV. GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS 
5.  The  report  focuses  on  two-subsectors  -  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs)  and  rural 
savings and credit cooperatives (RUSSACOs) - to calculate the incremental net benefit of 
investments,  using  ‘without-project’  (WOP)  and  ‘with-project’  (WP)  scenarios,  with 
parameters and targets set out in the working papers on credit demand analysis and the 
financial  sector.  Parameters  are  based  on  information  from  NBE  and  FCA/AEMFI  that 
determine: (i) the yield on portfolio, (ii) the rate of interest charged to RFIs for borrowed 
funds,  (iii)  the  loan  loss  provision,  (iv)  operating  costs,  (v)  cash  reserves  and  (vi) 
interest  on  savings.  Operating  costs  differ  by  subsector,  on  a  declining  basis,  with  the 
larger, more efficient MFIs benefiting from lower costs margins than smaller operations.  
6.  Three  major  factors  distinguish  the  WOP  and  WP  scenarios  from  each  other:  (i)  the 
portfolio growth rate and (ii) the increase in number of borrowers, and (iii) reduction in 
operating costs. While operating costs decline in both scenarios the reduction is greater 
under the WP scenario – attributed to engagement in the RUFIP3 TA.  
7.  The  interest  rate  on  borrowed  funds  under  RUFIP  II  was  6  percent;  however,  this  is 
set  to  increase  to  8  percent  under  RUFIP  III.  The  financial  discount  rate  used  is  12 
percent,  a  rate  used  by  successive  World  Bank  projects  in  Ethiopia  over  the  past  year 
(2018).1  Although  the  deposit  rate  on  savings  as  per  RUFIP3  is  at  8  percent,  a  more 
conservative  value  is  used  as  the  opportunity  cost  of  capital.  The  social  discount  rate 
used  in  the  analysis  is  rounded  up  to  7.0  percent,  based  on  Ethiopian  sovereign  bonds 
1 Resilient landscapes and livelihoods project (October 2018) and Urban Institutional and Infrastructure 
Development Project (March 2018).  
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
rates  of  6.6  percent.2  No  shadow  pricing  is  used  for  wages  since  all  staff  under  the 
programme  are  salaried  staff,  and  now  shadow  exchange  rate  is  used  either  since  all 
goods are purchased using the official exchange rate given that government offices will 
conduct any procurement under the programme. 
8.  In the analysis, the  major difference between the  ‘without-project’ and ‘with-project’ 
is  the  growth  rate  of  the  loan  portfolio,  deposits  and  reduction  in  operating  costs, 
resulting  from  improvements  in  management  and  operation  of  RFIs.  Growth  rates 
increase  for  the  first  10  years  deriving  the  twin  benefits  of  productivity  improvement 
driven  capacity  building  and  systems  improvements  as  well  as  economies  of  scale. 
Growth rates then begin to taper down on account of business nearing full economies of 
scale and lessening impact of capacity building measures under RUFIP. Improvements in 
operations and portfolio management slow down thereafter and any growth at this stage 
is  a  result  of  increased  volume  of  operation,  and  not  productivity  improvements  from 
programme related interventions.  
V. RUFIP II Achievements 
9.  The  analysis  builds  on  the  achievements  of  RUFIP  II,  whereby  the  number  of 
borrowers for MFIs is expected to grow from just over 5 million in 2018 to 10 million in 
2025  and  for  RUSSACOs  the  number  of  new  members  is  expected  to  grow  from  1.9 
million in 2018 to 3.3 million in 2025, under RUFIP III. Forecast figures estimate that on 
average 30 percent of new RUSSACO members will be borrowers.  
10.  Data  provided  on  36  MFIs  suggests  that  the  type  of  loans  will  likely  mirror  those 
from  the  past  as  per  the  table  below.  Repayment  rates  among  MFIs  and  RUSSACOs  is 
above  95-98  percent  according  to  NBE  and  FCA,  with  loan  loss  provision  equivalent  to 
non-repayment  of  around  2  percent.  It  is  expected  that  under  RUFIP3,  similar 
disbursements  by  sector  are  likely,  with  repayments  rates  as  high  as  they  were  under 
RUFIP2.  New  client  acquisition  is  not  expected  to  adversely  impact  repayment  rates 
since demand is very high for financial services that offer competitive pricing and service 
orientation compared to informal sources of finance.  
Table: Outstanding loans by sector of 36 MFIs, as of 31 December 2018 (in ETB 
billion) 
Source: AEMFI 
VI. INSTITUTIONAL AND SUBSECTOR LEVEL ANALYSIS  
11.  Financial  profitability  is  calculated  using  an  18-year  discount  period  to  reflect  the 
disbursement rate over six years of the programme, the seven-year grace period by DBE 
to RFIs and the five-year repayment period by RFIs to the DBE. While the programme is 
set  to  last  only  six  years,  the  loan  resources  from  RUFIP  remain  with  the  RFIs  for  18 
2 http://cbonds.com/emissions/issue/99509 
2 
Loans by sectorOutstanding loanPercentageAgriculture21,789,164,861  50%Manufacturing1,786,122,550     4%Trade & Commerce8,603,981,259     20%Other1,643,133,023     4%Energy & water446,044,550        1%Building & Cons2,628,106,941     6%Services5,464,588,370     13%Manufacturing 586,745,490        1%Consumer loan113,910,340        0%Other 251,856,374        1%All sectors43,315,867,933  100% 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
years; the modelling works to illustrate that the business is able to sustain operations to 
cover the whole repayment period of the line of credit.  
12.  Overall,  the  MFI  subsector  and  the  RUSSACOs  subsector  produce  positive  returns 
under  the  microfinance  sector.  The  microfinance  subsector  returns  over  an  18-year 
period  an  NPV  of  USD  3,279  million  and  a  FIRR  of  65.5%,  using  the  line  of  credit. 
Calculations of the RUSSACO subsector return  NPV of USD 111 million over an 18-year 
period  and  an  FIRR  of  20%.  The  returns  between  MFIs  and  RUSSACO  differ  since  MFIs 
are profit driven while RUSSACOs are membership-driven. The latter is governed by its 
members  and  decide  on  lending  rates  to  their  own  members,  while  MFIs  lend  to 
maximize  profit  –  within  the  limits  of  regulatory  oversight.  RUSSACOs  also  operate  in 
more remote areas and are an important part of financial access.  
Table: Financial Returns of RFIs by subsector 
VII.  PROFITABILITY 
PROGRAMME LEVEL 
INDICATORS  AND  SENSITIVITY  ANALYSIS  AT 
13. The discount period of 18 years is used to test the financial and economic scenarios 
for sensitivity to changes at programme level. While calculating the base scenario with a 
financial discount rate of 12 percent over an 18-year period, the analysis returns a FIRR 
of 26.6 percent, an NPV of USD 89.5 million and a BCR of 3.8. The base scenario, when 
calculating  the  economic  analysis,  uses  a  social  discount  rate  of  7.0  percent  over  the 
same period. It returns EIRR figure of 28.2 percent, an NPV of USD 197.8 million and a 
BCR of 7.26. 
14.  Switching  values  benefit  and  cost  under  the  12  percent  financial  discount  rate  and 
18-year discount period is -74% for benefits and 283% for costs, suggesting resilience in 
the base case scenario.  
3 
MFI Financial ReturnsDiscounted over 18 yearsNPV @12%, USD million3,279               NPV @12%, ETB million91,820            IRR65.5%FX28RUSSACO Financial ReturnsDiscounted over 18 yearsNPV @12%, USD million111                       NPV @12%, ETB million3,098                   IRR20%FX28 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Table: Financial and Economic Performance Indicators  
15. Alternative discount rates in the analysis offer to demonstrate the possible negative 
and  positive  impact  of  differing  operating  environments,  where  a  lower  or  higher 
discount  rate  is  used.  They  test  the  base  case  for  resilience  and  offer  an  example  of  a 
more  favorable  operating  environment,  taking  an  example  from  the  World  Bank  which 
often uses 5 percent as a social discount rate in investment projects.  
16.  Data  provided  by  AEMFI  on  the  operational  self-sufficiency  of  MFIs,  for  the  period 
2010-2016, illustrates a positive sub-sector with over 100 percent for all category of MFI 
(please  see  profitability  ratios  table  at  end  of  this  annex).  These  figures  are  set  to 
improve under RUFIP III. 
VIII. LOAN USE AND IMPACT TO BORROWER 
17.  The  capacity  to  repay  is  reflected  by  the  low  loan  loss  provision,  which  currently 
stands  at  2  percent  for  MFIs,  according  to  NBE  and  FCA.  With  an  average  repayment 
rate  of  98  percent,  the  ability  and  willingness  to  repay  loans  by  borrowers  remains 
robust. It is expected that this performance record will continue under RUFIP III. The low 
default  rates  reflect  the  debt  absorption  and  servicing  activity  among  clients  on  the 
ground. Field interactions revealed that most borrowers that repaid the loan felt they got 
good returns from borrowing, hence the high repayment rates (over 95-98 percent) and 
repeat  borrowing  with most  MFIs  and  RUSACCOs.  As  in  RUFIPII,  borrowing is  expected 
to  net  a  positive  return  of  about  20  percent  after  repayment  of  loans.  As  long  as  net 
return  of  the  client  is  above  10-12  percent  the  impact  of  the  programme  on  their  lives 
will be positive. 
IX. LOAN FAILURE RATE 
18. In line with IFAD internal guidelines on EFA, the analysis tested for a decline in the 
repayment rate from the current 2%, with a 5% decline each year over the course of the 
discount period. The results are summarized in the below table. 
4 
BASE CASE AND VARYING DISCOUNT RATESFinancial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV165.989.546.2FIRR27%27%27%BCR5.73.82.6Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV266.7197.893.5EIRR28.2%28.2%28.2%BCR8.97.34.418 years18 years 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Table: Sensitivity Analysis for two-fold increase in default rate from 2% to 4%. 
19.  The  18-year  discount  period  remains  robust,  with  positive  returns  for  all  scenarios. 
The sensitivity tested for increases in cost by 10 percent and 20 percent and a decrease 
in yield by 10 percent over an 18-year period. The results remain robust for the 18-year 
period  in  the  tables  below.  Since  the  market  for  financial  services  remains  early-stage, 
the combination of an 18-year discount period and continued appetite for micro-financial 
services  suggests  that  high  growth  is  more  than  likely  matched  by  high  appetite, 
willingness  and  ability  to  repay  loans  in  the  near  future.  For  this  reason,  the  upper 
quadrant of the scenarios tested is considered the more likely outcome. 
5 
TWO-FOLD INCREASE IN LOAN LOSS PROVISIONFinancial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV108.555.425.3FIRR23%23%23%BCR4.12.81.9Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV179.9132.159.4EIRR24.4%24.4%24.4%BCR6.45.23.218 years18 yearsINCREASE IN COSTS BY 10%Financial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV165.989.546.2FIRR27%27%27%BCR5.73.82.6Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV263.3194.690.7EIRR27.1%27.1%27.1%BCR8.16.64.018 years18 yearsINCREASE IN COSTS BY 20%Financial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV165.989.546.2FIRR27%27%27%BCR5.73.82.6Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV260.0191.488.0EIRR26.1%26.1%26.1%BCR7.56.03.718 years18 yearsDECLINE IN YIELD BY 10% Financial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV92.745.619.0FIRR21%21%21%BCR3.62.41.7Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV156.7114.249.7EIRR22.9%22.9%22.9%BCR5.74.62.818 years18 years 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
20. Detailed and summary tables are further provided in the below section. 
X. TABLES 
MFI – Summary balance sheet projections under RUFIP3 (in ETB MN) - truncated 
6 
MFI - BALANCE SHEET PROJECTIONS UNDER RUFIP3Without projectWith projectItem201820192020203720202037Key parametersOnlending interest rate22%22%22%22%22%22%Interests on savings6%6%6%6%6%6%Interest rate for borrowing, RUFIP II/other sources of finance10%10%10%10%10%10%Interest rate for borrowing from the project credit line/RUFIP III8%8%8%8%8%8%Operating expenses9%9%9%9%9%5.8%Cash reserves20%20%20%20%20%20%Capital15%15%15%15%15%15%Loan loss provision2%2%2%2%2%2%Increase in number of borrowers8%8%8%10.5%10.5%Number of borrowers5,105,698        5,514,154      5,955,286              22,034,666          6,093,140      33,265,946          Increase in average loan size (real)8%8%5%8.0%8.0%Average loan per borrower8,491.62          9,171               9,905                      26,135                   9,905               36,647                   Growth of deposits/savings15%15%15%30%15%Return on liquid assets8%8%8%8%8%8%Balance sheet elements, ETB millionAssets62,670              73,003            85,041                    837,924                87,832            1,849,434             Loan portfolio43,356              50,570            58,985                    575,884                60,350            1,219,107             Portfolio growth17%17%13%39%19%Cash reserves5,793                6,662               7,661                      82,442                   8,660               250,130                Other assets13,521              15,771            18,395                    179,598                18,821            380,197                Liabitilies62,670              73,003            85,041                    837,924                87,832            1,849,434             Equity funds13,868              15,379            17,045                    101,338                17,045            468,806                Savings = deposits28,964              33,309            38,305                    412,211                43,301            1,250,651             Loan from RUFIP II/other sources of finance19,837              24,315            29,692                    324,375                26,900            129,977                Loan from the project credit line-                     586                  -                         FlowsRevenues10,002              11,658            13,590                    133,290                13,970            288,214                Interests on loans9,538                11,125            12,977                    126,694                13,277            268,203                Interest of liquid assets463.43              532.94            612.88                    6,595.38               692.82            20,010.41             Expenses8,491                9,993               11,756                    120,517                11,927            183,127                Running costs3,902                4,551               5,309                      51,830                   5,432               70,708                   Interests on savings1,738                1,999               2,298                      24,733                   2,598               75,039                   Loan from RUFIP II/other sources of finance1,984                2,432               2,969                      32,437                   2,690               12,998                   Interests on loans from the project line-                     -                   -                         Loan loss provision867.11              1,011               1,180                      11,518                   1,207               24,382                   Margin1,511       1,666      1,834            12,772        2,043      105,087      Equity  funds15,379              17,045            18,878                    114,111                19,088            573,893                 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Financial performance and profitability of MFIs – only (in ETB MN) 
…continued 
7 
2020202120222023202420252026202720282029Additional revenues, million ETB210                  769                        1,562                    2,596                    3,961                5,831                7,481                9,529                  12,048               15,069               Additional revenues banks, million USD7.48                 27.45                    55.77                    92.71                    141.48             208.25              267.17              340.31               430.28               538.19               Credit line, million USD154Additional revenues, million USD146-                  27                          56                          93                          141                   208                    267                    340                     430                     538                     MFI Financial ReturnsDiscounted over 18 yearsNPV @12%, USD million3,279               NPV @12%, ETB million91,820            IRR65.5%FX28Additional borrowers137,854          301,211                493,630                719,118                982,174           1,287,855        1,641,836        2,050,486         2,520,945         3,061,215         2030203120322033203420352036203719,353               24,902               31,746                   40,329                   51,072                   63,920                   77,090                   92,314                   691.19               889.36               1,133.79               1,440.34               1,824.00               2,282.85               2,753.22               3,296.94               691                     889                     1,134                     1,440                     1,824                     2,283                     2,753                     3,297                       16,537,275       12,180,548       13,459,506          14,872,754          16,434,393          18,160,005          20,066,805          22,173,820           
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
RUSSACO  –  Summary  balance  sheet  projections  under  RUFIP3  (in  ETB  MN)  – 
truncated 
8 
RUSSACO - BALANCE SHEET PROJECTIONS UNDER RUFIP3Without projectWith projectItem201820192020203720202037Key parametersOnlending interest rate14%14%14%14%14%14%Interest on savings8%8%8%8%8%8%Interest rate for borrowing, RUFIP II6%6%8%8%8%8%Interest rate for borrowing from the project credit line/RUFIP III6%8%8%8%8%8%Operating expenses3%3%3%4%3%2%Cash reserves, 20% of savings20%20%20%20%20%20%Loan loss provision2%2%2%2%2%2%Increase in the number of members7%7%7%9%9%Number of members1,960,000        2,097,200       2,244,004                 7,088,394          2,285,948           9,892,745             Increase in number of borrowers30%28%25%35%20%Number of borrowers590,000            629,160           628,321                     1,772,098          800,082               1,978,549             Increase in average loan size (real)8%8%8%9%9%Share capital per new member436                    436                   #436                             438                      #436                       438                         Average loan per borrower9,718                10,495             11,335                       41,940                11,440                 49,962                   Increase in savings per member15%15%15%20%15%Savings per member1,821                2,094                2,408                         25,916                2,513                   35,566                   Return on liquid assets8%8%8%8%8%8%Balance sheet elements, ETB millionAssets7,411                7,258                7,875                         82,428                9,939                   109,978                 Loan portfolio5,701                6,603                7,122                         74,322                9,153                   98,853                   Portfolio growth15%15%15%18%18%Cash reserves570                    655                   753                             8,106                  786                       11,125                   Other cash at hand-                              -                        -                          Other assets1,140                Liabitilies7,411                7,258                7,875                         82,428                9,939                   109,978                 Equity funds845                    953                   1,215                         6,892                  1,215                   30,084                   Savings = deposits2,848                3,275                3,766                         40,532                3,930                   55,625                   Loan from RUFIP II/other sources of finance3,718                3,030                2,893                         35,004                4,374                   24,269                   Share capitalLoan from the project credit line419                       FlowsRevenues844                   977                   1,057                         11,054               1,344                   14,729                   Interests on loans798                    924                   997                             10,405                1,281                   13,839                   Interest on liquid assets45.57                52.40                60.26                         648.51                62.88                   890.00                   Expenses736                    774                   889                             10,824                1,122                   9,963                      Running costs171                    198                   214                             3,294                  275                       1,767                      Interests on savings228                    262                   301                             3,243                  314                       4,450                      Loan from RUFIP II/other sources of finance223                    182                   231                             2,800                  350                       1,942                      Interests on loans from the project line-                     -                    -                      -                          Loan loss provision114.0                132                   142                             1,486                  183                       1,804                      Margin108           203           168                  230            222             4,767           Retained earnings953                    1,156                1,384                         7,122                  1,438                   34,850                   Equity from new members0606420382358 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Financial performance and profitability of RUSSACOs – only (in ETB MN) 
9 
2020202120222023202420252026202720282029Additional revenues, million ETB54                         83                         117                       177                       235                       338                       496                       638                       852                       1,072                   Additional revenues banks, million USD1.92                      2.98                      4.19                      6.33                      8.38                      12.06                   17.71                   22.79                   30.42                   38.29                   Credit line, million USD110Additional revenues, million USD108-                       3                            4                            6                            8                            12                         18                         23                         30                         38                         RUSSACO Financial ReturnsDiscounted over 18 yearsNPV @12%, USD million111                       NPV @12%, ETB million3,098                   IRR20%FX28Additional borrowers171,761               199,786               231,212               260,068               297,219               338,676               423,231               352,796               402,564               458,073               203020312032203320342035203620371,342                   1,672                   2,074                   2,564                   3,161                   3,487                      3,762                      4,536                      47.92                   59.70                   74.07                   91.58                   112.88                 124.52                   134.34                   162.02                   48                         60                         74                         92                         113                       125                         134                         162                           519,927               588,792               665,400               750,556               845,144               533,812                 159,016                 206,450                  
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Programme Level Financial Analysis over 18-year discount period (in USD) 
10 
Rural Financial International Development Programme III (RUFIP3)Financial Analysis at Programme LevelProject Years(in USD MN)202020212022202320242025202620272028202920302031203220332034203520362037Incremental benefitsMFIs-5.21.02.03.35.17.49.512.215.419.224.731.840.551.465.181.598.3117.7RUSSACO-3.90.10.20.20.30.40.60.81.11.41.72.12.63.34.04.44.85.8Totalprogramme benefits-9.11.12.13.55.47.910.213.016.520.626.433.943.154.769.286.0103.1123.5CostsProgramme costs10.48.88.66.15.32.8Maintenance costs0.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.3Total programme costs10.48.88.66.15.32.80.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.30.3TOTAL NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITS-19.5-7.7-6.5-2.60.15.19.912.716.220.326.133.642.954.468.985.7102.8123.3 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Programme Level Economic Analysis over 18-year discount period (in USD) 
11 
Rural Financial International Development Programme III (RUFIP3)Economic Analysis at Programme LevelProject YearsUSD MN202020212022202320242025202620272028202920302031203220332034203520362037Incremental benefitsMFIs-5.21.02.03.35.17.49.512.215.419.224.731.840.551.465.181.598.3117.7RUSSACO-3.90.10.20.20.30.40.60.81.11.41.72.12.63.34.04.44.85.8Totalprogramme benefits-9.11.12.13.55.47.910.213.016.520.626.433.943.154.769.286.0103.1123.5CostsProgramme costs9.17.77.55.34.62.5Maintenance costs0.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2Total programme costs9.17.77.55.34.62.50.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.20.2TOTAL NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITS-18.2-6.6-5.4-1.80.85.49.912.716.220.326.133.642.954.568.985.7102.9123.3 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Sensitivity Analysis using Economic Results at Programme Level 
Summary  Table:  Sensitivity  Analysis  of  Financial  and  Economic  Results  at 
Programme Level – base case and various scenarios 
Summary  Table:  Sensitivity  Analysis  of  Financial  and  Economic  Results  at 
Programme Level – increase in loan loss provision scenario 
Summary  Table:  Sensitivity  Analysis  of  Financial  and  Economic  Results  at 
Programme Level – increase in cost by 10% scenario 
12 
BASE CASE AND VARYING DISCOUNT RATESFinancial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV165.989.546.2FIRR27%27%27%BCR5.73.82.6Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV266.7197.893.5EIRR28.2%28.2%28.2%BCR8.97.34.418 years18 yearsTWO-FOLD INCREASE IN LOAN LOSS PROVISIONFinancial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV108.555.425.3FIRR23%23%23%BCR4.12.81.9Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV179.9132.159.4EIRR24.4%24.4%24.4%BCR6.45.23.218 years18 years 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
13 
INCREASE IN COSTS BY 10%Financial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV165.989.546.2FIRR27%27%27%BCR5.73.82.6Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV263.3194.690.7EIRR27.1%27.1%27.1%BCR8.16.64.018 years18 years 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Summary  Table:  Sensitivity  Analysis  of  Financial  and  Economic  Results  at 
Programme Level – increase in cost by 20% scenario 
Summary  Table:  Sensitivity  Analysis  of  Financial  and  Economic  Results  at 
Programme Level - decrease in yield by 10 percent  
14 
INCREASE IN COSTS BY 20%Financial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV165.989.546.2FIRR27%27%27%BCR5.73.82.6Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV260.0191.588.0EIRR26.1%26.1%26.1%BCR7.56.03.718 years18 yearsDECLINE IN YIELD BY 10% Financial Performance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 8%@ 12%@ 16%IndicatorNPV92.845.619.1FIRR21%21%21%BCR3.62.41.7Economic Perfomance IndicatorsDiscount PeriodDiscount rate@ 5%@ 7%@ 12%IndicatorNPV156.7114.249.7EIRR22.9%22.9%22.9%BCR5.74.62.818 years18 years 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Table: Profitability Ratios for MFIs 
15 
Table:  Return on Assets & Return on Equity-MFIs A Category (2010-16)  Year Return on Assets Return on Equity 2010 6.13% 18.4% 2011 5.57% 19.9% 2012 6.17% 23% 2013 6.45% 25.2% 2014 6.35% 27.8% 2015 7.25 %  30.5% 2016  4.92 % 20.8%    Table:  ROA and ROE – Category B MFIs-(2010-16)  Year Return on Assets Return on Equity 2010 14.2% 32.6% 2011 13.7% 31.8% 2012 12.5% 31% 2013 15% 37.7% 2014 16.6% 41.8% 2015 17.2% 45% 2016 14.7% 39.1%    Table:  ROA and ROE – Category C MFIs-(2010-16)  Year Return on Assets Return on Equity 2010 -3.3% -5% 2011 2.4% 4.32% 2012 6.69% 12.2% 2013 5.72% 16.6% 2014 4.93% 13.1% 2015 6.17% 17.1% 2016 5.97% 17.1%   Table: OSS  of Ethiopian MFIs (2010-16)   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015  2016 Category A  OSS 195  214  211 206  204 212  166 Category B OSS 200 178 188 207 213 223  193  Category C OSS 85 111 127 141 156 160 162   Table: Financial Self Sufficiency (OFS ) of MFIs (2010-16)   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015  2016 Category A  FSS 95% 114% 111% 106%  104%          112% 66% Category B FSS 100% 78% 88% 107% 113% 123%  93%  Category C FSS -15% 11% 27% 41% 56% 60% 62%  
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Table: Operational Self-sufficiency - Forecast 
16 
Table: Operational Expenses Ratio of MFIs (2010-16)   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015  2016 Category C  MFIs 38.50% 36.90% 34.20% 37.70%  23%        21%  25.60% Category B MFIs 18.80% 23.10% 19.60% 18.60% 18% 123% 20.80%  Category A  MFIs 8.50% 7.20% 8.20% 8.50% 9.20% 60% 11.10%  NB: MFIs have been categorized as A,B and C, based on NBE categorization of MFIs in 2017. Source: Performance Analysis of Micro Finance Institutions in Ethiopia  by Abdi Ahmed Hasan & Dr. GS Batra – International Journal of Business and Management Invention (IJBMI) ,ISSN (online) 2319-8028(Print):www.ijbmi.org//Volume 7 Issue 4 Ver II/April 2018/PP-55-66 Operational Self-Sufficiency - Forecast202020252035202020252035202020252035202020252035MFIsNumber of borrowers2.3%12.8%33.8%5,955,2868,750,26922,034,6666,093,14010,038,12433,265,946137,8541,287,85511,231,280Loan portfolio (ETB MN)2.3%12.8%52.8%58,985127,344575,88460,350146,0861,219,1071,36518,742643,223Operational SS2.8%48.5%49.9%134.5%125.3%124.6%138.3%186.0%248.6%3.8%60.8%124.0%ROA10.0%150.6%73.2%2.2%1.6%1.5%2.4%4.0%5.7%0.2%2.4%4.2%RUSSACOsNumber of members1.9%11.8%28.3%2,244,0043,147,3327,088,3942,285,9483,517,2149,892,74541,944369,8832,804,351Number of borrowers27.3%43.0%10.4%628,321786,8331,772,098800,0821,125,5091,978,549171,761338,676206,450Loan portfolio (ETB MN)28.5%52.6%24.8%7,12213,10574,3229,15319,99398,8532,0316,88824,531Operational SS5.5%32.0%71.1%179%145%107%189%214%370%10.4%68.5%262.8%ROA13.2%41.8%93.6%2.1%1.6%0.3%2.5%2.7%4.3%0.3%1.1%4.1%WOPWPIncremental difference WOP-WPIncrem. diff. in %  - WP 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
SAMPLE AGREEMENT 
 LOAN AND MORTGAGE AGREEMENT BETWEEN DBE 
 AND  
 MFIS AND RURAL FINACIAL COOPERATIVES SUB SECTOR 
Loan Contract 
This  Contract  is  made  and  entered  into  this  day  of  February  2015  between  the 
Development Bank of Ethiopia (hereinafter called “the Bank”) on the one hand and ------
--------- (hereinafter called “the Borrower”) on the other hand.  
WITNESSES 
WHEREAS,  the  Bank  has  entered  into  a  Lead  Subsidiary  Agreement  with  the  Ethiopian 
Government, designated by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development on July 16, 
2012,  to  act  as  Lead  Programme  Agency  for  the  implementation  of  the  credit  fund 
component of Rural Financial Intermediation Program  II (RUFIP II), which the Government 
through  a  Programme  Loan  Agreement  signed  on  December  21,  2011  borrowed  from  the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).  
WHEREAS, the Borrower has applied for a loan of  Birr ( ) hereinafter called the “Loan”, to 
finance its loan-able fund requirement,  
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises above, the terms and conditions herein 
under, the Bank and the Borrower mutually agree as follows: - 
ARTICLE - I 
THE LOAN 
Section 1.01: Loan 
The  Bank,  in  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this  contract,  agrees  to  lend  to 
the  Borrower  a  loan  of  Birr  (  )  for  financing  Rural  Financial  Intermediation  Program  II 
(RUFIP  II).  The  Loan  shall  be  disbursed  from  the  Borrower’s  Loan  Account  in  two 
installments after the fulfillment of all the conditions and signing of this contract as follows: 
 1st Disbursement  
 2nd Disbursement -------- up on effective utilization of the 1st  
 Disbursement for the intended purpose  
Section 1.02: Use of the Loan 
The Borrower undertakes to deliver the Loan solely and exclusively to poor rural households 
in line with best micro financing practices which among others include: -  
a) group appraisal and lending decisions 
b) group collateral and peer pressure 
c) flexible demand driven loan products 
d) frequent repayment 
Section 1.03: Interest  
17 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
a) The Borrower shall pay interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the principal amount 
of each part of the loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to 
time together with cost and charges incurred hereunder by the Bank. 
b)  Interest  shall  accrue  from  the  respective  dates  on  which  amounts  are  so  withdrawn 
and  shall  be  payable  semi-annually  on  January  31st  and  July  31st,  of  each  year 
commencing on July 31, 2015. 
c) In case  of default or failure to repay the principal amount of the loan and  any other 
charges and costs,  or failure to pay interest thereon, the interest rate applied from the 
date of such default or failure shall be increased by 0.5%. 
d)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  sub-sections  “a”  and  “c”  of  section  1.03  above, 
should  there  be  an  Agreement  to  alter  the  rate  or  should  the  Bank  or  any  other 
competent authority issue a new interest rate, the rate of interest stipulated under sub-
section “a” and “c” shall be replaced by the new interest rate. 
Section 1.04 Collection Fees and Other Charges 
The  Borrower  undertakes  to  pay  all  collection  fees,  expenses  and  other  charges  that 
may  be  incurred  by  the  Bank  to  enforce  performance  of  all  the  obligations  of  the 
Borrower herein. 
ARTICLE – II REPAYMENT 
Section 2.01: Repayment  
The Borrower undertakes to repay the principal amount of the Loan in ten semi-annual 
installments,  where  the  first  nine  equal  semi-annual  installments  to  be  Birr  ----------- 
and  the  last  and  tenth  semi-annual  installment  shall  be  Birr----------  that  come  to 
payable  on  January  31st  and  July  31st  of  each  year  commencing  on  January  31, 
2022 and ending on July 31, 2026. 
Section 2.02: Appropriation of payment 
Repayment made by the Borrower  shall be appropriated first to the  costs and charges, 
secondly to the interest and eventually to the principal loan. 
Section 2.03: Prepayment  
The Borrower shall have the right to repay in advance all or any part of the outstanding 
principal  amount  of  the  Loan  upon  giving  90  days  advance  notice  to  the  Bank  and 
payment of all charges and accrued interest.  
Section 2.04: Promissory Notes  
Should  the  Bank  demand,  the  Borrower  undertakes  to  draw  and  sign,  at  its  own 
expenses, promissory notes payable to the Bank, in such manner and forms as the Bank 
may  reasonably  request,  for  an  amount  outstanding  and  due  for  payment  under  this 
Loan Agreement.  
ARTICLE- III 
COVENANTS AND WARRANTIES 
Section 3.01: General  
a)  The  Borrower  undertakes  to  conduct  its  business  activity  with  due  diligence  and 
efficiency and in conformity with sound  administrative, financial, economic, operational, 
environmental,  agricultural  practices  (including  rural  development  practices)  and  good 
governance. 
18 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
b)The Borrower shall comply with the prescribed prudential standards and regulations of 
the National Bank of Ethiopia.  
Section 3.02: Maintenance of Records 
a)  The  Borrower  shall  establish  and  maintain  accounts  in  accordance  with  generally 
accepted accounting principles. 
b)The  Borrower  shall  also  undertakes  to  prepare  and  maintain  separate  account  and 
financial records in respect of programme credits and other financial support. 
c)The  Borrower  undertakes  to  submit  its  external  audit  report  along  with  audited 
financial statements to the Bank within six months of the closure of each financial year.  
d)The  Borrower  shall  submit  the  progress  reports,  in  such  detail  and  form  as  may  be 
prescribed by the Bank. 
Section 3.03: Duty to Maintain Management Information System (MIS) 
a)The Borrower shall establish appropriate management information system adequate to 
generate the required information for the performance, monitoring, loan tracking and for 
timely preparation and submission of prescribed monitoring and progress reports. 
b)The  borrower  shall  respond  satisfactory  and  timely  to  the  expressed  concern  and 
recommendations of DBE. 
ARTICLE – IV 
CANCELLATION AND/OR SUSPENSION 
Section 4.01: Suspension 
If any of the following events happen, the right of the Borrower to withdraw money from the 
Loan account shall be suspended in whole or in part, as the case may be, until the event or 
events which give rise to such suspension shall have ceased to exist or until the Bank shall 
notify  the  Borrower  that  the  right  to  make  withdrawals  has  been  restored,  whichever  is 
earlier,  provided  however,  that  in  the  case  of  any  such  notice  or  restoration,  the  right  to 
withdraw money shall be restored only to the extent and subject to the conditions specified 
in  such  notice  and  no  such  notice  shall  affect  or  impair  any  right,  power  or  remedy  of  the 
Bank in respect of any other subsequent event described in this section. 
a)When the Borrower defaults under Art. I. II section 1:03 and 2.01 of this 
 Contract. 
b) When the right of DBE to make withdrawal from the special account is  
 Suspended in accordance with the Lead Subsidiary Agreement. 
c) When a default in the performance of any other provision on the part of the  
 Borrower occurs under this Loan Agreement. 
d)When  any  extraordinary  situation  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Bank,  make  the 
performance of the Borrower’s obligation, under this Loan Agreement, impossible. 
Section 4.02: Cancellation 
Notwithstanding the provision of section 4.01 above, the Bank  reserves the  right to cancel 
any  amount  of  the  Loan  un-disbursed  and  to  terminate  the  contract  and  to  claim  for  the 
repayment of the loan with interest and other costs. 
Section 4.03: Reservation 
19 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Notwithstanding  any  cancellation  or  suspension  made  on  the  balance  in  commitment, 
this contract shall remain in full force and effect until the loan is totally settled.  
20 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
ARTICLE –V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Section 5.01: Remedies 
If any  of the terms and conditions of the present Loan Agreement are in any way violated 
by  the  Borrower  or  any  event  specified  in  Article  IV  shall  occur  and  continue  for  a  period 
deemed to be unreasonable by the Bank, the Bank, at its option, may declare the principal 
amount  of  the  Loan  including  all  charges,  together  with interest  then  outstanding  due  and 
payable without prejudice to claim all other remedies available to the Bank under the Laws 
of Ethiopia; or where the borrower has some money in any of his account at the bank, the 
bank  has  the  right  to  use  the  said  money  in  the  said  account  for  the  repayment  and/  or 
payment or principal or interest or any other charges that are due. 
Section 5.02: Addresses 
Any  notice,  request  or  communication  given,  made  or  sent  by  the  Borrower,  or  the  Bank 
pursuant to this Loan Agreement shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly 
given, made or sent when it is forwarded at the following addresses:- 
TO THE BANK: 
DEVELOPMENT BANK OF ETHIOPIA 
 Tel: 251 0115-51-11-88 OR 011 553 89 43 
 P.O.BOX: 190 
 Fax: 251 0115-50-60-20 
 Addis Ababa 
TO THE BORROWER:  
New  addresses  may  be  substituted  for  the  above  addresses  provided  proper  notice 
thereof is given in writing and acknowledged. 
Section 5.03: Non-waiver 
No  delay  in  exercising  or  omission  to  exercise  any  right,  power  or  remedy  accrued  to  any 
party  under  Loan  Agreement,  upon  any  default,  shall  impair  any  such  right,  power  or 
remedy  or  be  construed  to  be  a  waiver  thereof  or  any  acquiescence  in  such  default;  nor 
shall  the  action  of  such  party  in  respect  of  any  default  or  any  acquiescence  in  any  default 
affect  or  impair  any  right,  power  or  remedy  of  such  party  in  respect  of  any  other  or 
subsequent default. 
Section 5.04: Amendments 
This  Contract  shall  only  be  altered  or  amended  by  the  written  consent  of  both  contracting 
parties. 
21 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 4 
Section 5.05: Heirs and Assignees 
This Agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, assignees, and survivors of the two parties, 
jointly and severally without the benefit of division. 
IN WITTNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have affixed their signatures. 
For and on behalf of: 
For & on behalf of  
Development Bank of Ethiopia    
 the Borrower 
_____________________ 
__________________ 
 WITNESSES:  
_________________                    _________________ 
22 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 5 – SECAP review note 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
The full length document should be provided here. The following SECAP-related studies if conducted should be made 
available ESMF, ESIA, FPIC, RAP, In-depth Climate risk analysis, GAO analysis. 
Introduction  
ANNEX 5: SECAP Note 
1.  The  SECAP  Review  Note  assesses  the  social,  environmental  and  climate  change  issues  relevant  for  the 
project,  in  order  to  identify  the  potential  impacts  of  the  project  activities  and  highlight  opportunities  for 
addressing  IFAD's  mainstreaming  themes  (gender,  youth,  nutrition,  environment  and  climate  change) 
through an integrated approach.  
2.  The SECAP Review Note is guided by IFAD's “Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP,  2017)  and  takes  into  consideration  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  and  other 
international relevant agreements.  
3.  The  Note  was  developed  through  desk  review  of  available  literature  and  consultations  with  relevant 
stakeholders  undertaken  during  the  project  design  mission,  including:  farmers’  organizations,  women  and 
youth  groups  members  of  RuSACCOs  and  MFI  clients,  national  authorities  (Ministry  of  Agriculture, 
Ethiopian  Development  Bank,  Federal  Cooperative  Agency)  local  authorities  at  the  Woreda  and  Kebele 
level, technical and development partners (World Bank) among others.  
Part 1 - Situational analysis and main challenges  
Socio-economic situation and underlying causes 
4.  Poverty: Ethiopia has seen rapid economic growth over the past decade and is one of the fastest growing 
economies in the world. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) predicted the growth rate of Ethiopia to be 
8.5 percent in 20181. The rapid growth over the last few  years has resulted  in poverty reduction;  extreme 
poverty has fallen from 55 percent in 2000 to 34 percent in 2011 and 24 percent in 20162.  
5.  According to the “Ethiopia’s Progress Towards Eradicating Poverty: An Interim Report on 2015/16 Poverty 
Analysis Study”3, Ethiopia’s per capita GDP has more than doubled from USD396 in 2010/11 to USD 794 in 
2015/16.  The  national  poverty  incidence  has  declined  from  29.6%  in  2010/11  to  24%  in  2015/16.  The 
achievement  in  poverty  reduction  could  be  attributed  to  the  wide  range  of  multifaceted  pro-poor 
programmes implemented by the Government in rural and urban areas in all sectors. Between 2010/11 and 
2015/16  about  5.3  million  people  been  lifted  out  of  poverty. Although  the  total  number  of  population  has 
increased from 84 million in 2010/11 to 93 million in 2015/16, the number of poor population declined from 
25.1 million to 21.8 million.  
6.  The regional poverty head count index has declined across all regional states and in both urban and rural 
areas. However, the rural poverty incidence is almost twice as high as the urban poverty, making poverty a 
predominantly rural phenomenon in Ethiopia. While urban headcount poverty declined from 36.9 percent in 
2000  to  14.8  percent  in  2016  rural  poverty  only  declined  from  45.4  percent  to  25.6  percent  in  the  same 
period.  The  report  indicates  that  income  inequality  measured  by  Gini  Coefficient  of  consumption 
expenditure increased from 0.3 to 0.33 at national level. The interim report outlined government’s intention 
1 World Economic Outlook, April 2018, IMF  
2 World Development Indicator. World Bank 
3 The report “Ethiopia’s Progress Towards Eradicating Poverty” was prepared using the 2015/2016 Household 
Income and Consumption Expenditure Survey (HICES) and Welfare Monitoring Survey (WMS) data to share key 
findings on the study with the public. 
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
to  reduce  poverty  mainly  through  economic  growth;  equitable  distribution  of  public  spending  and  income 
redistribution in times of crisis.  
7.  Poverty and vulnerability: Women headed households accounting for about 23% of all rural households 
tend to be markedly poorer than male headed households, with female headed households comprising 46% 
of  the  lowest  quintile.  The  intensity  of  poverty  varies  at  the  household  level  in  relation  to  the  land's  size, 
quality and productivity, climate conditions and production technologies. Women are much less likely than 
men  to  receive  an  education  or  health  benefits,  or  to  have  a  voice  in  decisions  affecting  their  lives.  For 
women, poverty means undernourished families, lack of education for children and other deprivations. 
8.  Poverty  in  Ethiopia  is  associated  with  geographical  inequalities.  Although  poverty  rates  have  converged 
over time across regions, thereby reducing inter-regional disparities, there are significant intra-regional and 
inter-woreda  disparities.  Oromia  and  Amhara,  the  most  densely  populated  regions  in  Ethiopia,  have  a 
greater  proportion  of  woredas  in  which  the  share  of  the  bottom  40  percent  is  higher  than  the  national 
average. The  Ethiopian  constitution  has  designated  four  historically  underserved  regions:  Gambella, Afar, 
Somali,  and  Benishangul-gumuz.  The  regions  present  very  high  rates  of  multidimensional  poverty, 
encompassing  various  indicators  (i.e.  income,  health,  education).  Expansion  of  basic  services  to  these 
historically underserved regions has helped to bridge development gaps.  
9.  Gender inequalities: Unequal gender norms limit Ethiopian women’s ability to innovate, own land, control 
resources and income, access credit, and engage in leisure pursuits. An estimated 46 percent of all working 
women (aged 15-49) are engaged in agricultural occupations, although this figure increases to 57 percent 
in rural areas4. Yet, one third of employed women are not paid. In terms of productivity, male-managed plots 
produce on average 23 percent more per hectare than female-managed plots and the gap is explained by 
differences in land manager characteristics, land attributes and unequal access to agricultural assets.  
10.  Main causes for gender inequalities in the agriculture sector are: unequal access to extension services, the 
field ́s distance from the house, reduced use of technical inputs (e.g., fertilizers), livestock use, land size,5 
product diversification and years of schooling. Gender inequalities across a range of indicators compound 
to  create  an  adverse  environment  for  women  farmers  that  results  in  productivity  losses.  Only  about  76 
percent of rural women have control over crop, land and livestock compared to over 90 percent of men, but 
even then, ownership  and  decision making remains in the control of men, implying that economic shocks 
may  have  a  greater  impact  on  women,  who  have  diminished  control  over  resources  (Population  Council, 
2010). As women also perform laborious household chores, including looking for water and firewood, they 
are more exposed to food insecurity as these might take them away from their productive activities for long 
hours at a time.  
11.  Women’s  Access  to  Land:  Land  ownership  and  use  rights  are  very  much  skewed  towards  men  in 
Ethiopia, including in rural areas. The legal framework provides women the right to use rural land through 
the issuance of joint holding certificate. The 2016 EDHS shows that 40% of women own land but only one 
in two who own land say there is a title or deed in their name for the land. Male-headed households have 
more fields and larger land holdings compared with female-headed households. On average, male-headed 
households cultivate approximately  12 fields,  while female-headed  households cultivate 8 fields. Similarly, 
male-headed  households  own  an  average  of  1.17  hectares  of  cultivated  land,  compared  to  only  0.63 
hectares of land owned by the average female-headed household.  6 These figures show the disadvantage 
of rural women in access to and control over important sources of livelihood.  
12.  Women’s  participation  and  representation:  Government  has  the  obligation  to  facilitate  rural  women  to 
organize  into  self-help  groups  and  co-operatives  and  participate  in  community  activities.  Out  of  over  8 
million  agricultural  cooperative  members,  women  accounted  for  a  little  over  1.5  million  members  (about 
18%). Women constituted 27.4 percent of overall members in 2015, registering a slight increase from 19.5 
4 Central Statistical Agency [Ethiopia] and ICF International (2012). Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey 
2011. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 
5 Kaka, L., Abate, G., Warner, J., and Kieran, C. 2015. Patterns of Agricultural Production among Male and Female 
Holders. International Food Policy Research institute, IFPRI, 2014. 
6 integrated surveys on agriculture, Ethiopia Socio-economic Survey (ESS) 2015-2016. 
2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
percent  in  2010.  It  must  be  noted  that  men  are  five  times  more  likely  than  women  to  hold  a  leadership 
position  within  cooperatives  while  only  about  3  percent  of  women  who  are  in  cooperatives  hold  such 
positions. (Federal Cooperative Agency Report, 2015). 
13.  Women’s access to finance: Micro Financial Institutions (MFIs) and rural saving and credit  cooperatives 
(RuSACCOs) constitute the main sources of finance in rural Ethiopia, especially for women. However, their 
level  of  penetration  remains  low,  with  less  than  4  percent  of  the  rural  national  population  being  served. 
Approximately  26  percent  of  male  adults  have  a  bank  account,  compared  to  only  17  percent  of  female 
adults. The proportion of adults with bank accounts is also higher in urban areas (54 percent) as compared 
to small town areas (38 percent). Unsurprisingly, this figure falls to 11 percent in rural areas. By gender, the 
proportion of savers for adult males is 37 percent compared with 28 for adult females.7  
14.  Though  women  possess  equal  rights  with  men  to  access  bank  loans,  mortgages  and  other  forms  of 
financial  credit,  they  have  not  been  able  to  use  them  effectively  for  different  reasons.  First,  women  have 
generally  limited  awareness  of  the  availability  of  these  facilities.  Second,  women  have  generally  low 
economic capacity to provide sufficient collateral to get the credit service they demand. Third, lack of trust 
towards  women  as  entrepreneurs  in  the  society  also  makes  the  financial  institutions  less  interested  in 
making the facilities available to women. 
15.  Youth:  In  agriculture,  access  to  land  is  the  prime  barrier  (most  of  the  young  population  is  also  landless 
people)  compounded  by  lack  of  access  to  credit.  Motivational  factors  associated  with  the  fact  that  in 
general, youth are less interested in engaging in this type of work if it is limited to subsistence agriculture 
are  also  a  barrier.  Apart  from  scarce  access  to  land  and  credit,  poor  infrastructure  and  limited  access  to 
improved agricultural technologies are key reasons for youth to exit agriculture. 
16.  Rural youth can only access the land through inheritance from parents and/or through allocation from land 
administrators. The young women are unlikely inherit the land since they marry and move to their husband’s 
village  (Bezu  and  Holden,  2014).  However,  a  recent  empirical  study  indicates  that  since  the  land  is 
becoming  scarce,  most  rural  youths  are  not  accessing  sufficient  land  farms  either  from  parents  or 
respective land authorities (Bezu and Holden, 2014).8 
17.   The  nationwide  youth  unemployment  rate  has  been  approximately  7.59  %  (WB,  2018).  However,  youth 
unemployment  varies  substantially  by  gender  and  location.  Young  women  are  much  more  likely  to  be 
unemployed  (10.2  percent)  than  young  men  (5  percent).  Urban  unemployment  rates  for  the  youth  are 
estimated at 27 percent – compared to 14 percent for those with ages above 25 – and are particularly high 
for those with secondary education.  
18.  Marginalised  groups:  The  Ethiopian  Constitution  recognizes  the  presence  of  different  socio-cultural 
groups, including historically disadvantaged and underserved communities, pastoralists, and minorities, as 
well  as  their  rights  to  socio-economic  equity  and  justice.  The  Ethiopian  Constitution  also  recognizes  the 
rights of pastoral groups inhabiting the lowland of the country.  
19.  The 12 to 15 million pastoralists belong to different groups of 29 Nations, Nationalities and Peoples. Whilst 
government policies have strengthened and resource allocations increased over the last decade, pastoralist 
areas  are  still  amongst  the  least  served  in  terms  of  basic  services.  Relating  to  institutional  framework 
designed to ensure equity between regions, the government had set up the Ministry of Federal and Pastoral 
Development Affairs (MoFPDA), now Ministry of Peace (MoP). The responsibilities of this Ministry  include 
promoting  equitable  development,  with  emphasis  on  delivering  special  support  to  the  developing  national 
regional  states.  The  main  purpose  of  the  special  support  is  to  address  the  inequalities  that  have  existed 
between the regions over the decades, thereby hastening equitable growth and development.  
20.  Men  and  women  pastoralist  and  agro  pastoralist  are  engaged  in  traditional  livelihood  systems  based  (i) 
exclusively on livestock rearing (camels, cattle, sheep and goats) or (ii) combining small to medium scale 
livestock production (including cattle, milking cows, sheep and goats, and poultry) with agriculture activities. 
7 ibidem 
8 Are rural you in Ethiopia abandoning agriculture? World Development, 2014. 
3 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
former  pastoralists  who  because  of 
These  are  groups  of 
losses  (natural  causes  or 
mismanagements  of  herds  and/or  lack  of  support  from  community  for  restocking/animal  diseases)  have 
abandoned pastoralism and are now surviving on alternative livelihood options, shifting from the traditional 
livelihood  based  system  (and  settlements)  to  a  more  sedentary  model  in  search  of  opportunity  for  work, 
cultivable lands, and moving closer to basic social services. 
livestock 
21.  Changes in the livelihood of pastoralists, especially for those moving from nomadic or transhumant groups 
to  sedentarized  groups,  have  brought  relevant  changes  in  the  social  system  not  only  regarding  the 
management of natural resources, but also in the gender roles. Those changes have given more space and 
created  opportunities  for  women  in  socio-economic  terms:  in  many  cases,  women  have  been  able  to 
benefit, gaining greater authority over their own earnings, social gains through trading activities as well as 
greater access to educational and health facilities as well as access to finance. Effectively, sedentarisation 
in these cases has acted to empower pastoralist women economically through market integration, access to 
financial services which has in turn advanced their social status9. 
22.  Nutrition:  Although  child  malnutrition  rates  have  decreased,  the  country  still  has  one  of  the  highest 
malnutrition rates in Sub-Saharan Africa according to the 2011 Ethiopia Demographic Health Survey data.  
23.  The percentage of chronically malnourished or stunted children dropped from 58% in 2000 to 44% in 2011, 
which translates to 5.1 million stunted Ethiopian children. Some 21% of children were severely stunted. By 
far the highest rates were in Amhara, Tigray, Afar and Benishangul-Gumuz, rural regions with high rates of 
food poverty. The prevalence of underweight children fell from 41% in 2000 to 29% in 2011. The prevalence 
was highest in the Afar region (40%) followed by Amhara,  Benishangul-Gumuz, Somali and Tigray. Acute 
malnutrition  or  wasting  stood  at  10%  or  1.1  million  children.  There  were  marked  regional  differences  in 
acute  malnutrition  with  more  than  20%  of  children  wasted  in  the  Afar  and  Somali  regions  where  large 
numbers of households rely  on  livestock as their main livelihood. Children  living  in rural  areas  were more 
likely to suffer from malnutrition than those living in urban. This may be explained by lower rates of poverty, 
improved diets and better access to clean sanitation facilities and clean water in urban areas (DHS 2011). 
The  primary  direct  and  indirect  causes  of  malnutrition  in  Ethiopia  include  persistent  food  insecurity,  poor 
dietary diversity, poor food quality/safety, poor maternal and child feeding practices, suboptimal hygiene and 
sanitation, cultural practices, and limited access to quality nutrition services.  
24.  Poverty,  vulnerability  and  food  consumption:  Households  in  Ethiopia  face  significant  uncertainty  with 
regards to future consumption. Vulnerability to weather risk has historically been very high among Ethiopian 
rural households. In 2015-2016, Ethiopia experienced a severe drought that required the delivery of US$1.7 
billion in food assistance to nearly 17 million people. The drought was concentrated in the crop producing 
regions in the north and west, leading to a significant shortfall in food availability. Straight off the back of the 
2016  El  Nino  drought,  in  January  2017,  the  United  Nations  appealed  to  the  General  Assembly  for  an 
additional  US  $900  million  to  support  roughly  five  million  more  people,  this  time  with  the  most  severe 
impacts felt in the pastoral regions of southern Ethiopia. 
25.  According to  the  background Paper for the Chronic  Poverty Report 2008-09 Growth and  Poverty in Rural 
Ethiopia:  Evidence  from  15  Communities  1994-2004,  almost  half  of  rural  households  in  Ethiopia  were 
affected by drought in a five-year period from 1999 to 2004 (Dercon, Hoddinott and Woldehanna 2005), and 
drought  has  been  found  to  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  welfare  of  these  households. Ten  years  after 
experiencing  drought,  the  consumption  levels  of  those  reporting  a  serious  drought  were  found  to  be  16 
percent lower than those of the families not affected, and these households still experienced lower growth 
rates (Dercon 2004).  
26.  Climate  change  affects  agricultural  production  in  various  ways.  Increases  in  temperature  and  reduced 
rainfall  can  result  in  shortening  of  maturity  period  and  then  decreasing  crop  yield,  limitations  in  livestock 
feed  availability,  adverse  effects  on  animal  health,  growth  and  reproduction,  depressing  the  quality  and 
quantity  of  forage  crops,  changing  distribution  of  diseases,  changing  decomposition  rate,  contracting 
9 PCDPII supervision mission report (IFAD/WB). 
4 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
pastoral  zones,  expansion  of  tropical  dry  forests  and  the  disappearance  of  lower  montane  wet  forests, 
expansion of desertification, etc (NMA, 2007; PANE, 2009). 
27.  Rain failure, more frequent or intense floods and droughts due to climate change threaten the performance 
of  the  economy  as  a  whole  and  are  the  main  causes  of  food  insecurity,  severe  malnutrition  and  loss  of 
livelihoods  particularly  in marginal  and less productive lands (PANE,  2009). This effect is attributed  to the 
fact  that  those  changes  can  seriously  depress  agricultural  production  in  the  country.  This  clearly 
demonstrates  that  economic  growth  in  general  and  households`  welfare  in  particular  are  entwined  and 
therefore  livelihoods  are  still  significantly  influenced  by  changes  in  rainfall  and  other  climate  variables 
(World Bank, 2006). 
1.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implication 
28.  Environmental  Assessment:  Land  degradation  in  the  form  of  soil  erosion,  sedimentation, 
depletion  of  nutrients,  deforestation,  and  overgrazing  -  is  one  of  the  basic  problems  facing 
farmers  in  the  Ethiopian  highlands,  and  this  limits  their  ability  to  increase  agricultural 
production  and  reduce  poverty  and  food  insecurity.  Land  degradation  in  Ethiopia  has 
proceeded  at  an  alarming  rate,  and  will be  increasingly  aggravated  by  the  impact  of  climate 
change.  Conservative  estimates  suggest  that  climate  change  will  reduce  agricultural  crop 
productivity in Ethiopia by 5 -10 percent by 2030.  
29.  Environmental  degradation  is  extensive  in  Ethiopia.  But  not  all  areas  of  the  country  are 
equally  suffering.  Both  the  extent  and  severity  of  the  problem  manifest  spatial  variations 
depending  on  difference  in  relief,  ecology,  rainfall,  land  use,  land  cover  and  soil  types.  Land 
degradation  in  Ethiopia  is  especially  severe  in  the  highlands.  Environmental  degradation  in 
Ethiopia is  replicated  in  the  form  of  land  degradation  and  degradation  of  water  resources  as 
well  as  loss  of  biodiversity.  The  scale  of  the  problem  dramatically  increased  due  to  the 
increase  in  deforestation,  overgrazing,  over  cultivation,  inappropriate  farming  practices,  and 
increasing  human  population.  Removing  vegetative  cover  on  steep  slopes  (slopes  ranging 
between  15  and  50  percent)  for  agricultural  expansion,  firewood  and  other  wood 
requirements as well as for grazing space has paved the way to massive soil erosion. 
30.  The three major aspects of environmental degradation in Ethiopia are depletion of forests, and 
degradation of farms and pastoral land: 
31.  Deforestation  and  Forest  Degradation:  Forest  degradation  in  Ethiopia  is  closely  linked  to  the 
ongoing  population  growth.  More  people  generally lead  to  an  increasing  demand  on  land  for 
living and for agricultural production. The situation got more severe in the eighties when large 
numbers  of  people  moved  to  South  West  Ethiopia  in  organized  resettlement  programs. 
Consequently, the pressure on the forest resources increased due to a higher demand on fuel 
wood  and  construction  timber.  Forests  covered  approximately  40%  of  the  land  in  Ethiopia  a 
century ago but has shrunk to only 3% of land by the late 90s (Berry, 2003). The extensive 
deforestation  has  also  led  to  the  extinction  of  various  biotas  resulting  in  significant 
biodiversity loss.  
32.  Degradation of Farm and Grazing Land. Since 95% of the cultivated land is under small-holder 
peasant  agriculture,  the  cumulative  impact  of  the  actions  of  these  land  users  has  eventually 
led to the degradation and depletion of these resources. Land degradation resulting from soil 
erosion is the most common environmental problem in Ethiopia. It is one of the major causes 
of low and declining agricultural productivity and continuing food insecurity and rural poverty. 
In  addition,  land  degradation  directly  affects  the  type  of  plant  grown  on  the  area,  reduced 
availability  of  potable  water,  lessened  volumes  of  surface  water,  depletion  of  aquifers  and 
biodiversity  loss.  The  major  causes  are:  rapid  population  increase,  severe  soil  loss, 
deforestation,  low  vegetative  cover  and  unbalanced  crop  and  livestock  production. 
Topography, soil types and agro-ecological parameters are also additional factors affecting the 
5 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
land  degradation  processes  influenced  by  natural  resource  exploitation  and  sub-optimal 
agricultural practices.  
33.  Climate  Trends  and  Impact:  According  to  the  UNDP  climate  change  country  profiles,  the 
average  annual  temperature  in  Ethiopia is  projected  to  increase  by  1.1°C  to  3.1°C  by  2060. 
Climate  model  projections  under  some  IPCC  scenarios  show  warming  in  all  four  seasons 
across Ethiopia, which may cause a higher frequency of heat waves as well as higher rates of 
evaporation (Conway and Schipper, 2011).  
34.  As one of Africa’s most vulnerable nations, and the first least developed country to submit its 
Intended  Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to the UNFCCC,  Ethiopia communicated 
its  plans  to  cut  emissions  below  2010  levels  from  150  mega  tonnes  of  carbon  dioxide 
equivalent  (Mt  CO2e)  in  2010  to  145  MtCO2e  in  2030.  Ethiopia’s  NDC  includes  a  section  on 
adaptation  in  its  climate  commitment  and  has  outlined  medium-  and  long-term  actions  to 
reduce  vulnerability  in  key  priority  areas  relating  to  drought,  floods,  and  other  cross-cutting 
interventions.  These  include  measures  such  as  capacity  building  to  cope  with  the  spread  of 
diseases;  strengthening  water  resource  management,  and  developing  insurance  that  can 
support farmers and herders in times of disaster. To achieve its long-term goal, action will be 
needed  to  build  capacity  to  mainstream  adaptation  into  all  public  and  private  development 
initiatives and the need to increase the status of women, the welfare of children and the well-
being  of  the  elderly,  disabled,  and  refugees.  The  NDC  indicates  that  full  implementation  of 
Ethiopia’s ambitious goals requires expenditures of more than $150 billion by 2030 and needs 
significant capital investment. However, Ethiopia will tap domestic resources to pay for some 
of its commitment and will determine what can be accomplished without support and what will 
require international support. 
35.  Ethiopia has confronted many adverse impacts, which are manifestations of variable climate. 
The northern, southern and south-eastern dry land regions of Ethiopia have repeatedly faced 
increased  frequency  of  meteorological  drought  episodes,  famines  and  outbreaks  of  diseases 
which are believed to be linked with climate change. The droughts have highly impacted the 
agriculture of the country and brought about the loss of crops, animals and above all the loss 
of millions of people. Flood hazards have increased in recent decades, negatively impacting in 
crop  and  animal  losses  as  well  as  human  lives.  Many  studies  have  concluded  that  the 
agriculture sector is the most affected by climate change. For example, Deressa et al., (2008) 
made  an  integrated  quantitative  vulnerability  assessment  for  seven  Regional  States  (of  the 
total  eleven  regions)  by  using  biophysical  and  social  vulnerability  indices  of  Ricardian 
approach.  The  study  revealed  that  decline  in  precipitation  and  increase  in  high  temperature 
are both damaging Ethiopian agriculture.  
36.  Impacts on Livestock production: Although the direct effects of heat stress on livestock have 
not been studied extensively, warming is expected to alter the feed intake, mortality, growth, 
reproduction, maintenance, and production of animals. Collectively, these effects are expected 
to  have  a  negative  impact  on  livestock  productivity  (Thornton  et  al.,  2009  cited  in  EACC). 
Chickens are particularly vulnerable to climate change because they can only tolerate narrow 
ranges  of  temperatures  beyond  which  reproduction  and  growth  are  negatively  affected.  It  is 
important  to  mention  that  poultry  is  mostly  associated  with  women,  women  headed 
households  and  with  poorest  subsistence  level  households  as  an  income  generating  activity 
(IGA). 
37.  Because  of  irregular  rainfall  and  droughts,  the  country  is  experiencing  deficits  in  food 
production in several areas, and likely increase in acute weather events, amplified aridity and 
a  decrease  in  precipitation,  range  resources  and  soil  moisture  will  escalate  the  problem 
severity.  The  shortage  of  water  which  is  supposed  to  result  from  climate  change  will  highly 
impact the already water stressed lowland regions and agricultural activities may no longer be 
6 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
successful. The limited availability of food, due to the repeated drought cycles and disparity in 
rainfall,  has  become  a  major  problem  for  millions  of  households  in  many  parts  of  Ethiopia. 
Agro-pastoral and pastoral households, which are reliant on livestock for their livelihoods, can 
also suffer severe asset losses during droughts (World Bank, 2007).  
38.  According  to  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  (1998),  Ethiopia  has  18  main  agro-ecological  zones. 
Of the 18 zones, the following 11 zones representing more than 74% of the country. Below a 
description:  
39.  Hot  to  warm  sub-moist  lowlands:  this  zone  covers  the  warm  sub-moist  plains  in  the 
north-west and Rift Valley lake regions  of the  country. The altitude here ranges  from 400 to 
1600m  above  sea  level  and  the  mean  annual rainfall  varies  between  200  and  1000mm.  The 
farming  system  includes  both  crop  cultivation  and  livestock  production.  Bush  and  grasses 
cover the majority of the land that is not under farming. The major problems in this zone are 
deforestation, malaria and poor infrastructure.  
40.  Tepid to cool sub-moist mid-highlands: this zone consists of the plains and mountains of 
the Tegray, Amhara and Somali Regional States. The altitude varies from 1400 to 2200m. The 
zone  is  intensively  cultivated,  the  farming  system  being  mixed  cereal  livestock  production. 
This zone has potential for rainfed agriculture on the plains and afforestation in the mountains 
area. The problems here are erosion and deforestation.  
41.  Tepid  to  cool  pre-humid  mid-highlands:  this  zone  is  physio-geographically  mountainous 
with  an  altitude  range  of  1000–3000m  and  it  is  found  in  different  parts  of  the  country.  The 
climate  is  favourable  for  crop  production  and  livestock  grazing.  The  mean  annual  rainfall 
varies  from  600  to  2200mm.  mixed  crop  livestock  production  is  the  faming  system  of  this 
zone.  The  crops  are  both  annual  and  perennial.  The  main  constraints  are  the  shortage  of 
fuelwood, and wind erosion in some places. 
42.  Tepid  to  cool  humid  midlands:  This  zone  has  a  good  climate  and  flat  to  gentle  sloping 
terrain,  which  make  it  favourable  for  agriculture.  The  altitude  ranges  from  2000  to  2800m, 
and  the  mean  annual  rainfall  from  900  to  2000mm.  Shallow  soil  depth  and  degraded 
topography and drainage are some of the major constraints of the zone.  
43.  Warm sub-humid lowlands:  This zone covers the  warm sub-humid plains in the Gambella 
and  Beneshangul  Gumuz  National  Regional  States.  Its  altitude  ranges  from  400  to  1000m. 
The  natural  vegetation  cover  is  wooded  grassland  and  cultivation  is  practiced  mainly  along 
major rivers such as the Baro and Akobo. Tsetse fly, malaria and the  workability of  vertisols 
are the major constraints in this zone. 
44.  Tepid  to  cool  moist  mid-highlands:  This  zone  covers  the  high  potential  areas  of  Oromia 
and  Southern  Nations,  Nationalities  and  People’s  Regional  State  (SNNPRS).  Its  climate  is 
highly  conducive  to  the  growth  and  development  of  various  plant  and  animal  species.  The 
general  physio-geography  is  mountainous,  with  altitudes  ranging  from  1000  to  2800m.  The 
mean  annual  rainfall  varies  from  1100mm  to  1500mm.  The  zone  has  a  high  potential  for 
crops, livestock, forestry and wildlife production. Topography is the major constraint here, as 
it impedes the use of large-scale mechanized farming.  
45.  Cold to very cold moist Afro-alpine: This zone covers the southeastern parts of the Oromia 
Regional State. The altitude here ranges from 3000 to 4200m. The mean annual rainfall varies 
from  900  to  1800  mm.  The  main  constraints  are  the  rugged  topography,  shallow  soil  depth 
and wind erosion. 
46.  Hot to warm humid lowlands: This zone covers Oromia and the Southern Regional States. 
As  it  has  favourable  climatic  conditions,  many  plant  and  animal  species  grow  here.  The 
topography is mainly mountains, with altitudes ranging from 800 to 2200m. The mean annual 
7 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
rainfall ranges from 1300 to 1700mm. The potential for forestry and wildlife is high here. The 
main constraints are the rugged topography and shallow soil depth.  
47.  Hot to warm arid lowland plains:  This zone covers the arid valley and escarpment  of the 
Afar and Somali Regions. The altitude ranges from 0 to 1200m, and  the annual precipitation 
from 100–600mm. The zone is sparsely cultivated (mostly irrigated) and covered by wooded 
grassland.  This  zone  has  a  potential  for  livestock  rearing  and  irrigated  agriculture.  Low 
rainfall, high temperature and lack of adequate infrastructure are the major constraints.  
48.  Hot to warm pre-humid lowlands: This zone is found in the SNNPRS. The climatic and soil 
conditions are conducive to the development of plant and animal species. The altitude ranges 
from  1400  to  2000m  and  the  mean  annual  rainfall  from  1000  to  1500mm.  This  zone  has  a 
high potential for crop production. The main constraint to production is the shallow soil depth. 
49.  Tepid to cool sub-moist mid highlands: This zone is found in the Oromia National Regional 
State  (ONRS)  and  the  SNNPRS.  The  topography  here  is  mountainous,  with  altitudes  ranging 
from  1600  to  3200m.  The  mean  annual  rainfall  ranges  from  700  to  2200mm.  The  livestock 
here  are  mainly  cattle,  sheep,  goats,  donkeys,  horses  and  mules.  Shallow  soil  depth  and 
drainage are the constraints on agricultural production here. 
50.  Beneficiaries  of  RUFIP  III  are  residing  in  various  agro  ecological  zones.  Variability  in  climate 
change in different agro-ecological zones is expected to adversely affect project beneficiaries 
of  RUFIP  III  in  different  ways.  An  assessment  conducted  on  major  agro-ecological  zones 
(AEZ)  which  covers  the  warm  and  sub-moist  mid  highland  areas  to  warm  and  semi-arid low 
land areas highlighted the fact that small-scale, rain fed, subsistence farmers and pastoralists 
are the most vulnerable to climate changes. This study also indicated that arid, semi-arid, and 
dry sub humid low lands are more vulnerable while highlands have been found less vulnerable 
to climate change. Diversification of livelihoods, migration, nonfarm activities, sales of assets, 
settlement  and  resettlement  activities,  and  the  adoption  of  improved  water  management 
system are few measures that have been taken at the house hold level to minimize impacts 
due to climate change. 
51.  RUFIP III will be implemented nationally, including in the degraded areas of the country where 
there  is  serious  environmental  vulnerability.  The  loans  given  by  RFIs  under  the  programme 
will  finance  production  and  enterprise  activities  of  small  holders,  including  for  agriculture, 
horticulture,  forestry,  livestock,  etc.  Excessive  adoption  of  such  activities,  without  adequate 
safeguards  and  reckoning  of  carrying  capacity  of  local  areas  can  aggravate  environmental 
degradation.  Possible  impacts  could  be  ground  water  pollution  due  to  excessive  use  of 
fertilizers and pesticides, soil erosion due to farming of steep slope/ marginal land, lowering of 
ground water level due to excessive water extraction for irrigation, contamination of food and 
water  bodies  due  to  improper  use/storage  of  agro  chemicals,  proliferation  of  insect  vectors 
due  to  lack  of  proper  drainage,  shortage  in  animal  fodder  due  to  over  grazing,  over  grazing 
due  to  increase  in  animal  population,  deforestation  due  to  expansion  of  agricultural  land, 
pollution of surface and ground water and release of pungent smell due to release of animal 
wastes, power shortage due to additional energy demand for agro processing and health risks 
due to improper use of agro-chemicals are expected to occur. 
52.  It  has  to  be  noted  that  RUFIP  III  does  not  advocate  any  specific  activities  or  any  specific 
technologies  that  tend  to  be  environmentally  counterproductive.  Financing  of  ground  level 
activities  will  follow  sound  principles  of  environmental  sustainability  with  RFIs  advising  the 
clients  to  take  the  guidance  of  appropriate  government  and  non-governmental  agencies  in 
sustainable production and processing practices. 
53.  The key trends and shocks that project beneficiaries should anticipate due to climate change 
during  project  implementation  include  the  following:  (i)  increase  in  frequency  and  extent  of 
8 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
drought episodes, famines and outbreaks of diseases;(ii) famine due to loss of crops, animals 
(iii)  increase  in  the  frequent  flood  hazards;  (iv)  decline  in  precipitation  and  increase  in 
temperature;  (v)  irregularity  in  rainfall  and  droughts;  and  (iv)  shortage  of  water  for  human 
and animals. 
54.  Pastoralists  are  adopting  a  variety  of  coping  mechanisms.  In  the  farming  areas,  many  are 
shifting to more drought tolerant crops and varieties, improved forest management practices, 
diversified  energy  sources,  and  alternative  means  of  income  from  off-farm  activities. 
Pastoralists have also divided pasture into wet and dry season grazing areas to better manage 
risk,  while  others  have  changed  the  composition  of  their  heard  from  cattle  to  camels  and 
goats, which can better tolerate dry, hot weather.  
55.  Besides  adopting  the  above  coping  mechanism  by  end  beneficiaries,  RUFIP  III  could  also 
support improved access to clean energy sources. Similarly, the following climate change risk 
management  measures  are  also  recommended  for  RUFIP  III  resources  and  their  use  by  the 
beneficiaries:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investing in livelihood opportunities and risk  management  strategies for poor farmers 
and pastoralists, particularly women; 
Improving access to agriculture extension and advisory services; 
Investing  in  select  activities  based  on  long-term  adaptation  plans  developed  through 
the  sharing  of  best  practices  and  community  participation,  civil  society  engagement, 
and  collaboration  with  academic  and  research  institutions.  The  plans  should  have 
regular monitoring to identify promising practices for scaling up; 
Investing  in  proven  farmers  and  pastoralists  adaptation  practices  such  as  forestation 
programs, reforestation, and sustainable forest management that ensure sustainability 
and impact on poverty and inequality; 
Investing in community environmental and drought monitoring systems and improving 
community disaster risk reduction capacity; 
Increasing  use  of  renewable  energy  such  as  solar  energy  and  promoting  photovoltaic 
technology. 
56.  RUFIP  III  can  beneficially  provide  resources  for  sustainable  investments  and  linkages  with 
organisations providing climate change resilience services and products. The capacity building 
activities  envisaged  can  promote  further  products  and  services  for  the  beneficiaries.  The 
sustainable  investments  would  support  the  climate  resilient  green  economy  development 
strategy and the role of RFIs in promoting climate change adaptation and mitigation.  
9 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
Part 2. Institutions and legal framework 
2.1  Institutions:  Most  important  institutions/  networks  that  represent  potential  strategic 
partners to help achieve IFAD's mainstreaming agenda are the following: 
through 
Gender  Ministry  of  Women,  Children  and  Youth  Affairs  (MoWCYA)  plays  a  proactive  role  in 
coordinating  gender  activities  in  the  country.  Coordination  with  civil  society  organizations 
the  Government  Organizations  (GO)  and  Non-Government 
takes  place 
Organizations (NGOs) Forum bringing together the two groups working on women, children 
and  youth  issues.  In  addition,  there  are  also  other  thematic  working  groups  on  issues  of 
early marriage, violence against women and children, and FG- M/C that bring all the actors 
working  along  those  themes  together  for  coordination  purposes.  The  Ministry  of  Women 
affairs  also  leads  the  coordination  mechanism  of  the  Government  of  Ethiopia/Joint 
Programme on Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women ( RWEE JP). 
The  Donor  Group  on  Gender  Equality  (DGGE)  is  the  main  donor  coordination 
mechanism  that  coordinates  the  work  of  all  donor  groups,  bi-lateral  and  multi-lateral 
organizations  on  gender  equality.  Among  UN  Agencies,  there  is  a  United  Nations 
Development  Assistance  Framework  (UNDAF)  Technical  Working  Group  whose  fourth 
pillar is on Women, Youth and Children. 
Women’s  affairs  directorate  in  the  ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Natural  Resources 
(WAD-MoANR):  The  MoANR’s  Women  Affairs  Directorate  (WAD)  as  per  its  mandate  has 
taken  the  initiative  to  establish,  lead  and  coordinate  a  network  -  Ethiopian  Network  for 
Gender  Equality  in  Agriculture  (ENGEA),  of  all  partners  who  have  been  working  and  are 
aspiring  to  engage  and  make  gender  one  of  their  critical  agenda  in  the  agriculture  sector. 
The Network is chaired by the Women's Affairs Directorate of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Natural Resources. 
Women’s  affair  directorate  in  the  Federal  Cooperative  Agency  (WAD-FCA):  the 
directorate  has  the  mandate  of  developing  women’s  membership  and  leadership 
participation in cooperatives, including credit and saving Cooperatives ( RuSACCOs). 
Youth 
The  Ethiopian  Ministry  of  Youth  &  Sport  is  responsible  for  facilitating  the  formation  of 
youth organizations to support national development, monitor and support youth initiatives 
as well as implementing the national youth policy. 
Climate  smart  agriculture  youth  network  Ethiopia  CSAYN:  the  network  serves as an 
open  platform  for  Ethiopian  Agropreneurs,  youth  farmers,  environmentalists  and  youth 
advocates within the ages 18 to 35. 
Social 
Inclusion 
Ministry of Peace (MoP): The responsibilities of this Ministry include promoting equitable 
development,  with  emphasis  on  delivering  special  support  to  the  developing  national 
regional states. The main purpose of the special support is to address the inequalities that 
have  existed  between  the  regions  over  the  decades,  thereby  hastening  equitable  growth 
and development.  
Pastoralists  associations/NGOs:  Several  CSOs/NGOs  supporting  work  in  pastoralists 
areas  are  the  following:  Afar  Pastoralist  Development  Association  (APDA);  Pastoralist 
Concern Association Ethiopia; Pastoralist Forum Ethiopia. 
Nutrition  The Ministry of Health (MoH):  The  Ministry  has  the mandate to coordinate government 
sectors  and  development  partners  for  nutrition.  A  high-level  multi-sectoral  and  multi-
stakeholder  platform  was  established,  the  National  Nutrition  Coordination  Body  (NNCB), 
comprising ministers from seven sectors: Health, Agriculture, Water and Energy, Education, 
Industry, Labour and Social Affairs and Women, Children and Youth Affairs. It also includes 
country representatives from United Nations agencies, bi-lateral donors as well as technical 
and research institutions and soon will add representatives from the private sector and civil 
society. 
10 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
The National Nutrition Technical Committee (NNTC). It is co-chaired by the Ministries 
of  Health  and  Agriculture,  consists  of  directors  and  technical  officers  from  eight  ministries 
including  the  Finance  &  Economic  Development  Ministry  and  one  representative  from 
UNICEF.  The  NNTC  provides  guidance  on  the  implementation  of  decisions  taken  by  the 
NNCB.  Three  technical  groups  are  working  under  supervision  of  the  NNTC,  one  on 
monitoring  and  evaluation  (MER-WG),  one  on  food  fortification  and  one  on  programme 
implementation.  
The  Ethiopian  Public  Health  Institute  (EPHI):  The  organisation  is  chairing  the 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Research Working Group of the National Nutrition Programme in 
Ethiopia, is in charge of running the NIPN, with support from the International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI). 
Environm
ent and 
Climate 
Change 
Ministry  of  Environment,  Forest  and  Climate  Change  of  Ethiopian,  now 
Environment,  Forest  and  Climate  Change  Commission  (EFCCC).  This  Ministry  is 
established  to  monitor  environmental  concerns  and  the  right  of  the  citizens  to  live  in 
healthy  environment,  devise  environmental  policy  and  coordinate  their  implementation. 
Offices and or Bureaus have also been established at the regional and woreda levels. 
2.2  Policy  and  regulatory  frameworks:  National  strategies,  policies  and  regulatory 
frameworks relevant to the project from a safeguard and IFAD mainstreaming perspectives are 
the following: 
Gender 
The  Ethiopian  Government  is  a  signatory  to  most  international  instruments,  conventions 
and declarations, and adopted international instruments such as;  the Convention on the 
Elimination  of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination  Against  Women  /CEDAW  (1979),  the 
Declaration  on  the  Elimination  of  Violence  Against  Women/DEVAW  (1993),  the 
Beijing Platform for Action/BPA (1995) including the domestication of the international 
instruments. CEDAW stipulates that signatories need to work on eliminating discrimination 
against women, and creating equality between women and men. 
The Government of Ethiopia has declared its commitment to gender equality by stipulating 
the rights of women in  the constitution  (Article  35),  by adopting the  Women’s  Policy  of 
Ethiopia and by formulating the National Action Plan on Gender and Development. 
The  Labour  Proclamation  and  the  Civil  Servants  Proclamation  prohibit  discrimination; 
protect  pregnant  women  and  maternity  rights.  The  revised  Pension  Proclamation  (2003) 
provides for equal rights over spouses’ pension to widow and widowers10. The Government 
also revised the Family Law in 2004 and the Criminal Code in 2005 to address issues linked 
to women’s rights.  
At  the  national  level,  the  National  Policy  on  Women,  formulated  in  1993,  is  the  first 
policy  formulated  on  women.  The  policy  encourages  equal  participation  of  women  in  the 
political,  social  and  economic  spheres  of  life  in  the  country  and  subsequently 
institutionalized the  rights of women by creating the  appropriate institutional mechanisms 
within  government  institutions  to  ensure  gender  sensitivity  of  public  regulations  and 
interventions. 
The United Nations Development assistance framework UNDAF 2016-2020 is aligned to the 
GTP  II  and  contributes  directly  to  eight  of  the  nine  GTP  II  pillars.  These  include  UNDAF 
pillar  5  on  equality  and  empowerment.  Under  the  UNDAF  (2012–2016).  Collaborative 
programming and joint programmes on priority themes such as social protection, resilience, 
migration  and  financial  inclusion  are  expected  to  continue  under  the  UNDAF  2016-2020. 
The areas are expected to largely benefit women. 
10 Gender Equality and Development, World Development Report, 2012 
11 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
Youth 
The National Youth  Policy (2004): The major elements of the youth policy are: Youth, 
democracy and good governance; Youth and economic development; Youth and education; 
Youth  and  health;  Youth  and  HIV  AIDS;  Youth  and  social  evils;  Youth,  culture,  sport  and 
entertainment; Youth and environmental protection; and Vulnerable youth. 
The  Rural  Job  Opportunity  Creation  Strategy  (RJOCS)  is  designed  to  consolidate  the 
rural  job  opportunity  creation  activities  at  both  federal  and  regional  levels.  It  recognized 
that rural youth are the critical labor force to ensure sustainable development of the sector 
at  present  and  in  the  future.  Enhancing  the  capacity  of  rural  youth  is  therefore  the  most 
important  task  to  be  done  towards  the  goal  of  ensuring  sustainable  development  of 
agriculture that provide livelihood to majority of the Ethiopian population. 
Social 
Inclusion 
The  Ethiopian  Constitution  recognizes  the  presence  of  different  socio-cultural  groups, 
including  historically  disadvantaged  and  underserved  communities,  pastoralists,  and 
minorities,  as  well  as  their  rights  to  socio-economic  equity  and  justice.  Article  39  of  the 
Ethiopian  Constitution  recognizes  the  rights  of  groups  identified  as  “Nations,  Nationalities 
and Peoples”. 
The  Ethiopian  Constitution  also  recognizes  the  rights  of  pastoral  groups  inhabiting  the 
lowland  of  the  country.  The  constitution  under  article  40  (4)  stipulates  “Ethiopian 
pastoralists have a right to free land for grazing and cultivation as well as a right 
not to be displaced from their own lands”. The Constitutions under Articles 41(8) also 
affirms  that  “Ethiopian  Pastoralists  have  the  right  to  receive  fair  prices  for  their  products, 
that would lead to improvement in their conditions of life and to enable them to obtain an 
equitable  share  of  the  national  wealth  commensurate  with  their  contribution.  Pastoralist 
regions/areas  recognized  by  the  government  are:  Afar;  Somali;  Borena  Zone  and  Fentele 
Woreda (Oromia); South Omo Zone, Bench-Maji Zone, and parts of Decha Wereda in Keffa 
Zone (SNNPR); and, Nuer Zone (Gambella).  
Nutrition   National  Nutrition  Strategy  (NNS)  launched  in  2008.  The  NNS  in  Ethiopia  is  now 
operationalised  through  the  multisectoral  National  Nutrition  Programme  (NNP)  2015-2020 
with ten stakeholder ministries.  
Environm
ent 
and 
Climate 
Change 
The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Natural  Resources  (MoANR)  has  developed  a 
Nutrition  Sensitive  Agriculture  Strategic  Plan  in  2016  that  aims  to  mainstream 
nutrition  in  all  programmes  of  the  MoANR.  This  Strategic  Plan  also  has  a  strong  focus  on 
the  empowerment  of  women  through  three  initiatives  and  related  actions  on  increased 
access  to  resources  and  inputs  for  women;  on  promotion  of  labour  and  energy  saving 
technologies to impact women’s work load; on promotion of gender sensitivity in nutrition 
sensitive agriculture at all level. 
The  Constitution  of  the  Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia:  It is  the  supreme 
law of the country. Article 92 of the Constitution states that the design and implementation 
of  any  program  and  development  projects  shall  not  damage  or  destroy  the  environment, 
and  people  have  the  right  to  be  fully  consulted  and  express  their  views  in  planning  and 
implementation of environmental policies and project.  
Environmental Policy of Ethiopia: The Environmental Policy of Ethiopia (EPE) was issued 
in April 1997. The overall  policy goal is to improve and enhance  the health and quality of 
life  of  all  Ethiopians  and  promote  sustainable  social  and  economic  development  through 
sound  management  and  use  of  natural,  human-made  and  cultural  resources  and  their 
environment  as  a  whole,  so  as  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  present  generation  without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The policy seeks to 
ensure  the  empowerment  and  participation  of  the  people  and  their  organizations  at  all 
levels  in  environmental  management  activities,  raise  public  awareness  and  promote 
understanding  of  the  essential  linkage  between  environment  and  development  National 
Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP). 
Ethiopia’s  Climate  Resilient  Green  Economy  Strategy:  To  cope  with  the  prevailing 
environmental problems such as land degradation and climatic hazards (rainfall fluctuation, 
increasing  temperature,  flooding),  and  speed  up  its  socioeconomic  development,  the 
12 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
Government  of  Ethiopia  has  planned  a  climate-resilient  green  economy  as  a  development 
strategy.  This  development  direction  promotes  environmental  protection,  reducing  fossil 
fuel consumption which releases greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.  
Water  Resource  Policy:  The  Ministry  of  Water  Resource  (as  it  was  named  by  then) 
prepared water resources management policy of Ethiopia. The overall goal of the policy is 
to  enable  and  promote  all  national  efforts  towards  the  efficient,  equitable  and  optimum 
utilization  of  the  available  water  resources  of  Ethiopia  for  significant  socio-economic 
development on a sustainable basis.  
Land  Tenure  Policy:  The  Constitution  of  the  Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia 
(FDRE)  states  that  the  right  to  ownership  of  rural  and  urban  land,  as  well  as  all  natural 
resources,  is  exclusively  vested  in  the  State  and  People  of  Ethiopia.  Article  40  of  the 
Constitution indicates that land is a common property of the Nations, Nationalities and the 
People  of  Ethiopia,  and  shall  not  be  subjected  to  sale  or  to  other  means  of  transfer.  The 
Land  Tenure  Policy  of  Ethiopia  strongly  supports  the  principle  that  project  plans  must 
include attractive and sustainable resettlement strategies to the people who are going to be 
displaced  as  a  result  of  the  development  plan,  and  they  have  to  be  fully  convinced, 
compensated and have been able to participate in all phases of the project implementation.  
National  Biodiversity  Policy:  The  National  Biodiversity  Policy  (NBP)  was  established  in 
1998 based on a holistic ecosystem approach to conserve, develop and utilize the country's 
biodiversity  resources.  One  of  the  objectives  of  the  biodiversity  policy  is  to  integrate 
biodiversity  conservation  and  development  into  Federal  and  Regional  agricultural,  health, 
industrial and overall national economic development strategies and plans.  
2.3  Programmes  and  partnerships:  Poverty  and  vulnerability  reduction  through 
Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP):  
57.  PSNP is run by the Government and provides regular cash or food transfers to 8 million people; 
covering  4  million  of  them  in  areas  affected  by  the  drought  and  targeting  the  very  poor  and 
poor  households.  From  the  beginning  the  project  supported  the  transition  from  the  annual 
emergency  appeal  system  post–crises  based  on  food  transfers  to  a  multiannual  predictable 
approach  with  the  introduction  of  cash  transfers.  The  second  and  third  phases  supported  the 
Program’s integration, consolidating performance and maximizing its long-term impacts on food 
security by ensuring effective integration and coordination with other critical interventions such 
as  household  asset  building  and  risk  financing  mechanisms.  The  fourth  phase,  along  similar 
lines,  has  gone  beyond  assets  building  to  strengthening  livelihood  and  supporting  poor 
households accessing financial services as a coping mechanism against vulnerability. 
58.  Targeted households receiving services on improved livelihood and access to finance households 
can  be  defined  as  transitory  poor.  They  are  given  support  to  secure  their  livelihood  in  the 
transition period where they are at risk of sliding back into poverty unless alternative livelihood 
strategies  are  developed  through  access  to  finance  and  ultimately  through  access  to  credit. 
Given the absence of a dedicated LoC within PSNP4, availability of funds depends exclusively on 
the  RFI  capacity.  It  is  found  that  the  lack  of  liquidity  is  the  major  constraint  limiting  the  full 
achievements  of  the  goal  (i.e.  securing  all  targeted  households  against  economic  and  climate 
shocks) in securing poor peoples livelihoods.  
59.  2.4  Environmental  and  social  category:  RUFIP  III  may  have  some  adverse  environmental 
and/or  social  impacts  on  human  populations  or  environmentally  significant  areas,  but  the 
impacts:  (i)  are  less  adverse  than  those  for  category  A;  (ii)  are  site  specific  and  few  are 
irreversible  in  nature;  and  (iii)  can  be  readily  remedied  by  appropriate  preventive  actions 
and/or mitigation measures. 
13 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
60.  Based  on  the  justification  above  and  the  National  EIA  Guideline  and  the  SECAP,  the  proposed 
project  falls  under  Category  B.  The  project  is  not  expected  to  have  any  significant irreversible 
adverse  environmental  or  social  implications.  The  project  will  support  access  to  financial 
products which are adapted to the needs of vulnerable populations and do not engender major 
environmental and social impact. Category B projects require an ESMP, which is incorporated in 
the SECAP review note in the form of a matrix, showing the output from the environmental and 
social  Management  Framework  analysis.  As  the  specific  investments  that  will  be  made  by  the 
RUFIP  III  beneficiaries  are  currently  unknown  an  Environment  and  Social  Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be developed. The ESMF will include guidance and screening criteria for 
the  selection  of  sub-projects  for  the  cases  that  necessitate  an  ESMP  to  be  developed  during 
project  implementation  phase.  The  ESMF  will  be  intergrated  in  the  PIM  as  well,  to  provide 
appropriate guidance to implementing RFIs. 
61.  2.5  Climate  risk  category:  Based  on  the  preliminary  design  of  RUFIP  III  and  the  agreed 
project  activities  in  the  design,  screening  of  climate  risk  has  been  done.  According  to  this 
analysis RUFIP III has moderate climate risk. The risk classification is based on the typology of 
investments  that  will  be  made  by  the  RUFIP  III  beneficiaries.  Given  that  most  of  the 
beneficiaries  are  smallholder  framers  and  pastoralists,  their  livelihoods  and  hence  investments 
made  are  exposed  and  sensitive  to  climate  shocks.  However,  the  resources  accessed  through 
RUFIP  III  can  also  be  utilized  for  investments  that  can  build  the  resilience  of  the  beneficiaries 
and support the recovery following climate related shocks.  
62.  The  following  is  summary  of  the  basic  climate  risk  analysis  of  RUFIP  III.  The  trainings  in 
financial literacy, building client capacity to use financial products, training on supervisory and 
regulatory  subjects,  strengthening  technical  and  operational  capacities  of  RFIs,  skill  and 
knowledge  development  of  staff  at  NBE  and  the  technical  assistance  to  develop  policy 
frameworks  do  not  have  any  direct  interaction  with  climate  change  risks.  The  main  climate 
change related risks are rainfall variability, droughts, floods and rising temperatures. Therefore 
the  climate  risk  for  these  activities  is  considered  low.  However,  measures  such  as  enhancing 
environmental,  social  and  climate  risk  management  systems  in  the  RFIs  can  be  beneficially 
included  in  the  programme.  These  measures  would  build  on  the  Responsible  Financing  for 
Smallholder  Agriculture  initiative  activities  in  Ethiopia  with  resources  from  the  Adaptation  for 
smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP 2).  
Part 3 - Strategic Recommendations:  
Recommendations for project implementation  
63.  In  line  with  national  programme  (GTP  II),  as  well  as  with  international  frameworks  (UNDAF 
2016-2020)  at  country  level,  specific  attention  should  be  placed  on  strengthening  access  to 
financial  services  and  products  for  vulnerable  as  well  as  economically  productive  rural 
households (men, women and youth). Given the strong nexus between gender, household food 
security  and  nutrition,  it  is  key  that  IFAD  engagement  will  consider  activities  aiming  at 
enhancing  women’s  decision  making  as  well  as  nutrition  education  interventions  at  all  levels, 
focusing on the most vulnerable and food insecure households.  
64.  RUFIP  III  will  use  the  following  entry  points  to  address  cross  cutting  issues:  (i)  improve 
women’s  access  to  suitable  financial  services/products  and  increase  their  voice  in  decision 
making;  (ii)  generate  economic  opportunities  for  youth  through  facilitating  access  to  financial 
services  and  (iii)  improve  nutrition,  especially  for  food  insecure  households  and  vulnerable 
categories experiencing negative environmental effects (i.e. draught). 
65.  Improve  women’s  access  to  suitable  financial  services/products  and  increase 
women’s voice in decision-making: The project will address gender disparities and the key 
constraints  that  limit  women’s  participation  in  accessing  financial  services/  products  by:  (a) 
14 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
ensuring  that  women  and  men  have  equal  access  to  capacity  building,  training  targeting  50% 
women  as  direct  beneficiaries;  (b)  promoting  financial  products  that  are  suitable  for  female 
clients  and  respond  to  women’s  needs  and  priorities;  (c)  increase  women’s  voice  in  decision-
making at RUSACCOs and UNIONs level by promoting leadership trainings for women leaders to 
achieve 50% representation; (d) increase women’s access to skills and knowledge by providing 
women's  skills  in  financial  literacy,  managing  and  saving  money  as  well  as  business 
development. The types of activities are tailored to serve women from different socio-economic 
categories:  vulnerable  women  interested  in  small  IGA  to  complement  their  livelihood 
(subsistence  level),  as  well  as  women  entrepreneurs  (better  off)  engaged  in  productive 
activities and interested to expand their businesses.  
66.  Generating economic opportunities for young people through access to finance: RUFIP 
III will replicate successful interventions aimed at supporting youth access to finance. The aim 
is to increase the % of young men and women clients of MFIs as well as RUSACCOs members 
following  a  gradual  approach:  from  initiating  young  men  and  women  to  (i)  finance  education 
(targeting  schools  for  example)  to  develop  (ii)  a  saving  culture  and  ultimately  (iii)  to  submit 
business plan proposal to access  small loans for alternative income generating activities (farm 
as well as off-farm sector).  
67.  The programme will closely work with existing youth groups, associations and schools in order 
to  provide  key  messages  about  financial  education  and  promote  a  saving  culture;  it  will  then 
in  alternative 
engage  with  existing  programmes  supporting 
livelihoods/off  farm  activities  to  join  SACCOs/MFIs.  The  UNCDF  supported  Youth  Start  (YS) 
programme  constitutes  a  source  of  evidence-based  achievements  for  increased  growth  rate  of 
youth  clients  (up  to  70%)  and  good  practices.  The  YS  training  modules  may  be  taken  up  for 
replication to improve access to finance for young men and women. 
landless  youth  engaged 
68.  Improving nutrition among food insecure households: The project recognizes that access 
to  finance  is  a  key  element  that  within  the  household  dynamics  can  play  an  important  role  in 
combatting  malnutrition  as  long  as  it  is  accompanied  by  awareness  creation.  Limited  nutrition 
knowledge  among  beneficiaries  may  prevent  RUFIP  III  target  groups  to  translate  increased 
production and income into improved diets. The project will contribute to improved nutrition by 
promoting awareness at community level, with special focus/priority in areas where higher food 
vulnerability  is  registered  due  to  environmental  negative  effects  (i.e.  draught).  To  support 
beneficiaries  in  addressing  gaps  in  nutrition  knowledge,  the  project  will  carry  out  nutrition 
education  at  the  cooperatives/union  levels  in  collaboration  with  other  agencies  as  well  as 
establishing demo-plots at SACCO/Union level.  
69.  Targeting and social inclusion strategy: The programme will provide financial services and 
products to clients from poor and vulnerable rural households living below the poverty line (set 
in  2016  at  ETB  7,184  per  capita  annual  income),  as  well  as  to  those  individuals  defined  as 
transitory  poor,  whose  average  income  is  above  the  poverty  line  but  are  subject  to  recurrent 
shocks  and  can  slide  back  into  poverty.  The  target  groups  will include  the  poor  and  transitory 
poor  (households  engaged  in  farm  and  off-farm  activities)  which  will comprise  the  majority  of 
RUFIP  III  clients,  while  the  better  off  will  be  a  smaller  percentage.  The  final  targets  to  be 
achieved  will  reflect  this  proportion,  serving  about  70%  of  clients  belonging  to  the  poor  and 
transitory poor categories. 
70.  Targeting  criteria:  To  ensure  that  project  services  will  serve  the  intended  households,  the 
Targeting  and  social  inclusion  Strategy  will  prioritize  drought  prone  areas  where  majority  of 
poor  are  concentrated  and  households  of  smallholder  farmers  are  highly  affected  by  climate 
shocks. These will be identified, among others, through the presence of safety net programmes 
(i.e. PSNP 4 among others) where activities support communities to develop alternative income 
generating  activities  (IGA)  and  savings  through  RUSACCOs.  RUFIP  III  will  prioritize  those 
15 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
geographic areas and given the high level of malnutrition and food insecurity that characterize 
the  households.  In  addition  to  PSNP  coverage,  available  statistics  on  poverty  and  malnutrition 
levels  across  woredas  and  kebeles  will  inform  the  geographic  targeting  and  the  selection  of 
priority areas/communities. RUFIP III will closely work with PSNP4 Project unit to define areas 
of intervention.  
71.  The  Gender  and  Youth  Mainstreaming  Strategy  will  consider  scaling  up  of  best  practices 
which have been effective for women and youth inclusion and outreach, as well as promotion of 
suitable  products  for  them.  RUFIP  I  and  II  have  demonstrated  experiences  on  outreach  of 
women and data disaggregation: women account for 46% SACCO members, and 40% directors 
on  their  governance  committees  (exceeding  the  minimum  required  at  30%).  In  MFIs  44%  of 
the clients are women. RUFIP III will continue to support implementing partners in the effort to 
reach  at  least  50%  in  terms  of  women  members/board  representatives  and  women  clients  in 
case  they  are  below  this  target  level.  The  performance  tracking  would  also  monitor  whether 
RFIs  register  increases  in  coverage  of  women  even  beyond  the  50%  minimum  threshold  and 
the annual trends. Women’s leadership trainings will be provided to women’s representatives in 
the expected decision making bodies. Furthermore, implementing partners will integrate gender 
analysis  as  part  of  any  analysis  undertaken  to  identify  suitable  financial  products.  It  is  indeed 
expected that RFI promote suitable products for women.  
72.  Youth:  The  UNCDF  supported  Youth  Start  (YS)  programme  constitutes  a  source  of  evidence-
based achievements for increased growth rate of youth clients (up to 70%) and good practices 
and training modules to be taken up for replication regarding young men and women access to 
finance. RUFIP III may consider the existing surveys as well as methodologies/training modules 
developed with support of YS programme and Women’s World Banking (WWB), to be adapted to 
the different regional contexts and trainings promoted among the MFIs/FCAs staff at all levels. 
Technical  assistance  (TA)  will  be  provided  to  train  selected  staff  from  the  MFIs  and  FCA 
respectively.  
73.  Among  others,  proposed  trainings,  workshop  and  conferences  will  include:  youth-targeted 
market  research;  training  on  product  development  for  youth  (pilots);  training  on  youth  client 
protection;  training  on  monitoring  and  evaluating  for  youth  participation;  financial  Education 
Training of Trainers; familiarization training on the new reporting format; Workshop on sharing 
best practices and knowledge among involved partners. This intervention is expected to expand 
finance  education  among  youth  and  to  catalyse  the  growth  of  young  clientele  of  the  financing 
institutions as a result of the suitable services/products promoted. Suitable technical institutions 
should be identified to build capacity of the RFI to drive this set of interventions. In each MFI a 
dedicated officer (nodal officer) will be identified to be able to expand the promotion of financial 
services for the target group, including the youth.  
74.  Nutrition  Interventions:  The  programme  will  promote  nutrition  awareness  (i.e.  nutrition 
education and demonstration plots). Nutrition-specific trainings will be provided to members of 
SACCOs Unions and they will be capacitated to further train (ToT) members at primary SACCOs 
level.  Existing  training  materials  for  nutrition  (i.e.  Ministry  of  Agriculture)  will  be  adapted. 
Collaboration with Bureau of Health at Regional, Woreda and Kebele levels, along with nutrition 
team/focal points and extension agents from the agriculture sector, at all levels, will be explored 
to  carry  out  the  above  mentioned  activities.  The  win-win  collaboration  is  foreseen  given  the 
wide  outreach  of  RUFIP  III  and  the  opportunity  to  convey  the  intended  nutrition  message  to 
about 13.5 million clients and their families using the MFIs, Unions and SACCOs as entry points. 
75.  Responsibility  during  implementation:  Overall  responsibility  for  the  targeting  strategy 
implementation as well as gender, youth and social inclusion and nutrition related issues will be 
under  the  Social  Performance  and  Customers  Protection  Officer  in  the  Project 
16 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
Coordination  Management  Unit  (PCMU).  Responsibilities  and  modalities  for  implementation  of 
the above are reflected in the ToRs attached to the PIM. 
76.  Recommendations for mainstreaming environmental management and climate change 
adaptation  and  mitigation:  It  is  recommended  to  use  the  exclusion  list  from  IFC,  also 
indicated in IFAD’s Guidance Statement 12 of the SECAP, as an initial screening of eligibility for 
access to the finance being provided through the MFIs and RUSACCOs at the time of screening 
project activities to be financed by RUFIP III; 
77.  The  ESMF  being  developed  includes  capacity  building  at  the  institutional  level  including  of  the 
MFIs  particularly  in  their  Environment  and  Social  Management  Systems.  This  can  be  delivered 
through  the  Environment  and  Social  Management  specialists  in  DBE  in  collaboration  with 
regional officers from the relevant Government Agencies.  
78.  An additional consideration is the capacity building of the MFIs with the aim of increasing access 
to  products  that  will  build  the  climate  resilience  of  the  end  beneficiaries.  An  assessment  of 
products readily available on the market such as insurance can be done and any adaptation of 
the products planned based on the needs assessment of the RUFIP III end beneficiaries and the 
climate risks that they face.  
79.  RUFIP  III  could  also  actively  seek  out  partnerships  with  projects  in  the  target  areas  that 
promote  improved  environmental  and  natural  resources  management  and  climate  change 
adaptation.  The  Programme  can  collaborate  with  these  projects  by  improving  financial  access 
for the target beneficiaries to invest in these areas and improve their livelihoods.  
80.  Further  studies  needed:  As  explained  above,  RUFIP  III  falls  under  category  B  and  also  has 
medium climatic risk. Project of this category and climate risk will need to further conduct the 
following  studies  (i)  Initial  environmental  Impact  Examination  (IEA)  using  environmental 
screening  format  annexed  in  the  ESMF  document;  (ii)  ESIA  and  or  ESMPs  for  small  holder 
irrigation, animal fattening and dairy investments located near sensitive ecosystems such parks, 
bird  sanctuaries,  natural  reserve  and  cultural  heritage;  (iii)  Further  Climate  risk  analysis  and 
Free  Prior  and  Informed  Consent  (FPIC)  Implementing  Plan  for  project  affected  communities 
where  required;  (iv)  analysis  estimate  carbon  emission  at  a  later  stage  when  the  further 
investment from RUFIP III resources would warrant this.  
3.3 Monitoring  
81.  Poverty reduction  Impact: RUFIP  III  will apply a graduation approach to poverty  reduction. 
Poverty  monitoring  will  be  conducted  by  applying  specific  methodologies  and  indicators 
(including  social  indicators)  to  enable  tracking  of  the  performance  and  impact  of  financial 
inclusion  as  an  instrument  for  poverty  reduction.  The  tracking  will  be  done  both  at  financing 
institution and project levels. These will consider best practice applied at country level, such as 
the  Progress  out  of  Poverty  Index  (PPI)11  survey  conducted  by  PEACE  MFI  and  the  lessons 
learned.  RUFIP  III  will  consider  these  methodologies  for  scaling  up  as  part  of  the  poverty 
monitoring  system  of  involved  MFIs  and  other  implementing  partners  (i.e.  FCA).  The  tracking 
system  will  enable  to  constantly  re-define  the  financial  profile  of  the  clients  and  provide 
appropriate products and services during project implementation. The project will also carry out 
Annual  Outcome  Surveys  to  track  changes  in  economic  and  social  aspects  of  lives  of  project 
beneficiaries. Technical Assistance (TA) will be provided to PCMU and implementing partners to 
introduce and manage the tools. 
82.  Youth: Disaggregated Information on youth (15-29 as per Ethiopian Definition) is not available 
to  determine  the  actual  outreach.  RUFIP  III  will  use  baseline  information  on  the  current 
11 Developed by Mark Shreiner and mainstreamed by Grameen Foundation. 
17 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
presence of youth and will make an effort to increase the existing number of youth clients and 
keep track of it by providing age disaggregated data. Technical Assistance (TA) will be provided 
to  reduce  the  existing  data  gap  and  capacity  building  for  M&E  will  be  considered.  Proposed 
indicators  will  consider:  #  youth  accessing  financial  services  (saving/credits).  #  and  students 
receiving finance education; # youth accessing finance for business plans related to on farm/off 
farm IGA; # youth self-employed as a result of accessing finance. (Baseline to be conducted). 
83.  Gender:  proposed 
financials  services 
indicators  will  consider:  #  women  access  to 
(MFIs/SACCos) and monitoring # women in leadership positions; # financial product delivered 
specifically suitable for women needs. (baseline to be conducted). 
84.  Environment and climate: RUPIP I and II had no monitoring mechanism to supervise proper 
implementation  of  the  national  environmental  policies  and  regulations  and  IFAD  Safeguard 
Policies.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  absence  of  ESMF  documents  for  RUFIP  I  and  II  and  lack  of 
awareness among the implementing institutions on the need to mitigate impacts resulting from 
project  activities  and  climate  change.  Proposed  Indicators  to  monitor  key  performance  for 
environment  and  climate  change  during  RUFIP  III  implementation  include  household  income 
and livelihood of families and communities, frequency of drought and flooding, catchment water 
yield,  ground  water  level,  soil  fertility,  rate  of  deforestation,  rate  of  soil  erosion  and  siltation, 
rate of migration of people and animals. 
85.  Nutrition:  Proposed  indicators  will  consider:  #  nutrition  promotion  activities  developed;  # 
demo-plots  established;  #  people  increased  dietary  diversity;  #  households  increased 
consumption of nutritious foods; # households starting backyard/kitchen garden as a results of 
the trainings received; # households investing in back yard gardening as a result of the demo-
plots. (Baseline to be conducted).  
18 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 5 
References  
  Transition to a Green Economy in Ethiopia – Going Green in Rural Finance through the 
support of Microfinance Institutions, AEMFI, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 2017; 
  Are rural youth in Ethiopia abandoning agriculture? World Development, 2014; 
  Ethiopia  Demographic  and  Health  Survey  2011.  Central  Statistical  Agency  [Ethiopia] 
and ICF International (2012) Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; 
  Ethiopian RUFIP Impact Assessment Report, World Council of Credit Union, INC; 
  Final Supervision Report of RUFIP II, IFAD, 2018; 
  Gender Equality and Development, World Development Report, 2012; 
 
Integrated surveys on agriculture, Ethiopia Socio-economic Survey (ESS) 2015-2016; 
  Kaka, L., Abate, G., Warner, J., and Kieran, C. 2015. Patterns of Agricultural Production 
among  Male  and  Female  Holders.  International  Food  Policy  Research  institute,  IFPRI, 
2014; 
  PCDPII supervision mission report (IFAD/WB); 
  RUFIP II Programme Design, IFAD 2011; 
  Rural Job Opportunity Creation Strategy (RJOCS), 2017; 
  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Change  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP),  IFAD, 
2017; 
  UN  Inter  Agency  Group  meeting,  Ethiopia’s  Progress  Towards  Eradicating  Poverty:  An 
Interim Report on 2015/16; 
  WFP, Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analisis (CESVA,2014); 
  World Development Indicator, World Bank; 
  World Economic Outlook, April 2018, IMF; 
19 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 6 – First Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 6 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) – Draft 
Work allocation 
Component I A - MFI 
Improvement of MIS 
Hardware and software upgrades 
Training and capacity building 
Total 
Capacity Building of MFIs: 
Capacity Building of MFIs 
Research ,Knowledge Management and SPM 
Exposure Visits 
Total 
Financial Literacy 
Capacity Building of AMFI 
Total MFI 
Component 1B- Cooperatives 
Capacity Building of RUSACCOs/ Unions: 
TOT/ Refresher Training 
Exposure Visits 
Training Need Assesment 
Total 
Member Level development: 
Financial Literacy/Grivance Redressal and Customer 
protection 
Social Performance management, PPI tracking tool 
Impact Assessment studies of benefits -
Documentation of success stories 
Total 
Support for IT infratructure (hardware, software) for 
RUSACCOs 
Policy and product Development Interventions: 
USD 000 
 2020 (6 
months) 
2019 
Total for 18 
months 
1088.50 
89.40 
1177.90 
730.90 
100.20 
180.30 
1011.40 
110.20 
185.30 
2484.80 
3.90 
36.10 
200.30 
240.30 
129.20 
67.00 
15.00 
211.20 
22.45 
0.00 
22.45 
406.90 
25.20 
0.00 
432.10 
30.20 
100.50 
585.25 
13.55 
18.10 
0.00 
31.65 
64.80 
12.50 
0.00 
77.30 
1110.95 
89.40 
1200.35 
1137.80 
125.40 
180.30 
1443.50 
140.40 
285.80 
3070.05 
17.45 
54.20 
200.30 
271.95 
194.00 
79.50 
15.00 
288.50 
805.00 
673.10 
1478.10 
Studies on new new financial services/ products (e.g. . 
Micro –insurance products- credit life) 
17.90 
0.00 
17.90 
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 6 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
- Continued - DRAFT 
Linkage with digital financial Services (e.g. vouchers, 
insurance) 
Deposit guarantee system 
Pilot testing new products 
Total 
Institutional Development and Financial Integration: 
Institutional Development- Setting up 2 Apex level 
national/regional Bodies 
Linking RUSACCOs to Unions 
Setting up a training Institution of excellence at the 
National Level 
Developing Training Institutions at Regional level for 
Financial Cooperatives- infrastructure Development 
Setting up Certification System for professional and 
institutional excellence 
Viability and Transformation Impact Study 
Integrating Financial Cooperatives with Financial 
Inclusion Programme 
Integrating SACCOs/Unions with Payment Systems 
Integrating Unions/ SACCOs with Credit Information 
system 
Mobility Support for Union/ RUSACCO staff 
Technical Staff Support for Unions 
Total 
Policy Makers Development Programmes : 
Exposure Visits- Overseas 
Exposure Visits- Internal 
Conferences /workshops 
Total 
Total Cooperatives 
Total Component I 
17.00 
40.00 
75.10 
150.00 
7.00 
4.00 
0.00 
5.00 
20.00 
0.00 
25.00 
0.00 
6.00 
22.00 
60.00 
75.10 
175.00 
7.00 
10.00 
25.20 
25.20 
50.10 
25.20 
75.30 
150.30 
50.10 
28.00 
8.50 
14.30 
536.60 
429.20 
1278.10 
0.00 
45.10 
9.00 
54.10 
2738.70 
5223.50 
0.00 
0.00 
9.00 
4.30 
9.00 
0.00 
215.40 
294.10 
40.40 
42.60 
4.50 
87.50 
1188.65 
1773.90 
150.30 
50.10 
37.00 
12.80 
23.30 
536.60 
644.60 
1572.20 
40.40 
87.70 
13.50 
141.60 
3927.35 
6997.40 
Component 2A- Regulation of MFI and Micro Insurance - NBE 
Supervision of MFIs (NBE) 
Financial and Digital Inclusion Framework 
150.30 
75.40 
225.70 
2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 6 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) - 
Continued - DRAFT 
Capacity Building Training for* 
Exposure Visits for Policy Exploration/ New Learning 
Conferences/ Seminars/ Workshops 
Studies and documentation 
IT Tools 
Setting up Apex Development Bank 
Appointment of long term consultant for overseeing NBE 
interventions 
Sub total 
Supervision of Micro Insurance (NBE) 
Exposure Visits in Micro- Insurance: 
Capacity Building / Training programmes for MI 
Studies related to MI 
IT Tools for MI 
Documentation/ Manual/ Guidelines on MI 
Literacy Campaign on Micro Insurance 
Conferences and seminars 
Sub total 
Total 
Component 2B- Regulation of cooperatives - FCA 
Training of supervising Officers auditors and Inspecting 
officers of FCA 
Training of internal auditors 
Sensitisation of Board/ Committee members on 
Governance 
MIS Development of Unions and SACCOs 
Appointment (Recruitment) of auditors at Unions 
Engaging consultant for drafting regulations and 
conducting studies 
Development of codes of Conduct and legal framework 
Total 
Total Regulation (Component 2) 
Component 3 
169.90 
140.80 
10.70 
500.90 
0.00 
125.20 
50.10 
1147.90 
54.10 
117.70 
50.10 
0.00 
0.00 
100.20 
0.00 
322.10 
1470.00 
17.90 
8.90 
133.70 
447.20 
429.20 
5.00 
21.50 
1063.40 
2533.40 
76.40 
88.30 
3.60 
188.45 
62.80 
125.60 
25.20 
645.75 
27.20 
58.20 
25.20 
150.80 
50.30 
1.30 
14.00 
327.00 
972.75 
30.00 
0.00 
89.45 
448.80 
0.00 
50.30 
0.00 
618.55 
1591.30 
246.30 
229.10 
14.30 
689.35 
62.80 
250.80 
75.30 
1793.65 
81.30 
175.90 
75.30 
150.80 
50.30 
101.50 
14.00 
649.10 
2442.75 
47.90 
8.90 
223.15 
896.00 
429.20 
55.30 
21.50 
1681.95 
4124.70 
Component 3A - Line of Credit 
 43291. 
22000.00 
65291.00 
3 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 6 
Component 3B Guarantee Fund 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) - Continued - DRAFT 
1500.00 
0.00 
1500.00 
Component 3C Marketing and Insurance through Agent Insurer Model 
Total (Component 3) 
44791.0  22000.00 
66791.00 
Component 4 
Component 4A- Programme Management 
IT - Hardware, Software and personnel 
Vehicle 
Programme Coordination (Recurring costs) 
Operating costs 
Total 
Component 4B- Setting up Guarantee Fund 
Component 4C- Managing insurance partnerships 
Component 4D- Knowledge Management  
Workshops 
Training and study tours 
Total 
657.10 
301.20 
146.60 
164.10 
1269.00 
750.00 
200.00 
75.00 
228.40 
400.70 
2923.10 
3.00 
0.00 
73.30 
82.00 
158.30 
125.00 
75.00 
75.00 
29.20 
201.00 
663.50 
660.10 
301.20 
219.90 
246.10 
1427.30 
875.00 
275.00 
150.00 
257.60 
601.70 
3586.60 
Grand total 
56941.0 
27001.45 
83942.45 
4 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 7 – Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 7 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months1 
1 Excel file attached for clarity 
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 7 
2 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III)  
ANNEX 8: PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL (PIM) 
1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Contents 
Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................................... 2 
Table of Figures ............................................................................................................................................. 4 
Table of Tables .............................................................................................................................................. 4 
Acronyms ...................................................................................................................................................... 5 
Definitions ..................................................................................................................................................... 6 
PART A: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSBILITIES .............................................................................................. 9 
A.1: Project Framework and Strategies ........................................................................................................ 9 
A.1.1: Target Groups ............................................................................................................................... 10 
A.1.2: Gender and Youth ......................................................................................................................... 12 
A.2: Institutional Arrangements and Responsibilities................................................................................. 13 
A.2.1: 
Project Governance Structures ............................................................................................... 13 
A.2.2: 
Lead Agency and Project Coordination and Management Unit ............................................. 13 
A.2.3: 
Implementing Agencies (IAs) .................................................................................................. 15 
A.2.4: 
Partnerships ............................................................................................................................ 16 
PART B: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES ................................................................................... 17 
B.1: Component 1: Building Capacity of Institutions and Clients ............................................................... 17 
B.1.1:  MFIs ......................................................................................................................................... 17 
Capacity Development ........................................................................................................................ 17 
Strengthening of AEMFI ...................................................................................................................... 17 
B.1.2: 
Financial Cooperatives and their Clients ................................................................................. 17 
Capacity Development ........................................................................................................................ 17 
Financial Integration ........................................................................................................................... 19 
Increasing Outreach ............................................................................................................................ 19 
B.2: Component 2: Improving Regulation, Supervision and Institutional Discipline .................................. 20 
B.2.1: 
NBE for microfinance regulation and supervision .................................................................. 20 
B.2.2: 
FCA for Financial Cooperatives Regulation and Supervision .................................................. 21 
Capacity development ........................................................................................................................ 21 
Technical Assistance ........................................................................................................................... 21 
Strengthening Unions Supervision ...................................................................................................... 22 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
B.3: Component 3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of businesses ............................................ 22 
B.3.1: 
Credit Line of RFIs ................................................................................................................... 22 
Procedure for application and repayment.......................................................................................... 25 
B.3.2: 
Enabling Conditions of for Diversifying Funding Sources and Business Lines by RFIs ............ 26 
B.4: Social Assessments .............................................................................................................................. 27 
PART C: PROJECT PROCEDURES .................................................................................................................. 29 
C.1: AWPB Process ...................................................................................................................................... 29 
C.1.1: 
Process of Developing the AWPB ............................................................................................ 29 
C.1.2: 
Targeting Considerations in the AWPB ................................................................................... 30 
C.1.3: 
Content of the AWPB .............................................................................................................. 30 
C.1.4: 
The First AWPB ........................................................................................................................ 31 
C.2: M&E, KM and Communication ............................................................................................................ 31 
C.3: Financial Management ........................................................................................................................ 33 
C.3.1: 
RUFIP III accounting software ................................................................................................. 33 
C.3.2: 
Disbursement and funds flow ................................................................................................. 34 
C.3.3:  Withdrawal Applications ......................................................................................................... 36 
C.3.4: 
Financial Reporting ................................................................................................................. 37 
C.3.5: 
Audit Arrangements ................................................................................................................ 38 
C.4: Procurement ........................................................................................................................................ 39 
C.4.1: 
Procurement methods and prior review amounts ................................................................. 41 
C.4.2: Procedure for Submission of Request for No Objection for IFAD funded projects ................ Error! 
Bookmark not defined. 
PART D: ANNEXES ....................................................................................................................................... 43 
Annex 1. Reporting Formats for Gender and Youth Targeting ................................................................... 44 
Annex 2. DRAFT TORs for PCMU Staff ........................................................................................................ 45 
Programme Accountant .......................................................................................................................... 45 
Social Performance and Customers Protection Officer .......................................................................... 46 
Procurement Specialist ........................................................................................................................... 47 
Annex 3. EFCMD Organigram ...................................................................................................................... 49 
Annex 4. Draft TOR for Technical Assistance (Comp 2.2) ........................................................................... 50 
Annex 5. Designated Account Reconciliation ............................................................................................. 51 
Annex 6: Document Checklist ..................................................................................................................... 52 
Annex 7. Internal Controls .......................................................................................................................... 53 
3 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Annex 8. Guarantee Fund ........................................................................................................................... 55 
Annex 9. Theory of Change………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..  56 
Annex 10. Logical Framework………………………………………………………………………………………………………………57 
TABLE OF FIGURES  
Figure 1: Workflow for implementation of the LOC ................................................................................... 22 
Figure 2: Application process (blue line) and flow of funds (red, dashed line) for LOC ............................. 26 
Figure 3: Current organigram of the External Fund and Credit Management Directorate ........................ 49 
Figure 4: Possible future organigram of the External Fund and Credit Management Directorate ............ 49 
TABLE OF TABLES  
Table 1: Preliminary estimate of the number of beneficiaries (projection by 2025) ................................... 9 
Table 3: Example of wealth ranking criteria for identification of target groups based on livelihood 
strategies ..................................................................................................................................................... 11 
Table 2: Targets for women inclusion ......................................................................................................... 13 
Table 4: The critical importance of the AWPB in financial control ............................................................. 29 
Table 5: Standard Requirements of accounting packages .......................................................................... 33 
Table 6: Minimum Bank Accounts required ............................................................................................... 35 
4 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
AEMFI 
AGRA 
ATA 
AOS 
AWPB 
BADEA 
CBE 
DBMS 
EFCMD 
EIB 
EU 
FAR 
FAIR 
FCA 
GoE 
IA 
ICB 
IFAD 
IGA 
ILCUF 
IPSAS 
KM 
LLRP 
M&E 
MFI 
MIS 
MoFEC 
MTR 
NBE 
PaR 
PASIDP 
PIM 
PCMU 
PP 
PPI 
PSC 
PSNP 
RuSACCO 
RCPB 
RFI 
RUFIP 
TNA 
UNCDF 
USD 
WA 
ACRONYMS 
Association of Ethiopian Micro Finance Institutions 
Alliance for Green Revolution Africa 
Agricultural Transformation Agency 
Annual Outcome Surveys 
Annual Work plan and Budget 
Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa 
Commerical Bank of Ethiopia 
Database Monitoring System 
External Fund and Credit Management Directorate 
European Investment Bank 
European Union 
Fixed Assets Registry 
Fixed Asset Issue Registry  
Federal Cooperative Agency 
Government of Ethiopia 
Implementing Agency 
International Competitive Bidding 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Income Generating Activity 
Irish Leauge for Credit Unions Federation 
International Public Sector Accounting Systems 
Knowledge Management 
Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Micro Finance Institution 
Management Information System 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
Mid-Term Review 
National Bank of Ethiopia  
Portfolio at Risk 
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development Project  
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Coordinaiton and Management Unit 
Procurement Plan 
Progress out of Poverty Index 
Project Steering Committee  
Productive Safety Nets Programme 
Rural Savings and Credit Cooperative 
Regional Cooperative Promotion Bureau 
Rural Financial Institution 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme 
Training Needs Assessment  
United Nations Capital Development Fund 
United States Dollars 
Withdrawal Appliation 
5 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
DEFINITIONS 
Climate Change 
In  line  with  the  Climate  Resilient  Green  Economic  Growth  Plan, 
innovative  financial  mechanisms  in  green  and  climate  finance  may 
contribute to lessening  the adverse effects  of climate change in rural 
environments and reduce climate-induced vulnerability. 
Customer 
Protection 
Customer protection are measures taken by RFIs to protect the rights 
of  their  clients.  This  could  include  insurance  products,  protecting 
relatives  against  loan  repyaments  incase  the  client  passes  away,  or 
ensuring  transparent  loan  conditions  so  that  customers  are  not 
trapped in continous debt repayment cycles. Some of these meausres 
will  be  enforced  through  the  prudential  regulation;  a  dedicated  staff 
wull  be  recuirted  to  support  policy  makes  to  develop  an  enabiling 
environment, and to support the RFIs in implementation.  
Digital Financial 
Services 
Is defined by McKinsey Global Institute as “the use of mobile phones, 
computers or cards used over point-of-sale (POS) devices connecting 
individuals  and  businesses 
to  a  digitized  national  payments 
infrastructure, enabling ‘seamless financial transactions’.” 
Financial 
Cooperatives 
term 
The 
includes  RuSACCOs,  Pastoral  SACCOs  (PaSACCOs), 
RuSACCO  Unions,  RuSACCO  apexes  /  federations  and  any  other 
financial  cooperative.  In  the  context  of  this  document,  the  term  is 
used to describe activities that cover both RuSACCOs and Unions. 
Financial 
Inclusion 
Nutrition 
Project 
Implementation 
Manual (PIM) 
As  per  the  National  Financial  Inclusion  Strategy  (2015-20),  financial 
inclusion  is  defined  as  receiving  services  from  formal,  licenses  and 
regulated  institutions.  E.g.  cooperatives  are  considered  semi-formal 
and  thus  do  not  contribute  towards  formal  financial  inclusion  of 
Ethiopians. 
The  project  will  contribute  to  improved  nutrition  by  promoting 
awareness  at  community  level,  with  a  special  focus  in  areas  with 
higher  food  vulnerability  due  to  environmental  negative  effects,  such 
as drought. 
An  annex  to  the  Project  Design  Report  (PDR)  provides  practical 
guidance  to  project  implementers  on  key  implementation  aspects.  It 
describes  in  detail  how  the  programme  components  and  activities 
outlined in the PDR are intended to be implemented. The PIM outlines 
the  detailed  mechanisms,  processes  and  procedures, 
formats, 
eligibility  criteria  etc.  which  will  ensure  efficient  programme 
implementation  and  achievement  of  the  envisaged  programme 
results.  The  PIM  is  a  living  document  and  may  be  updated  at  any 
time, as needs arise, during implementation. 
Poor 
The  poor  are  members  of  rural  households  living  below  the  poverty 
line  (in  2016  set  at  ETB  7,184  per  capita  annual  income).  May  be 
engaged  in  farm  or  off-farm  activities.  A  direct  target  group  for  the 
project. 
6 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Public 
Expenditure and 
Financial 
Accountability 
Assessment 
The PEFA is a tool for assessing public financial management systems. 
The most recent 2014 assessment indicated that the legal framework 
is  consistent  with  international  standards  and  widely  understood  by 
budget  institutions.  The  main  challenge  is  high  turnover  due  to  low 
salary. 
Public 
Procurement and 
Property 
Administration 
Proclamation 
Rural Finance 
Institutions 
RuSACCO 
Social 
Performance 
The PPPAP guides public procurement in Ethiopia, but does not cover 
procurements  by  public  enterprises  or  extra-budgetary  funds,  or 
procurements under external funding where the donor partner prefers 
to use different regulations.  
Overall term used when referring to both RuSACCOs and MFIs. 
Is  a  primary  Savings  and  Credit  Cooperative  in  the  rural  areas. 
RuSACCOs  are  member  owned  and  member  managed  cooperative 
societies  established  by  individuals  on  a  voluntary  basis  to  assist 
communities  to  save  and  lend  amongst  each  other,  and  thus 
providing  financial  services  under  a  democratically  managed,  locally 
owned,  institution.  RuSACCOs  are  the  most  recent  entrant  into  the 
rural financial landscape of Ethiopia and are similar to the institutions 
known  from  elsewhere  in  the  region.  They  contribute  significantly  to 
improved  access  to  financial  services  for  the  lower  and  more  rural 
tiers of the population. While common bond savings and loan societies 
have  existed  in  Ethiopia  for  some  decades,  the  outreach  of  credit 
union types of cooperative societies to rural Ethiopia was instituted by 
the  Government  only  over  the  past  decade  and  in  collaboration  with 
international  development  partners.  To  date,  there  are  about  18,000 
RuSACCOs  operating  all  over  the  country  with  the  Government 
targeting  1  RuSACCO  per  kebele  and  a  10%  increase  in  number  (to 
20,000  RuSACCOs)  under  the  Growth  and  Transformation  Plan  II 
(GTPII). Since these societies do not have a history of gradual build-
up  of  a  resource  base,  the  available  capital  in  these  small  rural 
societies  does  not  suffice  to  serving  the  borrowing  needs  of  the 
expanding agricultural sector. 
Social  performance  is  the  extent  to  which  an  RFI  manages  to 
translate  its  operations  in  line  with  accepted  social  values,  for 
example  to  ensure  that  the  most  vulnerable  are  also  targeted;  that 
youth  and  internally  displaced  people  are  able  to  receive  financial 
services,  and  that  repayment  rates  remain  high,  as  dictated  by 
Ethiopian  culture.  This  comes 
to,  and  without 
comprimising,  financial  viability  and  perfomrance  indicators.  The 
project  seeks  to  support  the  MFI  and  RuSACCO  sectors  in  improving 
their social performance and impact. Such principles are built into the 
project  design  througout  and  dedicated  staff  will  be  recruited  to 
ensure its implemetnation. 
in  addition 
Transitory poor 
Those  individuals  or  households  whose  average  income  is  above  the 
poverty  line  but  subject  to  recurrent  shocks  and  can  slide  back  into 
poverty. May be engaged in farm or off-farm activities. A direct target 
group for the project. 
7 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Twinning 
arrangement 
Twinning  is  the  pairing  of  experience  between  developed  and 
developing institutions, countries, etc., to reach common goals. 
Vulnerability 
Is defined as a condition of the  poor who have been lifted above the 
poverty  line,  but  may  not  have  come  out  of  poverty  irretrievably  – 
any shock that disturbs either the person or the livelihood makes the 
household  slide  back  into  poverty.  These  people  may  not  have 
alternate  risk  coping  mechanisms  such  as  insurances,  savings  or 
short-term loan access, and are a target group of the project. 
8 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
PART A: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSBILITIES 
A.1: PROJECT FRAMEWORK AND STRATEGIES  
1. 
RUFIP  III  is  the  third  phase  on  the  Rural  Financial  Intermediation  Project  (RUFIP), 
strengthening the RuSACCO and MFI sector in Ethiopia to increase outrach to the rural poor. 
The project will consolidate the existing base of rural financial cooperatives; from the RUFIP 
Phases  I  to  II,  for  example,  the  number  of  Rural  Savings  and  Credit  Coopertives 
(RuSACCOs)  increased  from  134  to  11,500  in  December  2018.  The  project  recognizes 
continued  liquidity  constraints  on  account  of  rural  financial institutions  (RFIs)  growing  at  a 
rapid pace on the back of a robust demand for credit from hitherto excluded people.  
The project goal is reduction in poverty levels through improving the livelihoods and 
2. 
reducing the vulnerability to shocks of the rural poor.  
3. 
The development objective is to increase access to a range of financial services and 
products  to  rural  households.  The  theory  of  change  and  the  logframe  are  provided  in  the 
annex.  
4. 
At the Micro level, the project will target 12 million clients (calculated as borrowers, 
see  Table  1)  and  have  nation-wide  coverage,  targeting  interventions  in  the  underserved 
areas. The project will explicitly target beneficiaries of  other projects,  such as  projects like 
the Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development Programme (PASIDP) and the Lowland 
Livelihood  Resilience  Project  (LLRP),  financed  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural 
Dvelopment  (IFAD).  The  expected  impacts  include  reduced  poverty  and  better  ability  to 
cope with vulnerability arising from shocks.  
Table 1: Preliminary estimate of the number of beneficiaries (projection by 2025) 
Savers 
Borrowers 
MFI 
10.25 
10.25  
RuSACCO 
3.33 
1.0  
At the meso level, the project will be potentially available to existing 11,260 RUFIP-
5. 
supported  RuSACCOs,  and  their  secondary  structures,  140  Unions  and  38  Micro  Finance 
Institutions  (MFIs),  that  currently  focus  on  rural  communities.  The  project  will  strengthen 
existing RFIs, rather than creating new ones, except in vulnerable and/or excluded regions. 
The  project  will  support  these  RFIs  to  bridge  their  liquidity  gaps  through  a  credit  fund, 
strengthen  them  through  consolidation  of  the  RuSACCO  sector  and  enhance  their 
institutional capacity for delivering financial services. The project will also explore setting up 
a  guarantee  fund  to  attached  commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  provide 
resources  to  RFIs;  initiate  marketing  of  rural  client-friendly  insurance  products  through 
RFIs,  and  continue  to  support  automation  of  mangement  information  systems  (MIS) 
systems to improve reporting of the entire rural finance system. The expected outcomes are 
(i)  strong  rural  finance  institutions  with  sound  operating  performance;  (ii)  enhanced 
linkages of MFIs and SACCO Unions with commercial banks; (iii) secondary apexes (Unions) 
and  regional  apex  organizations  established/strengthened  for  the  SACCO  sector;  and  (iv) 
higher levels of IT enablement in back- and front-office operations of RFIs.  
6. 
At  the  macro  level,  the  project  will  strengthen  the  regulatory  capacity  of  National 
Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) and the Federal Cooperative Agency (FCA), the regulatory bodies for 
MFIs  and  the  RuSACCO  sector,  respectively.  The  expected  outcome  is  improved  regulation 
and supervision of MFIs and RuSACCOs.  
9 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
A.1.1: TARGET GROUPS 
7. 
Livelihood groups in Ethiopia can be divided based on their livelihood systems (crop 
farming/  pastoral  activities)  and  level  of  production  (subsistence/surplus  and  commercially 
oriented).  RUFIP  III  target  groups  can  be  classified  as  very  poor  and  poor  (subsistence 
households,  living  below  the  poverty  and  food  poverty  line  and  being  often  food 
insecure/environmentally,  economically  and 
transitory  poor 
(households producing a surplus for marketing, being food secure but at risk of sliding back 
into  poverty/food  vulnerability  due  to  economic  or  climate  shocks)  and  better  off 
(commercially oriented households/entrepreneurs whose livelihood is secured and are not at 
risk  of  poverty  and  any  form  of  vulnerability.  They  are  drivers  of  economic  change).  The 
various target groups of the project include:  
socially  vulnerable), 
  Vulnerable  communities.  Characteristics  that  can  guide  identification  of  those 
communities  within  a  woreda  relate  to  poverty  and  vulnerability  levels  as  well  as 
remoteness  (location)  and  draught.  Vulnerability  and  social  inclusion  are  highly 
complex  and  context-related.  While  they  do  not  always  overlap,  individuals  and 
households who are excluded or underserved are more likely to be highly vulnerable 
to  situations  and  events  (for  example,  reduced  quality  of  life,  livelihood  and 
educational  opportunities,  compromised  health  status  and  threat  of  disease),  which 
compromise  their  well-being  and  compound  their  social  exclusion.  A  vulnerable  and 
underserved community within a woreda has the following characteristics: (i) higher 
vulnerability  and  poverty  levels  (compared  to  others  better-off);  and,  due  to  the 
remote  location  the  majority  of  the  households,  (ii) lack  access  to  social  and  public 
services, among others issues, including financial services; and (iii) because of agro-
ecologic characteristics are more vulnerable to climatic shocks.  
  Vulnerable  households:  Very  poor  and  poor  subsistence  households  and 
landless  youth:  Men  and  women  households  in  this  category  include:  (i)  landless 
and  asset  less  youth;  (ii)  landless/near  landless/asset  less  elderly  with  no  or  very 
low productive capacity (men and women); (iii) women head of households including 
widows, single/divorced/ women in polygamous union with no assets and no support 
from  family  members  (i.e.  remittances)  and  very  low  income;  (iv)  HIV-affected 
people;  orphans  and  differently-able  people  showing  high  constraints  to  enter  into 
any  form  of  income  generating  activity  and  receiving  minimum  support  to  make  a 
decent living. In the lowlands the poorest households of agro-pastoralists, drop outs 
and  stockless  youth  make  their  income  and  living  from  very  small-scale  livestock 
coupled  with  agriculture  and  other  incomes  derived  from  off-farm  activities  (petty 
trade  performed  mostly  by  women,  fattening,  poultry,  dairy  etc.).  They  live  below 
the poverty line; usually they are landless or near landless cultivating a limited area 
of land, less than 0.25 Ha and lack productive assets/means. They may be engaged 
in in on-farm and off-farm income generating activities such as fattening, poultry and 
petty trade. Households in this category can experience food insecurity and in some 
the  environmental  and  climate  shocks  such  as 
instances,  depending  on 
severe/moderate draught, can be recipients (permeant/transitory) of safety net type 
of  support  (i.e.  PSNP).  Many  experience  economic  and  social  constraints,  in  some 
cases  also  social  marginalization  and  exclusion  due  to  socio-cultural  biases  These 
households are part of the communities targeted by the project. 
  Transitory  poor:  smallholders  producing  a  limited  surplus  for  marketing: 
Transitory  poor  households  are  usually  above  the  national  poverty  line.  However, 
they  are  at  risk  of  transient  poverty.  A  household  may  be  classified  as  non-poor 
since  its  consumption lies  above  the  poverty/food  poverty  line.  However,  it  may  be 
classified as vulnerable if there is a higher than 50% likelihood that it could be poor 
in the near future (i.e. under a different scenario of risks materializing than actually 
10 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
happened). Households targeted by RUFIP III are experiencing transient poverty and 
are  at  risks  of  sliding  back  due  to  external  factors  (economic/climatic).  Men  and 
women  farmers/agro-pastoralists  in  this  group  are  actively  engage  in  livestock  and 
crop  production  at  a  larger  scale  that  their  subsistence  counterparts  with  a  market 
purpose, although their sale are limited to primary markets. Despite better economic 
gains,  households  in  this  category  continue  to  be  at  risk  of  climatic  shocks, 
particularly  in  arid  and  semi-arid  areas.    Access  to  finance  is  key  to  cope  with 
climatic shocks and avoid the risk of converting assets to consumption during those 
periods.  
  Micro  and  small  entrepreneurs  also  belong  to  this  category:  they  are  mostly 
engaged in activities such as agriculture, trade, commerce and transport. Households 
in  this  category,  either  on-farm  or  off-farm,  are  not  vulnerable  to  climatic  and 
economic  shocks.  They  are  individual  clients  of  MFIs  or  strong  RuSACCOs.  Average 
saving capacity (deposit) can exceed 150,000 ETB and borrowing capacity goes from 
18,000  ETB  up  to  100,000  ETB  and  above.  Nevertheless,  lack  of  liquidity  into  the 
available  financial  systems  (SACCOs/MFIs)  constrains  their  capacity  to  expand  their 
businesses and therefore to catalyze local economic growth. They are transformation 
drivers  and  are  key  for  the  development  of  the  local  economies  as  well  as  for 
generating employment for the poorer and the youth. 
Table 2: Example of wealth ranking criteria for identification of target groups based on livelihood strategies1 
Wealth  
criteria 
Poor 
Transitory Poor 
Lower Middle 
income HHs with 
limited surplus and 
living slightly above 
the poverty/ food 
secure but at high 
risk of climate/ 
economic shocks. 
Upper Middle 
income HHs with 
sufficient surplus, 
living above the 
poverty/food secure 
but at moderate 
risks of climate/ 
economic shocks. 
Very Poor HHs 
with no 
surplus living 
below the 
poverty line/ 
chronically 
food insecure. 
They are 
under PSNP 
support/cash 
transfer. 
Includes 
landless/stockl
ess youth.  
Economically 
Active Poor 
HHs w/ limited 
surplus. Still 
below the 
poverty and 
food insecure 
are recipients 
of IGA support 
from PSNP. 
Landless/stockl
ess youth can 
be included in 
this category.  
# in HH 
Ha cultiv.  
# goats  
# sheep 
# cattle 
# chicken 
# goats  
# cattle  
# sheep  
# camels 
2-3 
0-0.1 
0 
0 
0 
0-1 
0-8 
0-5 
0-6 
- 
Smallholder farmers 
2-4 
0.1-0.25 
0-2 
0-2 
0 
1-3 
3-5 
0.25-0.5 
1-3 
1-4 
0-1 
1-7 
4-6 
0.5 – 1.5 
2-10 
2-10 
1-2 
3-10 
Pastoralists and agro pastoralists 
9 
6 
7 
1 
15 
16 
9 
11 
25 
22 
18 
16 
Better off 
Hhs with sufficient 
assets/ econ res. 
to live above 
poverty and 
purchase enough 
food for hh 
consumption Not 
at risks of climate 
/economic shocks 
/food insecurity. 
Drive economic 
transformation. 
Includes 
entrepreneurs.  
4-6 
Above 1.5 
Above 10 
Above 10 
Above 2 
Above 10 
Above 25 
Above 22 
Above 18 
Above 16 
1 Characteristics of the target group’s categories will be further refined by the PCMU responsible person and nodal 
officer/social focal persons at UNION and MFIs level. The categorization will obviously varies according to 
regions/woredas. It is recommended that implementing partners develop a similar matrix, which is context-based, 
at woreda/regional level in order to have a realistic wealth ranking criteria and estimate number of clients: 
poor/transitory poor/better off. 
11 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Targeting Strategy. While RUFIP II applied mostly a self-targeting approach, RUFIP 
8. 
III will apply a combination of self-targeting and direct targeting approach. In doing so, the 
implementing partners will be encouraged to focus on the most vulnerable and marginalized 
groups: very poor and poor subsistence households and landless youth.  
The programme will provide financial services and products to clients from poor and 
9. 
vulnerable  rural  households  living  below  the  poverty  line  (set  in  2016  at  ETB  7,184  per 
capita  annual  income),  and  those  defined  as  transitory  poor:  whose  average  income  is 
above the poverty line but are subject to recurrent shocks and can slide back into poverty. 
The  target  groups  will  include  the  poor  and  transitory  poor  (households  engaged  in  farm 
and off-farm activities) which will comprise the majority of RUFIP III beneficiaries, while the 
better off will be a smaller percentage. The targets will reflect this proportion, serving about 
70% of clients belonging to the poor and transitory poor. 
10. 
Targeting  criteria.  To  ensure  that  project  services  will  serve  the  intended 
households,  the  Targeting  and  social  inclusion  Strategy  will  prioritize  draught  prone  areas 
where majority of poor  are  concentrated and households of smallholder farmers are highly 
affected by climate shocks. These will be identified, among others, through the presence of 
safety  net  programmes  (i.e.  the  Productive  Safety  Nets  Prgrogramme  (PSNP)  -  Phase  4) 
where  activities  support  communities  to  develop  alternative  income  generating  activities 
(IGA) and savings through RUSACCOs. RUFIP  III  will prioritize those  geographic areas and 
given the high level of malnutrition and food insecurity that characterize the households. In 
addition  to  PSNP  coverage,  available  statistics  on  poverty  and  malnutrition  levels  across 
woredas  and  kebeles  will  inform  the  geographic  targeting  and  the  selection  of  priority 
areas/communities.  RUFIP  III  will  closely  work  with  PSNP  Project  Unit  to  define  areas  of 
intervention/targeted Households.  
11. 
The project will support identification of the various target groups and directly target 
those who are participating in IGA interventions as part of PSNP or similar livelihood support 
programmes  implemented  by  Government  or  other  development  partners.  RUFIP  III  will 
ensure  their  mobilization  and  inclusion  in  RuSACCOs,  Village  Saving  Groups  (if  eligible)  as 
well as participation in all nutritional awareness related activities promoted.   
A.1.2: GENDER AND YOUTH  
The  Project  supports  the  Government’s  policy  to  mainstream  the  participation  of 
12. 
women (both female-headed households, women in male-headed households and women in 
polygamous marriages) and youth to access financial services. The Project Coordination and 
Management  Unit  (PCMU)  shall  make  the  effort  to  respect  the  percentage  of  outreach  of 
approximately  50%  women  and  20%  youth.  All  project  activities  will  be  implemented 
providing equitable opportunities for women and youth in general and vulnerable segments 
of the population (as described above) in the project area, including equitable opportunities 
to access capacity building activities and finance literacy trainings, in order to assist women 
and youth in being fully part of decision-making at SACCOs and Unions levels. See Annex 1 
for draft reporting formats.  
13. 
Gender  Mainstreaming  Strategy  will target women as an important target group 
for the project. The project will scale up best practices that have been effective for women, 
promote  suitable  products  for  them  and  introduce  performance  tracking  (on  an  annual 
basis). Women are a key target group for the project.  
12 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Table 3: Targets for women inclusion 
Women RuSACCO 
members 
Women membership 
in RuSACCO boards of 
directors 
Women MFI clients 
Minimum 
requirement 
30% 
30% 
Baseline 
Target 
46% 
40% 
50%+ 
50%+ 
44% 
50%+ 
14. 
Youth  Mainstreaming.  Youth  are  15-29  year  old  individuals,  and  a  key  target 
group for the project and the  Government of  Ethiopia (GoE), as per the Ethiopian National 
Youth  Policy  (2004).  The  Rural  Job  Opportunity  Creation  Strategy  (2017)  also  recognizes 
that  youth  are  the  critical  labor  force  for  rural  development.  The  project  will  up-scale 
successful  interventions,  such  as  the  United  National  Capital  Development  Fund  (UNCDF) 
supported Youth Start programme and Women’s World Banking to expand finance education 
amongst  youth  and  to  catalyze  the  growth  of  young  clientele  of  the  financing  institutions, 
targeting a 70% membership. No baseline information is available. 
A.2: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
A.2.1: PROJECT GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES  
Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Cooperation  (MoFEC)  is  the  representative  of  the 
15. 
borrower and provides the ultimate guidance for the project. It will establish a  Programme 
Steering  Committee  (PSC)  which  will  take  the  overall  project  governance  responsibility 
including  the  mainstreaming  of  IFAD’s  anti-corruption  policy  and  whistle  blowing 
procedures. The PSC will mitigate the risks of corruption and promote effective utilization of 
RUFIP III resources. The PSC will be trained in social performance, customer protection and 
poverty  tracking.  The  members  will  be  MoFEC,  NBE,  FCA,  DBE,  an  Insurance  Company,  a 
Commercial  Bank,  with  the  Project  Director  acting  as  Secretary.  It  will  meet  on  a  six 
monthly basis, more frequently if required.  
A.2.2: LEAD AGENCY AND PROJECT COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT  
16. 
DBE, in particular the External Fund and Credit Management Directorate (EFCMD) is 
responsible  for  implementing  RUFIP  III.  It  will  ensure  overall  oversight  for  the 
implementation  of  the  programme  at  national  level,  with  roles  reflected  at  regional  level. 
This includes  the  provision  of  general  policy  direction  for  the  implementation  and  ensuring 
coordination with other entities.  
DBE will ensure that the implementation of RUFIP III will be socially inclusive of the 
17. 
disadvantaged  groups/HHs.  Specific  attention  will  be  given  to  ensure  that  inclusive, 
equitable,  supportive,  fair  and  equitable  treatment  will  be  given  to  all  people  including 
vulnerable  groups.  Informed  consultations  should  be  conducted  to  ensure  that  all  are 
granted equal legal, financial and organizational opportunities under RUFIP III.   
18. 
The  PCMU  is  an  integral  part  within  the  DBE  EFCMD.  It  will  handle  operational 
aspects,  such  as  Annual  Workplan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  consolidation,  release  of  funds, 
collection,  analysis  and  reporting  of  information  on  a  quarterly  basis  and  financial 
management  of  the  project.  Some  staff  of  the  PCMU  may  therefore  be  100%  dedicated  to 
RUFIP, while other functions are carried out by the EFCMD team in charge. For example, the 
13 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
EFCMD  has  dedicated  accountants  for  RUFIP,  but  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (M&E), 
management and safeguards functions are carried out by teams within the EFCMD.  
19. 
DBE is resposnbile for recuritment of staff within its organization and resposnbile for 
assigning  adequate  staff  to  the  PCMU,  which  also  manages  a  number  of  other  proejcts.  In 
addition to the existing strcture (see Annex 3), the minimum functions / capacities required 
to implement RUFIP III are:  
a.  A  designated  coordinator  or  deputy  director.  At  the  moment,  the  EFCMD 
director  is  responsible  for  8  or  more  projects  being  managed  by  the  Unit,  and 
also  acts  as  the  Project  Director  for  RUFIP  II.  It  is  recommended  to  strengthen 
this function, through for example hiring a Deputy Director with at least 50% of 
his time dedicated to RUFIP III;  
b.  A full-time, dedicate Finance Manager and at least two accountants, with 
no objection guaranteeing the caliber. A full-time, dedicated accountant for RUFIP 
III  will  be  recruited  on  competitive  basis.  S/he  will  boost  financial  management 
capacity of FCA. Draft TORs can be found in Annex 2.  
c.  A  strong  M&E  function,  with  at  least  1  M&E  officer  dedicated  to  RUFIP 
III,  and  possibly  strengthening  of  the  team  with  2-3  additional  officers.  The 
team  will  integrate  data  collection  and  studies  relating  to  targeting,  social 
performance  and  customer  protection  to  normal  MIS  and  M&E  processes.  Will 
also  take  the  lead  in  AWPB  preparations  and  monitor  contributions  from  other 
partners under the partnership activities.  
d.  Procurement  specialist.  The  programme  shall  have  a  dedicated  fulltime 
procurement  specialist.  More  details  can  be  found  in  Annex  2:  Draft  TORs.  The 
PCMU will not be a procurement entity per say, but the procurement specialist, in 
partnership with the DBE procurement unit will be responsible for;  
a.  Consolidating  the  procurement  plans  from  IAs  in  the  IFAD  format,  and 
monitor  and  report  on  their  implementation.  In  monitoring  of  PP 
implementation, it will require that IAs provide quarterly reports indicating 
the  progress  on  the 
implementation  of  the  PP,  and  challenges 
encountered.  Based  on  this,  the  procurement  specialist  may  visit  the  IAs 
to provide support and address the identified challenges; 
b.  Review  procurement  processes  by  IAs  and  ensure  that  they  conform  to 
both  government  and  IFAD  requirements.  In  order  to  ensure  that  this  is 
effectively done, the PCMU will set thresholds for procurement after a risk 
analysis of  IAs, against which No Objections will be requested by the  IAs 
from the PCMU; and 
c.  Follow  up  on  procurement  processes  with  DBE  procurement  unit  and 
ensure that the entire procurement processes are sped up and carried out 
in accordance with the law. 
e.  A  Social  Performance,  Client  Protection  and  External  Linkage  Officer  will 
oversee  the  trainings  and  work  conducted  by  the  Nodal  Officers  and  the  social 
focal pints from UNIONs. Furthermore, the officer will work in close collaboration 
with  M&E  person  to  develop  specific  social  performance  indicators  and  targets. 
He/she  will  also  be  responsible  to  supervise  (federal  level)  all  activities 
concerning  consultation;  mobilization  and  clients’  outreach.  The  same 
responsibility  at local level  (region/woredas)  will  stay  with  nodal  officer  for  MFIs 
and Social Focal Points for FCA. Draft TORs can be found in Annex 2. The Officer 
will ensure that woredas and kebele level staff: Social Focal Points/Nodal Officers 
14 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
are  capacitated.  At  federal  level,  overall  implementation  for  activities  related  to 
the  environmental  and  social  management  Framework  (ESMF)  will  follow  under 
the responsibilities of the safeguard staff (full time) while the Social Performance 
and  Customers  Protection  Officer    will  responsible  for  the  cross  cutting  issues: 
gender,  youth,  nutrition  and  social  inclusion.  As  part  of  external  linkage 
responsibility,  the  person  will  facilitate  other  programmes  and  projects  to  gain 
access  to  finance  for  their  beneficiaries  from  RUFIP  supported  RFIs.  This  would 
involve identification of such areas where other proejct beneficiaries operate and  
the RFIs with a local presence; establish procedures by which those beneficiaries 
can  become  clients  of  the  RFIs  and  monitor  progress  of  linkages.  Any  training 
required  for  the  other  project  beneficiaries  should  be  carried  out  by  the  other 
projects, but technical support can be given by the RFI concerned in the interest 
of gaining good customers.  
f.  A financial sector specialist to anchor guarantee fund and insurance marketing 
partnerships between Insurance cos and RFIs. The specialist will also oversee the 
leasing  portfolio,  to  be  managed  in  partnerwhip  with  EIB.  The  role  will  support 
the guarantee fund operations including creating awareness about the same with 
financial  institutions  and  RFIs,  explore  different  means  of  issuing  guarantees  of 
diversified 
resources,  actively  pursue 
opportunities for RFIs to  become agents of insurance companies  to market rural 
insurance  products,  create  awareness  and  knowledge  in  RFIs  on  the  nature  of 
insurance  marketing,  training  of  RFI  staff  with  contributions  from  insurance 
companies  and  help  the  PCMU  in  monitoring  the  capacity  building  initiatives  in 
relation to these aspects. 
instruments  of  MFIs 
raising 
for 
Annex 3 shows the current and potential future organigrams. It is at the discretion of 
20. 
DBE Management to dictate the organizational structure and to recruit the required staff to 
implement RUFIP III as well as other projects, as well as decide the overall positioning and 
role  of  the  EFCMD  within  the  DBE  Organigram.  The  staff  costs  are  purely  counterpart 
financed.  
A.2.3: IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES (IAS) 
21. 
FCA  is  the  implementing  agency  for  the  financial  cooperatives  sector.  It  will 
undertake regulation and supervision of the financial cooperatives sector (SACCOs and their 
Unions), and guide the actors towards sustainability and customer-responsive performance. 
They  will  provide  strategic  guidance  and  technical  support  to  lower  level  structures, 
including  Regional  Bureaus,  zones,  woredas  and  kebeles.  FCA  will  coordinate  budgeting, 
release of fund and be responsible for providing justification of all advances transferred for 
capacity  building  of  financial  cooperatives  sector,  and  submit  it  to  the  PCMU.  FCA  will  also 
route  applications  for  funds  from  LOC  received  from  Unions  to  PCMU  with  its 
recommendations.  They  will  also  engage  with  DBE,  NBE  and  the  PCMU  on  strategic  issues 
concerning the sector, providing an overall direction of how the sector should develop.  
22. 
Regional Cooperative Promotion Bureaus  (RCPBs) are the counterparts of FCA 
at the regional level. They play an implementation role under the project and lead the work 
in their region, through zonal and woreda level presence under the guidance of FCA.  
NBE will undertake regulation and supervision of the micro-finance sector and guide 
23. 
the actors towards sustainability and customer-responsive performance.  
24. 
Association  of  Ethiopian  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (AEMFI)  is  a  long-term 
industry partner of RUFIP and are responsible for capacity building activities within the MFI 
sector as supported by the project.  
15 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
A.2.4: PARTNERSHIPS  
25.  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  the  regional  (and  lower  level)  counterparts,  provide 
training  materials  for  nutrition,  to  be  adapted  if  required,  to  suit  the  needs  of  the  target 
groups.  The  Woreda  and  Kebele  staff  (Development  Agents)  may  be  engaged  in  outreach 
campaigns such as financial literacy, homestead gardening, nutrition outreach.  They would 
also  technically  support  farm-based  production  and  processing  initiatives  in  PROSEAD 
project areas to strengthen value chain finance. 
26.  Within  the  sector.  Commercial  banks,  insurance  companies  and  other  financial 
institutions  will  partner  with  RUFIP  to  expand  the  resource  base  and  widen  the  range  of 
products offered to poor and marginalized. Similarly, RUFIP may learn from other countries, 
e.g. IFAD experiences from Uganda on financial literacy training.  
Financing  partnerships.  The  European  Union  (EU),  EIC,  Commerical  Bank  of 
27. 
Ethiopa  (CBE),  the  European  Investment  Bank  (EIB)  and  the  Arab  Bank  for  Economic 
Development  in  Africa  (BADEA)  are  potential  financiers  for  additional  credit  lines  or  other 
types  of  funding.  The  Alliance  for  Green  Revolution  Africa  (AGRA)  have  already  indicated 
their interest to partner around setting up a guarantee fund.  
28. 
Technical advisory institutions will be required to enable the PCMU to implement 
various  newer  initiatives,  such  as  poverty  tracking,  social  performance  and  customer 
protection  mainstreaming  as  well  as  manage  the  new  projects  such  as  operations  of  a 
guarantee  facility  and  insurance  product  marketing.  Some  of  these  may  include  Grameen 
Foundation,  ARDIATA,  Ethiopian  Institute  of  Financial  Studies  (EFSI)  and  the  training 
institutes associated with AEMFI. Universities will also be important partners.  
Irish  League  of  Credit  Unions  Foundation  (ILCUF)  are  recipients  of  an  IFAD  grant 
29. 
under  a  twinning  arrangement.  Extensive  analytical  work  and  manuals  have  been 
developed,  which  will  be  used  to  the  extent  possible  under  RUFIP,  and  further  partnership 
could be pursued.  
30.  Operational  level.  The  project  will  provide  a  framework  (“be  a  hub”)  for 
beneficiaries  of  different  projects  that  have  a  need  for  financial  services.  Projects  can  link 
with  RUFIP  and  improve  their  effectiveness.  Some  of  the  partners  include  the  Agricultural 
Transformation Agency (ATA), UNCDF projects; NGOs like Self Help Africa and AgraTera and 
larger projects and programmes like PCDP. These activities are placed under Component 3.  
16 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
PART B: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES 
B.1: COMPONENT 1: BUILDING CAPACITY OF INSTITUTIONS AND CLIENTS 
This component will strengthen the capacity of RuSACCOs and MFIs and the capacity 
31. 
of  their  clients  (including  financial  literacy).  The  outcome  is  an  operationally  sustainable 
network of MFIs and RuSACCOs. There are two similar sub-components, one related to the 
MFI  sector  and  its  clients,  and  one  related  to  the  financial  cooperatives  sector  and  its 
clients.  
B.1.1: MFIS 
Capacity Development 
AEMFI  will  lead  capacity  building  activities  in  the  MFI  sector,  in  collaboration  with 
32. 
NBE,  as  the  regulator,  when  required.  A  capacity  development  plan  will  be  developed  in  a 
participatory  manner  to  strengthen  MFIs.  Some  of  the  envisaged  activities  include 
knowledge  and  skill  building,  improving  MIS  and  M&E  systems,  introduction  of  social 
performance  and  customer  protection  practices,  improving  the  targeting  of  poor  and 
marginalized and product development.  The training modalities may be training of trainers 
for MFI staff, trainings of MFI staff, managements and boards, with particular emphasis on 
those  in  pastoralist  areas  and  initiatives  for  strengthening  outreach  to  women  and  youth. 
Further  capacities  of  MFIs  and  RuSACCO  unions  will  be  strengthened  to  mange  micro 
leasing portfolio in partnership with Leasing Companies. 
33.  While  high-level  training  ot  senior  staff  of  MFI  should  be  taken  up  by  AEMFI  in 
subjects  where  they  have  domain  competence,  in  other,  newer  areas  a  suitable  service 
provider may be engaged by the PCMU for training of MFIs staff. Training courses for mid-
and  lower-level  staff  of  RFIs  should  be  carried  out  by  other  agencies  including  in-house 
trainers  and  not  directly  by  AEMFI  as  was  done  under  RUFIP  III.  These  trainers  may  be  
trained  by  AEMFI/suitable  service  provider.  The  course  curriculum  for  training  of  trainers 
should  be    decided  based  on  traning  needs  assessment  -  of  what  the  mid  and  lower  level 
staff of MFIs normally require in terms of knowledge and skills for their jobs. It is estimated 
that  AEMFI  would  handle  around  50%  of  the  capacity  building  activites,  while  several 
desingated service providers might be recurited  
34. 
AEMFI  will  undertake  participatory  action  research  on  topics  of  relevance  to  the 
sector  and  spearhead  knowledge  management  (KM)  activities.  They  may  directly  hire 
consultants to support them in this. They will also organize exposure visits for MFI directors 
and management, with a particular emphasis on taking these to the underserved areas (e.g. 
pastoralist areas).  
35.  MIS improvements. The existing MIS project being implemented by AEMFI will be 
continued, with the use of a specialized service provider, managed directly by AEMFI. About 
USD 1 million has been set aside for this.  
Strengthening of AEMFI 
36. 
RUFIP  III  will  continue  to  build  capacity  of  AEMFI,  mainly  focused  on  strengthening 
the  staffing,  institutional  structure  and  their  products,  such  as  certification.  About  United 
States  Dollars  (USD)  200,000  is  set  aside  annually  for  these  activities.  They  will  be 
managed  directly  by  the  PCMU,  with  funds  partially  transferred  to  AEMFI,  and  some 
consultancies recruited directly by the PCMU.  
B.1.2: FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES AND THEIR CLIENTS 
Capacity Development  
17 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
This  sub-component  will  focus  on  capacity  building  of  RuSACCO  and  Union  staff,  as 
37. 
well as of the members. FCA, specifically the National Training Coordinator at federal level, 
and  the  Regional  Training  Coordinators  at  regional  levels,  where  available  (e.g.  Amhara, 
SNNP and Somali Regions), will take the lead in capacity building activities for the financial 
cooperatives sector. FCA and the RCPBs are responsible for training zonal and woreda level 
cooperative  staff,  who  in  turn  provide  technical  support  directly  to  the  RuSACCOs  and 
Unions.  The  implementation  differs  from  RUFIP  II  as  the  RCPBs  have  now  –  to  a  wider 
extent  –  established  presence  at  the  woreda  level.  RUFIP  III  will  therefore  focus  on 
strengthening  the  Union  function  and  structure.  Technically  competent  staff  members  will 
be  placed  at  the  Unions  to  support  capacity  development  at  RuSACCO  levels,  thereby 
strengthening  the  role  of  Unions.  They  will  be  a  critical  part  of  the  capacity  building 
strategy.  
To  strengthen  capacity  building  efforts,  The  National  Training  Coordinator  may 
38. 
establish a Standing Committee to guide the TA process. The Committee may be composed 
of:  
a.  Director, FCA (chairman) 
b.  Director, Ethiopian Institute of Studies 
c.  Director, ARDITA 
d.  Executive Director, AEMFI 
e.  2 RCPB Directors (on rotational basis) 
f.  Professor of Cooperative Banking, Addis Ababa University  
The objectives of the Standing Committee will be to: (i) review the progress, trends 
39. 
and impact of various capacity building interventions; (ii) guide FCA and other partners on 
value  addition  and  qualitative  improvement  of  the  programmes;  (iii)  suggest  changes  in 
strategies  of  implementation  and  contents  of  the  programmes,  based  on  studies  and 
feedback;  (iv)  discuss  findings  of  the  studies  conducted  for  policy  development  and 
designing  training  modules;  and  (v)  ensure  that  women  and  men  have  equal  access  to 
capacity building, and trainings should target 50% women beneficiaries; etc.  
40. 
A  Training  Needs  Assessment  (TNA)  –  a  medium-term  development  plan  for 
RuSACCO  /  Union  capacity  building  will  be  developed  in  2020,  following  the  analysis  and 
format used by ILCUF in the 2015 TNA. The development should be participatory, based on 
requests  received  from  RuSACCOs/Unions,  as  well  as  topics  promoted  or  weaknesses 
identified by FCA. 
41. 
There will be different modalities for capacity building and refresher trainings:  
a.  Training  of  trainers  (TOT).  Participants  from  FCA  and  from  Regional 
Bureaus  will  be  identified  as  potential  trainers  of  trainers,  and  be  trained  in 
order for them to provide hands-on support to RuSACCO Unions (and possibly 
RuSACCOs  directly,  as  required).  A  residential  training  will  be  conducted  in 
the first year, to be repeated after 2 years; 
b.  Exposure visits. RuSACCO Committee members may be taken on exposure 
visits  to  well-performing  SACCOs  in  other  regions.  Provision  has  been  made 
for  exchange  visits  for  the  Committees  of  around  400  RuSACCOs.  Policy 
makers  (specifically  defined  as  FCA,  RCPB  and  Union  experts)  will  be 
sensitized  on  good  practices  in  financial  cooperative  development,  through 
international  and  internal  exposure  visits  (with  30  and  150  experts, 
respectively) and annual conferences; 
18 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
c.  Trainings  at  SACCO  level.  One-on-one trainings to the RuSACCO  staff and 
boards  may  be  organized  on  a  needs  basis,  to  be  conducted  by  the  trained 
trainers; 
d.  Leadership trainings for women leaders to achieve 50% representation and 
specific  training  for  women  on  financial  literacy,  business  development  and 
cash management and savings; and 
e.  RuSACCO  members  may  be  trained  directly  at  each  RuSACCO,  either  by 
RuSACCO  staff  directly,  by  Union  staff,  or  by  RCPBs,  depending  on  the  level 
or  expertise  available.  Trainings  will  be  continuous  throughout  the  project 
implementation  and  cover  topics  like  financial  literacy,  grievance  redress, 
customer protection and social performance management.   
f.  RuSACCOs  staff,  through  their  unions  will  be  able  to  gain  insights  in 
nutrition  security  and  the  training  coordinator  should  link  the    unions  with 
concerned local programmes and government  functionaries. 
42. 
Training needs will be identified and planned for in the AWPB development process, 
as identified by the RCPB and compiled by FCA. FCA will lead in undertaking regular impact 
assessment  studies  and  documentation  of  success  stories  to  adjust  approaches  and  topics 
from  year  to  year.  Service  providers  may  be  recruited  at  national  or  local  level  for  one  or 
more elements of the training needs assessments and the actual trainings. 
Financial Integration  
43. 
The project will support the preparation of a road map for  strengthening of financial 
cooperatives  with  within  mainstream  banking;  this  entails,  on  the  one  hand,  ensuring  that 
regulation for MFIs is up to industry standards, and on the other hand, that MFIs are able to 
implement  the  measures  and  modus  operandi  that  commerical  banks  are  expected  to  live 
up  to.  The  project  will  support  development  of  a  road  map  on  how  to  achieve  this 
integration. This may include:  
a.  Feasibility  studies  on  topics  such  as  (i)  prudential  norms;  (ii)  codes  of 
conduct; (iii) legal framework; (iv) strengthening off-site surveillance and (v) 
a  feasibility  study  on  FCA  re-organization  to  separate  out  the  financial 
cooperatives sectors at all levels;  
b.  Development  and  implementation  of  best  pratice  mechanisms  such  as  work 
on  instituting  deposit  safety  and  institutional  protection  mechanisms,  whistle 
blower policies, vigilance mechanisms and fraud prevention etc.; 
c.  Development  of  new  financial  products,  especially  as  relevant  to  women, 
youth  and  other  marginalized  target  groups.  Specific  activities  may  include 
studies,  feasibility  studies  on  innovative  products  (such  as  eVouchers, 
ePayments, eInsurnace).  
44. 
Each  of  these  activities  may  be  undertaken  by  the  project  or  a  service  provider  / 
consultant  may  be  recruited  by  the  PCMU.  There  may  be  parts  of  this,  which  can  be 
combined with the technical assistance under Component 2.2 (see below).  
Increasing Outreach  
45. 
The PCMU will take the lead in developing specific messages for greater outreach to 
rural  communities  about  savings  culture  and  financial  behavior.  Promotional  material  (in 
local languages) will be developed and disseminated through the FCA structures on ground 
to  existing  youth  groups,  associations  and  schools. 
(regional,  zonal,  woreda) 
Communications campaings will be conducted on a regular basis sensitizing the rural public, 
but with particular emphasis on reaching out to the various target groups. Specific channels 
19 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
may  be  identified  during  start-up  towards  more  vulnerable  and  margnilized  areas,  such  as 
collaboration with PSNP in development of communications materials; distributing materials 
at school, health or animal health facilities, as well as village-to-village campaigns in areas 
of particular need.  
Ensuring  nutrition-focus.  In  close  collaboration  with  kebele  nutritional  focal 
46. 
persons, the project may (i) sensitize RuSACCO members on nutrition-sensitive agriculture, 
basic nutrition knowledge, and about nutritious food and adequate consumption patterns as 
per  the  agro-ecological  zone;  (ii)  promote  homestead  gardening;  and  (iii)  establish 
demonstration plots for vegetable growing and with water harvesting technologies at Unions 
or other institutions with availability of land, where clients may convene.  
B.2: COMPONENT 2: IMPROVING REGULATION, SUPERVISION AND INSTITUTIONAL 
DISCIPLINE  
47. 
The objective of the component is to strengthen the capacities of NBE and the FCA in 
their respective mandates to supervise and regulate MFIs and RuSACCOs (and their unions), 
respectively.  The  outcomes  are:  (i)  enhanced  regulation  and  supervisory  capacity  of  NBE 
and  FCA;  (ii)  strengthened  regulatory  and  supervisory  organizational  structure;  (iii) 
enhanced  MIS  support  the  supervision  and  regulatory  environment;  and  (iv)  timely 
regulatory  response  in  the  form  of  directives,  guidelines  and  advisories  supported  by 
studies. There are two-components which are similar in nature, but targets NBE and AEMFI 
for the MFI sector, and FCA for the financial cooperatives sector, respectively.  
B.2.1: NBE FOR MICROFINANCE REGULATION AND SUPERVISION  
NBE  will  be  the  target  of  these  activities  and  be  responsible  for  planning  and 
48. 
implementing  them.  A  long-term  consultant  will  be  recruited  (by  NBE)  to  support  this 
process. There will be different sets of activities, each implemented in a different way:  
a.  Skills  and  knowledge  development  of  staff  of  the  MFI  Supervision 
Department  of  NBE  and  other  critical  personnel  will include  a  number  of  on-
site trainings (through the recruitment of identified resource persons, be they 
national  or  international  consultants),  and  participation  of  staff  in  formal 
training  courses  hosted  by  technical  partner  institutions,  within  or  outside 
Ethiopia.  Conferences,  seminars  and  workshops  may  also  be  held,  through 
the partnership with technical advisory institutions and development partners. 
Exposure visits may also be organized;  
b.  Long  term  technical  assistance  policy  strengthening  will  be  procured  for 
policy  and  procedure  development,  overall  support  to  NBE  and  institutional 
support  for  setting  up an  Apex  Development  Bank.  Specialized  long-term  TA 
will  focus  on  micro-insurance  and  facilitate  the  learning  process  for  NBE 
and 
including 
studies/product development. Shorter term technical assistance by be used to 
supplement the work, for example in highly specialized product development;  
programmes 
organizing 
exposure 
trainings 
visits, 
c.  Short term technical assistance may be procured to undertake specialized 
studies and product development for MFIs, including leasing in rural areas. 
d.  Training  of  MFI  clients  will  be  managed  and  planned  with  the  support  of 
NBE, but be implemented by AEMFI, or other sector technical partners as time 
passes  and  needs  arise.  Topics  may  include  digital  financing  and  financial 
literacy, with a focus on lowlands areas where MFIs have less penetration;  
20 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
e.  Financial literacy campaigns  will be planned and coordinated by NBE with 
particular  outreach  to  lowlands  areas,  women  and  youth.  Insurance  literacy 
will be a key part of the campaign; and  
f.  MIS  strengthening  at  NBE  entails  a  number  of  specific  IT  services  which 
will  be  completed  one  by  one  by  outsourcing  to  service  providers.  The  Core 
Banking  project  for  small  and  medium  MFIs  will  also  continue  in  its  current 
form.  
B.2.2: FCA FOR FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES REGULATION AND SUPERVISION  
Capacity development  
49. 
The  thrust  of  activities  under  this  sub-component  will  be  trainings,  carried  out  by 
FCA and RCPB internal capacity, to the extent possible. Consultants (national or local level) 
may  be  recruited  to  supplement  the  activities,  for  example  technical  experts  from  the 
partner institutions. FCA will develop a governance enrichment plan to identify interventions 
over the next 5 years, focusing more or less on:  
a.  Trainings  of  Supervising  and  Inspecting  Officers  of  FCA,  RCPBs  and  Woreda 
Staff;  
b.  Training of Auditors from FCA, RCPBs, Woredas and Unions; and 
c.  Training  and  exposure  of  both  RuSACCO  and  Union  board  and  committee 
members.  
50. 
FCA  will  recruit  a  person  with  accounting  and  finance  competence  to  support  the 
review of applications for capacity building and credit from the unions, monitor the progress 
of  work,  coordinate  justification  of  use  of  funds,  manage  receipt  of  regular  and  periodic 
information  from  the  recipients  of  RUFIP  funds  and  produce  reports  for  internal  review  as 
well as submission to PCMU. 
51.  MIS. The project will continue to expand the on-going MIS project to more Unions in 
a phased manner (to remaining 100 Unions). This includes setting up of a central database, 
standardization  of  data,  and  reporting  and  disclosure  at  all  levels,  through  a  service 
provider,  as  per  the  RUFIP  II  implementation  modalities.  The  project  will  pilot  (amongst 
approx. 245 RuSACCOs) supporting RuSACCOs on IT infrastructure development (hardware, 
software)  and  in  directly  linking  (about  12,000)  to  Unions  (through  communications 
infrastructure).  Selected  RuSACCOs  may  receive  items  like  laptops,  printers  and  software 
(to  be  procured  either  regionally  or  centrally,  depending  on  the  geographical.  The 
implementation modalities of RUFIP II would be carried forward. 
Technical Assistance  
52. 
A partnership will be entered into with a designated service provider  for at least the 
first 2 years of project implementation for other elements, under twinning or other types of 
arrangements.  This  will  support  institutional  capacity  development  of  FCA.  The  proposed 
TORs can be found in Annex 4. After the 2 year period, it will be assessed how to proceed. 
Some of the activities would be:  
a.  Classification of RuSACCOs and Unions using business parameters (e.g. audit 
class,  business  volume,  profitability  and  clients  served).  This  will  assist  the 
project to better target activities;  
b.  Strengthen  the  financial  cooperatives  sector  policy  framework  though  a 
consultative stakeholder engagement process;  
c.  Strengthening the audit framework;  
21 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
d.  Support  setting  up  a  National  Training  Institution  of  Excellence,  as  well  as 
Institutional 
for  Professional  and 
developing  a  Certification  System 
Excellence; and 
e.  Any  other  activities  of  the  project  which  the  service  provider  may  be  well 
placed to undertake, bulking procurements for efficient solutions.  
Strengthening Unions Supervision 
53. 
The  RCPBs  will  identify  Unions  in  the  various  regions  which  are  deemed  strong 
enough  to  intensify  their  work  on  the  audit  and  supervision  functions,  gradually  taking  on 
this  role  from  the  Government  systems.  FCA  will  recruit  auditors  to  deploy  to  up  to  100 
Unions identified. The roles of the staff would be to:  
a.  To supplement the efforts of the Union and affiliated RuSACCOs to rationalize, 
internal  audit  and 
reform  and  strengthen  book-keeping,  accounting, 
inspection, compliance and MIS;  
b.  Assume  as  a  resource  person  for  the  Union  and  affiliated  RuSACCOs  for 
training, sensitization, mentoring and guidance;  
c.  Periodically  visit  the  RuSACCOs  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Union  and 
provide on-the-spot guidance to the staff and give feedback to the Union; and 
d.  To be the link to RUFIP II, in facilitating the interventions.  
B.3: COMPONENT 3: FACILITATING FUNDS FLOW AND DIVERSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES 
54. 
The  component  will  support  RFIs  in  securing  resources  towards  meeting  the  credit 
demand from clients. The objective is to improve financial support mechanisms to meet the 
financial  services  requirement  of  target  groups.  The  outcome  is  increased  availability  of 
lendable resources, capital and savings for MFIs and RuSACCOs benefitting from the credit 
lines. There will be  two main mechanisms to achieve this, namely (i) a lending facility and 
(ii) non-lending credit enhancement mechanisms.  
B.3.1: CREDIT LINE OF RFIS 
A  line  of  credit  (LOC)  will  be  established  with  financing  from  EU,  IFAD,  domestic 
55. 
funds  from  GoE,  Development  Bank  of  Ethiopia,  reflows  from  RUFIP  I  and  II  and  possibly 
other  commercial  banks  /  financial  institutions  which  show  interest.  The  LOC  will  be 
managed  by  DBE  and  important  decisions  about  its  implementation  are  taken  in  the  PSC. 
The workflow is depicted below.  
Figure 1: Workflow for implementation of the LOC 
22 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Eligibility Criteria for Credit Support to MFIs and Financial Cooperatives. The 
56. 
PMCU will assess eligibility of RFIs to access the LOC, based on documentation submitted by 
RFIs,  directly  (from  MFIs)  or  through  FCA  (for  RuSACCOs  or  RuSACCO  Unions).  The  PMCU 
will assess (1) entry level eligibility, i.e. if an RFI is eligible to access any funds at all, based 
on financial performance and regulatory compliance and (2) Criteria for Allocation of funds, 
i.e.  the  amount  of  financing  the  RFI  may  be  eligible  for,  to  ensure  that  the  LOC  equitably 
provides funds for minimizing regional imbalance, ensuring balanced funds flow to medium 
/small MFIs and Financial Cooperatives and meeting the needs of other excluded/vulnerable  
areas, where other projects of IFAD operate.  
Entry-level  eligibility  criteria.  The  below  10  criteria  will  be  used  by  the  PCMU  to 
57. 
assess if an RFI is eligible for accessing the credit line:  
a.  MFIs that have been in existence for three years can access LOC under RUFIP 
III;   
b.  The MFIs should have made profits in the preceding two years; 
c.  The MFIs should have at least 1000 active clients; 
d.  PaR  90  days  should  not  exceed  5%  of  loans  outstanding.  This  will  be 
applicable to MFIs (big, medium or small), and Financial Cooperatives; 
e.  MFIs and Unions / RUSSACOs should have, at least, OSS of 100 %. Any RFI 
having  OSS  of  95%  to  100%  can  avail  LOC  subject  to  providing  an 
undertaking  that  it  will  comply  with  the  100%  OSS  requirement  within  one 
year from the date of undertaking. If the RFI does not fulfil this undertaking 
within  the  stipulated  time,  no    further  LOC  should  be  allowed  till  the    MFI 
achieves the OSS benchmark;  
f.  Statutory  audit  of  MFIs  and  Union /RUSACCOs  should be  completed  within 6 
months from the closure of financial year; 
g.  The minimum paid up capital stipulated by NBE should be complied from time 
to time; 
h.  As per NBE directive in 2013, every MFI must obtain a license for renewal of 
its business every year. If a license is not renewed within one month, penalty 
provisions  will  be  applicable.  (In  other  countries,  generally  financial 
institutions  continue  until  the  license  is  not  withdrawn).  It  implies,  all  MFIs, 
big  or  small,  hold  licenses  for  one  year.  Every  participating  MFI  must  hold  a 
license and continue to renew periodically; 
i.  All the participating MFIs should comply with regulatory requirements such as 
CARR (12%), exposure standards, liquidity ratio (20%), loan limits (individual 
1%  of  Capital/group  4%  of  capital),  maximum  loan  repayment  period  (5 
years except housing for 15 years), fit and Proper Criteria for board, Interest 
rate directives, etc.; and 
j.  A  nodal  person  should be  identified in the  MFI  to  be  responsible  for  meeting 
the  requirements  of  RUFIP  targeting  strategy,  social  performance  practices 
and  customer  protection  aspects.    The  MFIs  should  also  identify  a  nodal 
person  to  link  clients  of  other  projects  and  programmes  in  which  access  to 
finance is a requirement.    
58. 
Criteria for allocation of funds. The below 14 criteria will be applied by the PMCU 
to determine the financing allocation, once an RFI has been deemed eligible for support. It 
is  envisaged  that  the  demand  will  be  greater  than  the  supply,  and  any  RFI  may  get  any 
23 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
share  of the total amount they  apply for. The proposed criteria, to be continuously revised 
by the PCMU with approval of the PSC, are:   
a.  Large MFIs (with total assets exceeding ETB  4 billion at the end of previous 
fiscal year) will be able access funds only to the extent available from reflows 
of loans issued under RUFIP I and RUFIP II in respect of their existing clients; 
b.  The  exception  to  the  above  rule  would  be  in  respect  of  credit  expansion  in 
underserved regions namely, Afar, Benishangul Gumuz, Gambela and Somali. 
Large MFIs will be able to access credit from LOC over and above the reflows. 
Large  MFIs  will  also  be  eligible  to  access  credit  from  LOC  in  respect  of  new 
clients  acquired  during  the  RUFIP  III  period  from  LOC  over  and  above  the 
reflows.  This  will  be  particularly useful in  case  of  PROSEAD  clients  and  other 
linkage projects clients; 
c.  The  Large  MFIs  should  secure  funding  from  other  sources  (excluding 
networth)  at  least  to  the  extent  of  amount  drawn  from  RUFIP  III,  before 
applying  for  the  next  tranche  of  funds.    The  Medium  MFIs  should  secure 
funding from other sources (excluding networth) at least to the extent of 25% 
amount drawn from RUFIP III, before applying for the next tranche of funds; 
d.  Two disbursements will be made each year by DBE to large and Medium MFIs, 
after  ensuring  the  funds  released  in  the  previous  tranche  has  been  fully 
utilized  and  that  MFI  has  secured  funds  from  other  sources  as  indicated  in 
rule 3; 
e.  Of  the  total  yearly  credit  line  budget,  RuSACCOs  and  Unions  would  be 
reserved a minimum of 25% during the first four years of the project. If their 
requirements  during  the  year  exceed  25%  of  the  budget,  the  same  will  be 
prioritized; 
f.  The  Small  (less  than  ETB  1  billion  in  assets)  and  Medium  (ETB  more  than  1 
billion  and  less  than  4  billion  in  assets)  MFIs  will  be  reserved  a  minimum  of 
10% and 15% of the budget each year;  
g.  The smaller MFIs and new MFIs operating substantially in rural areas will have 
to satisfy the following revised criteria for availing the credit line from DBE; 
h.  The  MFIs  /  Financial  Cooperatives  operating  in  the  excluded/vulnerable 
regions/  pastoral  areas  and  other  areas  where  other  projects  of  IFAD  are 
implemented will not be subjected to restriction of funds;  
i.  Agencies  operating  in  the  remote  rural  areas  as  compared  to  those 
concentrating  in  urban  areas  should  given  due  advantage.  The  agencies 
should  indicate  the  extent  of  their  rural  branches,  rural  clientele  and  rural 
finance to have the benefit of such funds advantage under RUFIP III; 
j.  All agencies need to prepare Institutional and Business Plan for 3/6 years and 
updated annually and submit to PCMU; 
k.  20% of funds would be earmarked for financial cooperatives; 
l.  The  unions  may  be  classified  in  to  A,B,  and  C,  based  on  performance 
parameters,  with  a  view  to  facilitating  more  equitable  distribution  within 
cooperatives,  if  considered  necessary  (as  some  of  the  Unions  might  become 
larger after 3-4 years). The classification can be reviewed annually; 
24 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
m.  Union/RUSACCOs  should  comply  with  regulatory  prescriptions  of  FCA,  e.g. 
equity  not  less  than  20%  of  net  assets,  exposure  limits,  governance 
standards (although prudential norms yet to be implemented); and 
n.  Unions should comply with an obligation to link, supervise, guide and support 
RUSACCOs. 
Procedure for application and repayment 
59. 
Financial Cooperatives Sector. The financial resource in the LOC will be available 
to both Unions and RuSACCOs, but the Unions will be responsbile for applying. This means 
that a RuSACCO must be a member of a Union to apply for funds from the LOC. Unions will 
aggregate  requests  from  RuSACCOs,  along  with  their  possible  own  requests,  and  submit  a 
consolidated request to FCA. The Union will be responsbile for checking eligbilitility critera of 
RuSACCOs  and  submit  all  the  required  documentation  to  FCA.  FCA  will  then,  again,  verify 
validty and eligibility, before sending a joint request to DBE. DBE will perform due diligence, 
and,  once  eligibility  is  confirmed,  and  the  total  amount  available  decided  upon,  release 
funding  to  the  Unions  directly.  The  Union,  upon  receipt  of  funds  from  DBE  will  credit  the 
accounts  of  the  RuSACCOs  held  with  it.  The  RuSACCOs  wil  be  able  to  withdraw  the  funds 
from the same as and when needed. 
60. 
Each  Union  will  establish  a  procedure  for  transmitting  funds  to  the  RuSACCOs  and 
support them to improve their financial systems, as required. In most cases, the RuSACCO 
manager will be required to come to the Union to collect the loanable fund, for safekeeping 
in the RuSACCO safe. The RuSACCO and Union may agree that the LOC is collected bit by 
bit, to minimize the financial risk of keeping funds at the RuSACCO.  In other  cases,  online 
banking  solutions  may  be  available,  in  which  case  funds  can  be  directly  sent  to  the 
RuSACCO bank account. In again other situations, the RuSACCO may have a bank account 
in a commerical bank or MFI, to which funds can be transferred. The RuSACCO will on-lend 
to clients as per standard procedure.  
RuSACCOS  will  ensure  that  their  accopunt  with  the  Union  has  adequate  funds  to 
61. 
meet  the  installment  of  repayment  from  time  to  time.  The  Unions  will  send  a  notice 
regarding the amount of instalment of repayment falling due 15 days before the due date so 
that  the  RuSACCOs  can  make  the  necessary  arrangements.  The  Union  will  debit  the 
accounts of the concerned RuSACCOs and make the payment to DBE directly.  
62.  MFIs.  MFIs  (currently  22-35  elibilge  MFIs,  with  more  possibly  entering  the  sector 
and  becoming  eligible  during  the  project  period)  will  submit  their  applications  directly  to 
DBE,  along  with  the  required  documentation.  DBE  will  confirm  eligibility,  eligibility  amount 
and perform due diligence. Upon approval, funds would be directly transferred to the MFI in 
question.  
25 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Figure 2: Application process (blue line) and flow of funds (red, dashed line) for LOC 
B.3.2: ENABLING CONDITIONS OF FOR DIVERSIFYING FUNDING SOURCES AND BUSINESS LINES 
BY RFIS 
63. 
The PCMU will, in collaboration with AGRA, set up a credit guarantee fund to secure 
bank  loans.  A  sub-committee  will  be  established  to  steer  the  process,  while  DBE,  in 
collaboration  with  qualified  experts  will  develop  and  implement  the  fund.  AGRA  and  other 
partners may provide technical assistance for  the initial set-up and for framing operational 
procedures  and  guidelines.  The  structure  of  the  fund,  its  operating  guidelines  and 
management  would  be  separately  finalised  and  maintained  outside  the  PIM,  as  the  fund  is 
supposed  to  continue  to  work  beyond  the  project  period.  Once  the  guarantee  fund 
mechanism is finalized and operational modalities worked out, elements may be included in 
the PIM. Details of the Guarantee Fund can be see in Annex 8.  
The  PCMU  will  position RUFIP  as  a  hub  for  financing  other  projects.  These  activities 
64. 
will be spearheaded by the Social Performance Officer in the PCMU and may include actively 
engaging  with  other  projects,  identifying  the  beneficiaries  on  ground  (for  example  youth 
SMEs  trained  on  business  planning)  and  supporting the linking  of  the  functions.  A  protocol 
for  these  types  of  linkages  will  be  developed,  specifying  the  requirements  for  selection  of 
eligible  clients  and  forwarding  the  applications  to  a  nodal  officer  in  the  local  RFI,  who  will 
then further process the credit application.  
The  PCMU  will  collaborate  with  the  EU-supported  PROSEAD  project  using  the  same 
65. 
partnership approach. PROSEAD will identify a nodal official in the project for each region to 
coordinate with the MFIs/RuSACCOs/Unions in the region.  The MFIs and Unions will notify a 
nodal  officer  for  collaboration  with  PROSEAD.    The  nodal  officers  from  the  RFIs  and 
PROSEAD will work out a plan for getting the clients in PROSEAD areas to apply for loans.  
(The  loan  proposals  will  prioritise  production  of  value  chain  crops  and  their  further 
processing. The loans will be available not just for croping but also for enterprise and trade 
activities in the realted  value chain). The RFIs  will provide initial training for the PROSEAD 
clients on the loan application, service and monitoring process. The loans when given will be 
the  loans  fo  the  RFI  and  they  will  remain  responsible  for  dealing  with  the  customer  and 
recovery.  PROSEAD  will  ensure  that  the  loans  are  applied  for  the  stated  purposes  and 
support the RFIs in sustaining the realtionship with the borrowing clients. RFIS will maintain 
and  report  information  on  loans  extended  for  PROSEAD  clients  and  valuechain  activities. 
This will facilitate the PCMU in monitoring the progress against the budget allocation againt 
credit funds to PROSEAD. 
26 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Initiatives  on  marketing  of  rural  insurance  products  to  the  RFI  clients  will  be 
66. 
undertaken.  A  sub-committee  will  be  established  to  steer  the  process  and  anchored  by 
PCMU.  
MFIs  will  be  provided  capacities  to  act  as  agents  of  leasing  companies  to  market 
67. 
leasing products in the rural areas after due regulatory approvals. 
B.4: SOCIAL ASSESSMENTS 
68. 
Each MFI implementing partners will identify a Nodal Officers/Social Focal Point who 
will  have  to  conduct  a  self-assessment  on  their  capacity  to  ensure  that  capacity  to 
undertake  consultation  with  client/potential  clients/members  from  all  socio-economic 
categories  is  in  place  and  is  undertaken  correctly.  In  case  of  need,  capacity  building  and 
trainings  will  be  provided  by  the  Social  Performance  and  Customers  Protection  Officer. 
Special measures to ensure the implementation of the targeting strategy could also include 
activities  such  as  targeted  awareness  campaign  and  consultations  of  communities,  data 
collection  and  focus  group  discussions  to  better  understand  the  local  needs  of  vulnerable 
communities/HHs,  in  particular  for  the  design  of  specific  financial/insurance  products  for 
women as well as households in drought prone areas (i.e. Insurance products). 
69. 
Existing  Social  Assessments,  as  well  as  available  vulnerability  studies  have  been 
conducted  as  part  of  the  PSNP  Work  (in  the  past  15  years)  and  can  be  used  to  identify 
vulnerable  communities/  Households  at  Woreda/Kebele  Level.  On  that  basis,  RUFIP  III 
PCMU  will  develop  tools  to  operationalize  the  targeting  strategy  to  ensure  that 
geographic/community  selection  is  capturing  intended  beneficiaries  as  clients/  SACCOs 
members.   
70. 
A  social  assessment  at  local  level  will  be  conducted  by  the  MFIs  Nodal  Officer 
responsible  for  customers’  identification,  as  well  as  social  focal  point  from  UNIONs,  to 
determine  the  presence  of  intended  beneficiaries,  strategy  for  their  mobilization  and  final 
integration  into  the  financial  sector.  Relevant  information  which  will  be  provided  and 
integrated into the AWPB will be, among others: (i) the list of Woredas /kebele where RUFIP 
III will collaborate with PSNP as well as other interventions supporting poor households; (ii) 
an  indicative  number  of  households  belonging  to  the  poor/transitory  poor  categories  by 
regions/woredas which are graduating from safety net support to economically active poor, 
hence having savings to be invested and be eligible to become members/clients of RFIs. As 
a tool, it is recommended to use a matrix with target groups’ categories to be completed by 
the  responsible  person  (nodal  officer  MFIS/social  focal  point  UNION)  with  targets  to  be 
achieved  by  social  category  and  based  on  poverty  level  as  first  criteria.  A  further 
disaggregation  should  be  done  according  to  sex/age,  including  targets.  The  responsible 
person should conduct consolidation of different matrixes from regions at Federal level: the 
Social Performance and Customers Protection Officer.  
Below is provided an example to be further defined by the responsible person in the 
71. 
PCMU and used as a basis to also train the nodal officers operating at clients’ level.  
Overview of target groups and beneficiaries by socio-economic category and estimated 
targets  
Disaggregation by socio-economic 
classifications: poor/ transitory poor/better 
off  
Disaggregation by sex and age  
27 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Young men and 
women (age is 
between 15-29)   
Adult men and 
women 
(productive and 
reproductive 
age and above 
30). 
Men  Women  Young  
men 
Young 
women 
Total direct 
beneficiaries 
Clients  
target groups can be classified as very 
poor and poor (subsistence households, 
living below the poverty and food poverty 
line and being often food 
insecure/environmentally, economically and 
socially vulnerable), transitory poor 
(households producing a surplus for 
marketing, being food secure but at risk of 
sliding back into poverty/food vulnerability 
due to economic or climate shocks) and 
better off (commercially oriented 
households/entrepreneurs whose livelihood 
is secured and are not at risk of poverty 
and any form of vulnerability.  
Poor and 
Very Poor  
Transitory 
poor  
Better off  
TOTAL 
3 Million clients from very poor and 
economically active poor households of 
which 40% women and 10% youth (% of 
them are PSNP beneficiaries, graduating 
from safety net support).  
6 Million clients transitory poor households 
of which approximately 50% women and 
10% youth (part of them are former PSNP 
beneficiaries but at risk). 
3 Million clients are expected to be better 
off clients, of which about 30% women  
(including entrepreneurs). 
28 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
PART C: PROJECT PROCEDURES 
C.1: AWPB PROCESS 
RUFIP  III  AWPB  process  for  each  year  will  start  in  September  of  the  previous  year. 
72. 
The AWPB commences on 7 July (as per the Ethiopian calendar), and must be submitted to 
IFAD  for  no  objection  every  year  by  at  last  7  April  (3  months  in  advance).  It  will  be 
prepared in a participatory manner from the ground up based on PCMU orientations and an 
agreed  upon  template.  The  process  will  start  with  the  MFIs  and  RuSACCOs.  The  Financial 
Institutions  will  plan  their  annual  activities  under  the  programme  and  incorporate  them  in 
their respective institutional and business development plans. While MFI  will transmit their 
budget  proposals  directly  to  DBE  for  review  and  consolidation,  RuSACCOs  needs  will  be 
consolidated by their  respective Unions, which in turn will submit them to  FCA.  (FCA may 
require  RCPBs  to  review  and  consolidate,  if  it  feels  it  necessary)..  FCA  will  consolidate  the 
AWPB and submit to PCMU for further processing review before submission to DBE. 
73. 
The authority to incur expenditure emanates from approved AWPB and as such, the 
detailed cost tables as prepared by the project are indicative of the costs to be incurred over 
the  years.  The  amounts  in  the  detailed  cost  tabs  can  be  altered  during  the  process  of  the 
AWPB.  The  processes  of  preparing  the  AWPB  are  well  described  in  the  IFAD  guidelines  for 
AWPB  preparation  and  progress  reporting.  Table  X  indicates  the  critical  importance  of  the 
AWPB not only as a planning tool, but also as a financial control tool, and as such the basis 
of financial management of the project.  
Table 4: The critical importance of the AWPB in financial control 
During day-to-day financial management, an approved AWPB is the most important 
document, and the principal guide on what to do and how to use resources.  In the 
context of RUFIP III financial management, the AWPB is more than a guideline. It 
represents: 
a)  a  commitment  of  RUFIP  III  and  its  implementing  agencies  to  carry  out  a  set  of 
activities, produce specific outputs and achieve certain targets; and 
b)  Agreement  by  government  and  IFAD  and  other  RUFIP  III  financiers  that  the 
planned activities are appropriate in light of the RUFIP III objectives and approval 
to spend the necessary money as specified in the annual budget. 
c)  GoE  and  IFAD  will  have  provided  “prior  approval”  to  implementers  to  spend 
resources on the activities included in the AWPB. It should be taken so important; 
any expenditure incurred outside the AWPB will be declared ineligible for 
IFAD financing. 
d)  The  AWBP  is  also  a  performance  measure,  therefore,  RUFIP  III  should  set 
challenging  targets  but  not  unrealistic  ones.  RUFIP  III’s  performance  will  be 
assessed, among other ratings, by the extent of AWPB execution. 
C.1.1: PROCESS OF DEVELOPING THE AWPB 
FCA, AEMFI and NBE will prepare their respective AWPBs, which will be consolidated 
74. 
by  the  PCMU.  As  AEMFI  and  FCA  will  be in  charge  of  Capacity  Building  for  their  respective 
sectors,  their  AWPB  will  be  prepared  in  consultation  with  the  MFIs  (AEMFI)  and  the  RCPB 
and Unions of RuSACCOs (FCA). Stakeholders’ meetings may be organized to review results 
to date, discuss lessons learned and agree on the priorities for the upcoming year.  
75. 
In the planning and budgeting stage, the finance officers are expected to:  
29 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
a.  Identify  and  share  with  the  team  the  status  of  balances  by  center  of 
responsibility,  by  category  and  component.  This  can  be  obtained  from  the 
Programme  Accounting  Software  and  IFAD.  The  status  of  funds  available 
should be adjusted by deducting commitments, withdrawal applications (Was) 
in the pipeline and projected expenditure for the remaining part of the current 
year.  The  adjusted  information  about  the  status  of  funds  is  provided  to  the 
budget  responsibility  centers  so  that  they  are  aware  of  budget  ceilings.  It 
would be poor financial management/accounting if the AWPB is cleared if it is 
actually not feasible in the context of available balances by category. 
b.  Analyze  other  restricting  factors,  such  as  the  total  available  funding,  which 
may  realistically  be  replenished  in  a  year;  The  net  available  balance  should 
also  be  broken  down  according  to  components,  sub-components  and  major 
activity headings, so that planners are able to determine the relative weights 
for each component/ sub-component in the AWPB. 
c.  Support  presentation  and  consolidation  of  financial  data  into  the  AWPB 
formats; 
d.  Develop a treasury plan.  
76. 
PCMU  consolidated  AWPB  will  be  validated  by  the  National  Steering  Committee  and 
sent to IFAD no later than 90 days before (7 April) the start of the implementation year (7 
July).  Each  AWPB  will  also  include  a  procurement  plan  and,  ideally,  a  disbursement  plan. 
The AWPB might be revised at least once during the implementation year, upon request by 
the PCMU to IFAD, or following orientations by a joint supervision mission. 
C.1.2: TARGETING CONSIDERATIONS IN THE AWPB  
77. 
At  the  planning  stage  (preparation  of  AWPB)  a  key  requirement  will  be  the 
preparation of a strategy for meeting targeting priorities relating to poor segments, gender, 
youth and marginalized areas with the help of baseline data by the MFIs and the Unions.  A 
nodal  officer  in  each  MFI  will  prepare  a  strategic  plan  that  will  outline  the  local  context  of 
current  coverage  of  vulnerable  customers  and  marginalized  woredas  and  how  these  would 
be  covered  to  meet  the  targeting  requirements  of  the  project  over  the  six-year  project 
period.  This  plan  would  be  integrated  in  to  the  AWPB  business  targets  so  that  tracking  of 
progress of targeting gets integrated in the planning process. 
78. 
Mobilization  process  to  engage  with  communities  should  be  conducted  in  close 
collaboration  with  promotion  Agents  from  FCAS  as  well  as  MFIs.  RUFIP  III  team  and 
Promotion agents will work together to inform the communities about the inclusion of those 
vulnerable  households  engaged  in  some  form  of  economic  activity  (IGA/subsistence 
livelihood  on  farm  and  off  farm)  and  will  consult  the  community  to  identify  clients,  on  the 
basis  of  the  characteristics  related  to:  i.e.  poverty,  vulnerability,  minimum  economic 
production  to  have  minimum  savings.  As  a  result  of  the  consultation  with  the  community 
and  subsequent  engagement  with  those  vulnerable  households  there  will  be  close 
monitoring of their inclusion and active participation as clients/SACCO Members.  
C.1.3: CONTENT OF THE AWPB 
79. 
The  AWPB  will  have  three  sections:  (i)  a  narrative  section  (in  word)  describing  the 
results of the previous year and the activities planned for the upcoming year; (ii) a detailed 
budget (in excel) (iii) a procurement plan. This must include as a minimum:  
a.  Executive Summary 
b.  Country context (in relation to project implementation) 
30 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
c.  Summary of key results of the previous year 
d.  Proposed Strategic Priorities for the upcoming year 
e.  Description of Expected results and activities (per component) 
f.  Implementation constraints and risks mitigation 
g.  Budget Summary (per financier, per component, per category) 
80. 
AWPB  should  clearly  indicate  which  items  are  funded  from  the  respective  financing 
sources.  This  is  important  as  under  a  parallel  basis  of  disbursement,  each  funding  source 
will Finance 100% of the expenditure items allocated to it in the AWPB. 
81. 
Consolidating  performance  and  reporting  on  achievements.  RUFIP  III 
implementing  partners  will  be  required  to  report  implementation  progress  on  a  quarterly 
basis.  PCMU  will  integrate  their  inputs  in  their  own  quarterly  report  and  submit  the 
comprehensive quarterly progress report of the programme to DBE management and IFAD. 
C.1.4: THE FIRST AWPB 
82. 
The  existing  PCMU  will be  responsible  for  developing  the  first  AWPB;  which  may  be 
for  less  than  one  financial  year,  depending  on  the  date  of  effectiveness.  They  will  engage 
with IFAD to receive training on AWPB preparation during the project start-up phase. Given 
that  this  is  a  third  phase  of  a  well-functioning  programme,  readiness  for  direct  project 
implementation  is  high.  Some  of  the  elements  to  be  addressed  in  the  start-up  phase  may 
include:  
a.  Finalization of a guarantee facility in collaboration with other agencies;  
b.  Finalization of the insurance agency business framework;  
c.  Baseline studies;  
d.  Recruitment  of  service  providers  for  tracking  client-level  progress  out  of 
poverty;  and  
e.  Procuring,  installing  and  coding  an  off-the-shelf  accounting  software  for  the 
PCMU.  
C.2: M&E, KM AND COMMUNICATION 
83.  M&E  key  processes  and  responsibilities.  RUFIP  III  will  develop  a  Results  Based 
Management M&E System aligned to the GoE and IFAD requirements. The M&E will be built 
around  the  programme’s  Logical  Framework  (Log  Frame),  which  will  be  informed  and 
updated  throughout  the  programme’s  lifetime.  The  M&E  system  will  be  used  as  a  decision 
tool throughout the programme’s life cycle, from inception to completion. 
As the PCMU will be fully integrated in  the EFCMD, RUFIP  III M&E will be under the 
84. 
responsibility  of  the  EFCMD’s  M&E  team.  RUFIP  III  will  maintain  the  multi-level project 
monitoring  and  evaluation system  of  RUFIP  II,  with  a  hierarchical  pyramid  from  the 
beneficiary RFIs to the EFCMD, host of the PCMU, with clear roles and responsibilities of the 
various actors at each level.  
85.  Monitoring  of  project  outcomes  and  output  indicator.  Two  baseline  surveys 
(one  in  the  MFI  and  one  of  the  rural  financial  cooperatives  sectors,  and  their  respective 
customers) will be carried out during the first year of implementation to provide benchmark 
data for impact assessments at Mid-Term Review (MTR) and completion.  
86. 
Due to the limited capacity to collect data and keep records on their customers, the 
RFI  will  be  required  to  at  least  track  outreach  and  repayment  indicators.  Additional 
31 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
information will be collected periodically or whenever necessary using thematic and follow-
up studies. 
87. 
Annual  Outcome  Surveys  (AOS)  will  be  conducted  in  the  target  area  every  year 
starting from the 2nd year  of implementation, in order to: (i) measure changes happening 
at  the  household  level  in  terms  of  livelihoods  and  food  security  during  the  project  life;  (ii) 
assess  targeting  efficiency;  (iii)  provide  evidence  of  project  success  or  failure;  and  (iv) 
provide timely performance information necessary to undertake corrective actions. 
RUFIP  III  will  take  advantage  of  studies  conducted  by  its  implementation  partners 
88. 
(ie: impact studies, thematic studies, reports by NBE, AEMFI, and/or the major MFIs).  
89. 
Progress  out  of  Povery  Index  (PPI)  will  consider  this  methodology  for 
introducing  and  adopting  up  poverty  monitoring  systems  of  involved  MFIs  and  other 
implementing partners, e.g. FCA.  
90. 
Capacity  building.  The  M&E  team  capacity  will  be  strengthened  to  collect  and 
analyze  data,  identify  key  trends  in  various  thematic  areas  and  advise  management  on 
adjustments needed in project implementation.  
91. 
In the first year of programme implementation, RUFIP III the EFCMD team in charge 
of  RUFIP  III  M&E  will  be  certified  through  PriME,  the  new  M&E  Training  and  Certification 
programme mandatory for IFAD-funded projects.  
The  programme  overall  M&E  capacity  building  plan  will  include  all  the  designated 
92. 
M&E  agents  and/or  focal  points  of  the  various  implementing  partner  agencies  based  on  a 
need assessment to be conducted by the PCMU. Key areas of capacity building will include 
(list  not  exhaustive):  management  skills  (Result  Based  Management  and  M&E  project 
management)  and  areas  of  specialization  (Statistics,  Database  Management,  Cross-cutting 
issues  such  as  Gender,  Environment  and  Climate).  The  PCMU  will  mobilize  Technical 
expertise  to  support  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  M&E  strategy,  the 
installation of a database management system (DBMS) and training of its users, and cross-
cutting issues. 
93. 
RUFIP  III  will  upgrade  RUFIP  II  M&E  system  –  which  uses  Excel  as  its  core 
application  for  data  collection  and  data  treatment.  A  DBMS  that  will  allow  to  monitor  the 
LogFrame indicators and implementation progress of the AWPB will be introduced in the first 
year of project implementation. The DBMS will be linked to the Accounting Software to allow 
for simultaneous monitoring of both Physical and Financial execution. The application will be 
customized  to  allow  for  easier  data  collection,  data  analysis  and  reporting  based  on  the 
needs of the different stakeholders.  
94. 
The DBMS will be administered by the PCMU; it will be informed with information and 
data  collected  at  the  grass-roots  level  following  the  hierarchical  organizational  structure 
outlined  above  and  using  instruments  developed  in  collaboration  with  the  various 
stakeholders.  For  more  efficiency  and  to  foster  more  ownership  from  the  RFIs,  RUFIP  will 
incorporate data collection tools commonly used by RFIs into the design of its own tools.  
95. 
Standardization  of  information  and  reporting.  In  addition  to  RUFIP  II,  the  EFCMD 
manages another eight projects, three of which are co-funded by the World Bank. IFAD will 
seek  to  harmonize  reporting  requirements  with  the  Word  Bank  to  avoid  duplication  and 
overburdening the team. 
96. 
The flow of data and information on the RuSACCOs  side will be simplified to reduce 
the number of actors involved in the chain of transmission and allow for easier interactions 
between the RuSACCOs Unions and their members with the PCMU. 
32 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
KM  and  Communication.  The  M&E  system  will  be  complimented  by  a  sound  KM 
97. 
system to allow for better informed decision-making. The KM will allow to capitalize on best 
practices in the industry and share key information in various formats based on the different 
target audiences (internal and external end-users). 
RUFIP III will streamline and scale-up RUFIP II best practices such as the publication 
98. 
of Case Studies in DBE Newsletter – uploaded on the Bank website, the organization of Peer 
Teaching Forums upon return of staff from exposure visits, and thematic researches. 
C.3: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
99. 
The  purpose  of  the  module  is  to  ensure  that  the  key  players  in  the  RUFIP  III 
Financial Management fulfill their Fiduciary Responsibility to ensure that proceeds from the 
Loan and Grant and other sources are used exclusively for intended purposes. 
100.  The MoFEC, as the representative of the borrower, will represent GoE on all matters 
pertaining  to  RUFIP  III  financial  management.  DBE,  the  Lead  Executing  Agency  and  will 
ensure the overall oversight for the implementation of Programme at National level with its 
roles reflected at Regional level. As a disbursement condition and as part of the PCMU, a full 
time  Finance  Manager  and  at  least  two  accountants  must  have  been  assigned.  IFAD  No 
Objection will be needed to assure the  caliber of staff assigned. As these are full time staff 
of  DBE,  counterpart  funds  shall  be  used  to  cover  their  salary  costs.  Terms  of  reference  of 
RUFIP III Programme Accountant are presented in Annex 2. 
101.  FCA has been designated as a key implementing agency for the financial cooperative 
sector. This will involve coordinating budgeting, release of funds, justification and reporting 
for all Regional Bureaus as well as FCA itself. Given the current low capacity at FCA’s finance 
directorate,  a  dedicated  accountant  will  be  recruited  competitively  on  fixed  term  contract 
basis to join the finance team for purposes of RUFIP III financial management. For each of 
the other implementing agencies, focal staff will be assigned to handle RUFIP III day to day 
financial management requirements. As there will be a small volume of transactions, these 
do not need to be fully dedicated.  
102.  The  AWPB  is  the  main  critical  document  for  budgeting  and  budgetary  control.  This 
has been described above.  
C.3.1: RUFIP III ACCOUNTING SOFTWARE 
103.  Under  RUFIP  II,  the  PMU  used  excel  to  post  Project  books  of  Accounts.  Whereas 
PCMU was able to generate financial statements and submit WAS, there were some gaps in 
the depth of financial reporting. Under RUFIP III, as an IFAD requirement financial data will 
not  be  managed  by  simple  excel  spreadsheets,  therefore  the  need  for  off-shelf  accounting 
package. 
104.  Chart  of  Accounts:  There  will  be  need  to  adopt  a  coding  structure  (chart  of 
accounts) that can be used both for the accounting system and M & E purposes, this coding 
system  should  be  developed  jointly  with  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Officer.  The  coding 
once  agreed  to  should  be  used  all  the  way  from  AWPB  presentation  fund  requisitioning, 
payment vouchers, posting the accounting system etc. The coding structure will depend on 
the accounting package selected. 
105.  Some  of  the  suggested  attributes  of  RUFIP  III  accounting  package  will  include 
functionality, reporting, security and support.  
Table 5: Standard Requirements of accounting packages 
FUNCTIONALITY 
REPORTING 
33 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
(a)  User friendly (e.g windows driven) 
(b)  Ability to account under different bases 
of  accounting  (cash,  modified  cash, 
modified accruals) 
(a)  Ability  to  track  and  report  on  flexible 
reporting  cycles  (e.g.  month,  quarter, 
calendar  year, 
fiscal  year,  project 
cumulative, etc.) 
(c)  Budget  Control 
including 
encumbering  funds  at  the  point  of 
commitment. 
features 
(d)  Capacity to track the following data: 
i.  Actual 
ii.  Budget 
iii.  Life of Project 
to 
(e)  Ability 
to  Physical 
track/link 
Performance  Indicators  (e.g.  units  of 
output  or  contract  completion  status) 
as required by project) 
(f)  Ability  to  track  and  search  by  specific 
transaction  references  (e.g.  cheque 
#’s.  P.O.  #’s.  direct  payments. 
Voucher #’s, direct payments, Voucher 
#’s, etc.) 
(g)  Dual  charts  of  account  (ability  to  track 
in  accordance  with  or  link  to  local 
reporting  systems  as  well  as  donor 
requirements) 
(h)  Ability  to  support  in  the  generation  of 
withdrawal  applications,  or  at  least 
through export into Ms excel. 
(i)  Ability  to  track  and  report  on  parallel 
multiple funding sources. 
SECURITY 
(a)  Internal  Security 
cannot 
(e.g. 
transactions, 
password protection) 
features  adequate 
posted 
access, 
delete 
controlled 
to 
(b)  Ability to track and report by financier 
(c)  Ability 
report  by 
track  and 
grant/loan  agreement  category-  with 
exact 
the  components, 
activities and expenditure categories 
(d)  Ability  to  track  and  report  by  project 
component  or  activity.  Capacity  to 
customize reports 
layout  of 
(e)  Ability 
to  generate  key  Financial 
Management  Review  report  formats 
with  a  clear  audit  trail  (e.g.  no 
additional 
in  a 
spreadsheet  which  would  modify  an 
audit trail) 
revisions  needed 
(f)  Ability to generate reports for previous 
periods  back  as  6  years  (e.g.  lost 
report) 
SUPPORT  
(a)  Support readily available for:  
i.  Technical issues 
ii.  Training   
(b)  Security  includes  back-up  and  system 
maintenance procedures 
(c)  Security includes self-diagnostic checks 
to ensure integrity 
C.3.2: DISBURSEMENT AND FUNDS FLOW 
106.  Project  costs  and  financing.  The  cost  structure  of  RUFIP  III  is  reflective  of  the 
Project’s  components  and  expenditure  categories  as  per  the  financing  agreements.  RUFIP 
III has multiple funding sources. Financing will be on parallel basis. 
107.  Any payment made from the designated Bank Accounts will be replenished by IFAD 
at  100%  net  of  taxes.  Payment  from  other  sources  like  RUFIP  I  &  II  reflows  cannot  be 
included in the withdrawal application to IFAD.  
108.  As  per  the  IFAD  disbursement  handbook,  Schedule  2  and  2A  of  the  financing 
agreement  can  also  be  amended  with  reasonable  justification  submitted  to  IFAD  by  the 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. It is however difficult to request for a reallocation 
of funds from investing activities to recurrent activities like operation costs and salaries.  
34 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
109.  Co-mingling  of  funds.  Each  funding  source  has  a  certain  level  of  “fiduciary 
autonomy”,  thus  these  funds  should  not  be  comingled/mixed  up.  There  is  need  to  open 
separate  Bank  Accounts  for  each  funding  source.  For  IFAD,  the  loan  and  the  grant  will  be 
administered  through  the  same  designated  bank  Account.  The  Bank  Accounts  required  are 
presented in Table 6.  
Table 6: Minimum Bank Accounts required  
IFAD  disbursement  separately 
Monitor 
disbursements. 
Monitors EU disbursements separately from the IFAD financing.  
from  EU  grant 
Remarks 
Bank Accounts 
A: DESIGNATED BANK ACCOUNTS (USD) 
IFAD Loan and grant:  
USD Bank Account 
EU-grant:  
USD Bank Account 
B: OPERATIONAL BANK ACCOUNTS (ETB) 
DBE  Level  –  Operating 
account 
RUFIP I, II & III-  Reflows 
Bank Account - ETB 
To  receive  funds  from  the  designated  account  for  transactions 
by PCMU including transfers to implementing partners 
Account  already  in  existence  and  is  “ring-fenced”  to  receive 
repayments  of  loans  given  out  under  RUFIP  I  &  II.  Such  loan 
repayments  should  not  be  mixed-up  with  RUFIP  III  IFAD 
loan/grant and EU Grant funds. Any mix-up result in difficulties 
in  reconciling  the  Authorised  allocation  to  the  designated  bank 
accounts. 
Account will be administered by DBE or under oversight of DBE 
in accordance with GoE arrangements acceptable to IFAD 
Bank 
III  Guarantee 
RUFIP 
Scheme account 
C: RUFIP II Operational Bank accounts to be opened by Implementing Institutions 
Funds  that  will  be  transferred  to  FCA  will  be  for  the  FCA 
FCA  Operating 
approved activities under RUFIP III and other entities under FCA 
Account - ETB 
supervision.  Funds  to  the  Regional  Cooperative  Bureaus  will  be 
channelled through this account. 
Funds  that  will  be  transferred  to  AEMFI  will  be  exclusively  for 
the AEMFI approved activities under RUFIP III. 
The  lowest  RUFIP  III  bank  accounts  will  be  at  regional  level, 
there is no need to open specific bank accounts at the Unions or 
Woreda  level.  A  system  to  follow-up  advances  made  by  the 
regions  to  the  woredas  as  established  under  RUFIP  II  will 
continue to apply under RUFIP III. 
AEMFI  Operating  Bank 
Account - ETB 
Each  Region 
should 
open  a  specific  Bank 
Account 
for  RUFIP  III 
specific funds. 
110.  From  PCMU,  funds  will  flow  to  FCA  (MoU  modality),  who  will  be  responsible  for 
collecting  justifications  for  all  transfers  to  the  Regional  Bureaus  and  below.  The  Regional 
Bureaus  will  transfer  funds  to  financial  cooperative  Unions,  the  last  point  of  disbursement. 
There will be no disbursements to Woredas, Kebeles or directly to SACCOs.  
111.  The applicable disbursement methods are indicated in the Letter to the Borrower and 
comprise:  
a.  Direct  Payment  Method  for  bigger  payments  above  USD  100,000,  whereby 
IFAD directly pays the service provider;  
b.  Use  of  designated  account,  whereby  IFAD  transfers  an  amount  estimated  to 
be  sufficient  for  a  given  time  period  (as  identified  in  the  AWPB),  to  a 
designated  bank  account  which  the  project  then  draws  upon  and  provides 
accountabilities to IFAD; and  
c.  Reimbursement if GoE has pre-financed any transactions.  
35 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
C.3.3: WITHDRAWAL APPLICATIONS 
112.  The  IFAD  Disbursement  Handbook  provides  all  the  guidance  and  forms  needed  for 
the preparation of withdrawal applications including replenishment applications. These have 
not  been  reproduced  in  this  module.  As  stated  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  the  Loan 
Disbursement  Handbook,  four  standard  disbursement  procedures  may  be  used  for 
withdrawal of financing: 
i.  Procedure  I.  Advance  withdrawal  (using  imprest  account  or  revolving  funds 
with replenishment to the National bank of Ethiopia). 
ii.  Procedure  II.  Direct  payment.  This  modality  is  used  for  eligible  project 
expenditure  to  be  paid  directly  by  IFAD,  generally  for  large  contracts,  to 
suppliers,  contractors  or  third  parties,  as  authorized  by  the  borrower  over  USD 
100,000. 
iii.  Procedure  III.  Special  commitment.  This  modality  is  used  for  eligible  project 
expenditure  related  to  items  imported  by  specific  implementing  agencies  under 
letter  of  credit  requiring  the  issuance  of  guarantee  for  reimbursement  to 
negotiating banks by IFAD. Under RUFIP III, use of this method is not foreseen. 
iv.  Procedure  IV.  Reimbursement.  This  is  applicable  when  eligible  project 
expenditures,  reimbursable  under  the  financing,  have  been  pre-financed  by  the 
borrower.  Such  reimbursements  are  expected  to  be  claimed  not  later  than  90 
calendar days from the date of payment by the borrower. 
113.  The tools needed in managing a proper treasury unit: 
i.  The  accounting  software  to  manage  the  entire  accounting  data  (production  of 
WA, AWPB control, disbursement rate, Variance analysis etc.); 
ii.  Regular updating  of the Cash Book (this will  prevent RUFIP III from going into 
Overdraft  which  could  cause  the  Project  to  issue  bouncing  cheques  and  expose 
the Project); 
iii.  Monthly Bank reconciliation for all currencies/accounts; 
iv.  Monthly Designated Account reconciliation (as per IFAD accepted format); 
v.  Regular update of the status of disbursement, commitment and un disbursement  
as  against  the  global  approved  fund  allocated    by  category  and  component  for 
your project (ensure to include commitments);  
vi.  Monthly Financial Report for management decision making; 
vii.  Regular  reconciliation  of  WA  presented  to  IFAD  by  RUFIP  III  for  reimbursement 
as against the payment made by IFAD to the designated account; and 
viii.  Cash & Expenditure forecast. 
114.  RUFIP  III  implementers  must  note  that  any  delays  to  justify  advances  can  clog  the 
replenishment  cycle  and  can  result  in  cash  flow  implementation  constraints.  A  tool  to 
measure  the  efficiency  of  a  replenishment  process  is  the  designated  account  reconciliation 
as illustrated in Annex 5. 
115.  Authorized  allocation  and  submission  of  withdrawal  application  for  replenishment  of 
the designated account 
i. 
ii. 
The  authorized  allocation is  USD  ………………..  as  provided  for  in  the letter  to  the 
borrower  (LTB);  USD  ……….  from  the  IFAD  loan  and  grant;  and  USD  …………….. 
from the EU grant taking into consideration the duration of the programme and 
the spread of the cost centers.  
The  Programme  shall  submit  withdrawal  application  for  replenishment  of  the 
designated  account  once  expenditure  reaches  30%  of  the  authorized  allocation. 
If  the  withdrawal  amount  is  less  than  30%  of  authorized  allocation,  the 
programme  should  submit  withdrawal  applications  once  90  days  from  the 
36 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
iii. 
iv. 
submission  of  the  last  withdrawal  application  as  provided  for  in  the  LTB: 
“irrespective  of  their  amounts,  if  90  days  have  lapsed  from  the 
submission of a previous Withdrawal Application”. 
Similarly,  implementing  agencies  shall  submit  expenditure  justifications  once 
actual  expenditure  is  equal  to  30%  of  the  advance  given;  or  expenditure 
justifications  at  least  every  3  months,  even  if  the  actual  expenditures  did  not 
reach the 30% threshold. 
In the  early years RUFIP II, the lead implementing agency (DBE) would include 
in a replenishment application funds transferred to the implementing partners at 
the  point  of  transferring  the  funds  (before  the  partners  had  spent  and  justified 
the expenditures). At the point of submitting the replenishment application, the 
only  supporting  documents  would  be  the  remittance  advice  from  the  National 
Bank of Ethiopia that funds have been transferred to the partners. This practice 
had  been  picked  from  RUFIP  I  as  it  was  acceptable  to  the  Cooperating 
Institution, the World Bank BUT unfortunately it is not acceptable to IFAD.  
v.  While  reconciling  the  designated  accounts,  in  absence  of  bank  statements, 
advances  to  the  Regional  Governments/implementing  agencies  shall  be  treated 
as funds drawn from the designated account but not yet replenished, instead of 
treating them as project bank balances as there shall not be any supporting bank 
statements.  This  shall  be  on  the  basis  of  information  sent  to  DBE  with  an 
additional  “Certification”  that  should  be  signed  (as  per  our  SOE)  by 3  staff  (in 
charge  of  the  IFAD  programme,  Authorized  representative,  Finance  Manager  or 
the like, in the Regional Government), certifying that the funds received are still 
at their disposal (in effect replacing the bank balances which could be difficult to 
obtain on time).  
SOEs  shall  be  summarized  in  order  to  reduce  the  huge  amount  of  individual 
transactions  otherwise  posted  in  the  SOEs  as  these  shall  be  generated  from 
many RUSACCO Unions and Woredas. However, each line of the summary listed 
in each SOE shall provide a full Audit trail to the individual supporting documents 
(which will need to be stamped and sequentially numbered). Therefore each line 
of  the  SOE  shall  have  a  description  similar  to:  “Training  provided  to  RUSACCO 
bookkeepers – supporting documents from say number 006 to 040”.  
vi. 
116.  Payment  Documentation.  Payments  must  be  supported;  and  in  the  public  sector 
there  are  certain  minimum  set  of  supporting  documentation  that  should  be  attached  to  a 
payment/journal  voucher.  To  ensure  that  the  implementers’  collect  all  the  supporting 
documents,  a  checklists  are  provided  in  Annex  6;  they  should  be  ticked-off  carefully  and 
attached to each cheque payment voucher. 
C.3.4: FINANCIAL REPORTING 
117.  The key tables in Financial Reporting under IFAD recommended  International Public 
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash/or accrual basis include: 
Statement of Receipts and Payments by category by financier; 
Statement of Receipts and Payments by Component by financier;  
Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual by category by financier; 
Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual by Component by financier; 
Statement of Designated Accounts Activities; 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi.  Designated Accounts Reconciliations Statement; 
vii. 
viii. 
SoE- Withdrawal Application Statement; 
Explanatory notes to the financial statements including accounting policies, non-
current  assets  schedule,  listing  of  yearly  procurements,  allocation  and  use  of 
loan funds.  
37 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
118.  Management  accounting  will  depend  on  the  information  needs.  It  is  not  possible 
to  prescribe  the  tables  needed  for  management  accounting  as  this  largely  depends  on 
judgement  of  the  Project  Director  and  PA  regarding  the  information  needs  at  any  given 
time. Management reports would include all the tables for financial reporting and in addition 
would include: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Budget Vs Actual comparison up to Individual Activity Level. This would be useful 
information for the M & E officer for the detailed AWPB-based progress reporting. 
Treasury  Position  and  cash  flow  forecasts  to  facilitate  transfer  decisions  and 
generation of withdrawal applications; and 
Advance  aging  Analysis  reports  to  facilitate  follow  up  and  other  decisions  on 
advances. 
C.3.5: AUDIT ARRANGEMENTS 
119. 
Internal  auditing  of  RUFIP  III  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Internal  Audit  Unit  in  the 
DBE. The internal audit unit at the DBE will review the financial transactions of the Project 
and submit reports which will include the: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Timeliness and accuracy of the update of the project accounting records; 
Timeliness and accuracy of the reconciliation of the bank accounts; 
Accuracy  of  project  expenditure  and  timeliness  of  the  preparation  and 
submission of the WA’s for the replenishment of the designated accounts; 
Eligibility of Loan/grant expenditure; and 
Adherence  to  the  approval  and  authorization  process,  internal  controls  and 
internal  checks,  including  adherence  to  the  FDRE  Procurement  process  and 
Procedures. 
120.  Statutory  External  Audits.  In  accordance  with  the  IFAD  General  Conditions  and 
the  IFAD  guidelines  for  project  audits,  the  RUFIP  III  must  have  its  financial  statements 
audited by an external auditor acceptable to IFAD. The Audited financial statements need to 
be sent to IFAD no later than 6 months after the end of the fiscal year. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
audits 
project 
available 
The  detailed  instruction  regarding  project  audit  are  outlined  in  the  IFAD 
guidelines 
at 
for 
http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm 
The  Federal  Auditor  General  [AG]  is  empowered  by  the  Constitution  of  the 
Federal  Democratic  Government  of  Ethiopia,  to  audit  all  Government  funds. 
However,  because  of  the  human  resource  constraints,  with  his/her  consent,  a 
private practice auditor can always be appointed. 
In  addition  to  the  audit  report,  the  independent  auditor  will  prepare  a 
management  letter.  This  will  include  comment  and  recommendations  on  the 
adequacy  of  the  financial  management  system,  and  on  the  system  of  internal 
control.  The  management  letter  should  also  include  a  follow  up  section  on  the 
status of implementation of previous years’ recommendations. 
121.  Internal  controls.  The  key  controls  under  RUFIP  III  are  implementation  of  a 
properly  codes  accounting  software  with  budget  module  for  budget  control,  monthly 
reconciliations of bank accounts, compliance with approval and authorization requirements, 
proper  filing  and  adhering  to  the  credit  line  and  guarantee  mechanism  implementation 
guidelines. Other RUFIP III internal controls are included in Annex 7. 
38 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
C.4: PROCUREMENT 
122. 
Introduction.  This  Section  is  intended  to  be  used  by  RUFIP  III  and  the  related 
stakeholders  while  undertaking  public  procurement  using  RUFIP  III  financing.  This is  not  a 
‘stand-alone’ document, but complements the ‘Public Procurement Manual as issued by the 
Public  Procurement  and  Property  Administration  Agency  (PPPAA),  IFAD's  Project 
Procurement Guidelines, IFAD's procurement handbook and the IFAD General Conditions for 
Agriculture Financing.  
123.  National  rules  and  regulations.  Procurement  for  RUFIP  III  will  be  governed  by  the 
Public  Procurement  and  Property  Administration  Proclamation  (No.  649/2009)  and  the 
procurement  Directive 
in  December  2015.  The 
proclamation, stipulates the procurement organization at federal level, the key procurement 
principles and operational procedures, and compliant handling system. It also re-establishes 
the  Federal  Public  Procurement  and  Property  Administration  Agency  (PPPAA),  as  an 
autonomous  Federal  Government  agency  under  the  Minister  of  Finance.  In  actual  practice 
procurement is decentralized to public bodies or procuring entities.  
issued  June  2010  and  amended 
124.  The main functions of the PPPAA are to regulate procurement in accordance with the 
Proclamation and a MOFED Directive of June 2010, and to build procurement capacity of all 
stakeholders – procurement units, members of Bid Approval Committees, senior officers of 
ministries  and  sector  agencies,  internal  and  external  audit,  and  finance  staff.  The 
Proclamation does not cover procurements by public enterprises or extra- budgetary funds, 
or  procurements  under  external  funding  where  the  donor  partner  prefers  to  use  different 
regulations. PPPAA is currently working on the revision of the procurement proclamation to 
ensure  that  it  accommodates  emerging  developments  and  addresses  gaps  noted  in  the 
existing  proclamation  including  the  regulation  of  the  procurement  of  State  owned 
enterprises that was not covered under the scope of the current proclamation. 
125.  And,  according  to  the  IFAD  General  Conditions 
for  Agriculture  Financing, 
‘Procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions of the Borrower/Recipient’s procurement regulations; to the extent that such are 
consistent with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. It is further stated that each Procurement 
Plan  shall  identify  procedures  which  must  be  implemented  by  the  Borrower/Recipient  in 
order  to  ensure  consistency  with  the  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines’.  By  specifying  that  the 
borrower’s  or  recipient’s  procurement  regulations  must  be  consistent  with  IFAD’s 
procurement  guidelines,  and  by  requiring  the borrower/recipient  and the  Fund to  agree  on 
mandatory  procedures,  it  ensures  that  there  is  consistency,  and  that  the  is  a  more 
predictable and coherent approach to procurement processes.   
126.  General principles to be followed are;  
a.  The  responsibility  for  project  and  programme  implementation  and  for 
procurement using IFAD funds lies with the Government.  
b.  IFAD  ensures  that  the  proceeds  of  any  financing  are  used  only  for  the 
purposes for which the financing was provided, after a full, fair and legitimate 
competition  among  the  bidders  with  due  attention  to  the  principles  of 
transparency, efficiency, effectiveness and economy.  
c.  IFAD  may  permit  the  adoption  of  the  Borrower’s  national  procurement 
regulations  provided  that  such  regulations  are  compatible  with  IFAD’s 
guidelines. 
127.  Project Specific principles are; 
a.  Procurement  is  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  Financing  Agreement  and 
the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  (and  PIM)  and  any  subsequent  amendments 
39 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
thereto,  reflected  in  the  Fund’s  Mission  Reports  (e.g.  supervision  reports, 
mid-term 
and 
correspondence).  
aide-  memoires, 
back-to-office 
reviews, 
reports, 
b.  Procurement  is  to  be  conducted  within  the  project  implementation  period 
(from  the  date  of  effectiveness  to  the  date  of  completion).  Procurement 
cannot be undertaken between the date of completion and the closing date.  
c.  Does  not  exceed  the  availability  of  funds  duly  allocated  by  the  financial 
agreement  
d.  Is consistent with the approved Annual Work Plan and Budget; and  
e.  Provides the best value for money: Best value does not necessarily mean the 
lowest  initial  SPIU  option,  but  rather  represents  the  best  return  on 
investments,  taking  into  consideration  the  unique  and  specific  circumstances 
of each procurement activity; the balance of time, cost and quality required; 
and  the  successful  overall  outcome  of  the  contract  in  meeting  its  original 
objectives.  
128.  Internal  Tender  Committees.  As  stated  above,  RUFIP  III  will  not  be  a  procuring 
entity and thus will not have a separate internal tender committee. The project, through the 
procurement  officer,  will  be  preparing  a  requisition  for  procuring  of  certain  items/services, 
to  be  approved  by  the  project  coordinator,  and  then  follow  the  normal  DBE  procurement 
procedures of approval up to the deputy director property facility management directorate, 
where the actual procurement processes begins. There are two committees; the bid opening 
committee  and  the  bid  approval  committee.  The  bid  opening  committee  is  permanent,  but 
the bid approval committee serves a maximum of a two years, and another is appointed by 
the  director  of  external  fund  and  credit  management  together  with  the  director  property 
facility  management.  Apart  from  AEMFI,  the  other  IAs  (NBE  and  FCA)  –  since  they  are 
government entities follow a similar procedure to that of DEB for constituting bid evaluation 
committees. AEMFI – being a private agency, was observed not to have a  structure that will 
ensure  internal  control  of  procurement  procedures,  and  will  be  required  to  constitute  one 
before signature of an MoU with RUFIP III. 
129.  Contract  management/monitoring.  For  contracts  entered  into  by  the  PCMU  or 
through financing by PCMU for services  and goods,  someone  should be  responsible for the 
execution  of  such  contracts.  As  for  goods,  the  relevant  procurement  unit  has  been 
undertaking  this  role,  but  for  consultancies,  this  has  been  lacking  across  all  Implementing 
Agencies  (IA).  Contract  management  is  part  of  the  responsibility  of  the  Procurement  Unit 
within the procuring entity, but it should be noted that the beneficiary department plays a 
crucial role in contract management. In corroboration with the procurement unit  therefore, 
there  is  need  to  nominate  a  Project  Manager  with  the  ultimate  responsibility  to  coordinate 
supervision  and  administration  of  consultancies  for  studies,  workshops,  research,  and 
technical assistance to develop the necessary training tools. This was observed to be lacking 
both at CPMU and IAs.  
130.  Preparation/monitoring  of  Procurement  Plans  (PPs)  by  IA.  As  has  been  the 
case with RUFIP II, NBE, FCA and AEMFI will play a significant role in the implementation of 
RUFIP III. Since the IAs individually procure items/services for the project, there is need for 
a procurement plan specific for an IA indicating the objectives to be achieved in accordance 
with  procurement  regulations,  and  the  timelines  at  different  stages  of  procurement.  To 
avoid  operational  problems  leading  to  a  rush  of  procurement  activities  towards  the  end  of 
the budget year, and the need for full budget utilization IAs should prepare and update PPs 
to  reflect  achieved  targets  Vs  planned  targets.  There  are  procurement  capacity  gaps 
observed  at  IAs  related  to:  bid  evaluation  processes,  preparation  of  bid  documents  and 
40 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
adherence  to  IFAD  procurement  procedures,  that  have  often  resulted  to  delays  of 
procurement  processes  due  to  back  and  forth  communication  with  PCMU.  It  is  important 
that  all  IAs  are  trained  on  IFAD's  revised  procurement  package  and  that  the  releant  IFAD 
procurement team monitors and collaborates closely to support the relevant implementation 
processes.       
C.4.1: PROCUREMENT METHODS AND PRIOR REVIEW AMOUNTS 
131.  Procurement  will  be  undertaken  using  the  general  methods  as  set  out  in  the  Public 
the 
Procurement  and  Property  Administration  Proclamation  (No.  649/2009)  and 
procurement  Directive  issued  June  2010  and  amended  in  December  2015.  Despite  the 
thresholds set out in the proclamation, in accordance with IFAD's Procurment Handbook and 
the Letter to the Borrower, the following procurment and prior review thresholds shall apply. 
Procurement & Prior-review Thresholds 
Currency: US$ 
International 
competitive bidding 
National competitive 
Bidding 
National 
Shopping 
Prior-review 
Goods 
≥ 250.000 
Works 
≥ 1.000.000 
> 100.000 to  
< 250.000 
> 200.000 to 
< 1.000.000 
≤ 100.000 
≥ 100.000 
≤ 200.000 
≥ 200.000 
Request for 
proposal 
(internationally) 
Request for proposal 
(nationally) 
Request for 
quotation 
(National 
Shopping) 
Non-
Consulting 
Services 
≥ 200.000 
> 100.000 to 
< 200.000 
≤ 100.000 
≥ 100.000 
132.  The  project  will  spell  out  the  object  of  procurement  and  specify  in  detail  in  the 
Bidding Documents and the technical specifications the procurement method to be applied. 
Otherwise,  procurement  proceedings  shall  not  begin  until  such  time  as  the  project  has 
prepared satisfactory technical specification or bills of quantities against which bids shall be 
invited.  
I. 
Conditions  for  use  of  Restricted  Bidding.  The  total  contract  value  of  a 
procurement  made  by  restricted  bidding  in  accordance  with  article  49.2  of  the 
Proclamation shall not exceed the following (local currency)  
  For works – 2,000,000  
  For Goods – 500,000  
  For consultancy – 300,000  
  For non-consultancy – 400,000  
41 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
II. 
Conditions  for  use  of  Request  for  Quotation.  A  public  body  may  carryout 
procurement by means of request for quotation with the authorization of the head of 
the  public  body  or  his  representative  without  having  to  obtain  the  approval  of  the 
procurement  endorsing  committee  if  the  value  of  such  procurement  falls  within  the 
threshold set forth below for each type of procurement (local currency)  
  For works – 250,000 
  For goods – 100,000 
  For consultancy – 60,000 
  For non-consultancy – 75,000 
133.  During implementation, the PCMU can request IFAD to modify the above thresholds. 
The modification will be guided by a risk assessment during supervision missions. It should 
be  noted  however  that  during  implementation,  the  SPIU  can  request  IFAD  to  modify  the 
above thresholds with justification. 
42 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
PART D: ANNEXES 
43 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
ANNEX 1. REPORTING FORMATS FOR GENDER AND YOUTH TARGETING  
134.  Reporting  format  to  capture  women  and  youth  participation  in  terms  of  accessing 
financial  services  (as  clients  of  MFIs  or  SACCOs  members)  as  well  as women  in leadership 
positions  should  be  embedded  in  the  reporting  system  (MIS).  Below  is  an  example  to  be 
taken into account:  
Sex and Age disaggregation Model for reporting  
Region  
Annual Plan 
Achievement 
% 
achievement  
% 
women   
% 
women 
leaders  
% 
youth 
Male  
Female  
MFIs 
Adults  
Youth 
RuSACCOs 
Adults  
Youth 
Example of Performance indicators for Youth (MIS) 
1  Total number of new youth clients as savers 
2  Youth start Savings mobilized (Birr) 
3  Youth saving balance  
4  Total number of year to data youth savers  
5  Dormant account (%) 
6  Number of youth clients received loan 
7  Youth loan Disbursement by sex (Birr) 
8  Total value of loans outstanding for youth 
9  Total number of youth Active Borrowers  
10  Number of youth attended financial education (schools)  
11  Number of Safe box Distributed for youth  
Example of Performance indicators for Women (MIS) 
1  Total number of new women clients as savers 
2  women start  Savings mobilized (Birr) 
3  women saving balance  
4  Total number of year to data women savers  
5  Dormant account (%) 
6  Number of women clients received loan 
7  Total value of loans outstanding for women 
8  Total number of women Active Borrowers  
9  Total number of women leader in SACCOs 
10  Total Number of Women Leader at UNIONs  
44 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
ANNEX 2. DRAFT TORS FOR PCMU STAFF  
PROGRAMME ACCOUNTANT 
Details and Terms of Reference for the position of the Programme Accountant  
Job Purpose:  The Programme Accountant will be required to design and implement the 
necessary accounting and financial management systems to address the programme’s 
needs in responding to the objectives. The systems to be designed, should focus on but 
should not be limited to budgeting, accounting, internal control, reporting and external 
auditing.  
Key responsibilities:  
1.  Develop,  implement,  modify,  and  document  record-keeping  and  accounting  systems, 
making use of the accounting software - implement the accounting software; 
2.  Prepare, examine, and analyze accounting records; 
3.  Perform  or  ensure  regular  reconciliations  are  prepared  for  relevant  account  balances 
for review and endorsement by the programme coordinator; 
4.  Prepare  examine,  and  analyze  monthly,  quarterly  (Quarterly  Interim  Financial 
Reports) and annual financial reports; 
5.  Analyze operations, trends, costs, incomes, financial commitments, and obligations, so 
as to prepare Programme  and provide advice to the Programme Director accordingly; 
6.  Develop, maintain, and analyze budgets comparing budgeted costs to actual costs on 
periodic basis; 
7.  Prepare  or  update  existing  forms  and  manuals  for  accounting  and  bookkeeping 
personnel, and direct their work activities; 
8.  Ensure and maintain a proper filing system for Programme accounting records; 
9.  Ensure compliance with relevant financial procedures, guidelines and standards; 
10. Initiate or conduct inventories and other relevant controls on assets; 
11. Supervise  the  work  of  Accountants  or  any  other  accounting  staff  assigned  to  the 
Programme; 
12. Compile  and  consolidate  SOEs  for  the  PCMU,  implementing  partners/agencies  for 
approval; 
13. Liaising  with  the  Accountants  and  Procurement  officers  at  PCMU  and  implementing 
partners to ensure that SOEs are prepared in a timely manner and forwarded to PCMU 
for consolidation and preparation of withdrawal applications; 
14. Survey  operations  to  ascertain  accounting  needs  and  to  recommend,  develop,  and 
provide solutions to financial problems;  
15. Advise  Programme  management  about  issues  such  as  resource  utilization  and  other 
matters pertaining to financial management; 
16. Prepare the Programme for external audits within the stipulated time-frames; 
17. Help build RUFIP III’s capacity in accounting and financial management.   
Reporting.   
The Programme Accountant shall be a full time member of the Programme coordination 
and management team and shall report to the Programme Coordinator.  
Qualification and Experience:   
a)  A Bachelor’s Degree in Accounting from a recognized university; 
b)  Additional professional qualification such as CPA, ACCA, etc. are a requirement; 
c)  Must  possess  at  least  7  years  of  experience  in  accounting  and  financial 
management  of  which  at  least  5  years  must  be  working  experience  with  donor-
funded Programmes/projects; 
d)  Must  be  computer  literate  with  demonstrable  proficiency  in  Microsoft  Word  and 
Excel and any other relevant application including accounting software; 
e)  Must have excellent writing, presentation and interpersonal skills, excellent 
45 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
analytical skills and ability to effectively communicate with a broad range of 
audiences 
SOCIAL PERFORMANCE AND CUSTOMERS PROTECTION OFFICER 
Details  and  Terms  of  Reference  for  the  position  of  Social  Performance  and 
Customers Protection Officer   
Job  purpose:  Under  the  general  supervision  and  policy  guidance  of  the  Project 
Coordinator,  the  Officer  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  and  implementing  social 
performance measures.   
Key responsibilities:  
1.  Overall coordinate all the gender, youth and nutrition related activities of the project, 
including Trainings and supervision of the work of the Nodal Officers (MFIs) and Social 
Focal Points (FCA); 
2.  Work  to  sensitize  all  project  and  partners  that  project  outcomes  should  be  achieved 
with respect for the principle of gender equity and women’s empowerment; 
3.  Identify  any  capacity  gap  from  project  implementers  that  limit  achievements  of 
gender/ youth related objectives and propose practical solutions to address the gap.  
4.  Review  basic  project  implementation  processes  and  outputs  to  provide  feedback  and 
suggestions  when  needed  on  how  to  achieve  best  possible  project  outcomes  with 
respect to gender equity, women’s empowerment, youth mainstreaming and nutrition 
mainstreaming. The basic processes to which the specialist should provide inputs are: 
a)  Preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget;  
b)  Design and implementation of project M&E system; 
c)  Project Progress Reports; 
d)  Project Supervision Reports; 
5.  To ensure that the M&E, Log frame is gender sensitive and reflective of the real time 
Review  project  plans  and  budgets  to  ensure  that  adequate  attention  is  paid  (and 
resources  allocated)  to  support  practical  and  strategic  support  to  women,  youth  and 
vulnerable groups as in line with project design document and percentage of outreach 
by categories is respected.  
6.  Work  with  the  M&E  Officer  situation.  Address  any  gaps  in  the  supervision  reports  for 
further follow up. Furthermore, work with M&E unit to ensure that lessons learned and 
success  stories  of  women  and  youth  are  fully  captured  and  reflected  in  relevant 
reports sections (i.e. Knowledge Management). 
7.  Work  on  emerging  strategies  and  plan  with  each  officer/specialist,  and  recommend 
good-practice methods relevant to the sector/issue under consideration.  
8.  Ensure  that  there  are  adequate  communication  materials  on  cross  cutting  issues, 
particularly for events organized at community level related to gender awareness and 
nutrition  awareness  and  education;  review  existing  training  materials  and  evaluate 
whether  additional  information  shall  be  included  for  specific  sectors/issues.  Ensure 
that  the  materials  the  project  develops  are  gender  sensitive  in  their  language  and 
image, considering literacy level of target groups.  
9.  Be  available  for  support  in  related  trainings/workshops  preparation  and  follow  up, 
particularly  at  the  beginning  of  the  project  and  in  relation  to  mobilization  strategy, 
identification and selection of target groups/woredas.  
10. Work  in  collaboration  with  PSNP  team  and  ensure  synergies  between  the  two 
interventions for what concern the target groups.  
11. Be responsible for the overall supervision, in collaboration with M&E Officer of impact 
studies  related  to  poverty  reduction  (i.e.  support  preparation  of  reporting  format  for 
impact studies on PPI); 
46 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
12. Work  in  close  collaboration  with  AEMFI  to  adapt  existing  methodologies  to  ensure 
youth  mainstreaming  strategies  (i.e.  UNCDF  initiative)  into  the  financial  sector  and 
ensure the approach is up taken by implementing partners (FCAs and MFIs). 
Implementation level:  
13. Participate  actively  in  networks  of  and  for  women  and  youth  and  facilitate  linkages 
among these groups; 
14. Assess  the  implementers’  capacity  in  relation  to  cross  cutting  issues  and  organize 
workshops  and  capacity  building  trainings  (gender,  youth,  nutrition)  for  interested 
staff and other relevant partners based on gaps identified.  
15. Ensure that the project implementation teams (at all levels) are  sensitized to gender 
and  diversity  issues  that  they  should  expect  and  explore  in  their interaction  with  the 
community through regular trainings and sensitization programmes.  
16. Work closely with Nodal Officers and Social Focal Points; 
17. Interacting with women in communities to gain better understanding of women’s’ and 
youth  perceptions  and  guiding  implementers  in  approaches  to  better  integrating 
women and youth into project activities; 
18. Reviewing  (regularly)  participation  of  women  and  youth  in  community  development 
activities  and  decision  making  processes  and  making  recommendation  to  improve 
processes; 
19. Guiding development of women’s groups, ensuring adequate representation of women 
in  all  Project  activities,  monitoring  impact  of  project  activities  on  status  of  women, 
monitoring gender orientation of participating agencies and service providers. 
Reporting.   
The Officer shall report to the Project Coordinator.   
Qualifications and Experience:   
1.  Be familiar with gender and youth mainstreaming policies of the institutions you work 
with including any national policies, policies of ministries, implementing institutions. 
2.  Have  experience  in  implementing  development  project  related  to  gender,  youth, 
nutrition in rural development sector. 
3.  Serve  as  a  channel  of  communications  between  your  project  and  others  working  on 
cross cutting issues (gender, youth, nutrition) in government, implementing agencies, 
research  centers,  NGOs  and  other  development  projects  of  relevance  for  your 
assignment. This should be done in close collaboration with PCMU officer in charge for 
partnership. 
PROCUREMENT SPECIALIST  
The  Head  of  Procurement  Department  will  be  reporting  to  the  PCMU  Coordinator.  His 
responsibilities will include: 
Specific Duties of the Position 
1.  Coordinate all procurement activities in PCMU; 
2.  Review procurement files from implementing agencies 
3.  Review and ensure that all procurement requests submitted for financing through are 
eligible  and  in  accordance  with  IFAD  guidelines  and  requirements  as  well  as  Nation 
Procurement Law; 
4.  Determine the most appropriate method of procurement; 
5.  Prepare  annual  procurement  Plans  in  accordance  with  the  strategic  and  action  plans 
for  the  implementation  of  Program  activities  and  ensure  its  implementation  on  a 
timely and efficient manner; 
6.  Help  to  identify,  specify,  estimate  the  cost  of,  and  consolidate  in  packages  (as 
47 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
appropriate)  the  procurement  of  goods  as  may  be  required  by  the  Rwanda  Pubic 
Procurement authority   
7.  Prepare  appropriate  bidding  documents;  including  specific  procurement  notices, 
standard contracts for goods and services, invitations for bids, etc.; 
8.  Maintain and update records of standard unit costs, technical specifications for goods, 
and local and international vendors and facilitators; 
9.  Participate in the evaluation of proposals/bids and contract negotiations 
10. Review and update procurement plans on a regular basis 
11. Advise  the  Project  Coordinators,  the  technical  staff  and  other  relevant  staff  of  PCMU 
and  other  agencies  on  guidelines  and  procedures  for  procurement  of  goods  and 
services; 
12. Ensure  that  implementing  entities  are  trained  and  adhere  to  National  procurement 
procedures and guidelines and to those of respective Donor Agencies; 
13. Ensure good filling system of all procurement documents; 
14. As necessary, assist sub-contractors in preparing bidding documents for goods, works, 
and services thereby ensure the most efficient use of resources; 
15. Perform any other duties as assigned by his/her superior. 
Qualifications and Experience Required 
16. Bachelor’s Degree  in public administration, or similar field, 
17. Five years of experience directly relevant to the area of procurement, 
18. Familiarity with IFAD and National procurement procedures. 
19. Proven  competence 
in  the  use  of  computer  software  applications 
spreadsheets and word-processing packages. 
including 
48 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
ANNEX 3. EFCMD ORGANIGRAM  
Figure 3: Current organigram of the External Fund and Credit Management Directorate 
Figure 4: Possible future organigram of the External Fund and Credit Management Directorate 
49 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
ANNEX 4. DRAFT TOR FOR TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE (COMP 2.2) 
1.  To prepare comprehensive regulations, directives and circulars on various regulatory 
themes to be issues by FCA/RCPBs;  
2.  To  take  exploratory  and  preparatory  activities  for  setting  up  of  the  National 
Federation and 1-2 regional federations on a pilot basis;  
3.  To  examine  and  pursue  segregation  of  audit,  inspection  and  supervision  functions 
from FCA/RCPBs and entrust the same to new organizational arrangements;  
4.  To  facilitate  integration  of  RuSACCOs  and  Unions  with  MFIs,  banks  and  insurance 
companies  under  the  supervision  of  NBE  for  enabling  the  former  to  provide  all 
financial services including money transfer and digital financial services;  
5.  To facilitate drafting of a new comprehensive Cooperative Development Policy and a 
new comprehensive and formal proclamation for financial cooperatives  
6.  To provide technical guidance to unions for expansion of MIS project and piloting MIS 
project in RuSACCOs;  
7.  To help in strengthening linking of potential RuSACCOs with potential Unions;  
8.  To  put  in  place  the  classification  of  RuSACCOs  and  Unions,  based  on  acceptable 
criteria and help in designing a transformation plan;  
9.  Facilitate building up training infrastructure in the form of an institution of excellence 
at national level and affiliated training outfits at regional level; and  
10. Any other issues.  
50 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
(ILLUSTRATION) 
ANNEX 5. DESIGNATED ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION  
 USD   Management Tips 
1  Total Advanced by IFAD 
   xxx   This reconciliation should give the whereabouts of 
xx 
this advance and the Project Coordinator should 
always, on a monthly basis, be interested to know 
the whereabouts of the Authorized allocation.  
(xxx) 
xx 
If less than 50% of the Authorized allocation can be 
traced to bank statements, this can always alert 
the Project Coordinator of lingering cash flow 
problems by looking at lines 4 and 5 
-    
  IFAD loan and Grant 
Authorized allocation 
2  LESS: Amount Recovered 
by IFAD 
  IFAD loan and Grant 
Authorized allocation 
3  Outstanding Advance to 
Designated Account 
4  Balance of Designed 
Account as per Bank 
statement   
5  Balance on Project 
Operational Accounts as 
per Bank Statements 
Total of Bank Balances 
6  Plus Total Amount claimed 
in this Application No.  
xxx 
xxx 
xxx  
If this amount is substantially higher than 30% of the 
Authorized allocations, it points at laxity in the 
replenishment system. If for example, this amount is 
twice or more than the minimum amount for Designated 
account replenishment. It tells the Project Coordinator 
that the Accountants could have lodged a WA when 
expenditure reached the minimum amount of 30% of the 
Authorized allocation but because of laxity/inefficiency, 
they allow expenditure to over bulk until expenditure 
accumulated to this level, which causes cash flow 
problems. 
This should cause the Project Coordinator to demand why 
money to this magnitude has been withdrawn but is not being 
included in the WA. The Programme Director should always 
demand for a schedule of this amount—it reflects inefficiency 
and results in cash flow problems to withdraw such a magnitude 
of money from bank accounts and take such a long time to 
replenish it back. Secondly care should be taken that this figure 
is not only inserted as a balancing figure, which would reflects 
that the designated account is not well managed. For 
implementing agencies, where there is difficulty in obtaining 
bank statements on a timely basis, additional certification is 
required. 
The WAs in the pipeline, if they take long to be 
processed, could reflect that IFAD raised many queries 
on the quality of the WAs, in which case the Project 
Director could request for staff training; or it could be 
delays on the side of IFAD and in which case the 
Manager would still have to initiate follow-up from IFAD. 
It is advisable for the Programme to always follow the 
status of the WA on IFAD’s Withdrawal Application 
Tracking System (WATTS). 
7  Plus Total Amount 
withdrawn from bank 
accounts not yet claimed 
xxx  
8  Plus Amounts claimed in 
previous Applications not 
yet credited at date of 
Bank Statement 
xxx 
9  Minus Interest Earned 
     -     
10. TOTAL ADVANCE 
ACCOUNTED FOR 
xxx  
If this total does not equal to the outstanding Authorized 
allocation, the Project Coordinator should demand 
explanation. It is so serious to fail to reconcile the 
Authorized allocation 
51 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Standard Goods 
(Tick) 
In-Country Workshops 
(Tick) 
ANNEX 6: DOCUMENT CHECKLIST 
1.  Complete Written Voucher, duly 
1. Attendance sheets 
approved 
2.  Confirmation by Procurement 
Officer that the Procurement 
was properly done in 
accordance with FDRE and IFAD 
procedures 
3.  Attach Copies of relevant No 
Objections from IFAD, where 
applicable 
4.  Attach Contract Monitoring 
form where applicable 
5.  Availability of supporting 
documentation 
a) Contract 
b) Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
d) Bank guarantee, where 
applicable 
e) Delivery notes/reports (Make 
Cross Reference if bulky) 
6.  Fund availability in 
a) Budget-Ensure Vote Book 
has been updated 
b) Category(ies) 
7.  Accuracy of 
Computations/footings 
8.  Reviewed optimality of the 
disbursement method? 
9.  Banking instructions 
10. Correspondence bank 
11. Percentage of financing 
Workshops- Abroad 
1.  Invitations and related IFAD’s 
(Tick) 
No Objection 
2.  Availability of supporting 
documentation 
a) Boarding passes reconciled 
DSA days taken 
b)  Back to Office Reports 
3.  Fund availability in 
a) Budget-Ensure Vote Book 
has been updated 
b) Category(ies) 
4.  Accuracy of 
Computations/footings 
52 
2. Attendance sheets should 
be reconciled to DSA paid 
3. Availability of supporting 
documentation 
a) Training report 
b) Hotel Receipts/ bills for 
meals and 
accommodation( should 
be reconciled to 
attendance sheets) 
4. Procurement record on 
how the venue was 
selected 
5. Justification for any fuel 
refunds and related 
support 
6. Fund availability in 
a) Budget-Ensure Vote 
Book has been updated 
b) Category(ies) 
7. Accuracy of 
Computations/footings 
Consultancies 
1.  Time  sheets in comparison 
(Tick) 
with the work done 
2.  Attach Copies of relevant 
No Objections from IFAD, 
where applicable 
3.  An acceptable report  
4.  Availability of supporting 
documentation 
a)  Contract 
b)  Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
d)  Bank guarantee for 
advances 
5.  Fund availability in Budget 
a)  Ensure Vote Book has 
been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
6.  Accuracy of 
Computations/footings 
7.  Banking instructions/ 
Correspondence bank 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Fixed 
Assets 
ANNEX 7. INTERNAL CONTROLS 
Other RUFIP III Key Controls 
Fixed Assets Register (FAR): 
a)  RUFIP  III  shall  maintain  a  consolidated  FAR  which is  a  record  of  fixed 
assets  for  the  Programme  including  assets  held  by  implementing 
agencies such as AEMFI, NBE and FCA.  
b)  The  RUFIP  III  register  format  includes  details  of  assets-make,  model, 
Specification,  quality,  rate,  value,  supplier,  receipts,  issues,  balance, 
location, etc. It also has the date of receipt of the asset & the payment 
voucher reference. 
c)  Each class of assets has a separate page in the FAR. 
d)  Any alteration in the FAR must be dully authorized. 
e)  It will reflect the book balance of a class of assets at any point of time. 
Fixed Assets Issue Register (FAIR) 
a)  While  the  FAR  is  maintained  according  to  class  of  assets,  the  FAIR  is 
maintained according to the staff member who holds the asset.  There 
will be one folio for each staff member who has custody of an asset. 
b)  It will record the date of issue & return of each asset. 
c)  It  will  bear  the  signatures  of  the  employee  when  s/he  receives  the 
asset. 
d)  The register has to be periodically reconciled with the FAR. All issues in 
the FAR should be reflected in the FAIR. 
e)  The  register  helps  in  locating  assets  at  the  time  of  physical  inventory 
taking. 
RUFIP III will follow the following fixed Assets internal controls: 
a)  Tagging & labelling of assets- assets are labelled or tagged so that they 
can be easily identified & their ownership established. 
b)  Insurance of assets- RUFIP III will insure all project assets. 
c)  Physical inventory of assets at regular intervals. 
d)  Log books for vehicles, the log book records the details of use vehicles 
&  is  usually  maintained  by  the  driver  and  checked  by  PA.  It  helps  in 
identifying  personal  use  of  RUFIP  III  assets.  It  is  also  used  for 
calculating fuel consumption appropriateness. 
e)  RUFIP III vehicles are not available as Personal to holder. They should 
be packed after working hours and cannot be used for private use. 
f)  Cross  referencing  of  financial  &  fixed  assets  records-  done  to  avoid 
payment to supplier before assets are recorded in the FAR. For internal 
controls purposes it is vital to reconcile the financial accounting records 
with assets records. 
Physical verification of fixed assets. 
a)  Conducted  by  an  inter-departmental  team  (Accounts,  Procurement, 
M&E, etc.) 
b)  Should  be  undertaken  under  the  supervision  of  external  /  internal 
auditors at least once a year. 
c)  Surprise checks during audit/supervision visits. 
d)  Meant to existence, condition & custody of assets. 
e)  Physical balances compared with book balances 
f)  Variances reported 
53 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Other RUFIP III Key Controls 
g)  Variances  have  to  be  adjusted  in  financial  records  after  due 
authorization. 
Physical Asset Inventory Form (PAIF) 
a)  This  is  the  form  used  for  recording  the  result  of  physical  asset 
verification. 
b)  PAIF records the asset code, book balance, physical balance, condition, 
variance & possible reasons for variance. 
c)  Surplus & shortage are equally serious & need further investigation. 
d)  Should be signed by all members of the verification team. 
e)  Preferably, it should be counter signed by the auditors. 
a)  Bank reconciliations prepared by the 5th day after month end. 
b)  Bank  reconciliations  are  prepared  within  Programme  Accounting 
Software and not off the system. 
c)  Prepared by the Assistant Accountant, checked by the PA and approved 
by the PD with hard copies formally kept on file. 
a)  As described in the module, advances are not expensed they are to be 
monitored in Programme Accounting Software in a control account for 
advance takers 
b)  Advances are aged on a monthly basis and the aging report is provided 
to the PD on a monthly basis 
c)  Advances  are  retired  after  expenditure  justifications  have  been 
submitted,  accepted  and  after  the  journal  voucher  has  been  formally 
approved. 
a)  Formal payrolls are prepared by the Assistant  Accountant, checked by 
PA and approved by PD. 
b)  In  preparing  the  payroll  care  is  taken  to  recover  any  outstanding 
advances 
c)  Staff cannot obtain loans from RUFIP III, they can be assisted to obtain 
loans from financial institutions 
d)  The  PA  should  ensure  salaries  included  in  payroll  are  as  per  the 
employment contracts. 
e)  Salary  adjustments  necessarily  require  IFAD’s  No  Objection  prior  to 
being effective 
f)  Payroll  taxes  are  a  responsibility  of  employees;  these  taxes  are 
deducted from employee salaries and remitted to the Tax Authority by 
RUFIP III only acting on agency basis 
Cash and 
Bank 
Advances 
Personnel 
Costs 
54 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
ANNEX 8. GUARANTEE FUND 
1. 
MFIs  and  Rusaccos  are  in  a  position  to  widen  and  deepen  financial  services  across 
Ethiopia.    The  number  of  borrowers  from  MFIs  and  Rusaccos  is  projected  to  increase  from 
more  than  5  million  in  December  2018  to  13.5  million  In  December  2025.    The  credit 
demand arising from the increased clients as also the larger loans that people aspire for is 
estimated to be about   ETB….. Million.  The gap between the credit demand on the ground 
the available supply from different sources including RUFIP III funds is of the order of ETB 
32712  Mn  (USD1167  Mn).    This  gap  has  to  be  filled  by  domestic  sources.    Commercial 
banks,  insurance  companies  and  other  financial  entities  might  be  able  to  fill  the  gap,  but 
their  willingness  to  lend  is  hampered  by  the  lack  of  familiarity  with  MFI/Rusacco  business 
and the consequent high risk perception. 
About eight MFIs have been able to borrow from banks in public and private sectors, 
2. 
some of them did so under a guarantee.  The guarantees in those cases led to a lower rate 
of interest, making the loan to ultimate clients affordable.  Taking a cue from the guarantee 
arrangements of the past (though selective), RUFIP III proposes to set up a guarantee fund 
which  will  guarantee  repayment  of  loans  taken  by  MFIs  from  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions. 
3. 
Purpose.  The  guarantee  product/mechanism  should  enable  MFIs  and  Rusaccos  to 
access  bulk  funds  through  different  modes  and  instruments  from  the  rest  of  the  financial 
sector.   
4. 
Need.  An  assessment  of  appetite  among  banks  to  lend  to  MFIs/Rusaccos  -  and  to 
what extent guarantee will catalyze such lending. For example, ICCO that has been working 
in Ethiopia for more than 10 years supporting MFIs and RuSACCOs with technical assistance 
on  value  chain  financing,  indicate  that  the  MFIs  (especially  the  private  sector  ones)  and 
RuSACCOs are short of loanable funds and therefore our focus should be to find a solution 
for  funds  scarcity  faced  by  MFIs  through  the  guarantee  facility  or  other  ways  or 
mechanisms. 
ICCO  Terrafina  has  been 
5. 
finance  through  guarantee 
mechanisms  offered  by  Rabo  bank  to  Commercial  bank  of  Ethiopia  (CBE)  and  Cooperative 
Bank  of  Oromia  (CBO).  However,  the  guarantee  funds  are  limited  due  to  issues  of  foreign 
exchange  hence  the  need  to  use  local  mechanisms  to  avoid  the  adverse  impact  of  foreign 
exchange. 
facilitating  access  to 
6. 
Structure. The Credit Guarantee Scheme should be placed at the Development Bank 
of Ethiopia (DBE) because of its mandate as a specialized financial institution which provides 
financial  services  to  agricultural  and  industrial  development  projects.  This  will  create 
synergy with current RIFIP III proposed implementation arrangements and leverage on the 
funds that are available at the bank for that purpose. 
7. 
The  CGS  should  target  commercial  banks  both  public  and  private  starting  with 
Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (CBE) and the Cooperative Bank of Oromia because of the role 
they  are  already  playing  in  the  agricultural  input  and  output  financing.  This  will  also  be 
available to other banks that are interested to sign in  
The  Commercial  banks  would  target  to  lend  to  MFIs  and  RuSACCOs  that  are 
8. 
providing financial services to the target farmers and SMEs who are unable to access credit 
because  of  inadequate  collateral,  or  the  inherent  risks  of  doing  agricultural  business 
perceived by lenders see as higher risk under their current credit risk evaluation practices or 
need for refinancing caused by the need to grow in the market. This would augment the line 
of credit proposed under RUFIP III. 
55 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Fund  Size  and  potential.  The  fund  size  should  be  incremental  with  starting 
9. 
amounts  approximately  $  4.5  Million  dollars.  This  fund  could  be  sourced  from  AGRA  funds 
matched by DBE at 1:2 yielding the 4.5 Million. As demand increases other sources could be 
brought  on  board  to  augment  the  funds.    As  explained  in  para  8,  the  potential  to  issue 
guarantees can be as high as ten times of the size of the fund, but realistically we can aim 
for  eight times leverage.  With commercial bank financing  projected  at USD 40 million, we 
might need a fund size of USD 5 Million.  All this corpus need not be cash funded up-front, 
but can be contributed in from time to time in line with the usage level.  If for example the 
initial  corpus  of  USD  1.5  million is  committed to  issue  guarantees  to  a  level  of  about  65% 
then the next instalment of about USD 1.5 million may be added to the corpus and so on. 
Apart from AGRA, Rabobank is a possible partner for the  fund. Since this fund will be based 
at DBE, there would be minimal additional costs to administer the funds under the RUFIP III 
implementation arrangements. 
10.  What  to  Cover  and  instruments.  The  fund  should  be  flexible  in  what  is  covered 
and therefore will not just limited to debt instruments. It should also look at the possibility 
of  covering  the  issue  of  debentures  or  bonds  by  the  MFIs  that  are  secured  by  the  loan 
receivables in their books. These bonds and debentures can be guaranteed by the fund for 
repayment. This would shift focus from individual institutions that lend to MFIs, but the debt 
instrument  and  facilitate  many  institutions  to  provide  funds  to  the  extent  of  their  ability. 
Additional ways of raising funds by MFIs would be securitize the debt receivables from their 
customers  and  sell  the  same  to  banks  and  financial  institutions.   The  securitized  debt 
obligations  of  MFIs  can  be  guaranteed  by  the  Fund.  In  both  these  cases,  apart  from  the 
guarantee, a primary security is also available which will encourage financial institutions to 
provide debt funds. These would be tested as we roll this out under the existing structure. 
Nature of cover and the underwriting risks. Traditionally MFIs have been able to 
11. 
recover their loans from borrowers with a high degree of efficiency.  The portfolio at risk (90 
days) for the sector as a whole for the last five years has been less than 2%.  With the low 
default risks, it should be  possible to offer a “First Loss Default Guarantee” cover of up to 
10%  of  the  loan  provided  to  the  MFI  by  a  bank  or  financial  institution.    The  FLDG  implies 
that default in repayment of the loan of upto 10% will be underwritten by the Guarantee.  If 
the  defaulted  amount  exceeds  10%  of  the  loan,  then  the  lender  has  to  cover  the  excess.  
With FLDG limit set at  5 times of the observed default at the  customer level, there should 
be  wide  acceptance  among  banks  for  this  guarantee  structure.    FLDG  at  10%  of  loan 
amount would also enable the guarantee fund to leverage the guarantee pool ten multiples.  
For  example,  if  a  guarantee  fund  pool  of  $  5 million is  established, it  would  be  possible  to 
guarantee loans of up to 50 $ million at any point of time. 
MFIs can also float bonds and debentures that are guaranteed for repayment by the 
12. 
fund.    This  guarantee  is  done  a  variety  of  ways,  following  the  same  principles  of  FLDG.  
While  the  debt  market  in  Ethiopia  is  not  familiar  with  non-governmental  entities  floating 
bonds for raising resources, with the changes envisaged in the financial sector, it is more a 
question  of  when  this  will  happen  rather  than  if.  Sale  of  securitized  debt  of  MFIs  to  other 
financial  institutions  can  be  another  source  of  raising  funds  for  on-lending.  Credit 
enhancements to securitized debt pools can be offered from the guarantee fund to provide 
additional  collateral  for  those  who  buy  the  securitized  debt.  In  short,  the  Guarantee  fund 
should not be a vanilla offering, but a forward looking mechanism that can support any kind 
of resource raising by RFIs from the rest of the financial sector. 
13. 
Partnerships  and  Technical  Assistance.  Rabobank  had  in  the  past  issued 
guarantees to  enable some MFIs raise loans from  commercial banks.  They might have an 
interest in participating in the guarantee fund.  They would also be able to bring in technical 
expertise that might be required at DBE to rund the guarantee facility. Hence, this potential 
partnership should be explored.  
56 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
It  is  absolutely  critical  that  technical  assistance  should  be  provided  both  to  the 
14. 
financial  instructions  and  the  demand  side.  While  RUFIP  III  already  captures  the 
interventions  on  the  demand  side  there  is  need  to  provide  for  the  supply  side  for  this  to 
work.  Possible  collaboration  with  Rabobank  and  ICCO  will  also  be  explored  as  they  are 
already  providing  services  in  that  area.  Other  AGRA  programmes  that  are  working  with 
Russaccos, Producer cooperatives and SMEs will also provide support to the system.   
57 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
ANNEX 9: THEORY OF CHANGE 
58 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
ANNEX 10: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
Outreach 
Project Goal  
Contribution to the reduction of poverty in rural 
Ethiopia 
Development Objective  
Increased access for rural households by a 
range of financial services and products  
Outcome 1  
Strong RFIs with sound operating 
performance offering better Financial 
access to vulnerable people (Improved 
sustainability of RFI**) 
Output 1.1 
Social performance& customer protection 
practices adopted 
Output 1.2  
MIS/M&E improved from scaling up of RUFIP-II 
IT and MIS 
Output 1.3 
Capacity and financial resources of MFIs and 
LFIs to provide financial access to farmers, 
Baseline 
Name 
1. People receiving services and products promoted or supported by the project 
Total 
7.000.000 
2. Annual income of participating households 
% increase  
Mid-Term 
10.250.000 
20% 
50% 
* 
13.500.0002 
Project End Target 
3. Increase in ownership of assets among beneficiaries (data disaggregated by gender) 
% 
* 
35% 
4. Increase in access to savings from MFIs and RUSACCOs  
5. Increase in access to credit from MFIs and RUSACCOs  
6. Increase in access to insurance through MFIs and RUSACCOs 
% increase 
35% 
* 
Min of 75% increase 
from baseline 
Min of 75% increase 
from baseline 
7. Percentage of partner MFIs and RUSACCOs with operational self 
Sufficiency above 100% (95 % MFIs and 90% RUSACCO Unions to have OSS above 100%) 
% 
* 
8400 
RUSACCOS 
35 MFI 
95% MFIs 
90% unions 
8. Percentage of partner MFIs and RUSACCOs with less than 5% PAR 90 days ((60 % MFIs and 
90% RUSACCO Unions to have PAR 90 days less than 5%) 
% 
60 % MFIs; 
90% 
RUSACCOs 
80% MFIs; 
90% 
RUSACCOs 
90% MFIs; 
90% RUSACCOs 
Source  
PCMU quarterly report from project 
MIS 
Means of Verification 
Frequency  
Annually 
Responsibility  
PCMU 
Baseline, mid & end line survey, 
Annual Outcome surveys 
Annually 
PCMU 
Baseline, Midline, end line surveys, 
Annual Outcome surveys and 
Poverty tracking tool results 
Annually 
Baseline, mid & end line survey 
Baseline, mid-
term and 
completion 
PCMU 
Assumptions (A) / Risks (R) 
Sustained national and regional 
economic and political stability (A) 
Competent TA provider available 
and able to offer the tools and train 
RFI and PCMU staff 
NBE, FCA quarterly, annual reports 
 Yearly/Mid-term 
and completion 
PCMU 
Regulatory policies and economic 
environment remain favourable to 
RFIs 
NBE, FCA quarterly, annual reports 
Yearly/Mid-term 
and completion 
PCMU 
9. Percentage of partner MFIs and RUSACCOs with 25% reduction in operating costs 
95% MFIs; 
% 
90% RUSACCOs 
0 
75% MFIs; 
50% 
RUSACCOs 
10. Number of RFIs with effective social and customer protection policies  
%. of RFI 
50% 
10% 
100% 
Data from RFIs – reported by AEMFI 
and FCA 
Yearly/Mid-term 
PCMU 
RFI are willing to adopt new 
practices (A) 
11. Number of RFIs with industry standard MIS/M&E 
No RFI 
50 Rusacco 
Unions3 
20 MFI 
100 Rusacco 
unions 
35 MFI 
140 Rusacco unions 
100% MFIs 
12. Percentage increase of number of farmers as clients of financial entities in the park 
catchment areas supported by the Project (disaggregated by sex) 
% increase 
15% 
* 
40% (to be decided 
RFIs M&E and reporting on lending 
portfolio against targets  
Yearly/Mid-term 
PCMU 
2 50% female, 10% youth 
*The values are to be taken from baseline survey data. 
3 In case of RuSACCOS, IT enabled MIS is being implemented at the Union level. 
Ethiopia – RUFIP III 2019 – 2025                              Annex 8 – Project Implementation Manual                        V01 – 02 June –‘19  
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
Project End Target 
with PROSEAD) 
Source  
Means of Verification 
Frequency  
Responsibility  
Assumptions (A) / Risks (R) 
13. Appropriate staff in place to deal with targeting, customer protection and diversified 
products 
% of RFI having expert staff 
14. New/modified services and products developed and marketed in response to customer 
needs4  
60% 
90% 
0 
0 
 % of RFIs offering new products  
15. Number of RFI accessing financing from other sources 
No. of MFIs 
% increase 
16. Increase in clients in underserved regions 
% increase 
* 
* 
50% 
50% 
Annual 
increase of 
25% 
90% 
80% 
Annual increase of 
25% 
17. Percentage of marginalised people/households reporting using rural financial services** 
% of HH 
25% annual increase 
* 
25% annual 
increase 
18. Number of marginalised woredas covered by partner rural financial services** 
No. of woredas 
* 
Cover 75 % of such 
woredas 
DBE quarterly reports, annual reports   Yearly/Mid-term 
and completion 
PCMU 
RFIs reports, FCA, AEMFI 
Yearly/Mid-term 
PCMU 
Poverty tracking tool results, Annual 
Outcome surveys  
Annually 
PCMU 
Sound industry reporting (A) 
Annual Outcome surveys 
Outcome surveys 
RFIs annual reports 
Yearly/Mid-term 
and completion 
Yearly/Mid-term 
and completion 
PCMU 
PCMU 
cooperatives, unions and SMEs operating in 
the value chains and in the AIPs are 
increased*** (PROSEAD). 
Output 1.4.  
Industry expertise augmented 
Outcome 2 
Wider offer of services and products 
responsive to customer needs 
Output 2.1. 
Funding from financial institutions and other 
programs mobilised 
Outcome 3 
Effective Financial inclusion for 
marginalised people and regions** 
Output 3.1 
Access to loanable funds for RFI improved and 
criteria made more equitable 
Output 3.2 
Establishment and implementation of 
partnerships with other government and PTF 
initiatives working with under-deserved regions 
and marginalized people  
Output 3.3 
Nutrition of vulnerable households 
improved 
85% 
50% 
19. Percentage increase of medium and small RFI accessing LoC  
80% 
% of MFIs 
% of RuSACCOs 
* 
20. Partnership coordination framework 
nil 
Number of Clients referred to by 
other partner/projects working with 
under-deserved regions and 
marginalized people 
21. Percentage of households 
starting backyard/kitchen garden 
as a results of the trainings 
received. 
25% 
0 
1.600.000 
90% 
75% 
3.200.000 
50% 
60 
4 Market research, product development, Product marketing  
* The values are to be taken from baseline survey data 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 9 – Integrated Risk Framework 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 10 – Exit strategy 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 10 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
1. 
This  being  the  third  phase  of  RUFIP,  the  project  will  focus  or  orderly  exit.  This 
requires  that  the  project  interventions  and  supported  institutions  continue  on  their  own  at 
the end of the project. The project seeks to develop a vibrant, growing rural finance sector 
that  can  function  autonomously  in  terms  of  raising  resources,  investing  in  sound  systems 
and  processes,  skilling  the  human  resources  and  continually  changing  in  response  to 
emerging  needs.  Since  the  implementing  partners  are  financial  institutions  their  form  and 
business  models  are  structured  with  continuous  long  term  operations  in  mind.  The  project 
seeks to improve upon their long term goals and operational efficiencies and strengthen the 
regulators to provide, sound and enabling oversight. 
One  critical  aspect  for  exit  is  the  resource  sustainability  of  RFIs.  The  RFIs  need  to 
2. 
secure  their  sources  of  funds  over  the  project  period  to  move  away  from  dependence  of 
externally funded credit lines. For this RFIs need to diversify sources of funds for onlending. 
The  project  will  introduce  a  guarantee  fund  that  will  continue  even  after  the  end  of  the 
project.  The  fund  will  provide  guarantees  for  loans  (in  the  short-term),  bonds,  debentures 
and other instruments  on behalf of RFIs, so that access funds  from different domestic and 
foreign  financial  institutions.  The  conditions  for  availing  LOC  from  RUFIP  will  also  require 
some  of  the  larger  MFIs  to  raise  more  resources  from  outside  the  LOC  for  continuing  loan 
business  in  their  existing  customers  and  branches.  With  the  interventions  both  from  the 
demand and supply sides RUFIP will influence diversification of loan sources in RFIs.  
3. 
The  second  aspect  at  exit  will  be  the  financial  sustainability  of  the  implementing 
RFIs.  Within  RFIs,  most  MFIs  work  on  profitable  lines  with  ability  to  cover  their  costs  and 
generates  surpluses  as  reflected  in  their  return  on  assets.  Some  MFIs,  especially  smaller 
ones set up recently are yet to achieve profitability. Even with operational sustainability, the 
MFIs can be at risk unless their systems and processes are strengthened, product portfolio 
is diversified, sources of funds are streamlined and technology of operations is upgraded to 
facilitate  their  entry  in  national  payments  system.  The  long  term  credit  line  will  provide 
stability  to  operations,  ensure  adequate  surplus  is  generated  for  retention  as  capital  and 
serve  as  a  key  instrument  of  financial  sustainability..  IT  enablement  that  began  during 
RUFIP  II  will  be  carried  forward  to  cover  all  remaining  MFIs  and  RUSACCOS  to  strengthen 
their  operational  capacities  in  accounting  and  MIS,  which  again  is  a  key  sustainability 
promoting  intervention.  The  current  operations  of  the  MFIs  are  highly  profitable  with 
consolidated  ROA  of  the  sector  exceeding  4%.  As  customer  protection  measures  get 
implemented  and  with  increased  competition  arising  from  scaling  up,  the  interest  rates  to 
the  clients  are  expected  to  decline.  The  project  sensitivity  analysis  shows  that  the 
profitability  and  viability  of  MFIs  will  not  be  impacted  by  reduction  in  yield  rates.  While 
RUFIP LOC is priced at 8%, this is more expensive than the interest rate of 6% offered on 
savings by MFIs. This is intended to reduce reliance on LOC and increase focus  on savings 
mobilization effort. 
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 10 
Operational Self sufficiency of MFIs 
MFIs OSS (%)category wise  
2.5
2.0
e
l
t
i
T
s
i
x
A
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Category C
Category A
Category B
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
4. 
MFIs  in  the  large,  medium  and  small  categories  have  all  been  achieving  full 
operational  cost  recovery  and  posting  surpluses.  In  the  initial  years,  smaller  MFIs  have 
problems  of  profitability,  but  after  a  five  year  period,  the  MFIs  are  able  to  become 
operationally sustainable. Similarly in terms of Return on Equity, all categories of MFIs have 
posted good numbers. The following chart shows again that the smaller MFIs struggle in the 
initial years, but with increased business they are able to stabilize. The last chart on Return 
on  Assets  indicates  the  strong  performance  of  MFIs  and  their  ability  become  financially 
sound at the current level. With RUFIP III support when they scale up, they will be able to 
serve  the  poor  and  vulnerably  over  the  long  term  on  account  of  their  sustainability.  The 
capacity  building  measures,  customer  focus  initiatives  and  diversified  resource  base  will 
ensure  the  continuity  of  services.  The  operations  of  MFIs  shows  that  the  business  can  be 
profitable  and  with  scale  they  achieve  operational  efficiency  and  productivity,  which  is  not 
impacted significantly by fluctuations in the market. 
5. 
In  case  of  RuSACCOs,  adequate  information  flow  is  presently  lacking.  The  work  on 
computerized information system at Union level during RUFIP is envisaged to be  scaled up 
to  cover  all  RuSACCOs.  FCA  will  be  able  to  access  data  each  month/quarter  and  based  on 
the  computerized  MIS  for  taking  timely  decisions  on  support  initiatives  needed  by  the 
RuSACCOs.  RuSACCOs  require  much  more  support  to  become  member-driven,  sustainable 
institutions. FCA is charged with the responsibility for Cooperatives along with an adequate 
capacity  building  budget.  FCA’s  capacity  to  supervise  and  guide  the  financial  cooperatives 
has also been undermined. 
2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 10 
MFIs ROE (%) category-wise 
e
l
t
i
T
s
i
x
A
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%
Category A
Category B
Category C
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
3
1
0
2
4
1
0
2
5
1
0
2
6
1
0
2
7
1
0
2
8
1
0
2
Category wise comparison of last nine years average ROA of MFIs 
MFI A MFI B MFI C
16.31% 
7.47% 
5.00% 
Average ROA
6. 
The third aspect at exit is the fit, adequacy and relevance  of Regulation the RFIs in 
the overall context of financial inclusion. RFIs can function well in a regulatory environment 
that is  positive,  encouraging innovations  and  seeks  to  balance  institutional  soundness  with 
customer protection. Component 2 principally addresses regulatory capacity of NBE and FCA 
for  RFI  sector  development,  good  market  conduct  of  RFIs  and  establishing  evidence  based 
regulation that relies on improved MIS and reporting. The capacity building at FCA level will 
make  it  focus  on  RuSACCO  sustainability  through  regulation,  supervision  and  institution 
building initiatives. Setting up of benchmarks and handholding the RuSACCOs through their 
unions to achieve the benchmarks would be key approaches followed by FCA. 
RuSACCOs  will  need  an  institutional  framework  at  the  apex  level  to  support  their 
7. 
future growth and stabilization. A provision for supporting creation of an apex organization 
for the financial cooperatives has been made, in recognition that some technical support has 
3 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 10 
already been provided by the ILCUF. FCA will continue exploring the best ways of setting up 
the  apex  organization  and  take  necessary  steps.  In  case  of  regulators  (NBE  and  FCA)  the 
interventions  support  upgrading  human  skills  necessary  for  regulation,  study  of  several 
aspects  of  financial  sector  where  regulators  need  to  creating  an  enabling  environment  for 
rural finance.  
8. 
The fourth key aspect at exit is the customer focus and responsible finance practice 
by  RFIs.  Apart  from  regulatory  guidance  on  customer  sensitivity,  RFIs  will  have  capacity 
building  initiatives  supported  by  in-house  staff  ensuring  that  the  internal  processes  are 
appropriately  oriented  in  the  right  direction.  Monitoring  of  customer  protection  and 
responsible  finance  is  envisaged,  based  on  a  mix  of  targeting  and  business  data.  The 
capacity building measures will improve skill levels, enable introduction of new products and 
processes  and  invest  in  financial  literacy  among  clients,  These  initiatives  strengthen 
customer  protection  levels  and  social  performance  practice,  thereby  promoting  customer 
sustainability.  The  diversification  in  to  insurance  distribution  on  behalf  of  insurance 
companies  will  introduce  a  new  revenue  stream  and  more  importantly  provide  a  risk 
mitigation  facility  to  clients  and  reduce  their  vulnerability  to  shocks.  The  introduction  of 
microleasing  will  increase  product  range  for  rural  customers  apart  from  strengthening 
revenue lines of the RFIs. 
In  summary,  the  design  of  the  project  does  not  create  dependencies  on  the 
9. 
programme as has been evidenced during RUFIP II. 
10. 
The design promotes sustainability of clients and RFIs from the beginning as an exit 
strategy.  The  exit  strategies  are  built  in  to  project  design  and  not  as  a  separate  set  of 
measures  towards  the  end  of  the  project.  The  progress  on  each  of  the  aspects  relating  to 
sustainability is planned to be measured and reviewed either as part of the log frame or at 
lower  levels  of  project  review  depending  on  the  criticality  and  time-sensitivity  for  remedial 
actions.  RUFIP  will  almost  double  the  number  of  customers  and  increase  access  to  finance 
manifold.  While  the  expansion  and  scaling  up  is  a  natural  outcome  of  the  project,  the 
improvements in i) customer’s interface with RFIs, ii) RFIs operational performance, iii) RFIs 
with regard to diversified sources of finance and iv) inclusive, supportive regulatory practice 
that  enables  RFIs  to  focus  on  customers  are  the  outcomes  valued  most  from  the  point  of 
view of all round sustainability and orderly exit.  
4 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 11 – Assessment of Demand for Financial Services 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
Annex 11  Assessment of Demand for Financial Services 
1. 
The  macro  scenario.  As  per  the  Global  Findex  Database  (2017),  only  32%  of  rural 
adults  aged  15+  had  accounts  with  financial  institutions  in  Ethiopia.  The  Database  further 
revealed  that  25%  of  rural  adults  aged  15+  saved  in  financial  institutions  and  only  12% 
borrowed  from  them.  An  additional  8%  borrowed  from  Savings  Clubs.  Assuming  that 79% 
of the population lived in rural areas, close to 30 million adults in rural Ethiopia were yet not 
serviced  by  financial institutions.  Further,  close  to  35  million  rural  adult  population  did not 
have  access  to  loans  from  financial  institutions  or  savings  clubs.  Assuming  2.6  adults  per 
household, close to 14 million rural households will serve as prospective borrowers.  
2. 
In 2018, an estimated 5.13 million customers as borrowers were active with the MFIs. 
Even  if  double  counting  of  members  with  multiple loans  and  those  dealing  with  more  than 
one  MFI  are  excluded,  MFIs  would  account  for  5  million  unique  customers.  In  addition, 
RUSACCOs were lending to 0.15 million members. Taken together, the RFIs were lending to 
5.15 million clients. Assuming that each of these clients belonged to individual households, 
then 5.15 million households are being financed by RFIs ,at present. 
3. 
If 40% of the 14 million prospective borrower households are assumed to be financed 
during  RUFIP  III,  then  an  additional  6  million  households  will  be  part  of  the  programme. 
Assuming  one  borrower  per  household,  an  estimated  11million  borrowers,  representing  11 
million households will have to be covered during RUFIP III. The MFIs can cover 10 million 
clients  and  RUSACCOs,  the  balance  1  million  clients.  The  outreach  of  the  programme 
including  direct  and  indirect  beneficiaries  (including  savers)  will  be  around  62.2  million 
people.  Indirect  beneficiaries  will include  the  borrower’s  family,  an  average  household  size 
of 5.2 is assumed for rural Ethiopia.1 
MFIs 
4. 
For the MFIs, from a level of ETB per capita of 4482.86 in 2014, the average loan size 
had increased to ETB 8769.44 in 2018 at a CAGR of 18%. If the growth rate continues to be 
steady, by 2025, the average loan size would reach a level of ETB 27,935. In real terms, a 
loan of ETB 27,935 in 2017, indexed at 10% inflation to 2018 prices, will be the equivalent 
of ETB 14,335 in 2010, which is about ETB 5566 more than the existing average loan. 
Table1: Growth Rates of Average Loan Per Capita 
Average Loans 
(ETB) 
Average Savings 
(ETB) 
Average Loans ETB 
(Nominal) 
Average Loans ETB 
(2018 prices) 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018  CAGR 
 4,482.86  
 5,111.79   5,820.73  
 6,893.52  
 8,769.44  
18%    
1,444.00 
1,510.00  1,467.00 
1,535.00 
1,874.00 
7%    
2019 
10348 
2020 
2021 
12211 
14408 
2022 
17002 
2023 
2024 
2025 
20062 
23674  27935 
9407 
10091 
10825 
11613 
12457 
13363  14335 
1LSMS – Integrated Surveys on agriculture Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey 2015-16 (ESS) 
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
5. 
The  ideal  loan  size  is  typically  for  tiny  enterprise  activities  for  which  the  demand  is 
likely to be from about 30%2of the customers that are enterprise oriented with risk- taking 
ability.  The  demand  from  the  other  customers  would  be  at  around  65%  of  this  level.  In 
2018, the average loan size for enterprises is around ETB 11,615 and the average loans to 
other customers is around ETB 7,550. 
Demand for credit 
6. 
An analysis of the macro factors in demand, based on underserved population, banking 
spread  and  the  potential  for  MFIs  to  expand  provide  a  sufficient  basis  for  assuming  that 
acquisition  of  5.25  million  new  customers  by  MFIs  is  possible.  The  demand  projections, 
based  on  the  foregoing  analysis  in  2018  prices  (indexed  to  inflation  rate  of  10%)and  on 
nominal terms are presented in the following tables. 
Table2: Demand projections 2025( Real) 
Total number of customers requiring loans (million) 
Of which tiny enterprises requiring larger loans 
(million) (30%) 
70% requiring smaller loans (million) 
Loan demands for larger loans (million)( Real average 
loan 18,986 ETB) 
Loan demands for smaller loans (million)(Real 
average loan 12,342 ETB) 
Total demand (million ETB) 
Average Loan per customer (Real)ETB 
Table3: Demand projections 2025 (Nominal) 
Total number of customers requiring loans (million)* 
Of which tiny enterprises requiring larger loans 
(million) (30%) 
70% requiring smaller loans (million) 
Loan demands for larger loans (million) 
( Nominal average loan 36,999 ETB) 
Loan demands for smaller loans (million) 
(Nominal average loan 24,050 ETB) 
Total demand (million ETB) 
Average Loan per customer (Nominal)ETB 
10.25 
3.08 
7.18 
58382 
88553.85 
146936 
14335 
10.25 
3.08 
7.18 
113772 
172559 
286331 
27935 
7. 
Based  on  these  projections,  a  loan  demand  of  ETB  286  billion  will  be  required  to  be 
met by the MFIs during RUFIP III. In real terms, this will be equivalent to a demand of ETB 
147 billion in 2018 prices (adjusted at 10% inflation).  
2 Different studies in emerging economies have found that 25% to 40% of rural populations take up enterprise 
activities under development projects and credit programmes. 3. 
http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/ageing/household_size_and_composition_ar
ound_the_world_2017_data_booklet.pdf 
2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
The current position of microfinance loans in the macro context is provided in the following 
table3. 
Table4 : Significance of Bank Credit and Microfinance in the Macro Economy 
2014-15 
2015-16 
2016-17 
2017-18 
ETB bn 
GDP – current prices (BRR-
B) 
Net bank credit O/S 
Net bank credit O/S – other 
than to government 
MFI loans O/S 
Net bank credit as % of 
GDP 
MFI loans as % GDP 
MFI Loans as % net bank 
credit (other than to 
government) 
1297.96 
232.82 
217.31 
16.85 
18% 
1.30% 
1528.1 
1806.7 
280.3 
263.9 
21.83 
18% 
1.43% 
448.9 
394.6 
32.40 
365.6 
323 
25.20 
20% 
1.39% 
7.75% 
8.27% 
7.80% 
8.21% 
Note : GDP data for 2017-18 needs to be updated 
8. 
The  ratio  of  bank  credit  to  GDP  is  comparatively  low  in  Ethiopia  as  compared  to  the 
Sub-  Saharan  country  average.  Several  other  countries  in  African  continent,  such  as 
Namibia, Kenya, Tonga and Senegal had higher credit to GDP ratios. Microfinance loans are 
significant at approximately 8% of bank credit to private sector and individuals. In terms of 
credit  outreach,  the  numbers  of  loan  clients  serviced  by  MFIs  in  September  2018  stood  at 
5.3 million, far outstripping the 246,724 borrowers serviced by the Banks. 
9. 
The demand side analysis shows that the demand for microfinance, especially loans is 
large  and  perhaps,  beyond  the  immediate  capacities  of  microfinance  sector,  even  with 
continuing  support  from  RUFIP  III.  While  the  existing  institutional  architecture  in  the 
banking system is not in a position to meet any part of the micro and rural finance demand 
directly,  rural  financial  cooperatives  can  meet  a  small  part  of  this  demand.  Thus,  a 
substantial proportion of the demand for loans from the rural sector will continue to be met 
by  the  microfinance  Institutions  sector  in  the  coming  years.  RUFIP  III,  like its  predecessor 
RUFIP II, has a critical role to play in developing the organizational, technical and financial 
capacities of the MFIs. 
Institutional Capacity to Supply 
10.  The  consolidated  data  provided  by  NBE  depicting  the  actual  supply  position  in  2018 
and the projections made by the sector in terms of loans and savings is given below: 
3 Computed from basic data in NBE annual report. 
3 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
Table 5: Business Projections Made by MFIs 
Aspect 
2018 actual 
Outreach million (borrowers) 
Saving accounts 
Savings ETB mill 
Loans ETB mill 
Average savings 
Average loan 
5.13 
17.72 
33,213.12 
43,772.36 
1,874.00 
8,769.44 
2019 
projection 
5.55 
21.62 
43104.13 
55989.7 
2007.66 
10381.74 
2025 projection -
extrapolation for the 
sector 
8.81 
71.3 
208055.4 
246245.29 
3012.96 
28026.07 
11.  The  projections  made  by  NBE  are  based  on  the  actual  growth  trajectory  of  outreach, 
savings  and  loans  observed  during  the  period  2014-2018.  The  growth  rate  assumed  for 
client  expansion  is  8%,  while loans  outstanding  and  savings  are  expected  to  grow  at  28% 
and 30% respectively. The per capita loan size is expected to grow at 18%, higher than the 
estimated 10% inflation; indicating an increase in the real size of loans and a shift towards 
a  higher  proportion  of  large  loans  to  tiny  enterprises,  small  businesses  and  production 
credit. 
12.  In  order  to  understand  the  capacity  of  microfinance  institutions  to  meet  the  demand 
for  increased  credit  in  the  coming  years  ,the  MFIs  were  segregated,  based  on  a 
categorisation  of  MFIs  made  by  the  NBE  on  the  basis  of  their  capital  and  business 
parameters. The average business size (Business per MFI) of the three categories of MFIs is 
summarised below: 
Table 6: Average Business of 3 categories of MFIs 
Active borrowers per 
MFI 
Loans outstanding per 
MFI (million ETB) 
Savings per MFI 
(million ETB) 
Total Assets per MFI 
(million ETB) 
Capital per MFI 
(million ETB) 
Category A(5 MFis) 
891410 
Category B(13 MFIs) 
29675 
Category C(18 MFIs) 
6838 
7650 
5311 
11176 
2354 
185 
90 
254 
84 
98 
45 
131 
33 
13.  The business projections for each category of MFIs were made to determine the size of 
the  loan  portfolio,  the  extent  to  which  it  can  be  funded  by  their  own  resources  and  their 
requirement  of  external  borrowings  to  fund  their  portfolio.  The  projections  for  the  three 
categories  of  MFIs  are  given  below.  The  MFIs  in  all  the  three  categories  show  a  gap  in 
resources  of  up  to  60%  of  their  net  worth,  which  will  have  to  be  bridged  to  meet  their 
expansion plans. 
4 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
Table 7: Business Projection for the three categories of MFIs 
Clients 
Avg loan 
Avg Savings 
Total loans OS (borr 
client*avg loan) (Million ETB) 
Total Savings OS (50% of 
assets)(Million ETB) 
Total Assets (135% of 
loans)(Million ETB) 
Capital (15% of assets)/ 
networth (Million ETB) 
Borrowings (Million ETB) 
Borrowings in (Million USD) 
Category A 
Category B 
Category C 
2018 
2025 
2018 
2025 
2018 
2025 
4450000  8751569  356000  1074896  116000  423529 
8600 
5805 
22000 
14850 
6260 
4226 
18000 
14000 
17500 
12150 
9450 
11813 
38270 
192535 
2229 
19348 
1624 
7412 
25832 
129961 
1504 
13060 
1096 
5003 
51665 
259922 
3009 
26120 
2192 
10006 
7750 
4688 
167 
38988 
23585 
842 
451 
273 
10 
3918 
2370 
85 
329 
199 
7 
1501 
908 
32 
14.  The  year-  wise  projection  for  the  three  categories  of  MFIs  giving  the  growth  in 
business  during  2019-2025  and  the institutional  capacity  to  fund  the expansion  is  given in 
the  Annexure.(to  be  added).  Together  all  the  MFIs  across  categories  would  cover  10.25 
million  borrowers.  For  dispensing  loans  of  an  average  size  of  around  21000  ETB,  the  MFIs 
would  require  upwards  of  200,000  million  ETB.  Their  savings  and  capital  funds  will, 
however, cover only 88% of their fund requirements. The borrowings required are given in 
the table below: 
Table 8: Borrowings requirement of MFIs 
2018 
2025 
Clients (millions) 
Avg loan 
Avg Savings 
Total loans OS (borr client*avg 
loan) (Million ETB) 
Total Savings OS (50% of 
assets)(Million ETB) 
Total Assets (135% of 
loans)(Million ETB) 
Capital (15% of assets)/ networth 
(Million ETB) 
Borrowings (Million ETB ) 
Borrowings in (Million USD) 
5 
8588 
5777 
42123 
10.25 
21395 
14441 
219294 
28433 
148024 
56865 
296047 
44407 
26864 
959 
8530 
5160 
184 
5 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
15. 
 Diversified  sources  for  accessing  bulk  funds  should  be  created  for  MFIs  to  meet  the 
large  needs  of  growth.  As  the  sector  grows  very  large,  it  may  not  be  able  to  depend  on 
sheltered  borrowings  guaranteed  by  the  governments.  Nor  can  it  rely  on  donated  equity. 
Market- based options for equity , loan funds ,co-financing and guaranteed funds should be 
created so as reduce the costs of funds and continued growth in operations. Issues relating 
to  dividend  distribution,  broad  -basing  ownership  and  the  connected  taxability issues  need 
to be resolved as MFIs attain mega-size. Deposit protection for savers(deposit insurance or 
deposit  safety  and  institutional  protection  fund)  is  an  aspect  of  customer  protection  that 
should be prioritised as the sector enters an aggressive phase of savings mobilisation.  
Cooperatives 
16.  As on June 2018, there were 11,267 RUSACCOs4 providing loans to the extent of 4750 
ETB to its members. 95 percent of the RUSACCOs were concentrated in the Trigay, Amhara, 
Oromiya and SNNP regions, the balance 5% was spread over the regions of Afar, B/Gumuz, 
Gambella  and  Somale.  The  demand  analysis,  therefore,  differentiates  between  the  two 
groups of regions and analyses the growth in business over the tenure of RUFIP III. 
17. 
In  Region  1  (Tigray,  Amhara,  Oromiya  and  SNNP),  the  average  loan  rose  from  2445 
ETB  at  the  end  of  RUFIP  I  to  9875  ETB  in  2018;  whereas  in  Region  2  (  Afar,  B/Gumuz, 
Gambella and Somale), the average loan rose from 567 ETB to 2707 ETB during the same 
period.  Projecting  forward,  for  the  duration  of  RUFIP  III,  the  average  loan  is  expected  to 
grow at a CAGR of 12% to 22006  ETB in 2025 in Region 1 and to 17348 in Region 2 at a 
CAGR  of  30%.In  real  terms,  a  loan  of  9871  ETB  in  2018  in  Region  1,  indexed  at  10% 
inflation, will grow to 11,498 and, in Region 2, a loan of 2707 ETB in 2018 will be 8902 ETB. 
Table 9: Projected average savings and loans per RUSACCO member 
Average 
savings (ETB 
Nominal) 
Region 1 
Region 2 
Average Loan 
(ETB nominal) 
Region 1 
Region 2 
Average Loan 
(ETB real) 
Region 1 
Region 2 
2018 
1838 
1034 
2019 
2114 
1179 
2020 
2431 
1344 
2021 
2795 
1532 
2022 
3215 
1746 
2023 
3793 
1991 
2024 
4476 
2270 
2025 
5282 
2587 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
9871 
11352 
12714 
14240 
15948 
17862 
20005 
22006 
2707 
4061 
5685 
7106 
8882 
11103 
13879 
17348 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
9871 
10320 
10507 
10698 
10893 
11091 
11293 
11498 
2707 
3691 
4698 
5339 
6067 
6894 
7834 
8902 
4In addition there are close to 103RUSACCO Unions, but they have not been considered for the purpose of this 
analysis. 
6 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
Demand analysis 
18.  The  membership  in  RUSACCOs  are  expected  to  grow  from  1.9  million  in  2018  to  3.3 
million in 2025. It is expected that there will be fresh demand for loans from at least 30% of 
the  1.4  million  new  members,  in  addition  to  demand  for  loans  from  existing  members. 
Overall,  the  RUSACCOs  are  expected  to  service  the  demand  for  loans  from  close  to  one 
million members, of which 400,000 will be new members. To understand the demand from 
the  two  region  groupings,  the  loans  outstanding  for  the  duration  of  RUFIP  III  has  been 
projected.  
Table10: Demand for Loans (in nominal terms)   
Region 1 
 Projected Borrowers 
Loan per capita(ETB) 
Loans O/S 
Loan O/S in million ETB 
Region 2 
Projected Borrowers 
Loans per Capita (ETB) 
Loans O/S 
Loan O/S in million ETB 
Total loans O/S 
Loans in million ETB 
Loan in USD 
2 025 
965 160 
22 006 
21 239 310 960 
21 239 
32 580 
17 348 
565 197 840 
565 
21 804 508 800 
21 805 
778 732 457 
Demand for loans (million USD) 
779 
2 025 
965 160 
11 498 
11 097 409 680 
9 427 
Table 11 Demand for Loans (in real terms) 
Region 1 
Projected Borrowers 
Loan per capta(ETB) 
Loans O/S 
Loan O/S in million ETB 
Region 2 
Projected Borrowers 
Loans per Capita (ETB) 
Loans O/S 
Loan O/S in million ETB 
Total loans O/S 
Loans in million ETB 
Loan in USD 
Demand for loans (million USD) 
32 580 
8 902 
290 027 160 
290 
11 387 436 840 
11 387 
406 694 173 
407 
19.  The two regions will face a demand for loans to the extent of 18170 million ETB or 648 
million dollars in 2025 in nominal terms. In real terms, this will amount to 9489 million ETB 
338 million dollars in 2025. This is almost four times the amount of loans disbursed in 2018 
and it may be challenging for the RUSACCOs to raise the amount by mobilising the savings 
7 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
of  its  members.  The  average  size  of  loans  and  savings  indicate  a  wide  variation,  with  per 
capita savings in Region 1 less than 24% of the per capital loan and close to 14% of the per 
capita loan in Region 2, indicating difficulty in mobilising sufficient savings for meeting the 
loan requirement of RUSACCO members.  
Institutional Capacity to supply  
20.  The actual supply position in 2018 and the projections made by RUSACCOs in terms of 
loans and savings is given below:  
Table 12: Business Projections for RUSACCOs 
Borrowers 
Members/ Savers 
Savings ETB Million 
Loans ETB Million 
Average Savings 
Average Loans 
2018 
0.59 
1.96 
3560 
5701 
1821 
9718 
2019 
0.63 
2.11 
4425 
7097 
2093 
11186 
2025 
0.998 
3.33 
17274 
21805 
5194 
21854 
21. 
In  order  to  give  due  weightage  to  regional  requirements  in  the  business  projection, 
the demand for loans and the institutional capacity to support business expansion is worked 
out separately for the two  regional groupings. Region 1 is expected to service 0.97 million 
borrowers and Region 2, around 30,000 borrowers in 2025. As the net savings and capital 
together can only fund 79 percent of the projected loan portfolio in Region 1 and 48 percent 
in Region 2, the RUSACCOs will have to resort to borrowings to the tune of 162million ETB 
in Region 1 and 11 million ETB in Region 2 respectively.  
Table 13: Borrowings of RUSACCOs- Region 1 and 2 
Region 1 
Region 2 
Members/savers(million) 
Borrowers (million) 
Avg loan ( ETB) 
Avg Savings ( ETB) 
Total loans OS (borrowing 
client*avg loan) (million 
ETB) 
Total Savings OS (million 
ETB)  
20% liquidity on savings 
(million ETB) 
Net savings (million ETB) 
Total Assets (million ETB) 
Capital (million ETB) 
Borrowings (million ETB) 
Borrowings (million USD) 
2018 
0.04 
0.01 
2707 
1034 
34 
43 
9 
34 
44 
11 
-12 
0 
2025 
0.11 
0.03 
17348 
2587 
565 
281 
56 
225 
735 
46 
295 
11 
2025 
3.22 
0.97 
22006 
5282 
21239 
16993 
3399 
13595 
27611 
3101 
4544 
162 
2018 
1.91 
0.57 
9871 
1838 
5667 
3517 
703 
2814 
7367 
834 
2019 
72 
8 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
22.  The  consolidated  borrowings  by  RUSACCOs  projected  for  the  period  2019-2025  is 
given below. It is expected that RUSACCOs will increase their loaning business by 69% from 
the  current  levels.  Despite  the  increase  in  total  savings  and  capital  funds  by  more  than 
three  times  that  of  2018,  there  would  be  a  shortfall  in  meeting  the  demand  for  loans  by 
RUSACCO members. In order to make good this shortfall, a total of 4839 million ETB or an 
equivalent amount of 173 USD will be required to be borrowed by RUSACCOs.  
Table 14 : Borrowings for RUSACCOs  
Members/savers(million) 
Borrowers (million) 
Avg loan ( ETB) 
Avg Savings ( ETB) 
Total loans OS (borrowing 
client*avg loan) (million ETB) 
Total Savings OS (million ETB)  
20% liquidity on savings (million 
ETB) 
Net savings (million ETB) 
Total Assets (million ETB) 
Capital (million ETB) 
Borrowings (million ETB) 
Borrowings (million USD) 
( 1 US$ =28 ETB) 
Conclusion: 
2018 
1.96 
0.59 
9718 
1821 
5701 
3560 
712 
2848 
7411 
845 
2007 
72 
2025 
3.33 
1.00 
21854 
5194 
21805 
17274 
3455 
13819 
28346 
3147 
4839 
173 
23.  RUFIP  III  aims  at  providing  the  requisite  impetus  to  the  flow  of  credit  to  rural 
households  through  cooperatives  and  microfinance  institutions.  Access  to  appropriate 
lending  products  are  very  important  for  poor  households  to  manage  their  seasonal  cash 
flows,  smoothen  their  consumption,  invest  in  income-  generating  agricultural  inputs,  small 
business activities, home improvement, invest in livestock and for emergencies.5 While the 
MFIs and RUSACCOs have made commendable progress in terms of outreach during RUFIPI 
and  II,  the  sector  continues  to  require  support  for  expanding  and  deepening  their 
operations.  As  per  the  demand  and  supply  analysis,  during  RUFIP  III,  a  total  of  11.25 
million  households  are  expected  to  avail  of  loans  by  2025,  the  concluding  year  of  the 
programme. Total loans of the RFIs are projected at touch 19635 million ETB, for which the 
institutions  will  have  to  raise  resources  by  way  of  savings,  capital  funds  and  borrowings. 
Despite  a  healthy  growth  in  savings  and  capital,  the  analysis  reveals  a  shortfall  of  31703 
million  ETBs  which  the  institutions  will  have  to  fill  by  way  of  borrowings.  The  business 
projections for the MFIs and Cooperatives are presented in the table below.  
5Financial Service Market Assessment – Desk Review Report (Final Draft) by Alema Woldemariam and 
GetachewMekonnin, ILCU Foundation  
9 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 11 
Table 15: Business Projection of MFIs and RUSACCOs 
 2025 
Savers 
Borrowers (million) 
Avg loan ( ETB) 
Avg Savings ( ETB) 
Total loans OS (borrowing 
client*avg loan) (million ETB) 
Total Savings OS (million ETB)  
20% liquidity on savings (million 
ETB) 
Net savings (million ETB)6 
Total Assets (million ETB) 
Capital (million ETB) 
Borrowings (million ETB) to 
meet resource gap 
Borrowings (million USD) to 
meet resource gap 
MFIs 
10.25 
10.25 
21395 
14441 
219294 
148024 
29605 
118419 
296047 
44407 
26864 
959 
RUSACCOs 
3.33 
1.00 
21854 
5194 
Aggregate 
13.58 
11.25 
21431 
12172 
21805 
17274 
3455 
13819 
28346 
3147 
4839 
173 
241099 
165298 
33060 
131608 
324393 
47554 
31703 
1132 
6 Net savings are arrived at after deducting liquidity requirements from total savings – i.e., 80% of total savings 
10 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 12 – Guarantee fund Facility 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 12 
Annex 12 Guarantee fund facility 
Credit Guarantee under RUFIP III 
1. 
MFIs  and  Rusaccos  are  in  a  position  to  widen  and  deepen  financial  services  across 
Ethiopia.  The  number  of  borrowers  from  MFIs  and  Rusaccos  is  projected  to  increase  from 
more  than  5  million  in  December  2018  to  13.5  million  In  December  2025.  The  credit 
demand arising from the increased clients as also the larger loans that people aspire for is 
estimated  to  be  about  ETB…..  Million.  The  gap  between  the  credit  demand  on  the  ground 
the available supply from different sources including RUFIP III funds is of the order of ETB 
32712 Mn (USD1167 Mn). This gap has to be filled by domestic sources. Commercial banks, 
insurance  companies  and  other  financial  entities  might  be  able  to  fill  the  gap,  but  their 
willingness to lend is hampered by the lack of familiarity with MFI/Rusacco business and the 
consequent high risk perception. 
2. 
About eight MFIs have been able to borrow from banks in public and private sectors, 
some of them did so under a guarantee. The guarantees in those cases led to a lower rate 
of interest, making the loan to ultimate clients affordable. Taking a cue from the guarantee 
arrangements of the past (though selective), RUFIP III proposes to set up a guarantee fund 
which  will  guarantee  repayment  of  loans  taken  by  MFIs  from  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions. 
3. 
The Purpose: The guarantee product/mechanism should enable MFIs and Rusaccos 
to access bulk funds through different modes and instruments from the rest of the financial 
sector.  
Need.  An  assessment  of  appetite  among  banks  to  lend  to  MFIs/Rusaccos  -  and  to 
4. 
what extent guarantee will catalyze such lending. 
5. 
We  had  discussions  with  ICCO  that  has  been  working  in  Ethiopia  for  more  than  10 
years  supporting  MFIs  and  Russacos  with  TA  to  finance  a  number  of  value  chains.  They 
mentioned that the MFIs (especially the private sector ones) this and Russaccos are short of 
loanable funds and therefore our focus should be to find a solution for funds scarcity faced 
by MFIs through the guarantee facility or other ways or mechanisms. 
ICCO  Terrafina  has  been 
6. 
finance  through  guarantee 
mechanisms  offered  by  Rabo  bank  to  Commercial  bank  of  Ethiopia  (CBE)  and  Cooperative 
Bank  of  Oromia  (CBO).  However,  the  guarantee  funds  are  limited  due  to  issues  of  foreign 
exchange  hence  the  need  to  use  local  mechanisms  to  avoid  the  adverse  impact  of  foreign 
exchange. 
facilitating  access  to 
7. 
Structure: The Credit Guarantee Scheme should be placed at the Development Bank 
of Ethiopia (DBE) because of its mandate as a specialized financial institution which provides 
financial  services  to  agricultural  and  industrial  development  projects.  This  will  create 
synergy with current RIFIP III proposed implementation arrangements and leverage on the 
funds that are available at the bank for that purpose. 
8. 
The  CGS  should  target  commercial  banks  both  public  and  private  starting  with 
Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (CBE) and the Cooperative Bank of Oromia because of the role 
they  are  already  playing  in  the  agricultural  input  and  output  financing.  This  will  also  be 
available to other banks that are interested to sign in  
The Commercial banks would target to lend to MFIs and Russacos that are providing 
9. 
financial services to the target farmers and SMEs who are unable to access credit because of 
inadequate  collateral,  or  the  inherent  risks  of  doing  agricultural  business  perceived  by 
lenders  see  as  higher  risk  under  their  current  credit  risk  evaluation  practices  or  need  for 
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 12 
refinancing caused by the need to grow in the market. This would augment the line of credit 
proposed under RUFIP III. 
10. 
Fund  Size  and  potential.  The  fund  size  should  be  incremental  with  starting 
amounts  approximately  $  4.5  Million  dollars.  This  fund  could  be  sourced  from  AGRA  funds 
matched by DBE at 1:2 yielding the 4.5 Million. As demand increases other sources could be 
brought  on  board  to  augment  the  funds.  As  explained  in  para  8,  the  potential  to  issue 
guarantees can be as high as ten times of the size of the fund, but realistically we can aim 
for  eight  times  leverage.  With  commercial  bank  financing  projected  at  USD  40  million,  we 
might need a fund size of USD 5 Million. All this corpus need not be cash funded up-front, 
but can be contributed in from time to time in line with the usage level. If for example the 
initial  corpus  of  USD  1.5  million is  committed to  issue  guarantees  to  a  level  of  about  65% 
then the next instalment of about USD 1.5 million may be added to the corpus and so on. 
Apart from AGRA, Rabobank is a possible partner for the fund. Since this fund will be based 
at DBE, there would be minimal additional costs to administer the funds under the RUFIP III 
implementation arrangements. 
Coverage  and  instruments.  The  fund  should  be  flexible  in  what  is  covered  and 
11. 
therefore  will  not  just  limited  to  debt  instruments.  It  should  also  look  at  the  possibility  of 
covering  the  issue  of  debentures  or  bonds  by  the  MFIs  that  are  secured  by  the  loan 
receivables in their books. These bonds and debentures can be guaranteed by the fund for 
repayment. This would shift focus from individual institutions that lend to MFIs, but the debt 
instrument  and  facilitate  many  institutions  to  provide  funds  to  the  extent  of  their  ability. 
Additional ways of raising funds by MFIs would be securitize the debt receivables from their 
customers  and  sell  the  same  to  banks  and  financial  institutions.  The  securitized  debt 
obligations  of  MFIs  can  be  guaranteed  by  the  Fund.  In  both  these  cases,  apart  from  the 
guarantee, a primary security is also available which will encourage financial institutions to 
provide debt funds. These would be tested as we roll this out under the existing structure. 
Nature of cover and the underwriting risks. Traditionally MFIs have been able to 
12. 
recover their loans from borrowers with a high degree of efficiency. The portfolio at risk (90 
days) for the sector as a whole for the last five years has been less than 2%. With the low 
default  risks,  it  should be  possible  to  offer  a  “First  Loss  Default  Guarantee”  cover  of  up  to 
10% of the loan provided to the MFI by a bank or financial institution. The FLDG implies that 
default in repayment of the loan of up to 10% will be underwritten by the Guarantee. If the 
defaulted amount exceeds 10% of the loan, then the lender has to cover the  excess. With 
FLDG  limit  set  at  5  times  of  the  observed  default  at  the  customer  level,  there  should  be 
wide  acceptance  among  banks  for  this  guarantee  structure.  FLDG  at  10%  of  loan  amount 
would  also  enable  the  guarantee  fund  to  leverage  the  guarantee  pool  ten  multiples.  For 
example,  if  a  guarantee  fund  pool  of  $  5  million  is  established,  it  would  be  possible  to 
guarantee loans of up to 50 $ million at any point of time. 
MFIs can also float bonds and debentures that are guaranteed for repayment by the 
13. 
fund. This guarantee is done a variety of ways, following the same principles of FLDG. While 
the debt market in Ethiopia is not familiar with non-governmental entities floating bonds for 
raising resources, with the changes envisaged in the financial sector, it is more a question of 
when  this  will  happen  rather  than  if.  Sale  of  securitized  debt  of  MFIs  to  other  financial 
institutions  can  be  another  source  of  raising  funds  for  on-lending.  Credit  enhancements  to 
securitized  debt  pools  can  be  offered  from  the  guarantee  fund  to  provide  additional 
collateral for those who buy the securitized debt. In short the Guarantee fund should not be 
a  vanilla  offering,  but  a  forward  looking  mechanism  that  can  support  any  kind  of  resource 
raising by RFIs from the rest of the financial sector. 
2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 12 
14. 
Partnerships  and  Technical  Assistance.  Rabobank  had  in  the  past  issued 
guarantees  to  enable  some  MFIs  raise  loans  from  commercial  banks.  They  might  have  an 
interest in participating in the guarantee fund. They would also be able to bring in technical 
expertise that might be required at DBE to rund the guarantee facility. Hence this potential 
partnership should be explored.  
15. 
It  is  absolutely  critical  that  TA  should  be  provided  both  to  the  financial  instructions 
and  the  demand  side.  While  RUFIP  III  already  captures  the  interventions  on  the  demand 
side there is need to provide for the supply side for this to work. Possible collaboration with 
Rabobank  and  ICCO  will  also  be  explored  as  they  are  already  providing  services  in  that 
area. 
Other  AGRA  programmes  that  are  working  with  Russaccos,  Producer  cooperatives 
16. 
and SMEs will also provide support to the system.  
3 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 13 – Insurance product mainstreaming strategy 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 13 
Annex 13 – Insurance product mainstreaming strategy 
Rural Insurance 
1. 
Rural households need access to insurance products to reduce vulnerabilities arising 
from  natural  factors  –  such  as  deficient  or  excessive  rains  and  life  events  –  such  as 
accidents, sickness and death. Further if insurance cover is available, it would enhance the 
ability of households to cope with risks that people face from time to time. While insurance 
companies  have  a  variety  of  insurance  products,  the  same  are  not  always  suited  to  rural 
households. Secondly, the insurance companies find it difficult to market insurance policies 
for small amounts to a large number of clients dispersed over remote areas cost effectively. 
Hence mainline insurance companies look to having partnerships with institutions that have 
a  presence  in  the  rural  areas  and  thus  able  to  market  insurance  products  with  low 
incremental costs. NBE has classified most rural insurance products under Microinsurance. 
1 
Collection  of  the  relatively  small  amounts  of  premium  periodically  is  one  of  the 
2. 
challenges faced by the insurance companies. Secondly the lack of reach to the rural areas 
impedes  prompt  settlement  of  claims.  If  insurance  companies  are  able  to  set  up  ground 
level  presence  that  can  get  the  applications  completed  and  insurance  premiums  collected, 
without having to open their offices, they would be able to handle rural insurance business 
cost-effectively.  MFIs  and  Financial  cooperatives  have  a  presence  on  the  ground  and 
continually  handle  money  flows;  thus  best  placed  to  market  insurance  products,  collect 
premiums  and  assist  the  policy  holder  and  the  insurance  company  in  case  of  claims.  A 
number  of  emerging  markets  have  seen  insurer-MFI  partnerships  making  available 
insurance products to vulnerable people.  
3. 
In  Ethiopia,  some  insurance  companies  have  products  suitable  for  rural  population. 
Some  of  them  have  tried  out  pilot  schemes  involving  crop,  livestock,  life  and  health 
insurance.  (Nyala,  Oromio  Insurance,  Abby  insurance  and  Ethiopia  Insurance  are  some 
examples).  During  the  recent  RUFIP  III  mission  the  possibility  of  insurance  company 
marketing  its  products  through  MFIs  and  RUSACCO  Unions  was  discussed  with  Oromio 
Insurance  Company  (OIC).  The  company  was  keen  and  had  indicated  that  it  has  following 
products that are targeted at rural areas.  
Multi-Peril Crop Insurance 
Index Based Crop Insurance 
Vegetation Index Crop Insurance 
Index Based Livestock Insurance and 
Multi-peril Livestock Insurance 
Over the last eight years it has tested out products in the microinsurance space and 
4. 
covered  over  34000  people  for  a  sum  assured  of  more  than  ETB  313  million.  In  a  mailed 
response  OIC  had  indicated  “  The  agency  arrangement  can  be  concluded  between  the 
selected MFIs/Unions and the insurer by signing MOU. In that MOU roles and responsibility 
1 Excerpted from What People Want, Investigating insurance demand in Ethiopia – The World Bank Group 2018. 
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 13 
of each party will be clearly stated. The operation model can vary depending on the type of 
insurance product to be distributed and on the distribution channel we opt to use.” 
Extant regulation allows Insurance Companies to utilize services of MFIs and Rusacco 
5. 
unions as insurance agents. 
6. 
The  MFIs  and  Rusacco  unions  would  require  select  staff  to  be  trained  in  insurance 
marketing as well as claims procedures. They would also look forward to a commission for 
marketing in line with usual industry practice. OIC already has worked with some MFIs and 
Rusaccos  and  hence  familiar  with  partnership  processes.  RUFIP  III  would  be  required  to 
support  development  of  a  framework  for  collaboration  between  insurance  cos  and  RFIs, 
capacity building of MFIs and Rusaccos (with technical support from insurance companies), 
product  customization  to  meet  context  specific  requirements  and  insurance  literacy 
campaign. 
7. 
Currently credit-life insurance is offered on ‘own account’ by MFIs and Rusaccos and 
unions. Given the fact many MFIs and Rusacco unions are small with limited clientele, they 
would be not be able to manage risks (especially weather based covariant risks that impact 
multiple  people  in  an  area)  and  pay  out  the  claims  with  the  premia  collected.  Such 
institutions  should  be  encouraged  to  either  distribute  credit-life  product  of  an  insurance 
company or avail reinsurance. 
8. 
In terms of practical initial steps RUFIP III may start the engagement with OIC ( and 
EIC,  public  sector  insurer)  and  willing  MFIs  and  Unions.  The  initial  progress  in  this  would 
attract other insurance companies and RFIs.  
Market potential 
9. 
The  existing  clients  of  MFIs  and  Rusaccos  are  all  covered  by  credit-life  insurance. 
RUFIP III aims at 11.25 million borrowing clients and more than 13 million clients including 
savers.  Even  if  25  %  of  these  clients  are  covered  under  crop  and  livestock  insurance, 
insurance penetration would have increased greatly in the country.  
No of clients 
for crop 
insurance Mn 
Sum assured 
Crop ETB mn 
ETB (10000 
/client) 
No of clients 
for livestock 
insurance Mn 
Sum assured cattle 
ETB (20000 per 
client) 
MFIs 
2.5 
25000 
1.0 
Rusacco 
0.30 
3000 
0.15 
20000  About  25%  of  clients 
take  up  crop 
will 
insurance  and  10% 
clients 
livestock 
insurance 
3000  About  30%  and  15% 
of  clients  will  take  up 
crop  and 
livestock 
insurance respectively 
10. 
Given  the  climate  risks  and  the  vulnerabilities  arising  from  natural  calamities, 
insurance marketing is a key element in managing risks to livelihoods. Insurance marketing 
will  not  require  additional  manpower  in  RFIs  to  any  significant  extent.  At  best  one  person 
with insurance product  and process  knowledge might be required in the large and Medium 
MFIs; in case of smaller MFIs and credit unions, one of the staff members can be trained in 
insurance  aspects  so  that  she/he  can  take  of  insurance  business.  Agency  commissions  on 
insurance marketing introduce an additional revenue stream to MFIs and Rusaccos. 
2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 13 
Activities 
  Meeting  between  OIC/EIC  and  MFIs,  FCA,  Unions  (with  involvement  of  Director, 
Insurance of NBE) 
  Development of guidelines on partnership and a draft MOU (comprising regions and 
woredas  of  coverage,  products  to  be  marketed,  obligations  of  insurer  and  RFI, 
mechanism of premium collection and remittance, Claims settlement procedures and 
timelines, Commission payable to RFIs) 
  Review of existing products and the need if any for adjustments, changes 
  Training  of  RFI  staff  on  insurance  products  to  be  marketed,  procedures  of  enrolling 
clients, handling of premium collected, claim applications and supporting documents, 
periodic reporting to the insurer, etc. 
  Rollout of marketing of products  
  Setting  targets  in  terms  of  number  of  persons  to  be  covered,  acreage  for  crop 
insurance, number of animals for livestock insurance and sum assured crop season-
wise and year-wise  
  Conduct  of  annual  insurance  workshops  for  MFIs  and  unions  (by  insurers  with 
support of Director, insurance, NBE. 
3 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 14 – Line of credit eligibility criteria 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 14 
Annex 14 Line of Credit – eligibility criteria 
I. Eligibility Criteria for Credit Support to MFIs and Financial Cooperatives: 
1)  MFIs that have been in existence for three years can access LOC under RUFIP III.  
2)  The MFIs should have made profits in the preceding two years 
3)  The MFIs should have at least 1000 active clients. 
4)  The conditions stipulated for eligibility of MFIs and Financial Cooperatives for availing 
funds from Credit Component under RUFIP III can be categorized under two heads viz; 
(1)Based on financial performance and regulatory compliance ; (2) Rationing the funds 
release for minimizing regional imbalance , ensuring balanced/equitable funds flow to 
medium /small MFIs and Financial Cooperatives and meeting the needs of other 
excluded/vulnerable areas, where other projects of IFAD operate.  
5)  PaR 90 days should not exceed 5% of loans outstanding. This will be applicable to MFIs 
(big, medium or small), and Financial Cooperatives.  
6)  MFIs and Unions / RUSSACOs should have, at least, OSS of 100 %. Any RFI having OSS 
of 95% to 100% can avail LOC subject to providing an undertaking that it will comply 
with the 100% OSS requirement within one year from the date of undertaking. If the 
RFI does not fulfil this undertaking within the stipulated time, no further LOC should be 
allowed till the MFI achieves the OSS benchmark. 
7)   Statutory audit of MFIs and Union /RUSACCOs should be completed within 6 months 
from the closure of financial year. 
8)  The minimum paid up capital stipulated by NBE should be complied from time to time. 
7.As per NBE directive in 2013, every MFI must obtain license for renewal of its business 
every year .If license is not renewed within one month, penalty provisions will be 
applicable. (In other countries, generally financial institutions continue till the license is 
not withdrawn). It implies, all MFIs-big or small holds a license for one year. We may 
therefore stipulate that every participating MFI must hold license &continue to renew 
periodically. 
9)  All the participating MFIs should comply with regulatory requirements such as CARR(12 
%), exposure standards, liquidity ratio(20%), loan limits (individual 1% of Capital/group 
4% of capital), maximum loan repayment period (5 years except housing for 15 years), 
fit and Proper Criteria for board, Interest rate directives,etc  
10)  A nodal person should be identified in the MFI to be responsible for meeting the 
requirements of RUFIP targeting strategy, social performance practices and customer 
protection aspects. The MFIs should also identify a nodal person to link clients of other 
projects and programmes in which access to finance is a requirement.  
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 14 
II Conditions for allocation of funds: 
1)  Large  MFIs  (with  total  assets  exceeding  ETB  4  billion  at  the  end  of  previous  fiscal 
year)  will  be  able  access  funds  only  to  the  extent  available  from  reflows  of  loans 
issued under RUFIP I and RUFIP II in respect of their existing clients. 
2)  The  exception  to  the  above  rule  would  be  in  respect  of  credit  expansion  in 
underserved  regions  namely,  Afar,  Benishungul  Gumuz,  Gambrlla  and  Somali.  Large 
MFIs  will  be  able  to  access  credit  from  LOC  over  and  above  the  reflows.  Large  MFIs 
will also be eligible to access credit from LOC in respect of new clients acquired during 
the RUFIP III period from LOC over and above the reflows. 
3)  The  Large  MFIs  should  secure  funding  from  other  sources  (excluding  networth)  at 
least  to  the  extent  of  amount  drawn  from  RUFIP  III,  before  applying  for  the  next 
tranche  of  funds.  The  Medium  MFIs  should  secure  funding  from  other  sources 
(excluding  networth)  at  least  to  the  extent  of  25%  amount  drawn  from  RUFIP  III, 
before applying for the next tranche of funds. 
4)  Two disbursements will be made  each  year by DBE to large and Medium MFIs, after 
ensuring  the  funds  released  in  the  previous  tranche  has  been  fully  utilized  and  that 
MFI has secured funds from other sources as indicated in rule 3. 
5)  Of  the  total  yearly  credit  line  budget,  Rusaccos  and  Unions  would  be  reserved  a 
minimum  of  25%  during  the  first  four  years  of  the  project.  If  their  requirements 
during the year exceed 25% of the budget, the same will be prioritized. 
6)  The  Small  (less  than  ETB  100  million  in  assets)  and  Medium  (  ETB  more  than  100 
million and upto ….MFIs will be reserved 10% and 15% of the budget each year. 
7)  The  smaller  MFIs  and  new  MFIs  operating  substantially  in  rural  areas  will  have  to 
satisfy the following revised criteria for availing the credit line from DBE 
8)  The MFIs / Financial Cooperatives operating in the excluded/vulnerable regions/ 
pastoral areas and other areas where other projects of IFAD are implemented will not 
be subjected to restriction of funds.  
9)   Agencies operating in the remote rural areas as compared to those concentrating in 
urban areas should given due advantage. The agencies should indicate the extent of 
their rural branches, rural clientele and rural finance to have the benefit of such funds 
advantage under RUFIP III. 
10) All agencies need to prepare Institutional and Business Plan for 3/ 6 years and 
updated annually and submit to PCMU. 
11) 20% of funds would be earmarked for financial cooperatives  
12) The unions may be classified in to A,B, and C ,based on performance parameters , 
with a view to facilitating more equitable distribution within cooperatives ,if 
considered necessary ( as some of the Unions might become larger after 3-4 years). 
The classification can be reviewed annually. 
13) Union/RUSACCOs should comply with regulatory prescriptions of FCA, e.g. equity not 
less than 20% of net assets ,exposure limits, governance standards ( although 
prudential norms yet to be implemented). 
2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 14 
14) Unions should be stipulated to comply with an obligation to link, supervise, guide and 
support RUSACCOs. 
15) RUSACCOs/ unions will be offered loan terms and conditions similar to that of MFIs. 
16) Allocation of funds for AIP catchment areas as also for leasing would be done as per 
the agreement with EU (PROSEAD) and EIB respectively. 
3 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 15 – Note on Impact of RUFIP on Lines of Credit 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 15 
Annex 15: Note on Impact of RUFIP on Lives of Clients 
1. 
The World Bank, in its seminal work, Finance for All points out that “since financial 
market  imperfections  play  an  important  role  in  perpetuating  inequalities,  financial  sector 
reforms  that  promote  broader  access  to  financial  services  need  to  be  at  the  core  of  the 
development  agenda.  Indeed,  if  financial  market  frictions  are  not  addressed  redistribution 
may  have  to  be  endlessly  repeated,  which  could  result  in  damaging  disincentives  to  work 
and  save.  …cross  country  data  and  evidence  from  specific  policy  experiments  suggest  that 
more-developed financial systems are associated with lower inequality.1” Ethiopia, with high 
poverty  levels  and  low  access  to  financial  services  for  the  poor  and  marginalized  regions, 
required  to  build  financial  infrastructure  that  can  sustainably  serve  the  requirements  of 
excluded  people.  RUFIP  I  and  II  were  thus  designed  in  the  context  of  an  acute  need  for 
building an inclusive rural financial sector which prioritized poor and vulnerable.  
2. 
The performance of RUFIP over the last 15 years has been commendable in terms of 
providing access. While the well-organised and capitalized banking system did not focus on 
small  clients  either  for  loans  or  for  savings,  the  microfinance  sector  comprising  MFIs  and 
RUSACCOs  had,  with  RUFIP  support,  acquired  more  than  7  million  clients  at  the  end  of 
2018.  In  comparison,  the  commercial  banks  had  a  total  borrower  base  of  less  than  0.25 
million. 
RUFIP I and II have an impressive outreach record as can be seen from the following 
3. 
table. 
Indicator 
Achievement 
RUFIP I 
3.3 
Number of savers million 
2.7 
Number of borrowers million 
2.65 
Amount of savings ETB bn 
Amount of borrowings ETB bn  5.82 
Number of MFIs 
Number of RUSACCOs 
Women clients % 
30 
5000 
RUFIP II 
7.09 
5.72 
33.99 
47.82 
38 
11267 
45 
4. 
Apart  from  achieving  goals  of  financial  inclusion  RUFIP  I  and  RUFIP  II  have  had 
significant impact among the clients in terms of livelihood improvement. According to World 
Bank,  ‘Finance  is  at  the  core  of  the  development  process.  Backed  by  solid  empirical 
evidence,  development  practitioners  are  becoming  increasingly  convinced  that  efficient, 
well-functioning  financial  systems  are  crucial  in  channeling  funds  to  the  most  productive 
uses  and  in  allocating  risks  to  those  who  can  best  bear  them,  thus  boosting  economic 
growth,  improving  opportunities  and  income  distribution,  and  reducing  poverty’2.  Whether 
RUFIP I and II can provide evidence that supports the view of the World Bank is the subject 
of this note. IOE, IFAD had carried out an interim evaluation of RUFIP in 2011 as a part of 
which impact on clients was assessed. On poverty impact, the interim evaluation enquired in 
to income, assets, income generating activities, crop yields, housing and savings.  
1 Finance For All, Policies and Pitfalls in expanding access, 2008; A World Bank Policy Research Report- 
siteresources.worldbank.org/INTFINFORALL/ Resources / 4099583.../FFA_ch01.pdf   
2 Access to Finance and Development: Theory and Measurement, Chapter 1; Finance For All, A World Bank Policy 
Research Report- siteresources.worldbank.org/INTFINFORALL/ Resources / 4099583.../FFA_ch01.pdf   
1 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 15 
RUFIP impact indicators 
Impact Indicators 
%  of  households  who  reported  an  increase  in 
income1  (For  control  and  treatment  groups,  and 
by gender for treatment group) 
%  of  households  who  acquired  assets  (in  the 
duration of the project) (disaggregated by asset) 
1 
Food  security:  %  of  households  who  are  net 
sellers and net buyers of food (by treatment and 
control group) 
Improved  food  consumption  (Consumption  of 
cereals, vegetables, etc…): % of households who 
report improved food consumption 
Improved  food  consumption  (Consumption  of 
cereals, vegetables, etc…): % of households who 
report improved food consumption 
Improved housing 
2003 – 2010 
Both genders: 
Control: 48% 
Treatment: 65% 
Income increased by 76% 
Treatment group, by gender: 
Men:53% 
Women:58% 
Domestic animals: 93% 
Modest  consumer  assets  (e.g.  radio, 
chairs, etc..) : 88%  
Agri.  equipment  and  tools(beehives, 
pumps, etc..): 84% 
Land: 65% 
Control3: 
Net buyers of food: 30% 
Net sellers of food: 19% 
Treatment4: 
Net buyers of food: 39%  
Net sellers of food: 29% 
Control: 33% 
Treatment: 47% 
Control: 33% 
Treatment: 47% 
60  to  93% 
studies 
in  two  different 
5. 
Considering the fact that RUFIP line of credit supported a small proportion of overall 
resources of the RFIs and the evaluation report rated the performance on household assets 
and income improvements as moderately satisfactory. The evaluation commented that it is 
not  possible  to  directly  attribute  impact  to  RUFIP  as  ‘there  is  no  mechanism  to  track  the 
performance of RUFIP’s credit funds independently of other credit resources at the disposal 
of MFIs”. This is a specious argument as the general impacts caused by credit funds of any 
type would certainly be attributable to RUFIP credit funds as well. Attribution of all impacts 
to RUFIP might be flawed and RUFIP significance would be limited to its share of total funds 
flow to the RFIs. However the RUFIP had a catalytic role in galvanizing the RFIs, which led 
to  other  positive  changes  in  products,  processes  and  institutional  systems  through  its 
capacity building efforts. 
Several studies of the impact of MFIs, microfinance and savings services in Ethiopia 
6. 
had been carried out. The findings of the studies are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
3 Control = Recent MFI clients, covers client of 9 MFIs out of 19 supported MFIs of RUFIP I 
4 Treatment = Mature MFI clients; with same coverage as “control” group 
2 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 15 
7. 
The  impact  of  microfinance  on  savings  was  studied  among  clients  of  ACSI  by  two 
researchers5.  The  report  concluded  that  the  client  households  were  better  off  in  terms  of 
cash savings. 
The  result  of  the  descriptive  and  econometrics  analysis  of  microfinance  impact  on 
8. 
rural  household  saving  had  shown  that  70  %  of  the  sample  households  practiced  savings 
with average amount of 1,319 Birr. The remaining 30 % of the sampled respondents did not 
practice  any  form  of  savings.  In  the  case  of  the  first  question  of  the  study,  the  research 
result  has  showed  that  the  impact  of  microfinance  on  total  savings  of  rural  households  is 
statistically  significant  and  an  important  in  magnitude.  Due  to  program  participation,  the 
intensity  of  household  total  savings  had  been  increased  by  436.03  Birr.  In  addition  to 
program participation, variables including livestock holdings, land size, household education 
level  (secondary  education),  household  size  and  health  related  expenditure  were  found  as 
significant explanatory variables of household  total saving in the study area. Except health 
related expenditures, all significant variables impacted on household total saving positively. 
Particularly  education  level  of  household  head  has  considerably  large  positive  impact  in 
magnitude.  The  regression  result  shows  that  the  change  in  education  level  from  base 
category (illiterate) to secondary education increases the intensity of household savings by 
2261.85  Birr.  This  is  directly  related  to  the  impact  of  education  on  financial  literacy  which 
could  help  households  understand  their  saving  situations  better,  save  more,  and  attain 
higher economic status and more economic security. In the case of the second focus of this 
research,  program  participation  has  a  positive  and  significant  impact  on  household  cash 
savings.  Participation  in  microfinance  increases  the  intensity  of  household  cash  savings  by 
283.26  Birr.  However,  the  impact  of  participation  on  in-kind  (non-financial)  savings  is  not 
significant  at  least  at  10 %  level  of  significance.  But  its  sign  and  magnitude  indicates  that 
participation  in  microfinance  decreases  the  intensity  of  household  non-financial  savings  by 
146.83 Birr. The positive and significant impact of program participation on total household 
savings (cash saving plus in-kind saving) is a clear indictor for the risk aversions behavior of 
poor  rural  households  through  diversification  of  income  sources  (saving  forms).  Generally, 
from  this  research  it  can  be  concluded  that  rural  poor  households  can  save  a  considerable 
fraction  of  their  income  when  they  have  access  to  financial  institutions  and  there  is  a 
possibility to mobilize rural savings through financial intermediaries to narrow the resource 
gap which fosters capital formation of the country and accelerates economic growth.  
One  study6  focused  on  the  impact  of  RUSACCO  membership  on  food  security  and 
9. 
found  that  client  households  were  able  to  improve  food  security.  They  were  able  spend 
adequately on food and other general consumption. 97% of members believe the RUSACCO 
helps  them  to  improve  their  food  security  and  70%  of  non-members  agreed  that  the 
RUSACCO  improves  its  member  well-being.  In  this  study  annual  household  total 
consumption  expenditure  and  food  expenditure  are  used  as  food  security  indicators. 
Membership  is  positively  correlated  with  both  indicators  and  significant  at  99%  level  of 
confidence  interval.  The  study  results  also  confirm  that  membership  has  a  significant  and 
positive impact on households’ food security. The overall average consumption expenditure 
of  members  is  more  than  non-members  in  the  range  from  34.21  to  62.765  euro.  The 
5 The Impact of Microfinance on Household Saving: The Case of Amhara Credit and Saving Institution, Feres Bet 
Sub-Branch, Degadamot Woreda - Journal of Poverty, Investment and Development www.iiste.org ISSN 2422-
846X An International Peer-reviewed Journal Vol.27, 2016 78  
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322953380) 
6 The impact of saving and credit cooperatives on food security in the West Amhara Region of Ethiopia - Ayele 
Zemen Ayalew, University College of Cork, Ireland - https://cora.ucc.ie/ 
bitstream/handle/10468/2019/Zemen's%20Thesis.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
3 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 15 
average  annual  food  expenditure  gain  due  to  joining  a  RUSACCO  ranged  from  28.46  to 
43.98 euro.  
Average Annual Food Expenditure of Households  
Membership   Number of Respondents   Mean annual Food Expenditure in euro  
Member  
259 
Non-member  253 
320.79 
252.78 
A  study  went  in  to  the  impact  of  microfinance  on  households’  incomes  in  Mekelle 
10. 
city7,  among  the  clients  of  DECSI,  a  large  MFI  funded  under  RUFIP.  The  study  found  that 
average  incomes  of  participating  households  went  up  significantly  compared  to  those  who 
were not accessing credit. 
11. 
Participation in the micro credit service of DECSI has highly significant average effect 
on households’ average monthly income. This is obvious that the average monthly incomes 
of households that get access to micro credit are fairly higher than those of households in all 
propensity  score  matching  methods.  Estimation  results  displays  that  ATT  for  households’ 
average  monthly  consumption  expenditure  are  fairly  significant  in  all  ATT  estimation 
methods,  except  in  the  nearest  neighbor  method,  ranging  from  125.3  -  132.8.  Hence,  the 
hypothesis  which  says  the  presence  of  microcredit  shall  boost  the  average  family 
consumption  expenditures  of  borrowers  is  accepted  at  5%  level  of  significance.  Household 
average  monthly  savings  is  another  impact  indicator  used  in  this  study.  Based  on  the 
estimation results, the average effect on household average monthly savings is moderately 
improved in all ATT methods (from 66.4 for attnd at 10% significant level to 96.9 using attk 
at  5%  significant  level).  Therefore,  the  hypothesis  which  says  participation  in  micro  credit 
increases savings of borrowers is accepted at 10% and 5% level of significance  
12. 
The housing improvement of respondents is highly significant in all ATT methods and 
it  is  insignificant  when  applying  the  nearest  neighbor  method  where  t=  0.82  hence  the 
average  positive  effect  ranges  from  Birr  1,440  using  atts  to  1,499  using  attk.  This  can  be 
true  because  some  of  participants  take  the  loan  explicitly  for  the  purpose  of  housing 
improvements.  Thus,  the  researcher’s  hypothesis  that  says  participation  in  microcredit 
improves the dwelling house of borrowers is accepted at 5% and 10% levels of significance.  
13.  With  regard  to  investment  in  human  capital  development,  expenditure  on  children 
education  is  moderately  improved  expressed  by  moderate  average  effect  using  all  ATT 
methods  but  not  the  attk,  which  is  insignificant.  Then,  the  hypothesis  which  says 
participation  in  microcredit  increases  the  expenditure  on  children  education  is  accepted  at 
10%  and  1%  levels  of  significance.  The  result  of  the  study  showed  that  participation  in 
microcredit have had significant impact on the livelihood indicator variables such as average 
monthly income, consumption expenditure, savings of borrower households, expenditure on 
housing  improvements,  and  investment  on  human  capital  development,  particularly 
expenditure on children education and medical care (health) of borrower households.  
7 Impact of Micro Credit on the Livelihood of Borrowers: Evidence from Mekelle City, Ethiopia 1*Bekele Abraham 
Diro, 2Dereje Getachew Regasa  Department of Accounting, Banking and Finance, Aksum University, Ethiopia 
2Department of Cooperative Studies, Mekelle University, Ethiopia - Journal of Research in Economics and 
International Finance (JREIF) (ISSN: 2315-5671) Vol. 3(1) pp. 25-32, January, 2014 
http://internationalresearchjournals.org/full-articles/impact-of-micro-credit-on-the-livelihood-of-borrowers-
evidence-from-mekelle-city-ethiopia.pdf?view=inline 
4 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 15 
Impact of microfinance on incomes was also studied8 in Oromia by a group of three 
14. 
researchers.  They  found  that  households  with  access  to  microfinance  generated  higher 
incomes  through  a  combination  of  farm  and  off-farm  activities.  The  difference  in  comes 
between MFI clients and others was of the order of 11%.  
15. 
The  computed  average  treatment  effect  on  treated  result  in Table  8 indicated  that 
microfinance credit has statistically significant effect on rural households’ income. A positive 
value  of  average  treatment  effect  on  the  treated  (ATT)  indicates  that  households’  annual 
income has been improved as a result of microfinance credit intervention in the study area. 
Accordingly, participation in microfinance service has increased a total annual income the of 
participant  households  by  ETB  2129.7  which  is  11%  higher  than  the  income  of  non-
participants.  Moreover,  the  mean  difference  between  participants  and  non-participants  in 
terms of total annual income was significant at 1% significance level. (See following table). 
Variable 
Farm income 
Non-farm 
income 
Total income 
Mean 
Treated 
18,383.77 
Control 
16,923.56  1,460.22 
Difference 
8,216.06 
6,553.87  1,662.19 
21,502.11 
19,372.14  2,129.97 
Another  study  in  Mekelle9,  indicated  that  most  users  of  financial  services  of  DECSI 
16. 
benefited  from  increased  household  assets,  incomes  and  higher  standard  of  living.  The 
study  concludes  “Debit  Credit  and  Savings  Institution  (DECSI)  role  in  Mekelle  Branch  has 
brought about positive changes in the standard of living of people who access their services. 
Although  some  of  the  clients  have  not  benefited,  most  of  the  clients  have  benefited 
positively.” (See following table) 
Effect of access to MFI on the household 
Aspect 
Improved standard of living 
Expansion of business 
Increase in assets 
Able  to  send  to  children  to 
school 
% of households reporting 
(sample size 210) 
50% 
30% 
62% 
70% 
17. 
The different studies in different geographies have concluded that there is a positive 
impact  of  microfinance  on  lives  of  clients.  But  as  pointed  out  in  the  interim  evaluation  of 
RUFIP I, it is difficult to entirely attribute the positive impact to RUFIP as its significance to 
8  Analysing  the  Impact  of  Credit  on  Rural  Households’  Income  in  the  Case  of  Cheliya  District,  West  Shoa  Zone, 
Oromia  National  Regional  State,  Ethiopia-Tadele  Erena  Geleta1, Alelign  Ademe  Mengistu1 and Solomon  Amsalu 
Gesese2*  -  Journal  of  Global  Economics J  Glob  Econ  2018,  Vol  6(3):  304    https://www.omicsonline.org/open-
access/analysing-the-impact-of-credit-on-rural-households-income-in-the-case-of-cheliya-district-west-shoa-zone-
oromia-national-regional-2375-4389-1000304-105074.html 
9 The role of microfinance institutions on poverty alleviation in Ethiopia - Dr. D. Guruswamy Assistant Professor, 
Department of Accounting & Finance College of Business & Economics, Mekelle University, Mekelle, Ethiopia - 
Indian Journal of Commerce & Management Studies  January 2012 
5 
Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP3) 
Programme Design Report 
Annex 15 
overall resources deployed by RFIS is limited. But the contribution of RUFIP is important as 
it was catalytic. 
18. 
Under  RUFIP  I  and  II  the  MIS  and  M&E  systems  had  not  been  designed  to  gather 
periodic information on impact of the programme on clients lives. Under RUFIP III, the MIS 
would  be  geared  to  gather  clearer  targeting  information.  A  poverty  tracking  tool  (such  as 
the  Progress  out  of  Poverty  Index  –  PPI)  will  be  deployed  by  MFIs  to  measure  changes  in 
key aspects of clients lives from which a poverty scorecard can be developed. Use of such a 
tool by the MFIs will provide information on what proportion of clients move up or down the 
poverty  ladder  annually.  Further  to  this  an  annual  outcome  survey  has  been  envisaged 
which  will  gather  information  from  a  representative  sample  of  clients  and  non-clients 
(control  group)  on  aspects  such  as  savings,  income,  food  security,  housing,  health,  asset 
holding  etc.  This  annual  measurement  will  enable  the  programme  to  measure  impact  and 
come to conclusions both at mid-term and at the end.  
6 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 16 – Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD) 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III 
RUFIP III)  
  Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) 
Second Draft 
                                                                                     Addis Ababa-Ethiopia 
                                                                 May 2019 
i 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summery 
 1  Introduction  
1.1 Background 
1.2 Objective of the Proposed Programme 
1.3 Objective of the ESMF 
1.4 Study Methodology 
2   Project Description 
2.1  Review of RUFIP II 
2.2  Description of  RUFIP III  
3   Environmental Policies, Legal and Administrative Framework 
3.1  Relevant National Policies and Legal Framework 
3.1.1 The Constitution 
3.1.2 Relevant Policies 
3.1.3 Strategies 
3.1.4 Proclamations, regulations and Guidelines 
3.1.5 Administrative/Institutional Framework 
3.2  IFAD Safeguard Policies 
3.3  Comparison of SECAP and the National Policies 
4    Environmental Setting 
4.1  General Setting   
4.2  Environmental Setting Specific to the Regions 
4.2.1 Afar National Regional State  
4.2.2  Tigrai National Regional State 
4.2.3  Amhara National Regional State 
4.2.4  Oromia National Regional State 
4.2. 5  Benshangul Gumuz National Regional State, 
4.2.6   Gambella National Regional State 
4.2.7   Somali National Regional State 
4.2.8   Southern Nations , Nationalities Peoples  Regional State 
5   Consultation with Stakeholders and Communities  
6   Environmental and Social Impact Mitigation Measures 
6.1 Positive Impacts 
6.2 Negative Impacts 
7   Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Plans 
8   Institutional Arrangement 
9   ESMF Implementation, Monitoring and Reporting 
9.1 Exclusion List of IFC 
9.2  ESMF Approval and Implementation Process 
9.3  Monitoring and Reporting 
vii 
1 
1 
1 
2 
3 
5 
5 
6 
11 
11 
11 
12 
14 
15 
17 
21 
38 
39 
39 
47 
47 
49 
51 
52 
54 
55 
57 
59 
61 
63 
63 
64 
71 
77 
81 
81 
82 
87 
ii 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
10   Capacity Building and Technical Assistance  
11  Estimated Budget for the Implementation of RUFIP III 
12  Grievance Redress Mechanism  
13  Chance Finds 
92 
94 
95 
97 
AEMFIs 
Association of Ethiopian Microfinance Institutions 
List of Acronyms 
CSA 
DBE 
ESMF 
EA 
EMP 
EPA 
ESMF 
ESMP 
ESMS 
FCA 
FDRE 
GHC 
GRS 
IFAD 
Masl 
NRFPSC 
EFCCC 
PAPs 
PAS 
PCRs 
Central Statistics Authority  
Development Bank of Ethiopia 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Environmental Assessment 
Environmental Management Program 
Environmental Protection Authority 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Environmental and Social Management Systems 
Federal Cooperative Agency 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Grievance Hearing Committee 
Grievance Redress Service 
International Food and Agricultural Development  
Meters above sea level 
National Rural Finance Policy Steering Committee 
 Environment, Forest and Climate Change Commission 
Project affected Peoples 
Peasant Association 
Physical Cultural Resources 
iii 
PCMU 
PMC 
PPE 
PSE 
RPF 
RUFIP 
RUSACCOs 
SFA & RUFIP 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Project Coordination and Management Unit 
Project Management Committee 
Personal Protective Equipment 
Private Sector Enterprises 
Resettlement Policy Framework 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programmme 
Rural Savings and Credit Cooperation 
Special  Fund  Administration  and  Rural  Financial  Intermediation 
Program  
SNNPRS 
Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Regional State 
TA 
ToR 
Technical Assistance 
Terms of Reference 
List of Tables 
Table 6.1: Summery of environmental and social Impact of RUFIP III 
Table 7.1: Generic Social and environmental Management and monitoring plan 
Table 9.1: Sample Criteria for Requiring a Field Appraisal 
Table 12.1: Budget Estimate for the implementation of the ESMF 
List of Annexes 
Annex 1: List of Proposed project activities that are not eligible for Funding 
Annex 2: Environmental and Social Screening Checklist   
Annex 2.1: Information for screening potential safeguards impacts 
Annex 2.2: Eligibility checklist for DBE or MFI at the National/Regional/Woreda/Kebele levels  
Annex 3: Suggested Environmental and Social Field Appraisal Form  
Annex 4: Guideline for the preparation of site specific ESMP 
Annex 5: Generic Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  
iv 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Annex 6: Procedures for Chance Find of Physical Cultural Resources 
Annex 7: Guidelines for Annual Reviews 
Annex 8: Suggested Forms for ESMF Reporting, Training and Follow-up 
Annex 9: Sample Terms of Reference (ToR) for ESIA Preparation  
Annex 10: Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Annex 11 Institutions Consulted during the Fieldwork 
v 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Executive Summary 
 The overall goal of Rural Finance Intermediation Programme (RUFIP) is to contribute to the 
reduction of poverty in Ethiopia by providing rural households with increased and sustainable 
access to a range of financial services and products. RUFIP is one of the largest programmes 
of IFAD in Eastern and Southern Africa with Approximate cost of US $ 88.73 million for the 
first phase of RUFIP programme and an estimated cost of US$ 249 million for RUFIP II. The 
initial  RUFIP  Programme  was  implemented  from  2003  to  2010  and      RUFIP  II  started  in 
2012, with a completion date of June, 30, 2019. 
Overall,  RUFIP  II,  together  with  RUFIP  I  has  had  significant  positive  results  in  improving 
access  to  financial  services  to  a  rural  population.  Both  programmes  have  contributed 
significantly  to  the  development  of  the  Ethiopian  rural  micro-finance  sector,  especially  in 
strengthening of MFIs and RuSACCOs and their unions to remarkably improving outreach of 
relevant  financial  products  and  services  to  rural  households.  So  far  RUFIP  programmes 
contributed  in  improving  outreaches  to  approximately  7.63  million  rural  households  by 
providing financial services through MFIs and RUSACCOs. Of those that received financial 
service 45 % of them were females and 55% males. Only 3.3 million rural households were 
receiving such service at the beginning of the programme. 
In designing RUFIP III, issues such as improving financial literacy, creating employment to 
the  youth,  making  rural  finance  institutions  more  robust,  contributing  inclusive  rural 
transformation, capacity building at different government institutional levels, and programme 
management will be given special consideration and opportunities to link or coordinate with 
other IFAD and other development partners’ interventions will be explored. 
IFAD has availed resources for the purpose of increasing the flow of finance to the rural poor 
with the aim to reduce poverty and improve the quality of life of the poor people in the rural 
part of the country. The Development Bank of Ethiopia together with MFIs and RUSACCOs 
in the regions are assigned to implement RUFIP III.  
Project Objective 
 RUFIP III is expected to scale up achievements and lessons learned from the two previous 
RUFIP programmes in order to increase outreach and results in rural poverty reduction of the 
targeted  rural  households.  The  primary  objective  of  RUFIP  III  is  to  promote  effective 
delivery and efficient, demand-driven financial services responsive to the needs of the rural 
poor including smallholder farmers. 
Objective of the ESMF 
RUFIP III could have limited adverse environmental and social impacts and climate related 
risks on the surrounding environment. This impacts and risks necessitated the preparation of 
ESMF that meets the requirements of the national guidelines and safeguard policies of IFAD.  
The general objective of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is 
to indicate processes and guiding principles for assessing potential environmental and social 
impacts  and climate risks when implementing RUFIP  III. ESMF provides a comprehensive 
framework  for  environmental  and  social  impact  screening,  assessment,  and  monitoring, 
consultations with concerned stakeholder groups and capacity building measures.  
vi 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Study Methodology 
Relevant information/data useful for the preparation of   ESMF has been obtained from both 
primary and secondary sources. The methodologies adopted for the preparation of this ESMF 
include  literature  review;  consultations  and  focal  group  discussions  with  key  institutions, 
stakeholders,  and  beneficiaries.  An  account  of  the  existing  biophysical  and  social 
environment  conditions  were  assembled  from  secondary  sources  and  from  physical 
observation  and  discussion  with  stakeholders  and  project  beneficiaries  and  this  information 
has  been  used  to  analyze  impact  of  RUFIP  III.  The  outcomes  of  the  consultations  with 
stakeholders  and  beneficiaries  are  summarized  discussed  under  consultation  section  of  this 
report.  
Project Description 
 RUFIP III is aimed to develop a vibrant rural financial sector by providing financial support 
to rural institutions such as DBE, MFIs and RUSACCOs. RUFIP III has the following four 
components.  Component  1  is  dealing  with  capacity  building  of  institutions  and  customers. 
Similarly,      component  2  is  dealing  with  the  improvement  of  institutions,  regulation  and 
supervision,  component  3  in  building  RFIs  to  enhance  their  business  and  component  4  on 
project management. Each of the components has sub components and these sub components 
are described in the project description section of this report.    
RUFIP III  is  a national sector-wide investment that has been carefully conceptualized and 
enhanced through subsequent stages of formulation and appraisal and it  seeks synergy  with 
the country’s national development policy in general and poverty reduction strategies  in 
particular as well as and with other donors’ initiatives working on  similar projects. The 
project is prepared in line with IFAD’s comparative advantage that focuses on ‘enabling poor 
rural people to access the assets, services and opportunities they need to overcome poverty’. 
Besides providing support to the financial institutions and improving regulation and 
supervision part   of the budget it will also be    used   to implement the following project 
activities.   
•  Enhancement of animal production such as animal breeding poultry and animal 
fattening  
•  Traditional abattoir practices 
•  Enhancement of food crop production using irrigation fertilizers and pesticides 
•  Agro processing /value addition on animal and crop products such as meat, and milk, 
fruits and vegetables.  
Relevant National Policy, Legal and Administration Framework 
According  to  Environmental,  legislation  and  guideline      development  projects  should  be 
assessed in order to ensure that project activities are as much as possible in harmony with the 
environment. Relevant national policies as well as legal and administration framework have 
been reviewed and included to the ESMF report of RUFIP III. 
IFAD's Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP)  
According to SECAP guideline of  IFAD all projects  entering the pipeline are subject  to  an 
environmental,  social  and  climate  risk  screening,  and  are  assigned  a  risk  category  for 
environment  and  social  standards  (A,  B,  C)  and  for  climate  vulnerability  (high,  moderate, 
low).  
•  Category  B  projects  must  have  a  SECAP  review  note,  including  a  matrix  of  the 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP)  at  the  design  stage.  The 
vii 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
identified  social  and  environmental  risks  and  opportunities  management  measures 
must  be  reflected  in  the  project  design  and  the  project  design  report.  The  ESMP 
matrix must be integrated into the project’s implementation manual or developed as a 
stand-alone  guidance  document  for  the  project  management  unit  late  in  the  design 
stage or early in implementation.  
•  Category  A  projects  must  have  an  Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment 
(ESIA) at the design stage (or relevant stage of implementation). The draft and final 
ESIA  reports  and  other  relevant  documents    must  be  disclosed  in  a  timely  and 
accessible  manner  at  the  quality  assurance  stage  (or  other  stages  during  project 
implementation)  
•  For all projects with a “moderate” climate risk classification, a basic climate risk 
analysis  must  be  conducted  during  the  project  design  stage  and  included  in  the 
SECAP review note. Adaptation and mitigation measures must be mainstreamed into 
the project design and project design report.  
•  For  all  projects  with  “high”  climate  risk  classification,  an  in-depth  climate  risk 
analysis must be conducted during project design and adaptation, and risk-mitigation 
measures must be mainstreamed into the project design and project design report.  
•  For all projects with a “moderate” climate risk classification, a basic climate risk 
analysis  must  be  conducted  during  the  project  design  stage  and  included  in  the 
SECAP review note. Adaptation and mitigation measures must be mainstreamed into 
the project design and project design report.  
•  For  all  projects  with  “high”  climate  risk  classification,  an  in-depth  climate  risk 
analysis must be conducted during project design and adaptation, and risk-mitigation 
measures must be mainstreamed into the project design and project design report.  
•  All projects entering the pipeline are subject to an environmental, social and climate 
risk screening, and are assigned a risk category for environment and social standards 
(A,  B,  C)  and  for  climate  vulnerability  (high,  moderate,  low)  These  findings,  along 
with subsequent analysis and assessments, must be reflected in the project’s SECAP 
review  note.  Projects  with  environment  and  social  category  “C”  and  climate  risk 
“low” do not require any further analysis.  
In  line  with  good  practice,  SECAP  ensures  early  consultation  with  communities  and 
stakeholders that must be maintained throughout the life of the project, especially in high-risk 
projects.  
Environmental Setting  
Ethiopia is a landlocked country situated between 30 N and 150 N latitudes and 330 E and 
480 E longitudes with a land mass of 1.13 million km2. It has a diverse topography ranging 
from 110 m below sea level in the Danakil depression in Afar Region to the Ras Dashen peak 
at 4,620 m high in the Simien highlands of North Gonder in Amhara Region.  
Climate: The highlands generally have a temperate climate and cover about 50% of the total 
land area. The rest of the land is arid or semiarid. The highlands are the home of nearly 90% 
of Ethiopia’s population that supports 75% of the national livestock herd;  and, this account 
for 95% of the area under cultivation. More than 95% of agricultural production is based on 
viii 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
dry-land  farming  and  only  1.7%  of  the  land  classified  as  “arable  land”  is  under  permanent 
cultivation by the help of irrigation. Rainfall varies throughout the country, not only spatially 
but also temporally. Some areas of the south western highlands experience rainfall for most 
of the year (March to October), while rainfall in most of the rest of the country is during the 
main rainy season (Kiremt - July to September) and also during the short rains (Belg – March 
to  May).  Mean  annual  precipitation  ranges  from  more  than  2,200  mm  in  the  south  western 
highlands to less than 200 mm in the east and south east lowlands. Variation in temperature is 
mostly due to variation in elevation.  
Population: Ethiopia is the second most populous country in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) with 
over  110  million  people  and  a  population  growth  rate  of  around  2.7%  per  year.  Women 
account for about 48% of the population. Approximately 20% of households are headed by 
women. Almost 50% of the population is under 20 years of age. 85% of the population lives 
in rural area and they solely dependent on subsistence agriculture.  
 Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy accounting for about 42% of GDP, employing 
80% of the labor force, and contributing about 90% of export earnings. Smallholder farmers 
account for about 96% of total agricultural production. Agriculture is dominated by a rain-fed 
(95%)  with  low-input  and  low-output  subsistence  farming  system.  Low  agricultural 
productivity  can  be  attributed,  inter  alia,  due  to  severe  land  degradation,  poor  farming 
practices, de-forestation  causing severe erosion, population  pressure (human and livestock), 
perceived insecurity of land tenure, and variable rainfall.  
 Agricultural landscapes are critical sources of ecosystem services required by people. Within 
a watershed, people living upstream and downstream are interdependent on resources such as 
water. In their efforts to secure their livelihoods, farmers may mine soils, leading to declined 
productivity,  soil  erosion,  and  increased  greenhouse  gases.  The  deteriorating  resource  base 
ultimately  push  farmers  into  poverty.  Water  continues  to  be  a  critical  basic  resource  for 
improved  productivity.  Soils  can  contain  water  and  are  a  main  buffer  against  drought  and 
floods  and  also  climatic  change  through  sequestration  of  atmospheric  carbon.  Soil  and 
groundwater are natural reservoirs that hold more water than all existing or conceivable man-
made  reservoirs.  Good  husbandry  of  soil,  water  and  crops  (soil  and  water  conservation 
measures), enhances agricultural productivity, increases groundwater recharge and base flows 
in streams.  
 Most of the  country is  increasingly  affected by  over-cultivation/over-grazing and improper 
conversion  of  forests,  woodlands  and  rangelands  to  farmland,  rapid  urbanization,  excessive 
exploitation of fuel  wood resources and land degradation. Environmental  issues in Ethiopia 
include deforestation, soil erosion, desertification, water shortage and degraded water quality, 
poaching,  and  domestic  and  industrial  pollution.  Water  resources  are  under  pressure  from 
agricultural  chemicals  and  urban  and  industrial  wastes.  Water-quality  problems  in  lakes, 
including water hyacinth infestation in Lake Tana and lakes in the Rift Valley for example, 
have  contributed  to  a  substantial  decline  in  fishing  output  and  endangered  fish  species.  
Output from forestry also has declined because of resource degradation and over-exploitation. 
Overexploitation in the past three decades has reduced the country’s timber resources by one-
half.  At  present,  only  2  per  cent  of  the  land  remains  forested,  and  an  estimated  50  square 
kilometers  of  forest  are  lost  each  year.  This  loss  of  forest  aggravates  erosion,  the  silting  of 
dams and flooding, and the loss of biodiversity. 
ix 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Consultation with Stakeholders and Communities 
The  Team  of  experts  assigned      to  prepare  the  project  design  report  made  field  visit  to 
SNNPR and Amhara Region and have carried out consultation and discussion with relevant 
stakeholders and beneficiaries. The field visit was   conducted from 4 to 10 March 2019. In 
the course of the consultation process, objective of the project including likely positive and 
negative  impacts  and  mitigation  measures  to  minimize  impacts  been  discussed  with 
stakeholders and beneficiaries.   
The  study  team  made  Consultation  with  the  key  stakeholders  beneficiaries  at  the  national, 
regional,  and  Woreda  levels.  Consultation  was  made  with  DBE,  AEMFI  and  FCA  at  the 
federal  level.  At  the  regional  level  consultation  was  made  with  AEMFI,  Amhara  Regional 
Cooperative  Agency,  ACSI,  RUSSACO  of  Soser  RUSSACO  Union,  Reb  RUSACCOS 
Union and with  the project  beneficiaries at  Addis  Zemen Town and with Soser RUSSACO 
Union at Dangla Town in Amkara region as well as with the SNNPR Cooperative Agency, 
SIDAMA CHALAL RUSSACO Union and SIDAMA MFI at the regional level.  
During the consultation the issue that was repeatedly raised by the officials and beneficiaries 
in the two regions is lack of adequate finance to further expand and diversify the businesses 
and requested the team to allocate more funds in RUPIF III to meet their needs. 
Project Impacts  
Project impact will not arise from the subcomponents of the project itself but from the project 
activities funded by RUFIP III    such as for example, livestock and agricultural production 
(small scale irrigation) dairy production and processing, livestock rearing and fattening and 
food crop production. Summary of Impacts and proposed mitigation measures are shown in 
the table below. 
 Impacts 
Socio-economic Impacts 
Health  Impact  due    Malaria 
Intensification 
due 
to 
shortage 
Power 
Establishment  of  small  agro-
processing plants   
Impacts due to misuse of 
Fertilizers and Pesticides 
Impact  on  air  quality  due  to 
poultry,  animal  rearing  and 
fattening 
Problem of over grazing to 
increase in animal population  
Occupational health and 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
-Avoid mosquito breeding sites by draining  ponds and  
standing waters; 
-Wear clothing such as long-sleeved shirts and pants  when 
working outdoors; 
Spraying clothing with repellents containing permethrin; 
-Use impregnated mosquito net during night; 
The  local  administration  should  plan  in  advance  to  get 
additional power that will adequately meet power demand of 
the   agro processing plants and the communities. 
Provide  Training  to    farmers    on    proper  application  and 
storage of agrochemicals 
-Clean animal wastes and remove  feed remnants regularly; 
-Remove dead animals and dispose them  promptly;  
-Avoid excess moisture in stacking sheds since excess 
moisture increases the amount of odor generated due to 
anaerobic decomposition; 
-Avoid grazing too early so that there will be enough grass in 
the dry season; 
-monitor rainfall pattern and growth of pasture; 
-Availability  and  proper  use  of  PPE  by  the  project 
x 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
safety and Child labour  
Impact on Cultural Heritage 
Land Expropriation 
Social Conflicts  
Impact Due to Lack of 
Consultation with the 
Community  
beneficiaries,  contractors,  laborers  who  are  engaged  in  the 
construction,  installation  and  operation  and  maintenance  of 
the proposed project activities shall be in place and regularly 
monitored  by  the  project  coordination  unit  at all phases of 
the project.  
-National labor law should be respected to avoid child labor 
Due attention should be given to the preservation of cultural 
heritage    during  screening  of  the  project  activities  in 
consultation with relevant institutions 
In the case of chance finds the contractor has to immediately 
contact  the  office  responsible  for  cultural  heritage  for 
guidance 
Prepare  RAP  and  pay  appropriate    compensation  to  the 
project affected population  
Encourage  and  consider  the  employment  of  local  labor  for 
semi-skilled  and  unskilled  people  including  women  and  
also  ensure  that  criteria  is  set  to  give  priority  to  poor  and 
family head households. 
Create  awareness  among  the  communities  on  the  benefits, 
adverse effects  and their   roles    to minimize impacts and 
sustainably managed  project  
Impact on the biophysical environment 
Ground  water  pollution  due 
to  misuse 
  of  chemical 
fertilizers and Pesticides  
Create awareness among the farmers   health effects of these 
inputs when misuse and   encourage to use manure (organic 
fertilizer) and also apply integrated Pesticide management to 
fight   pests.  
Soil Erosion due to 
expansion of agricultural 
activities to marginal land 
and steep slopes 
Loss  of soil fertility 
Excessive   exploitation of 
ground water due to  
irrigation  activities  
Shortage  in  animal  fodder 
and overgrazing  
to 
Deforestation 
expansion  of  Agricultural 
land  
due 
Impact  due  to  the  lack  of 
proper waste Management of 
agricultural residues     
-Steep  slopes  or  erodible  soils  can  be  alternatively  used  for 
forage production or grazing and steeply sloped lands under 
cultivation  can  be  converted  to  perennial  plantation  to 
minimize soil erosion 
-  Wooded  areas  with  poor  soils  and  steep  slopes  should  be 
left in their natural state.  
Provide  training  to  farmers  on  how  soil  fertility  can  be 
maintained by changing cropping pattern, growing   nitrogen-
fixing crops and composting of crop residues   
-Avoid  over  pumping  of  ground  water  beyond  recharge- 
discharge balance of the catchment areas. 
-Avoid grazing too early so that there will be enough grass in 
the  dry  season  and  monitor  rainfall  pattern  and  growth  of 
pasture 
Sensitized  and 
conserving forest to maintain  balance of the ecosystem  
  informed  farmers  of 
the  benefits  of 
Properly collect, transport and dispose such wastes on a site 
designated for this purpose.  
xi 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Climate Change Induced 
Impacts and Shocks  
Impact on Biodiversity 
Cumulative Impacts of the 
Project  
Rehabilitation  of    degraded  lands  by  Introducing  soil  and 
Water conservation techniques such as  such as terracing, tree 
planting  and  the  development  of  various  techniques  to 
minimize impact due to climate change. 
Avoid cutting of indigenous trees  and preserve tree species 
of biodiversity importance  
Mitigation of the impacts of individual businesses supported 
by  RUFIP  III  and  of  other  development  activities  that  are 
currently operating in the project area. 
Project implementation Arrangement 
The  environmental  and  social  management  process  during  implementation  of  RUFIP  III 
starts  with  the  project  activity  planning  and  demand  creation  process.  This  include 
identification of project  activities based on beneficiaries’ demands and subsequent technical 
support  and  advice  received  from  MFIs    to  prepare  their  proposal  and  loan  request 
application  documents  to  be  benefited  from  RUFIP  III  .  Based  on  the  type  and  scale  of 
project activities selected by the beneficiaries, loan applications/proposals will be submitted 
to DBE for approval. The DBE and MFI with the support from regional and Woreda offices, 
if  required  will  conduct  desk  appraisal  on  the  proposal/request  loan  document,  prior  to 
commencing  the  loan  eligibility  and  screening  against  the  national  environmental 
regulations and IFAD safeguard policies.  
The  screening  process  will  be  carried  out  against  the  pre-set  criteria  for  eligibility  of  the 
project  activities  and  environmental  and  social  safeguards  compliance  by  staffs/team  of 
experts  from  DBE  at  national  level  and  from  MFI  Branch  offices  at  regional  and  Woreda 
level using the screening checklist (Refer annex 2.2). Once DBE and MFI have completed 
the initial screening process, the safeguards officers will verify the screening process. The 
loan  request  proposal  and  screening  reports  will  be  complied  and  send  to  the 
environmental offices for further review and approval.  
EBE  will  also  review  the  plan  of  activities  and  screening  results  from  MFIs  and 
provide  decisions      if  any design  modifications  or  additional  safeguards  instruments  are 
required.  If  program  activities  of  any  significant  environmental  concerns  are  included, 
then  the  plan  document  will  be  directed  to  the  attention  of  the  DBE  or  MFIs.  The  final 
clearance  and  approval  of  the  plan  document  will  be  referred  to  the  respective  institutions 
with  all  the  enclosed  environmental  and  social  screening  documents  and  final  decision 
reports.   
As  stated  above  various  institutions  have  responsibilities  to  manage  and  complete  the 
overall  process  of  environmental  management  and  implementation  of  the  ESMF.  In  this 
regard,  DBE,  Regional  and  Woreda  bureaus  and  offices,  Regional  and  Woreda 
Environmental  offices,  Woreda  administrations,  other  relevant  line  ministries  are  major 
actors  for  the  implementations  of  the  proposed  programme  in  an  environmentally 
sustainable way. Duties and responsibilities of various institutions to implement the ESMF 
prepared for RUFIP III s have been discussed in detail the main body of this report. 
One  of  the  key  elements  in  the  framework  is  the  importance  of  the  development  and 
implementation  of  cost  effective  and  accessible  grievance  handling  mechanism.  Grievances 
from  the beneficiaries  will be actively managed  and tracked to  ensure that  the right  actions 
are  taken  in  an  appropriate  and  timely  manner,  with  corrective  actions  being  implemented 
xii 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
and  the  complaints  handled  as  early  as  possible  to  address  specific  concerns  raised  by  the 
project-affected persons. 
The  ESMF  also  outlines  that  the  successful  implementation  of  the  project  activities  will 
require  dynamic  and  multi-disciplinary  professionals.  Therefore,  regular  short  and  tailor 
made training courses and workshops will be required to reinforce the capacity and skills of 
the  direct  implementers,  stakeholders  and  beneficiaries  during  the  entire  project  cycle.  The 
existing  capacity  of  the  implementing  institutions,  particularly  DBE,  MFI,  PSE,  and  sector 
ministries to implement the ESMF and other environmental and social safeguard instruments 
also require assistance to independently carry out   screening and appraisal  on the proposed 
project  activities  and  supervise  the  implementation  of  the    Environmental  and  Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) that are included in the ESMF.  
Capacity building and technical assistance to all relevant implementing agents at the national, 
regional and woreda levels is needed to fill the capacity gaps to implement RUFIP III. The 
capacity building needs to properly implement the ESMF of RUFIP III is discussed in chapter 
12 in detail.  
Disclosure of documentation  
The IFAD policy on the disclosure of documents, approved in 2010, adopted the principle of 
“presumption  of  full  disclosure”  The  sharing  of  draft  and  final  ESIAs  and  other  relevant 
documents with programme and project stakeholders and interested parties will be subject to 
the above-mentioned principle. As such, the documents will be disclosed, when available, in 
a timely manner prior to project appraisal at the quality assurance stage on IFAD’s website 
and in an accessible place in the programme or project-affected area, in a form and language 
understandable to project-affected parties and other stakeholders, for the purposes of keeping 
them informed and obtaining their meaningful feedback.  
 Grievance and redress mechanism  
IFAD has established a complaints procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns 
and  complaints  with  respect  to  alleged  non-compliance  of  its  environmental  and  social 
policies  and  the  mandatory  aspects  of  its  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures  in  the  context  of  IFAD-supported  projects.  The  procedure  allows  affected 
complainants  to  have  their  concerns  resolved  in  a  fair  and  timely  manner  through  an 
independent  process.  IFAD  may  be  contacted  by  e-mail  at  SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org    or 
via  its  website  In  addition,  IFAD  will  require  the  borrower  to  provide  an  easily  accessible 
grievance  mechanism,  process  or  procedure  to  facilitate  resolution  of  concerns  and 
grievances  of  project-affected  parties  arising  in  connection  with  the  project  (on  a  case-by-
case basis for projects that pose special risks). Grievance redress will use existing formal and 
informal  grievance  mechanisms,  strengthened  or  supplemented  as  needed  with  project-
specific  arrangements,  and  will  be  proportionate  to  the  risks  and  impacts  of  the  project. 
Although  IFAD  normally  addresses  risks  primarily  through  its  quality  enhancement/quality 
assurance process and by means of project implementation support, it remains committed to: 
(i) working proactively with the affected parties to resolve complaints; (ii) ensuring that the 
complaints procedure and project-level grievance mechanism are easily accessible to affected 
persons, and (iii) maintaining records of all complaints and their resolutions.  
ESMF Implementation budget  
The budget earmarked to implement ESMF is about 540,000 US$.  This includes training on 
various topics, annual review and end-program-evaluation of the impacts of the ESMF by a 
consultant. Apart from the allocation of money, integration and coordination of various actors 
xiii 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
both  at  federal,  regional  and  woreda  levels  has  of  paramount  importance  for  the  successful 
realization of the proposed project activities.  
xiv 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Background 
IFAD has been engaging the rural financial institutions that provide financial services to the poor and 
marginalized  people through  the  Rural  Financial  Intermediation  Programme  (RUFIP)  I  and  II  since 
2003. More than seven million people are estimated to have accessed savings and credit products as a 
result of these interventions. The poverty levels in Ethiopia declined  from 38.7% in 2005 to 23.5% in 
2016 as a result of RUFIP I and II  and other similar interventions. A significant proportion of these 
people  are  emerging  out  of  the  poverty  trap  and  have  been  able  to  do  so  with  increased  financial 
access to improve their livelihoods. 
However,  close  to  35  million  rural  adults  do  not  have  access  to  loans  from  financial  institutions. 
RUFIP III will seek to strengthen livelihoods of the poor, enabling them to attain higher income and 
assets  that  will  improve  their  quality  of  life.  RUFIP  III  will  strive  to  capacitate  about  12  million 
clients  by  managing  risks  through  financial  and  non-financial  measures,  including  savings,  credit, 
insurance, peer support mechanisms and financial literacy.  RUFIP III will ensure that fledgling Rural 
Savings and Credit Cooperatives (RUSACCOs) and their unions get merited attention and rise to their 
full potential and respond to members’ needs. The building of Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) and 
financial cooperatives in to sustainable institutions that their clients can rely on will be a core outcome 
that  will  be  targeted.    RUFIP  III  aims  to  address  the  constraints  in  availability  of  and  access  to 
financial services to poor households and marginalized areas.   
The proposed RUFIP III is expected to contribute and scale up achievements and lessons learned from 
the two previous phases of the programme in order to increase outreach and results in rural poverty 
reduction among the targeted rural households. Design considerations will be given to such issues as 
improving  financial  literacy,  youth  unemployment,  making  rural  finance      institutions  more  robust, 
contribution  to  inclusive  rural  transformation,  capacity  requirements  at  different  government 
institutional levels and programme management. Opportunities to link or coordinate with other IFAD 
and other development partners’ interventions will also be explored. 
1.2   Objective of the Proposed Programme 
RUFIP III will seek to strengthen livelihoods of rural poor, enabling them to attain higher income and 
assets required to improve the quality of life. The proposed programme will strive to capacitate about 
13.5  million  clients1  of  RFIs  (of  which  6.5  million  would  be  new  entrants)  in  improving  their 
livelihoods  and  managing  risks  through  financial  and  non-financial  measures,  including  savings, 
credit and insurance.  RUFIP III will address the constraints in availability of and access to financial 
services  to  poor  households  and  marginalized  areas;  adopt  programmatic  approach  that  builds  on 
positive past experiences; introduce innovations, consolidate and scale up achievements and lessons 
learned so far. The overall goal of RUFIP III is improved livelihoods and reduced vulnerability and 
poverty  through  increased  incomes  and  better  ability  to  manage  risks  at  household  level.  The 
objective of the programme is to increase access to a range of financial products and services to rural 
households through sustainable rural financial institutions. 
RUFIP  III  will  directly  contribute  to  achievement  of  the  COSOP  (2017-21)  Strategic  Objective  1 
(SO1), enhanced resilience and productivity of ecosystems and livelihoods through  the provision of 
sustainable financial services and Strategic Objective 2 (SO2), improved market linkage and access to 
finance  and  technology,  through  its  focus  on  rural  and  agricultural  finance  and  the  associated  asset 
build up, income improvements and better and continuous market integration. It is also aligned with 
1 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
the IFAD Strategic Framework (2016-2025). RUFIP III is aligned to IFAD mainstreaming priorities 
relating to youth, women and pastoralists and also contribute to developing partnerships with public 
and private sector entities. RUFIP III will support achievement of three (3) Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG). 
RUFIP III will be achieved through a nationwide network of more than 11,000 RUSACCOs and their 
secondary structure (the Unions), and 38 MFIs that currently focus on rural communities. Improved 
access  to  finance  will  also  be  available  to  beneficiaries  of  other  IFAD  funded  projects  such  as 
PASIDP  and  LLRP  in  order  to  enhance  the  overall  impact  of  IFAD  portfolio  in  Ethiopia.  The 
programme  will  support  eligible  rural  financial  institutions  (RFIs)  to  bridge  their  liquidity  gaps 
through a credit fund; strengthen them through consolidation of the RUSACCO sector and  to enhance 
their  institutional  capacity  for  delivery  of  financial  services  through  capacity  building  activities; 
explore setting up a guarantee fund that would attract commercial banks and financial institutions to 
provide  resources  to  RFIs,  initiate  marketing  of  rural  client friendly  insurance  products through  the 
RFIs, continue to support ongoing automation of RFI’s MIS systems; and strengthen the regulatory 
and supervisory capacity of regulators, National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) and the Federal Cooperative 
Agency (FCA). 
The  key  impacts  envisaged  include  reduced  poverty  and  better  ability  to  cope  with  vulnerability 
arising  from  shocks.  The  programme  should  lead  to:  (i)  strong  rural  financial  institutions  that  offer 
financial  services  to  vulnerable  people;  (ii)  Wider  offer  of  services  and  products  responsive  to 
customer needs; iii) diversified and expanded business in RFIs; and, (iv) Effective Financial inclusion 
for marginalised people and regions.  
RUFIP  III  is  expected  to  scale  up  achievements  and  lessons  learned  from  RUFIP  I  and  II.  It  will 
reduce poverty levels through strengthening of livelihoods of the poor and reducing vulnerabilities by 
making the rural people resilient to shocks by increasing access to a range of financial products and 
services to rural households. 
1.3  Objective of the ESMF 
This  environmental  and  social  management  framework  (ESMF)  defines  the  steps,  processes  and 
procedures  for  screening,  scoping,  assessment  and  monitoring  to  be  undertaken  during  different 
phases of the programme. The framework is also designed to present  a  sample  Environmental and 
Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP),  outlining  the  measures  that  will  be  taken  to  avoid  the 
potential  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts,  or  if  avoidance  is  not  possible,  to 
minimize/mitigate them to  acceptable  levels.  It  contains  measures  and  plans  to  enhance positive 
impacts, provisions for estimating the costs of such measures and identify the relevant institutions 
responsible  for  implementing  and  monitoring  project  impacts.  In  addition,  it  assesses  capacity 
building needs to implement the ESMF. 
Implementation of RUFIP III is expected to generate positive and negative environmental and social 
impacts  on  biophysical  and  social  environment.    To  manage  environmental  and  social  issues  and 
climate risks of the project, it is essential to prepare the pertinent environmental and social safeguards 
instruments, including this ESMF. 
The  ESMF  will  help  to  establish  a  mechanism  to  systematically  identify,  predict,  evaluate,  and 
manage  beneficial  and  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts  of  the  project,  designing 
enhancement  measures  for  beneficial  impacts,  and  recommend  and  implement  mitigating  measures 
for adverse impacts. The sites where specific project activities will be implemented are not yet clear at 
this  stage  and  their  impacts  cannot  be  determined  until  planning  begins  in  collaboration  with 
beneficiaries at the grass root level. 
2 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The specific objectives of ESMF include the following: 
•  To  develop/establish  clear  procedures  and  tools  (including  checklists,  guidelines)  for 
environmental  and  social  impacts  assessment,  review,  approval,  implementation  and 
monitoring of project activities  to be financed under the Program interventions; 
•  To  specify  appropriate  roles  and  responsibilities  of  various  institutions/actors  in  different 
tiers,  and  outline  reporting  procedures  and  mechanisms  for  managing  and  monitoring 
environmental and social concerns related to the programme  
•  To  prepare  an  ESMP  which,  among  others,  constitutes  the  specific  likely  negative  impacts, 
mitigation  measures  along  with  indicators  to  be  monitored,  specific  responsible  institutions 
and the required budget; 
•  To determine the capacity building components (including training and technical assistance) 
for the successful realization of the provisions stated in the ESMF; and 
•  To indicate implementation strategies of the major issues outlined in the ESMF and ESMP. 
1.4 Study Methodology 
The  ESMF  has  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  applicable  National  policies  and  IFAD's  Social, 
Environment  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP).  The  task  has  been  conducted  by  using 
both  primary  and  secondary  sources.  The  methodologies  adopted  for  the  preparation  of  this  ESMF 
include literature review; consultations and focal group discussions with key institutions, stakeholders 
and  beneficiaries;  and  site  visits.  An  account  of  the  existing  biophysical  and  social  environment 
conditions  were  assembled  and  discussed  under  the  baseline  information  section  of  this  ESMF  and 
used in the impact assessment of the proposed project activities.  
Literature Review 
Review  on  the  existing  baseline  information  and  relevant  literatures  were  undertaken  that  helps  in 
obtaining further and deeper understanding of the proposed programme. A desk review of the national 
policies  and  legal  framework  and  IFAD's  SECAP  was  conducted.  Among  the  documents  that  were 
reviewed were ESMF documents prepared for similar projects and final supervision report of RUFIP 
II 2018.  
Review  on  the  existing  baseline  information  and  relevant  literature  materials  were  undertaken  that 
helps  to  obtain  further  and  deeper  understanding  of  the  proposed  programs.  A  desk  review  of  the 
national  policies  and  legal  framework  and  IFAD  environmental  and  social  safeguards  policies  and 
procedures were also reviewed to get relevant information. Among the documents that were reviewed  
include  Constitution  of  the  Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia,  Environmental  Policy  of 
Ethiopia,  Environnemental  Impact  Assessment  Proclamation  (FDRE  2002),  Environnemental 
Pollution Control Proclamation (FDRE 2002), Proclamation to Provide for the Expropriation of Land 
Holdings  for  Public  Purposes  and  Payment  of  Compensation  (FDRE,2005),  Ethiopia’s  Climate-
Resilient Green Economy Strategy (FDRE,2011), Growth and Transformation Plan(National Planning 
Commission (December 2015),  and the  SECAP of IFAD. 
Field visit 
The  RUFIP  III  design  mission    to  which  the  ESMF  consultant  was    a  member  was  fielded  to  the 
project  areas    from  25  February  till  15  March  2019.    The  mission  met  different  organizations, 
stakeholders in Addis Ababa and have made field visit  to Amhara and SNNPR regions.   During the 
field visits the mission interacted with four MFIs, two cooperative unions and three RUSACCOs.  In 
addition the mission held  meetings with eight MFIs and had extensive discussions with Development 
Bank of Ethiopia (DBE), National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE), Federal Cooperatives Association (FCA), 
Association of Ethiopian MicroFinance Institutions (AEMFI) and the World Bank.  The mission  team 
members  shared  their    preliminary  findings  in  a  meeting  on  15  March  2019  with  DBE  and  
implementing  partners  of  RUFIP  II.  The  field  mission  enabled  the  study  team  to  understand  the 
environmental  and  social  settings  of  the  proposed  project  area  and  identify  some  of  the  existing 
conditions and gaps during the implementation of RUFIP I and II.  
3 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Stakeholder Consultations 
A series of stakeholder consultations have been carried out with key resource persons, beneficiaries, 
institutions at the national, regional, and local levels. The discussions were facilitated by the 
programme coordinator of DBE. Discussions have also been made with officials and farmer 
beneficiaries   of Hawassa Zuria Woreda of the SNNPR and Addis Zemen Woreda office of the 
Amhara region. The project beneficiaries that participated in the discussions were farmers who are 
and have been obtaining credit from RUFIP I and II.  
The list of institutions consulted during the field work is provided in Annex 11.  During consultations 
and focus group discussions, the major objectives of the project were explained by the study team and 
various  issues  including  the  likely  positive  and  negative  impacts  and  the  respective  mitigation 
measures have been raised and discussed by the stakeholders/beneficiaries.  
Questionnaire  was also  distributed  by  AEMFI  to  the MFIs  to  gather information  on  climate  related 
shocks in the proposed prgramme areas and four MFIs replied to the questionnaire. The MFIs in their 
response identified areas and trends in the rates of clients defaulting during the time of climate related 
shocks, measures taken by institutions to maintain the loan portfolio and specific requests made by the 
client  during  climate  related  shocks.  Refer  to  Annex  12  for  the  details  of  their  responses  to  the 
questions raised using the questionnaire.     
4 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
2 Project Description 
2.1 Review of RUFIP II  
During RUFIP II, the focus was on strengthening of MFIs, building and improving the rural financial 
cooperatives  (RUSACCOs)  and  their  unions,  capacity  building  of  staff  of  FCA,  NBE  and  others.  
These  capacity  building  and  institution  building  interventions  were  accompanied  a  credit  line  for 
providing  loan  funds  for  Rural  Financial  Institutions,  helping  them  to  offer  credit  products  to 
customers.  RUFIP  II  is  estimated  to  have  successfully  reached  more  than  8  million  clients,  mostly 
first time users of formal financial services.  The studies carried out from time to time and the field 
mission interactions reveal that a significant proportion of the clients have come out of poverty and 
generate  viable  incomes.  The  study  carried  out  by  Peace  Microfinance  brought  out  that  apart  from 
livelihood  improvement,  there  were  significant  social  payoffs  arising  from  RUFIP  II.  Two  studies 
conducted  on    RUFIP  II  in  2017  indicated  there  is  income  and  asset  gains  besides  improving  the 
quality of life of the project beneficiaries’ . But there are some continuing challenges. The challenges 
that  were  raised    during  the  consultation  meetings  with  RUSSACOs,  MFIs  and  the  beneficiaries  
include gaps in funding projects activities, the absence of  monitoring system and data base of IFAD 
projects, the need for co-financing to fill the gaps,  means of  handling  drought and climate change 
shocks,  means of filling   the liquidity gap, availability of insurance  to reduce  shock during death, 
payment extension or exemptions during drought, loan loss provision,  synergy with ongoing projects 
by  different  institutions,  frequency  of  drought,  promotion  of  certain  financial  products    for 
diversifying business to improve livelihood and  promoting saving as risk mitigation.  
During  the  consultation  meetings  issues  such  as  gaps  in  funding  projects  activities,  the  absence  of 
monitoring system and data base of IFAD  projects, the need  of co-financing, synergy with ongoing 
projects by different institutions, means of filling the liquidity gap were raised by the RUSSACOs and 
MFIs  whereas  the      availability  of  insurance  to  reduce  shock  during  death,  payment  extension  or 
exemptions during drought and loan loss provision was raised by the project beneficiaries.  To fill the 
financial gaps it was proposed to create synergy and cooperation with other institutions such as the 
World  Bank  for  co-financing  some  of  the  project  activities  relevant  to  their  manadate.Despite  the 
considerable  gender  disparity  in  financial institution outreach in  the  country,  RUFIP  II  has  enabled 
both women and men to participate in the programme and benefit from the incremental credit.  Of the 
5.7 million households that RUFIP II has supported in outreach, 45% are females and 55% males.  
 RUFIP  II  enhanced  increase  in  climate  resilience  as  it  enables  households  to  engage  in  adaptive 
interventions.  Linkages  have  been  developed  between  RUFIP  II  and  other  IFAD-funded  initiatives 
promoting micro- insurance innovations, with the objective to increase resilience, strengthen capacity 
to manage risks and improve the livelihoods of poor rural households who depend on off-farm and 
on-farm income. 
The  support  given  to  RUFIP  II  clients  by  Development  Agents  who  have  been  trained  in  natural 
resource  management  contributed  to  the  moderate  improvement  in  the  environment  and  the  natural 
resources of the project target areas. RUFIP II clients who are mostly farmers are generally aware of 
natural resource management.  
2.2  Description of RUFIP III 
5 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
2.2.1 Project objectives, geographic area and target groups  
RUFIP III will seek to strengthen livelihoods of rural poor, enabling them to attain higher income and 
assets required to improve the quality of life. The proposed programme will strive to capacitate about 
13.5  million  clients2  of  RFIs  (of  which  6.5  million  would  be  new  entrants)  in  improving  their 
livelihoods  and  managing  risks  through  financial  and  non-financial  measures,  including  savings, 
credit and insurance.  RUFIP III will address the constraints in availability of and access to financial 
services  to  poor  households  and  marginalized  areas;  adopt  programmatic  approach  that  builds  on 
positive past experiences; introduce innovations, consolidate and scale up achievements and lessons 
learned so far. The overall goal of RUFIP III is improved livelihoods and reduced vulnerability and 
poverty  through  increased  incomes  and  better  ability  to  manage  risks  at  household  level.  The 
objective of the programme is to increase access to a range of financial products and services to rural 
households through sustainable rural financial institutions. 
RUFIP  III  will  directly  contribute  to  achievement  of  the  COSOP  (2017-21)  Strategic  Objective  1 
(SO1), enhanced resilience and productivity of ecosystems and livelihoods through the provision of 
sustainable financial services and Strategic Objective 2 (SO2), improved market linkage and access to 
finance  and  technology,  through  its  focus  on  rural  and  agricultural  finance  and  the  associated  asset 
build up, income improvements and better and continuous market integration. It is also aligned with 
the IFAD Strategic Framework (2016-2025). RUFIP III is aligned to IFAD mainstreaming priorities 
relating to youth, women and pastoralists and also contribute to developing partnerships with public 
and private sector entities. RUFIP III will support achievement of three (3) Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) as explained in Para 4. 
RUFIP III will be achieved through a nationwide network of more than 11,000 RUSACCOs and their 
secondary structure (the Unions), and 38 MFIs that currently focus on rural communities. Improved 
access  to  finance  will  also  be  available  to  beneficiaries  of  other  IFAD  funded  projects  such  as 
PASIDP  and  LLRP  in  order  to  enhance  the  overall  impact  of  IFAD  portfolio  in  Ethiopia.  The 
programme  will  support  eligible  rural  financial  institutions  (RFIs)  to  bridge  their  liquidity  gaps 
through  a  credit  fund;  strengthen  them    through  consolidation  of  the  RUSACCO  sector  and    to 
enhance  their  institutional  capacity  for  delivery  of  financial  services  through  capacity  building 
activities;  explore  setting  up  a  guarantee  fund  that  would  attract  commercial  banks  and  financial 
institutions to provide resources to RFIs, initiate marketing of rural client friendly insurance products 
through the RFIs, continue to support ongoing automation of RFI’s MIS systems; and strengthen the 
regulatory and supervisory capacity of regulators, National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) and the Federal 
Cooperative Agency (FCA). 
The  key  impacts  envisaged  include  reduced  poverty  and  better  ability  to  cope  with  vulnerability 
arising  from  shocks.  The  programme  should  lead  to:  (i)  strong  rural  financial  institutions  that  offer 
financial  services  to  vulnerable  people;  (ii)  Wider  offer  of  services  and  products  responsive  to 
customer needs; iii) diversified and expanded business in RFIs; and, (iv) Effective Financial inclusion 
for marginalised people and regions.  
In terms of geographic coverage, RUFIP III will continue to be a nationwide initiative with increased 
focus  on  marginalized  areas  (drought  prone  areas,  pastoral  areas  and  areas  with  low  penetration  of 
financial services) and achieve goals of GTPII and the national financial inclusion strategy.  
6 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The  proposed  target  group  consists  of  13.5  million  rural  people  (about  6.5  million  would  be  new 
clients, 50% will be women and 10% youth) with financial services requirements for asset build up 
and productive utilization of loans for agricultural development and other rural enterprises, especially 
youth-led and women-led enterprises. People in marginalized areas would be served through savings, 
credit and insurance products. Beneficiaries of other IFAD supported investment projects  – PASDIP 
II, PCDP III, LLRP – will be targeted as well. RUFIP III also aims to facilitate access to finance by 
rural  communities  in  programmes  and  projects  financed  by  other  development  partners  where 
technical capacities are being built among rural communities for improving livelihoods and enhancing 
economic performance.  
RUFIP  III  target  groups  can  be  classified  as  very  poor  and  poor  (subsistence  households,  living 
below  the  poverty  and  food  poverty  line  and  being  often  food  insecure  and  vulnerable),  transitory 
poor (households producing a surplus for marketing, being food secure but at risk from economic or 
climate shocks) and better off (commercially oriented households with secure livelihoods is and able 
to cope with shocks). RUFIP III estimates to target about 3.25 Million clients from very poor and poor 
households  7  Million  transitory  poor  households  and  3.25  million  better  off  clients.    Thus  75%  of 
RUFIP  direct  benefits  are expected to reach the  poorest and  most  vulnerable  groups  and  regions in 
Ethiopia.  
Targeting and social inclusion strategy: While RUFIP  II had a self- targeting approach driven by 
the RFIs, RUFIP III will apply a combination of self-targeting and direct targeting approach. While 
client  enrolment  decisions  are  left  to  the  RFI,  they  will  be  capacitated  and  incentivised  (through 
resources  access  criteria)  to  focus  on  the  most  vulnerable  and  marginalized  groups.  RFIs  will  be 
required  to  track  and  report  coverage  of  clients  of  different  categories  as  defined  in  the  targeting 
strategy. Some of the capacity building interventions and LOC will be utilized for incentivizing RFIs 
to implement the programme’s targeting strategy. A key requirement for RFIs will be the preparation 
of  a  strategy  for  meeting  targeting  priorities  relating  to  poor  segments,  gender,  youth  and 
marginalized areas with the help of baseline data. This plan will be integrated in to the AWPB targets. 
Asdetailed  in  the  PIM,  the  mobilization  process  will  be  conducted  in  close  collaboration  with  
Unions/FCA  as  well  as  MFIs.  RUFIP  III  team  and  Region/Woreda  Promotion  agents  will  work 
together to bring about the inclusion of vulnerable households. 
Targeting criteria: To ensure that project services will serve the intended households, the targeting 
and  social  inclusion  strategy  will  prioritize  drought  prone  areas  where  majority  of  poor  are 
concentrated  and  where  smallholder  farmers  are  highly  affected  by  climate  shocks.  These  will  be 
identified,  among  others,  through  the  presence  of  safety  net  programmes  (i.e.  PSNP  4)  where 
communities  are  supported  to  develop  alternative  income  generating  activities  (IGA)  and  savings 
through  RUSACCOs.  In  addition,  the  available  statistics  on  poverty  and  malnutrition  levels  across 
Woredas  and  Kebeles  will  inform  the  geographic  targeting  and  the  selection  of  priority 
areas/communities.  
Improving  nutrition  among  food  insecure  households:  The  project  recognizes  that  access  to 
finance  is  a  key  element  that  can  play  an  important  role  in  combatting  malnutrition  if  it  is 
accompanied  by  awareness  creation.  Limited  nutrition  knowledge  among  beneficiaries  may  prevent 
RUFIP III target groups to translate increased production and income as a result of access to finance 
into  improved  diets.  The  project  will  contribute  to  improved  nutrition  by  promoting  awareness  at 
community level, through nutrition education and demonstrations, with special focus in areas where 
higher food vulnerability is registered due to negative environmental effects (i.e. drought).   
7 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The  Gender  Mainstreaming  Strategy  will  consider  scaling  up  of  best  practices  which  have  been 
effective for women and youth inclusion and outreach, as well as promotion of suitable products for 
them. RUFIP I and II have demonstrated experiences on outreach of women and data disaggregation: 
they  account  cumulatively  for  46%  RUSACCO  members,  whose  board  of  directors  include  40% 
women representatives (exceeding the minimum required at 30%) and 44% of MFIs clients. RUFIP 
III  will  require  implementing  partners  to  reach  a  level  of  at  least  50%  women  clients  and  in 
RuSACCO boards. The performance of RFIs’ in gender coverage will be tracked.    
The youth mainstreaming strategy recognizes the relevance to scale up successful interventions and 
results  such  as  the  UNCDF  supported  Youth  Start  (YS)  programme.  It  constitutes  a  source  of 
evidence-based  achievements  for  increased  growth  rate  of  youth  clients  (up  to  70%)  and  good 
practices and training modules to be taken up for replication regarding young men and women access 
to  finance.  RUFIP  III  will  consider  the  existing  surveys  as  well  as  methodologies/training  modules 
developed with support of YS programme and Women’s World Banking (WWB)3, to be adapted to 
the  different  regional  contexts  and  trainings  for  MFIs/FCAs  staff  at  all  levels.  This  intervention  is 
expected to expand finance education among  youth, catalyse the growth of young clientele of RFIs 
and enhance investment in viable enterprises. 
2.2.2 Components/outcomes and activities  
Description of Components and Activities 
RUFIP III  is  a national sector-wide investment that has been carefully conceptualized and enhanced 
through subsequent stages of formulation and appraisal and it  seeks synergy and complementarities 
with  the  country’s  national  development  policy  in  general  and  poverty  reduction  strategies    in 
particular as well as and with other donors’ initiatives working on  similar projects. The programme is 
prepared  in  line  with  IFAD’s  comparative advantage  that focuses  on ‘enabling poor rural  people  to 
access the assets, services and opportunities they need to overcome poverty’ 
The proposed Programme will be implemented over a 6-year period and consist of four components: 
(i) Building capacity of institutions and clients; (ii) Improving regulation, supervision and institutional 
discipline  (iii)  Facilitating  funds  flow  and  diversification  of  RFI  business,  and  (iv)  Programme 
Management.  
Component 1: Building capacity of institutions and clients 
Component 1 focuses on building the capacity of RFIs (RUSACCOs and MFIs) and more importantly 
their  clients.    The  objectives  of  this  component  are  to  enhance  financial  literacy  among  the  rural 
population to enhance uptake of financial products and to strengthen the institutional capacity of RFIs 
to better serve the target groups. The anticipated outcome is an operationally sustainable network of 
MFIs and RUSSACOs to serve poor.  
Training in financial literacy in more remote Woredas of the country is of critical importance. Client 
capacity  to  use  financial  products  and  services  will  be  built  up  through  structured  courses,  and 
delivered  by  the  RFIs.  Greater  financial  literacy,  combined  with  wider  institutional  presence,  will 
increase  membership  in  RFIs,  enhance  uptake  of  financial  products  and  services,  strengthen  client 
relationship  and  improve  consumer  protection.  IFAD's  experience  with  promoting  financial  literacy 
trainings  of  immediate  use  to  low  income  rural  people  will  be  drawn  upon  from  IFAD-supported 
8 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
SACCO development programmes in  Uganda and other countries in the region.  Client training will 
also consider investment aspects, especially for youths to enhance their ability to invest in productive 
enterprises. The IFAD financed trainings will be embedded in the annual training calendars of MFIs 
and RUSACCOs and will utilize training materials developed under RUFIP II.   
The  technical  and  operational  capacities  of  the  RFIs  would  be  strengthened  through  training  and 
exposure  to  good  practices/institutions.  High  level  training  courses  would  be  carried  out  for  senior 
management of RFIs with involvement of AEMFI and other competent service providers. Training of 
trainers from the RFIs would be carried out on key operational aspects which would then be used by 
RFIs to train mid and junior level staff. Training on supervisory and regulatory subjects specified by 
the regulators (NBE and FCA) would be provided from time to time to address emerging needs. RFIs 
will  be  supported  for  improved  internal  systems  and  processes,  higher  levels  of  information 
technology adoption, introduction new products, services and financial sector partnerships.  Some of 
the IT adoption related work that commenced during RUFIP II (Enabling RFIs to acquire IT systems 
and customized software) would be continued and brought to a fruitful conclusion. 
Component  2:  Improving  regulation,  supervision  and  institutional  discipline.    This  component 
will deal with regulatory capacities for ensuring best performance outputs from  RFIs and improved 
client protection.   The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacities of National Bank of 
Ethiopia and the FCA in their mandates to supervise and regulate MFIs and RUSSACCOs (and their 
Unions),  respectively  in  a  manner  that  improves  client  confidence  in  financial  services  and  affords 
protection from risks and losses in use of RFIs’ services. Regulatory and supervisory support under 
this  component  will  directly  enhance  the  operational  sustainability  of  MFIs  and  RUSACCOs.  With 
RUFIP support, NBE has implemented a number of measures to strengthen its supervision over MFIs, 
including capacity building of staff, development of policy framework, covering areas such as micro-
insurance,  and  consolidation  of  MFI  sector  through  mergers,  acquisitions  and  liquidation,  agent 
banking  and  leasing  for  rural  areas.  NBE  will  continue  to  be  supported  for  policy  development  for 
RFIs, in aspects such as fit and proper criteria for diversification of business, governance, advanced 
risk  management,  customer  protection  and  social  performance  practices.  Need  based  support  for 
improving MIS at NBE to enhance supervision rigor will continue. 
FCA  for  RuSACCOs:  The  process  of  separating  the  legal,  as  well  as  regulatory  and  supervisory 
responsibilities  between  financial  and  non-financial  cooperatives  and  setting  up  dedicated  financial 
cooperatives regulation wing in FCA will be supported. A twinning arrangement as well as an IFAD-
financed  technical  assistance  has  produced  useful  recommendations  that  will  be  the  basis  of  a 
roadmap for orderly separation of these functions between financial and non-financial cooperatives. 
Supervision and regulation capacity of FCA will be developed further. 
Component  3:  Facilitating  funds  flow  and  diversification  of  business  will  support  the  RFIs  in 
securing resources required to meet the credit demand. Apart from the line of credit from IFAD and 
EU, domestic funds from Government of Ethiopia, Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) and other 
commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions  is  envisaged.  The  objective  of  this  component  is  to 
improve  financial  support  mechanisms  to  meet  the  financial  services  requirement  of  IFAD  target 
groups.  The  anticipated  outcome  is  increased  availability  of  lendable  resources,  capital  and  savings 
for  MFIs  and  RUSSACOs  benefitting  from  the  line  of  credit.    The  proposed  financial  instruments 
consist  of  a  lending  facility  (Line  of  Credit  -LOC),  and  non-lending  credit  enhancement 
mechanisms. RUFIP III would utilize a lending facility with a number of innovative features: (i) the 
lending  ratio  between  the  MFI  and  RUSACCO  sector  would  be  monitored  regularly  to  equitably 
9 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
allocate  resources  between  the  RFIs;  (ii)  access  to  loan  fund  resources  would  be  based  on 
performance and client targeting criteria so that different types of RFIs can avail of the LOC.  (criteria 
proposed:    such  as  size  of  the  RFI,  financial  performance  indicators,  region/woreda  of  operation, 
inclusion  of  target  client  base  from  among  women,  youth,  etc.,)  and  (iii)  coverage  of  clients  from 
other partner projects. The criteria for availing funds from credit line will level the field for small and 
medium MFIs and prioritize the needs of pastoral and other underserved regions.  RUSACCOs would 
have an adequate allocation of credit resources so that they can meet the needs of their members more 
effectively. Out of the LOC, an amount of $ 32.14 million would be utilized in financing MFIs and 
Unions in the PROSEAD catchment areas for undertaking AVCF activities. Out of the co-financing 
contribution of EIB, about $ 25 million would be utilised to develop and strengthen leasing portfolio 
for  rural  enterprises.  The  modalities  of  leasing  will  be  worked  out  in  detail  before  the  start  of  the 
programme. 
To  attract  interest  of  commercial  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  in  funding  of  RFIs,  a 
guarantee  fund  in  collaboration  with  AGRA  and  other  partner  institutions  is  envisaged.    The 
guarantee fund will make access to loan resources easy from commercial banks for small and medium 
MFIs, Cooperative Unions and also reduce the cost of borrowing. The guarantee fund would examine 
different alternatives for guaranteeing different instruments issued by RFIs and expand the range of 
possibilities.  
 In view of the multitude of different lines of credit currently in the market and also the need to put 
domestic  support  funds  under  a  unified  and  professional  management,  stakeholders  expressed  the 
desire to IFAD for creating a more sustainable loan fund structure and use RUFIP III as an anchor and 
launch platform. To achieve this, RUFIP III will provide linkages and access to finance for clients of 
other development projects that need credit, savings or insurance products.  The LOC will be used by 
RFIs for on-lending to clients of other projects for which linkage protocols will be in place.  
In  a  bid  to  improve  risk  mitigation  capacity  of  clients,  initiatives  on  marketing  of  rural  insurance 
products to the clients of RFIs will be taken. The MFIs and RUSACCO Unions would be linked to 
willing  insurance  companies  to  train  their  staff  to  market  insurance  products  (life,  health,  crop, 
livestock,  etc.)  that  are  suitable  to  their  clients.    In  collaboration  with  EU  supported  PROSEAD 
project,  access  to  finance  for  farmers,  primary  cooperatives  and  Unions  operating  in  the  catchment 
areas of Agro Industrial Parks (AIP) promoted by the GoE will be supported. 
Component  4:  Programme  Management:  This  component  will  support  the  management  of  the 
project  implementation  through  Programme  Steering  Committee  and  Programme  Coordination  and 
Management  Unit  (PCMU)  in  DBE.  The  PCMU  will  be  strengthened  with  appropriate  expertise  to 
address the technical needs of RUFIP III, such as expertise in social performance, customer protection 
and  poverty  tracking  to  fully  reflect  the  focus  of  RUFIP  III  on  poverty  outcomes  and  also 
mainstreaming IFAD priorities. Based on experiences from RUFIP II's PCMU capacity on financial 
management,  procurement,  MIS  and  core  banking  system,  as  well  as  product  development  will  be 
strengthened. The weaknesses in MIS and Monitoring and evaluation, information flow and quarterly 
reporting  experienced  during  RUFIP  II  will  also  be  addressed  under  RUFIP  III,  with  appropriate 
training,  staffing  and  systems.    Given  the  two  decades  involvement  in  RUFIP  by  2025,  knowledge 
management will be a key part of programme management. The lessons would be documented in the 
form of cases, best practices and tools utilized and made available in public domain. 
10 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
3 Relevant Policies, Legal and Administrative Framework 
3.1 National Policy and Legal Frameworks  
The effects of the proposed programme on the environment should be assessed in order to ensure that 
the  programme  is  in  harmony  with  the  natural  and  socio-economic  environment  and  also  ensure 
sustainability  of  the  resulting  development.  The  following  section  provides  a  summary  of  IFAD's 
SECAP  and  the  national  policies,  legislative  frameworks,  guidelines  and  standards  relevant  to  the 
proposed programme. 
3.1.1 The Constitution   
The  Constitution  of  the  Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia  was  issued  in  August  1995  with 
several  provisions,  which  provides  basic  and  comprehensive  principles  and  guidelines  for 
environmental  protection,  and  management  in  the  country.  The  relevant  articles  and  environmental 
provisions of the constitution among others are the following: 
Article 35- Rights of Women  
•  The  historical legacy  of inequality  and  discrimination  suffered  by  women  in  Ethiopia taken 
into account, women, in order to remedy this legacy, are entitled to affirmative measures. The 
purpose of such measures shall be to provide special attention to women so as to enable them 
to compete and participate on the basis of equality with men in political, social and economic 
life as well as in public and private institutions;  
•  Women  have  the  right  to  full  consultation  in  the  formulation  of  national  development 
policies,  the  designing  and  execution  of  projects,  and  particularly  in  the  case  of  projects 
affecting the interests of women;  
•  Women have the right to acquire, administer, control, use and transfer property. In particular, 
they  have  equal  rights  with  men  with  respect  to use,  transfer,  administration  and  control of 
land. They shall also enjoy equal treatment in the inheritance of property; and,  
•  Women  shall  have  a  right  to  equality  in  employment,  promotion,  pay,  and  the  transfer  of 
pension entitlements.  
Article 40- The Right to Property 
•  The  right  to  ownership  of  rural  and  urban  land,  as  well  as  of  all  natural  resources,  is 
exclusively vested to the State and in the peoples of Ethiopia. Land is a common property of 
the Nations, Nationalities and Peoples of Ethiopia and shall not be subject to sale or to other 
means of exchange.  
Article 43- The Right to Development 
•  The Peoples of Ethiopia as a whole, and each Nation, Nationality and People in Ethiopia in 
particular have the right to improved living standards and to sustainable development; and, 
•  Nationals  have  the  right  to  participate  in  national  development  and,  in  particular,  to  be 
consulted with respect to policies and projects affecting their community.  
Article 44- Environmental Rights  
•  All persons have the right to a clean and healthy environment; and,  
•  All persons who have been displaced or whose livelihoods have been adversely affected as a 
result  of  State  programs  have  the  right  to  commensurate  monetary  or  alternative  means  of 
compensation, including relocation with adequate State assistance. 
11 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Article 90- Social Objectives  
•  To  the  extent  the  country’s  resources  permit,  policies  shall  aim  to  provide  all  Ethiopians 
access to public health and education, clean water, housing, food and social security; and,  
•  Education  shall  be  provided  in  a  manner  that  is  free  from  any  religious  influence,  political 
partisanship or cultural prejudices.  
Article 92- Environmental Objectives  
•  Government  shall  endeavor  to  ensure  that  all  Ethiopians  live  in  a  clean  and  healthy 
environment;  
•  The design and implementation of programs and projects of development shall not damage or 
destroy the environment;  
•  People have the right to full consultation and to the expression of views in the planning and 
implementations of environmental policies and projects that affect them directly; and,  
•  Government and citizens shall have the duty to protect the environment.  
3.1.2 Relevant Policies  
The following policies are relevant to RUFIP III since it will give policy guidance to prevent or mitigate 
environmental impacts of RUFIP III   that may arise due to prgramme implementation. 
(a) Environmental Policy of Ethiopia 
The first comprehensive statement of Environmental Policy of Ethiopia (EPE) was approved by the 
Council  of  Ministers  in  April  1997  that  was  based  on  the  policy  and  strategic  findings  and 
recommendations of the Conservation Strategy of Ethiopia. The policy is aimed at guiding sustainable 
social and economic development of the country through the conservation and sustainable utilization 
of the natural, man-made and cultural resources and the environment at large. The overall policy goal 
is to improve and enhance the health and quality of life of all Ethiopians and to promote sustainable 
social  and  economic  development  through  the  sound  management  and  use  of  natural,  human-made 
and  cultural  resources  and  the  environment  as  a  whole  so  as  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  present 
generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 
The specific Policy objectives seek to, among others: 
• 
•  Ensure that the benefits from the exploitation of non-renewable resources are extended as far 
into the future as can be managed, and minimize the negative impacts of their exploitation on 
the use and management of other natural resources and the environment; 
Incorporate the full economic, social and environmental costs and benefits of natural resource 
development into the planning, implementation and accounting processes by a comprehensive 
valuation  of  the  environment  and  the  services  it  provides,  and  by  considering  the  social  and 
environmental costs and benefits which cannot currently be measured in monetary terms;  
•  Prevent the pollution of land, air and water in the most cost-effective way so that the cost of 
effective preventive intervention would not exceed the benefits; 
•  Conserve,  develop,  sustainably  manage  and  support  Ethiopia’s  rich  and  diverse  cultural 
heritage; and, 
•  Raise  public  awareness  and  promote  understanding  of  the  essential  linkages  between 
environment and development. 
  (b) Ethiopian Water Resources Management Policy 
The  overall  goal  of  the  Ethiopian  Water  Sector  Policy  is  to  enhance  and  promote  all  national  efforts 
towards the efficient, equitable and optimum utilization of the available water resources of Ethiopia for 
significant socio-economic development on sustainable basis. The objectives of Water Resources Policy 
are the following: 
•  Development  of  the  water  resources  of  the  country  for  economic  and  social  benefits  of  the 
people, on equitable and sustainable basis; 
12 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
•  Allocation  and  apportionment  of  water  based  on  comprehensive  and  integrated  plans  and 
optimum  allocation  principles  that  incorporate  efficiency  of  use,  equity  of  access,  and 
sustainability of the resource; 
•  Managing and combating drought as well as other associated slow on-set disasters through, 
inter-alia,  efficient  allocation,  redistribution,  transfer,  storage  and  efficient  use  of  water 
resources; 
•  Combating  and  regulating  floods  through  sustainable  mitigation,  prevention,  rehabilitation 
and other practical measures; and, 
•  Conserving, protecting and enhancing water resources and the overall aquatic environment on 
sustainable basis. 
 (c) National Health Policy 
Ethiopia  has  a  low  level  of  health  coverage  even  in  comparison  with  other  Sub-Saharan  countries. 
This  is  largely  related  to  low  levels  of  income  and  widespread  poverty,  low  levels  of  education, 
nutritional deficiencies, poor environmental conditions, and inadequate access to health services. The 
Government has therefore assigned a very high priority to significantly improve health care and, in 
1998, issued a health policy. 
(d)  Land Tenure Policy 
The  Constitution  of  the  Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia  (FDRE)  states  that  the  right  to 
ownership of rural and urban land, as well as all natural resources, is exclusively vested in the State 
and People of Ethiopia. Article 40 of the Constitution indicates that land is a common property of the 
Nations, Nationalities and the People of Ethiopia, and shall not be subjected to sale or to other means 
of transfer.   
The  Land  Tenure  Policy  of  Ethiopia  strongly  supports  the  principle  that  project  plans  must  include 
attractive  and  sustainable  resettlement  strategies  to  the  people  who  are  going  to  be  displaced  as  a 
result of the development plan, and they have to be fully convinced, compensated and have been able 
to participate in all phases of the project implementation.     
(e) National Biodiversity Policy 
The  National  Biodiversity  Policy  (NBP)  was  established  in  1998  based  on  a  holistic  ecosystem 
approach to conserve, develop and utilize the country's biodiversity resources. One of the objectives 
of the biodiversity policy is to integrate biodiversity conservation and development into Federal and 
Regional  agricultural,  health,  industrial  and  overall  national  economic  development  strategies  and 
plans.  
(f) National Social Protection Policy of Ethiopia 
The main objectives of Social Protection Policy of Ethiopia are the following: 
•  Protect  poor  and  vulnerable  individuals,  households  and  communities  from  the  adverse 
• 
• 
effects of shocks and destitution; 
Increase the scope of social insurance; 
Increase access to equitable and quality health, education and social welfare services to build 
human capital thus breaking the intergenerational transmission of poverty; 
•  Guarantee  a  minimum  level  of  employment  for  the  long  term  unemployed  and  under-
employed; 
•  Enhance  the  social  status  and  progressively  realize  the  social  and  economic  rights  of  the 
excluded and marginalized; and, 
•  Ensure  the  different  levels  of  society  are  taking  appropriate  responsibility  for  the 
implementation of social protection policy. 
13 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
 (g) Energy Policy of Ethiopia 
Ethiopia's  energy  policy  document  drafted  in  1994  encourages  the  use  of  indigenous  resources  and 
renewable energy. The general objectives of the Energy policy are:  
•  To ensure a reliable supply of energy at the right time and at affordable prices, particularly to 
support  the  country's  agricultural  and  industrial  development  strategies  adopted  by  the 
government; 
•  To ensure and encourage a gradual shift from traditional energy sources use to modern energy 
sources; 
•  To  stream-line  and  remove  bottlenecks  encountered  in  the  development  and  utilization  of 
energy resources and to give priority to the development of indigenous energy resources with 
a goal toward attaining self-sufficiency; 
•  To set general guidelines and strategies for the development and supply of energy resources;  
•  To increase energy utilization efficiency and reduce energy wastage; and,  
•  To ensure that the development and utilization of energy is benign to the environment. 
Currently, this National Energy Policy is under review to identify the gaps between what is stated in 
the  1994  National  energy  policy  and  the  existing  status,  as  well  as  the  anticipated  energy  resource 
development. The potential areas that are considered in updating the Ethiopia National Energy policy 
(1994) include: among others are current technological levels, bottlenecks in the energy development 
including cross cutting issue, etc. 
3.1.3 Strategies 
The following strategies are relevant in one way or another to RUFIP III since it will provide strategy to 
prevent  or  mitigate  environmental  impacts  of  RUFIP  III      that  may  arise  due  to  programme 
implementation. 
(a)  Conservation Strategy of Ethiopia 
The Conservation Strategy of Ethiopia, which was approved by the Council of Ministers, provided a 
strategic framework for integrating environmental planning into policies, programs and projects. With 
regard  to  development  of  alternative  energy  resources  and  their  utilization,  the  relevant  strategies 
include the following: 
•  Develop  alternative  energy  sources  (e.g.  solar  -power,  wind,  biogas,  agricultural  bio-fuel, 
liquid bio-fuel or small hydroelectric plants) for towns and villages remote from the national 
grid; 
•  Acquire,  develop,  test  and  disseminate  appropriate  and  improved  energy  use  technologies 
(e.g. improved stoves, charcoal kilns, -powered cookers and heaters); and, 
•  Demonstrate and support the use of other energy sources (e.g. geothermal, solar, etc.) in the 
various economic sectors where it is currently little used such as in transportation, irrigation, 
crop-drying, food processing, fish drying, and thermal heating. 
(b) Ethiopia’s Climate-resilient Green Economy Strategy 
The Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has initiated the Climate-Resilient 
Green Economy (CRGE) initiative to protect the country from the adverse effects of climate change 
and  to  build  a  green  economy  that  will  help  realise  its  ambition  of  reaching  middle-income  status 
before 2025. 
Ethiopia’s green economy plan is based on the following four pillars: 
• 
Improving  crop  and  livestock  production  practices  for  higher  food  security  and  farmer  income 
while reducing emissions; 
•  Protecting  and  re-establishing  forests  for  their  economic  and  ecosystem  services,  including  as 
carbon stocks; 
14 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
•  Expanding  electricity  generation  from  renewable  sources  of  energy  for  domestic  and  regional 
markets; and, 
•  Leapfrogging  to  modern  and  energy-efficient  technologies  in  transport,  industrial  sectors,  and 
buildings. 
(c) Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) II  
The  GTP  consists  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  targets  in  the  spheres  of  macro-economic 
performance, performance of economic and social sectors (including energy) and crosscutting sectors 
(including  environment  and  climate  change).  The  GTP  aims  at  building  a  ‘Green  Economy’  and 
implementing  the  existing  environmental  laws  as  part  of  the  key  strategic  directions  to  be  pursued 
during the plan period.  
3.1.4 Proclamations, Regulations and Procedural Guidelines 
(a) Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation (Proclamation No. 299/2002) 
This  Proclamation  (No  299/2002)  aims  primarily  at  making  the  EIA  mandatory  for  categories  of 
projects specified under a directive issued by the EPA. The law specifies the projects and activities 
that will require an environmental impact assessment (EIA 
Environmental  guidelines  are  among  the  tools  for  facilitating  the  consideration  of  environmental 
issues and principles of sustainable development and their inclusion in development proposals. To put 
this Proclamation into effect EPA, now restructured and named as Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change Commission, issued EIA guideline documents, which provide details of the EIA process and 
its requirements. According to this EIA guideline projects are categorized into three schedules: 
Schedule 1: Projects which may have adverse and significant environmental impacts thus requiring a 
full Environmental Impact Assessment 
Schedule 2:   Projects whose type, scale or other relevant characteristics have potential to cause some 
significant  environmental  impacts  but  are  not  likely  to  warrant  a  full  EIA  study,  and  therefore  an 
initial environmental examination is required (IEE). 
Schedule 3: Projects which would have no impact and do not require an EIA 
Institutions responsible to monitor and supervise proper implementation of the national environmental 
policies and regulations at the federal level are the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change of Ethiopian, now Environment, Forest and Climate Change Commission (EFCCC). This 
Ministry is established to monitor environmental concerns and the right of the citizens to live in 
healthy environment, devise environmental policy and coordinate their implementation. Offices and 
or Bureaus have also been established at the regional and woreda levels to ensure environmental 
sustainability of projects such as that of RUFIP III.  
The Ethiopian Government have already prepared framework for environment and climate including 
nationally  determined  contribution  (NDCs),  Nationally  Appropriate  Mitigation  Actions  (NAMAs, 
National  Adoption  Plans  (NAPs),  Strategies  /Action  Plans.  Moreover  it  has  ratified  r  the  UN 
Convention  on  Biodiversity  (CBD),  UN  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification  (UNCCD)  and 
RAMSAR.  
 (b)  Environnemental Pollution Control Proclamation (Proclamation No. 300/2002) 
This  proclamation  is  aimed  at  eliminating  or,  when  not  possible,  to  mitigate  pollution  as  an 
undesirable  consequence  or  social  and  economic  development  activities.  It  has  also  an  objective  of 
protecting the environment and safeguarding of human health, as well as the maintaining of the biota 
and  the  aesthetic  value  of  nature  are  the  duty  and  responsibility  of  all  citizens.  The  Proclamation, 
among  others  has  considered  control  of  pollution;  management  of  hazardous  waste,  chemical  and 
15 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
radioactive  substances;  management  of  municipal  wastes;  the  importance  and  need  to  respect 
environmental standards; and punitive and incentive measures. 
(c)  Proclamation to Provide for the Establishment of Environmental Protection Organs 
(Proclamation No. 295/2002) 
The  first  objective  of  this  proclamation  is  to  assign  responsibilities  to  separate  organizations  for 
environmental  development  and  management  activities  on  the  one  hand,  and  environmental 
protection, regulations and monitoring on the other, which is instrumental for the sustainable use of 
environmental  resources.  The  second  objective  is  to  establish  a  system  that  fosters  coordinated  but 
differentiated responsibilities among environmental protection agencies at federal and regional levels. 
(d) Proclamation to Provide for the Expropriation of Land Holdings for Public Purposes and 
Payment of Compensation (Proclamation No. 455/2005) 
The  major  objectives/rationales  for  the  formulation  of  this  proclamation  were  the  need  of  the 
government  to  use  land  for  development  works  it  carries  out  for  public  services;  to  provide  land 
through  redevelopment  schemes  for  the  construction  of  dwelling  houses,  infrastructure,  investment 
and  other  services  and  supply  of  land for  development  works  in  rural  areas  and  to  define the  basic 
principles  that  have  to  be  taken  into  consideration  in  determining  compensation  to  a  person  whose 
landholding has been expropriated. For the specific proposed project activities at hand, expropriation 
of land holdings for public purposes is not expected as the installation/construction is supposed to be 
conducted in one’s premises.  
(e) Water Resources Management Proclamation (197/2000) 
The purpose of the Proclamation is to ensure that the water resources of the country are protected and 
utilized  for  the  highest  social  and  economic  benefits  of  the  people  of  Ethiopia,  to  follow  up  and 
supervise that they are duly conserved, ensure that harmful effects of water are prevented, and that the 
management of water resources is carried out properly. 
(f) Proclamation on Research and Conservation of Cultural Heritage (No. 209/2000) 
The Authority for Research and Conservation of Cultural Heritage (ARCCH) has been established by 
Proclamation No. 209/2000 as a government institution with a legal personality. The Proclamation has 
also provisions for management of cultural heritages in part two, exploration, discovery and study of 
Cultural Heritages in part three and miscellaneous provisions in part four.  
Article 41 of the Proclamation deals on Fortuitous Discovery of Cultural Heritages and Sub-Article 1 
states that, any person who discovers any Cultural Heritage in the course of an excavation connected 
to mining explorations, building works, road construction or other similar activities or in the course of 
any other fortuitous event, shall forthwith report to the Authority for Research and Conservation of 
Cultural  Heritage  (ARCCH),  and  shall  protect  and  keep  it  intact,  until  the  Authority  takes  delivery 
thereof.  Sub-Article  2,  on  the  other  hand  states  that,  the  Authority  shall,  upon  receipt  of  a  report 
submitted pursuant to Sub- Article (1) hereof, take all appropriate measures to examine, take delivery 
of and register the Cultural Heritage so discovered. 
(g) Labor Proclamations 
Ethiopia  has  issued  proclamations  in  the  effort  to  improve  employment  relations  and  outcomes, 
protect  against  child  labor  exploitation,  and  maintain  proper  occupational  health  and  safety.  The 
transitional government of Ethiopia has issued Labor Proclamation No. 42/1993.  This proclamation 
was  amended  and  replaced  with  Labor  Proclamation  No.  377/2003.  The  Labor  Proclamations  have 
had detailed provisions pertaining to workers’ suspension and protects their rights. Besides, there are 
other  labor  related  proclamations  such  as  the  provisions  of  the  Employment  Exchange  Service 
Proclamation (Proclamation No. 632/2009) and the Right to Employment of Persons with Disability 
(Proclamation No. 568/2008) enacted to govern the relations between employers and employees. 
16 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The  Labor  Law  protects  Children  against  Child  Labor  abuse.  Under  the  provisions  of  the  Revised 
Family Code (2000), a child or minor is defined as “a person of either sex who has not attained the 
full  age  of  eighteen  years”.  Proclamation  No.  377/2003,  Article  89  prohibited  employment  of  less 
than 14 years. The proclamations states “It is prohibited to employ persons under 14 years of age”. It 
is also prohibited to employ young workers which on account of its nature or due to the condition in 
which  it  is  carried  out,  endangers  the  life  or  health  of  the  young  workers  performing  it.  "Young 
worker" means a person who has attained the age of 14 but is not over the age of 18 years (Article 89 
Sub-Article 3). 
The Labor Proclamation mandates employers to protect occupational safety, health and create better 
working environment for their workers. Article 92 states that “An employer shall take the necessary 
measure  to  safeguard  adequately  the  health  and  safety  of  the  workers…”  The  proclamations  have 
details about the safety and health of workers. For instance, it forces employers to i) take appropriate 
steps  to  ensure  that  workers  are  properly  instructed  and  notified  concerning  the  hazards  of  their 
respective occupations and the precautions necessary to avoid accident and injury to health; ii) ensure 
that  directives  are  given  and  also  assign  safety  officer;  establish  an  occupational,  safety  and  health 
committee of which the committee's establishment, shall be determined by a directive issued by the 
Minister;  iii)  provide  workers  with  protective  equipment,  clothing  and  other  materials  and  instruct 
them of its use; etc.  
3.1.5 Administrative/Institutional Framework 
(a)   Environment, Forest and Climate Change Commission 
As  per  proclamation  916/2015, The  Ministry  of  Environment,  Forest  and  Climate  Change  has  been 
bestowed among others with the following powers and duties: 
•  Coordinate  activities  to  ensure  that  the  environmental  objectives  provided  under  the 
Constitution and the basic principles set out in the Environmental Policy of the Country are 
realized;  
•  Establish a system for evaluating and decision making, in accordance with the Environmental 
Impact Assessment Proclamation, the impacts of implementation of investment programs and 
projects on environment prior to approvals of their implementation by the concerned sectoral 
licensing organ or the concerned regional organ;  
•  Coordinate actions on soliciting the resources required for building a climate resilient green 
economy in all sectors and at all Regional levels; as well as provide capacity building support 
and advisory services; and, 
•  Establish  an  environmental  information  system  that  promotes  efficiency  in  environmental 
data collection, management and use. 
The Commission has the mandate of overseeing to ensure the  basic environmental  principles of the 
Constitution such as for example, the right to live in a clean environment is realized;  
(b) The Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity (MoWIE) 
According  to  Proclamation  no.  916/2015,  the  mandates  of  The  Ministry  of  Water,  Energy  and 
Electricity  include  promoting  the  development  of  water  resource  and  electricity  and  promoting  the 
growth  and  expansion  of  the  country's  supply  of  electric  energy.  The  Ministry  has  an  Environment 
and Climate Change Directorate so as to manage issues related to environment and climate change of 
the sector. 
(c) Regional Environmental Organs 
At  regional  level  there  are  environmental  bureaus  to  implement  environmental  related  issues 
including  the  preparation  of  directives  within  their  respective  regions.  RUFIP  III  is  proposed  to  be 
implemented  in  all  the  9  regional  states  and  the  regional  office  responsible  for  environment  is 
responsible for reviewing and approving ESIAs and ESMPs of this programme. 
17 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
(d)  Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) 
The DBE’s new organizational structure takes in to account the business nature of the Bank, which 
are  intended  to  improve  the  service  efficiency,  effectiveness  and  create  value  for  customers  and 
stakeholders and is also expected to facilitate smooth execution of the five years strategic targets.  
IFAD and DBE have a successful track record of partnership. DBE was selected for the  RUFIP and 
energy related projects (Market Development) based on its track record of managing lines of credit 
and on its management commitment to the project.   
Under  the  Vice  President  for  Credit  Management,  there  is  Special  Fund  Administration  and  Rural 
Financial Intermediation Program (SFA & RUFIP) Coordination Directorate having seven teams, one 
of which is named as Energy Coordination Team. This Team is the focal entity for supporting, follow-
up and monitoring of ongoing RUFIP and energy related projects.  
DBE has strengthened its Internal Audit process and Compliance and Risk Management Process and 
has  a  well-established  risk  management  policy  framework  and  internal  audit  function  that  will 
conduct an audit and review of the pertinent energy programs. 
Microfinance Institutions   
Microfinance  institutions  are  institutions  that  provide  suitable  financial  and  other  services  using 
innovative methodologies and systems at low cost to meet the need of low-income sections of the 
Population and act as financial intermediaries. 
Association of Ethiopian Microfinance Institutions (AEMFI) 
 The Association of Ethiopian Microfinance Institution (AEMFI) was registered under the Ministry of 
Justice of the Federal Democratic Republic if Ethiopia on June 28, 1999. The strategic goal of AEMFI 
includes,  among  others,  creating  institutional  structure  to  serve  as  a  national/industry  forum  and 
network for microfinance institutions (MFIs). The Association of Ethiopian Microfinance Institutions 
(AEMFI)  was  formed  as  a  non-for-profit,  non-governmental  association  of  the  Ethiopian 
microfinance  institutions  as  defined  by  Proclamation  No.  40/1996  under  which  microfinance 
institutions in Ethiopia are regulated by the National Bank of Ethiopia. 
AEMFI has a well defined ownership and governance structure. The supreme decision making organ 
is the General Assembly of the member MFIs. The general assembly comprises of 58 member MFIs 
which represents two from each member MFIs on an equal basis. It has a board of directors which 
elected by the general assembly to serve for three years. The vision of AEMFI is to see reduced 
poverty level through efficient and sustainable delivery of financial services by member MFIs to the 
poor in Ethiopia.  
AEMFI in conjunction with its members sets out to identify and promote “good practices” through a 
number of key programs and activities, these include:  
•  Training:  to  coordinate  and  ensure  that  appropriate  technical  and  skill  training  is 
delivered to the board, management and all other personnel of the MFIs and also the 
clients of the MFIs.  
•  Performance Monitoring: In consultation with the National bank of Ethiopia (NBE), 
AEMFI seeks to monitor the financial performance of the MFIs and Produce periodic 
performance indicator.  
•  Advocacy:  to  liaise  with  federal  and  local  governments,  NGOs  and  other  relevant 
organizations  in  the  financial  sector  to  promote  the  services  of  the  microfinance 
industry in all appropriate media.  
•  Technical  Assistance:  to  assist  members  with  the  provision  of  MFIs,  marketing, 
financial management and preparation of business plans  
18 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
•  Research: To carry out, coordinate, publish and disseminate the results of the research 
projects  that  are  relevant  and  related  to  the  future  success  of  the  microfinance 
industry.  
•  Support  is  provided  by  AEMFI  through  training,  technical  support,  research,  and 
performance monitoring of (SACCOs/RUSSACOS)  
•  Networking: AEMFI, together with its members, seek to liaise with all organizations, 
networks (SEEP, AFMIN, INFAFI, MAIN and AFRACA) and individuals who share 
a common interest, in promoting and delivering financial services to the economically 
active poor.  
•  Exposure  visit:  To  build  and  maintain  a  resources  center  providing  a  collection  of 
books  and  reports,  relevant  to  the  microfinance  industry,  available  to  all  interested 
individuals and groups.  
•  Fund raising: To seek out and identify potential donors and lenders who are interested 
in developing, building and enhancing the services of the microfinance industry and 
providing loan and equity funds.  
 Cooperatives 
Currently Cooperatives in Ethiopia are governed by the comprehensive and multi-sectoral cooperative 
Promotion  Proclamation  No.  147/1998.  This  Proclamation  was  based  on  internationally  accepted 
cooperative principles. It laid the ground for the development of all kinds of cooperative societies at 
different levels, and is comprehensive in its coverage. According to this Proclamation, a minimum of 
ten  individuals  can  form  a  cooperative  society.  Individuals  are  eligible  for  membership  at  age 
fourteen. A member is allowed to hold a maximum of 10 percent of the total paid up share capital of 
the society. The Proclamation stipulates that cooperative societies can borrow from members based on 
their  bylaws  and  at  rates  not  exceeding  the  prevailing  interest  rate  of  the  commercial  banks. 
Cooperative lending is restricted to members only. However, the law permits a cooperative to lend to 
another  society.  While  lending,  cooperatives  are  not  restricted  with  regard  to  the  interest  rate  they 
charge. Saving and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs) in Ethiopia are semi-formal financial institutions 
in the sense that they are registered entities and subject to all general rules, but are not subject to the 
same  prudential  standards  applicable  to  formal  financial  institutions.  Unlike  the  commercial  banks 
and MFls, savings and credit cooperatives are not subjected to the rigorous supervision and regulatory 
rule of the NBE. The Cooperative Proclamation allows SACCOs to operate as self-regulated entities 
with  a  few  restrictions  such  as  the  allocation  of  profits  and  the  maximum  shareholding  to  a  single 
member.  Internal  monitoring  and  controlling  generally  provides  the  checks  and  balances  of  the 
operation of the cooperatives. 
The Government has set-up cooperative promotion bodies at Federal, Regional, City administrations, 
Zonal  and  Woreda  (district)  levels.  At  the  Federal  level,  the  Federal  Cooperative  Agency  (FCA)  is 
responsible,among  others,  for  cooperative  promotion,  institutional  capacity  building  and  human 
resource development, and registration and supervision of societies organized at the national level. It 
is  headed  by  a  Director  General  assisted  by  a  deputy.  There  are  also  Cooperative  Promotion 
Bureaus/Departments in each of the nine national regional states and in Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa 
city administrations. In addition, there are Woreda Cooperative Promotion Desks and in some regions 
zonal  Cooperatives  Promotion  desks.  Such  an  extensive  structure  is  intended  to  ensure  that 
cooperatives societies are widely promoted and properly supervised.  
RUSSACO/SACCOS  
 SACCOs  seems  to  be  the  most  successful  types  of  cooperatives  among  the  different  types  of 
cooperatives established in both urban and rural areas of Ethiopia for a number of reasons. SACCOs 
have many desirable properties than other types of cooperatives. Members participate continuously in 
the business activities of the cooperative and the amount of members’ money continuously grow over 
time,  hence,  members  develop  strong  ownership  feelings  on  their  cooperatives  and  they  actively 
participate in any matters of the cooperative. The cooperatives provide credit services at zero default 
risk. The types of business activities are few, simple, predetermined and periodic. Hence, it puts small 
19 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
burden on  management  committee.  In  sum,  RuSACCOs  primarily  improve  the saving  behaviour  of 
members  and  also  encourage  them  to  enter  into  profitable  business  activities.  Thus,  it  increases 
savings  and  enables  them  to  increase  their  income  which  in  turn  increases  the  saving  capacity  and 
enable  them  to  diversify  and  expand  their  business  activities  which  further  increase  income  and 
saving capacity and so on. It thus leads to an upward spiral saving-income growth.  
MFIs 
The  development  of  MFI  in  Ethiopia  is  a  recent  phenomenon  and  known  by  its  fast-growing 
according to Ebisa Deribie, et al., (2013) and aggressive drive to achieve a large scale of geographic 
location in the country, a dominance of government-owned MFIs, an emphasis on rural households, 
promoting both credit and saving products, a strong focus on sustainability and in fact, it is Ethiopian 
owned  and  driven  sector.  After  the  Ethiopian  government  proclamation  no.  40/1996  of  MFI  was 
issued, this paved the way for establishment of MFIs to provide financial service to the communities 
who  suffered  lack  of  financial  service  from  the  formal  banks,  various  MFIs  have  legally  been 
registered  and  started  delivering  service  of  microfinance  like  other  countries  and  they  can  mobilize 
savings once they got registered and legally empowered to supervise the activities MFIs by the NBE 
(Wolday Amha, 2000). According to Getaneh (2005), in Ethiopia MFI spread across urban and rural 
areas  to  offer  deposit,  withdrawal  and  accept  a  draft  to  the  public  and  to  manage  the  microfinance 
business  funds  which  are  allowed  by  low.  The  Ethiopian  deposit-taking  MFIs  provide  different 
financial services such as; savings, micro-insurance, loan, remittance, and payment such as collecting 
taxes, pension payment, and another related service charge. Consequently, a progressive transition has 
been  seen  in  Ethiopian  MFIs  from  microcredit  to  microfinance  and  finally  to  financial  inclusion 
(Wolday and Anteneh, 2015).  
The Ethiopian five-year growth and transformation plan (GTP) and the micro and small enterprise 
development agency (MSEDA) strategy has given more emphasis on the saving behavior of 
household and saving mobilization and this is why all MFIs in Ethiopia offer both compulsory and 
voluntary savings. The financial performance of this sector shown a remarkable achievements and the 
sector outreach is impressive, according to AEMFI’s 2016 annual report, the Ethiopian MFIs has 
shown a remarkable progress in terms of outreach and performance, the sector outreach or the number 
of active borrowers is 3.9 million in which out of these borrowers 1.7 million were women .RUFIP III 
budget is expected to be channeled to the programe beneficiaries though the RUSSACOs and MFIs 
and Federal Cooperative Agency (FCA) is responsible  for cooperative promotion, institutional 
capacity building and human resource development, registration and supervision of societies 
organized at the national level. 
3.2 IFAD Policies and Procedures 
IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) endeavor to ensure that 
the   goal  of  enabling  poor  rural  people  to  improve  their  food  and  nutrition  security,  increase  their 
incomes and strengthen their resilience, particularly to climate change, is done in an environmentally 
and  socially  responsible  manner.  The  procedures  set  the  minimum  standards  for  the  assessment  of 
social, environmental and climate change risks of IFAD funded projects to be applied throughout the 
project cycle. The procedures aim to:  (i) Provide information and analysis that strengthen the social, 
environmental  and  climate  change  risk  management  dimensions  of  projects  and  programmes;  (ii) 
maximize  social,  environmental  and  climate  change  adaptation  benefits  and  avoid  or  minimize 
negative  impacts;  and  (iii)  increase  the  consistency,  transparency  and  accountability  in  decision 
making concerning these dimensions...”. SECAP provides a step-wise description of the processes to 
assess risk at each phase of the project or programme cycle.  
IFAD Relevant Policies 
20 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The following are IFAD policies relevant to RUFIP III. 
Rural Finance Policy 
To  foster  financial  inclusion  for  poor  people  in  rural  areas,  IFAD’s  Rural  Finance  Policy 
requires compliance with the following six guiding principles in IFAD-financed rural finance 
interventions: 
support access to a variety of financial services; 
• 
•  promote a wide range of financial institutions, models and delivery channels;  
• 
support demand driven and innovative approaches, including providing a full range of 
financial  services  to  poor  families  who  live  in  degraded  areas,  which  may,  for 
example,  support  natural  resource  management  practices  and  alternative  livelihoods 
that are less harmful to the ecosystem; 
•  encourage, in collaboration with private sector partners, market-based approaches that 
strengthen  rural  financial  markets,  avoid  distortions  in  the  financial  sector  and 
leverage IFAD’s resources; 
•  Develop  and  support  long-term  strategies  focusing  on  sustainability  and  poverty 
outreach;  
•  participate  in  policy  dialogues  that  promote  an  enabling  environment  for  rural 
finance; 
Any deviation from these principles requires clear justification and approval by management;  
As a financing institution, IFAD has no tolerance for Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) 
in its supported operations, requiring that precautionary and remedial measures to safeguard 
against SEA risks and remedy any occurrences be addressed. 
Gender equality and women’s empowerment Policy 
The policy goal is to deepen the impact and strengthen the sustainability of IFAD- supported 
development  initiatives.  The  purpose  is  to  increase  IFAD’s  impact  on  gender  equality  and 
strengthen  women’s  empowerment  in  poor  rural  areas.  This  will  be  achieved  through  three 
strategic objectives: 
• Strategic objective 1: Promote economic empowerment to enable rural women and men to 
have equal opportunity to participate in, and benefit from, profitable economic activities. 
•  Strategic  objective  2:  Enable  women  and  men  to  have  equal  voice  and  influence  in  rural 
institutions and organizations. 
• Strategic objective 3: Achieve a more equitable balance in workloads and in the sharing of 
economic and social benefits between women and men. 
The Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment will be central to the attainment 
of  the  overarching  goal  of  the  IFAD  Strategic  Framework  2011-2015:enabling  poor  rural 
women  and  men  to  improve  their  food  security  and  nutrition,  raise  their  incomes  and 
strengthen their resilience. 
The  policy  will  reinforce  IFAD’s  position  as  a  leader  in  promoting  gender  equality  and 
women’s impowerment in agricultural and rural development. It builds on IFAD’s experience 
and  achievements  in  field  operations  and  in  the  broader  policy  arena  in  promoting  gender 
equality and women’s empowerment. The policy will provide IFAD with strategic guidance 
in systematizing, intensifying and scaling up its efforts to close gender gaps and improve the 
economic  and  social  status  of  rural  women  in  rapidly  changing  rural  environments.  The 
preparation of a gender policy was recommended by the 2010 corporate-level evaluation of 
IFAD’s performance with regard to gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
21 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Indigenous Peoples Policy 
This Policy on Engagement with  Indigenous Peoples aims to enhance IFAD’s development 
effectiveness in its engagement with indigenous peoples’ communities in rural areas. It sets 
out  the principles of  engagement  IFAD  will adhere to  in  its work with  indigenous peoples, 
and  the  instruments,  procedures  and  resources  IFAD  will  deploy  to  implement  them.  The 
the  United  Nations 
Policy 
Development  Group  Guidelines  on  Indigenous  Peoples’  Issues,  and  with  IFAD’s  mandate 
and Strategic Framework 2007-2010. 
international  standards, 
is  consistent  with 
inparticular 
IFAD’s  Strategic  Framework  identifies  indigenous  peoples  as  an  important  target  group 
because they face economic, social, political and cultural marginalization in the societies in 
which they live, resulting in extreme poverty and vulnerability for a disproportionate number 
of them. To reach them requires tailored approaches that respect their values and build upon 
their strengths. IFAD’s targeted and participatory approach to grass-roots rural development 
and its experience in empowering poor people and communities give the Fund a comparative 
advantage  in  working  with  indigenous  peoples,  even  in  the  most  remote  rural  areas.  In  its 
engagement with indigenous peoples,IFAD will be guided by nine fundamental 
principles: (a) cultural heritage and identity as assets; (b) free, prior and informed consent;(c) 
community-driven  development;  (d)  land,  territories  and  resources;  (e)  indigenous  peoples’ 
knowledge;  (f)  nvironmental  issues  and  climate  change;  (g)  access  to  markets;  (h) 
empowerment;  and  (i)  gender  equality.IFAD  will  implement  these  principles  in  the 
formulation  of  country  strategies,  in  policy  dialogue  and  throughout  the  project  cycle,  and 
will  update  its  operational  guidelines  accordingly.  In  addition,  IFAD  will  strengthenthe 
Indigenous  Peoples  Assistance  Facility,will  establish  new  learning  and  knowledge  sharing 
instruments, and will further develop dialogue with indigenous peoples through the creation 
of an indigenous peoples’ forum. 
ENRM Policy 
The  ENRM  policy  goal  is  to  enable  poor  rural  people  to  escape  from  and  remain  out  of 
poverty through more-productive and resilient livelihoods and eco-systems.The purpose is to 
integrate the sustainable management of natural  assets across the activities of  IFAD and its 
partners.  ENRM  policy  is    build  on  and  strengthens  commitments  made  in  other  IFAD 
policies  in  particular,  the  Climate  Change  Strategy  (2010),  ESAP  (2009),  Policy  on 
Improving  Access  to  Land  and  Tenure  Security  (2008),  Policy  on  Engagement  with 
Indigenous  Peoples  (2009) and Rural  Poverty  Report 2011, which all  acknowledge the key 
role natural assets play in the livelihoods of poor rural people. The present policy also owes 
much  to  learning  from  best-practice  ENRM  experiences  at  other  major  development 
institutions  and  organizations.  This  is  complemented  by  literature  reviews  on  food  security 
and  sustainable  development  and  a  range  of  regional  consultations  and  comments  received 
within IFAD and from partners. 
 The  following  are  10  ENRM  core  principles  that  provide    basis  for  shaping  IFAD’s 
programmes  and  investments,  and  strengthening  ENRM  across  IFAD  Activities.  The 
following are summary of the core principles: 
•  Scaled-up  investment  in  multiple-benefit  approaches  for  sustainable  agricultural 
intensification; 
22 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 Recognition  and  greater  awareness  of  the  economic,  social  and  cultural  value  of 
natural assets; 
 ‘Climate-smart’ approaches to rural development; 
 Greater attention to risk and resilience in order to manage environment- and natural-
resource-related shocks; 
 Engagement in value chains to drive green growth; 
 Improved  governance  of  natural  assets  for  poor  rural  people  by  strengthening  land 
tenure and community-led empowerment; 
 Livelihood diversification to reduce vulnerability and build resilience for sustainable 
natural resource management; 
 Equality and empowerment for women and indigenous peoples in managing natural 
resources; 
 Increased access by poor rural communities to environment and climate finance; and 
 Environmental commitment through changing its own behavior. 
Climate Change strategy 
The  goal  of  this  strategy  is  to  maximize  IFAD’s  impact  on  rural  poverty  in  a  changing 
climate. This goal is further articulated in three statements of purpose: to support innovative 
approaches to helping smallholder producers – both women and men – build their resilience 
to  climate  change;  to  help  smallholder  farmers  take  advantage  of  available  mitigation 
incentives  and  funding;  and  to  inform  a  more  coherent  dialogue  on  climate  change,  rural 
development,  agriculture  and  food  security.  The  main  strategy  output  is  a  more  ‘climate-
smart’ IFAD, where climate change – alongside other risks, opportunities and themes – is 
Systematically integrated into core programmes, policies and activities: 
• On operations, climate change can be –and in many cases already is – factored into IFAD’s 
operating model. This means incorporating it into our toolkit for the early stages of country 
programme and project design and for implementation. 
•  On  knowledge,  innovation  and  advocacy,  IFAD  will:  explore  new  arrangements  for 
sourcing climate-related expertise, share ground-level experiences to ensure their application 
throughout IFAD-supported 
programmes,  and  continue  our  work  to  shape  the  global  dialogue  on  climate  change  for 
smallholders. 
• On resource mobilization, our primary focus is to make IFAD’s expanding overall portfolio 
climate-smart.  Increased  supplementary  climate  funds  will  continue  to  be  sought  to  deepen 
the  integration  of  climate  change  into  IFAD’s  core  programmes  and  to  cover  the  increased 
cost this implies. 
• On internal organization, IFAD will make greater use of existing in-house skills and people, 
and will implement a new organizational structure that brings together and increases its staff 
capacity on climate and  the environment.  It  will also  continue to  demonstrate the values of 
environmental awareness internally. 
Land Policy 
The IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security has been formulated to: 
(a)  Provide  a  conceptual  framework  for  the  relationship  between  land  issues  and  rural 
poverty, acknowledging the complexity and dynamics of evolving rural realities; (b) identify 
the major implications of that relationship for IFAD’s strategy and programme development 
and  implementation;  (c)  articulate  guiding  principles  for  mainstreaming  land  issues  in  the 
Fund’s  main  operational  instruments  and  processes;  and  (d)  provide  the  framework  for  the 
subsequent development of operational guidelines and decision tools. 
23 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
In this  policy, land refers to  farmland, wetlands,  pastures and forests.  Land tenure refers to 
rules and norms and institutions that govern how, when and where people access land or are 
excluded from such access.2 
Land  tenure  security  refers  to  enforceable  claims  on  land,  with  the  level  of  enforcement 
ranging  from  national  laws  to  local  village  rules,  which  again  are  supported  by  national 
regulatory frameworks. It refers to people’s recognized ability to control and manage land – 
using  it  and  disposing  of  its  products  as  well  as  engaging  in  such  transactions  as  the 
transferring or leasing of land. 
Disclosure Policy 
This policy will ensure stakeholder consultation, transparency and accountability through the 
life  of  programmes  and  projects.  Engage  in  early  and  continuing  meaningful  consultation 
with  the  full  range  of  stakeholders  in  formulation,  implementation  and  monitoring  of 
programmes  and projects. Maintain transparency and  accountability by disclosing draft and 
final  environmental  and  social  impact  assessments  and  other  relevant  documents  (at  the 
quality assurance stage or key stages during project implementation) to stakeholders and by 
responding to their concerns and complaints in a timely manner.  
The IFAD policy on the disclosure of documents, approved in 2010, adopted the principle of 
“presumption of full disclosure”.31 The sharing of draft and final ESIAs and other relevant 
documents32 with programme and project stakeholders and interested parties will be subject 
to the above-mentioned principle. As such, the documents will be disclosed, when available, 
in  a  timely  manner  prior  to  project  appraisal  at  the  quality  assurance  stage  (or  other  key 
stages during project implementation)33 on IFAD’s website and in an accessible place in the 
programme-  or  project-affected  area,  in  a  form  and  language  understandable  to  project-
affected  parties  and  other  stakeholders,  for  the  purposes  of  keeping  them  informed  and 
obtaining their meaningful feedback. Comments on SECAP-related disclosed documents can 
be submitted through the SECAP Help Desk email using: ecd_secap@ifad.org.  
Guiding values and principles of SECAP 
The  values  and  principles  in  many  of  IFAD’s  policies,  strategies  and  guidelines  are  relevant  to 
SECAP are: 
 (i) Address the vulnerability and adaptation priorities of rural people: Examine the cause-effect 
relationship  between  rural  poverty,  environmental  degradation,  social  impacts  and  climate  change. 
Ensure  the  efficient  use  of  natural  resources,  subject  to  their  regenerative  capacity.  Promote 
approaches to (re)build social cohesion and good governance of natural resources. Respect and make 
use  of  endogenous  knowledge  and  gender-sensitive  technologies,  drawing  especially  on  the  unique 
knowledge  of  women  and  indigenous  peoples.  [ENRM  Policy,  Indigenous  People’s  Policy  and 
Climate Change Strategy]  
(ii) Promote  the  conservation,  rehabilitation  and sustainable  use  of  natural  resources  and  key 
ecosystems in an integrated manner: Ensure that IFAD operations do not lead to natural or cultural 
resource degradation, including clearing of tropical forests, unsustainable use of natural resources, the 
threat/loss  of  biodiversity  and  ecosystem  services,  or  threats  to  resources  of  historical,  religious  or 
cultural significance. This applies especially to agricultural intensification activities and value chain 
development.  
(iii)Minimize  adverse  social  impacts  and  incorporate  externalities.  Avoid  and  mitigate  any 
potential  adverse  impacts  on  health  and  safety,  labour  and  working  conditions,  and  well-being  of 
workers  and  local  communities.  Avoid  any  potential  diseconomies  imposed  by  an  IFAD-financed 
operation  on 
(contextual/unintended 
consequences).  Where  possible,  address  the  affected  areas  through  joint  projects  (which  may 
the  environment  external 
the  project  boundaries 
to 
24 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
constitute an entire command area or watershed) and partnerships to minimize social, economic and 
environmental  impacts  in  the  affected  area  and,  where  possible,  to  incorporate  the  externalities. 
[Targeting and ENRM Policy] 
(iv)  Implement  participatory  approaches,  with  special  emphasis  on  the  participation  of  and 
benefits to women, youth and site-specific targeted groups.  Strengthen local institutions, including 
user  groups,  essential  for  promoting  environmental  sustainability  and  social  cohesion.  Promote 
appropriate  incentive  systems  at  all  levels  and  maximize  the  opportunities  for  local  grass-roots 
organizations  and  clients,  with  special  emphasis  on  equal  participation  of  women  and  youth  in 
programme/project  design  and  implementation,  as  well  as  in  cost  recovery  and  delivery  systems. 
[Gender and Targeting Policies]  
(v)  Promote  the  development  of  indigenous  peoples  and  other  marginalized  groups.  Enhance 
their  livelihoods:  secure  ownership/access  to  ancestral  land  and  territories;  strengthen  their 
institutions;  promote  free,  prior  and  informed  consent  and  document  and  report  outcomes  of  the 
consultations; and value indigenous knowledge systems. Apply the principles and procedures in the 
IFAD Engagement with Indigenous Peoples Policy.  
(vi)   Avoid involuntary resettlement wherever possible.  While working on  “doing good”,  IFAD 
will adhere to a “do no harm” principle at all times, so as to minimize potential adverse physical and 
economic  impacts.  Explore  viable  alternative  project  designs  to  address  risks  and  to  restore 
livelihoods to improve the standards of living of affected persons. The approach and level of measures 
taken will be proportional to the range of IFAD’s operations. [Land Policy]  
(vii)  Promote  sound  agricultural  and  manufacturing  processes.  These  include  traditional, 
indigenous  and  climate-smart  technologies,  integrated  pest  management,  and  use  of  biological 
control.  When  the  use  of  agrochemicals  is  necessary,  ensure  (through  enhanced  environmental 
awareness, farmer training, improved field extension services, etc.) that their application, storage and 
disposal  is  in  line  with  international  standards.  Requires  clients  to  apply  international  standards, 
including  safe  and  healthy  working  conditions,  and  have  in  place  and  maintain  sound  environment 
and social management systems.   
(viii) Promote  SECAP  compliance  monitoring.  Monitor  the  implementation  of  the  environmental 
and social management plan and the effectiveness of stakeholder engagement by the borrower. Focus 
on projects identified as “high risk”, or located in areas that are environmentally or socially sensitive, 
to  ensure  continued  diligence  in  pursuing  the  project’s  development  objectives.  [ENRM  Policy, 
Supervision and Project Completion Guidelines]  
(ix)  Ensure  stakeholder  consultation,  transparency  and  accountability  through  the  life  of 
programmes  and  projects.  Engage  in  early  and  continuing  meaningful  consultation  with  the  full 
range  of  stakeholders  in  formulation,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  programmes  and  projects. 
Maintain  transparency  and  accountability  by  disclosing  draft  and  final  environmental  and  social 
impact assessments and other relevant documents (at the quality assurance stage or key stages during 
project  implementation)  to  stakeholders  and  by  responding  to  their  concerns  and  complaints  in  a 
timely manner. [Disclosure Policy]  
(x) Support borrowers in achieving good international practices  by supporting the realization of 
United Nations principles expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the toolkits for 
mainstreaming employment and decent work.  
Refer SECAP Document published in 2017 for the details of SECAP Guiding Principles.   
Mandatory elements of SECAP  
All projects entering the pipeline are subject to an environmental, social and climate risk screening, 
and  are  assigned  a  risk  category  for  environment  and  social  standards  (A,  B,  C)  and  for  climate 
vulnerability (high, moderate, low). These findings, along with subsequent analysis and assessments, 
must be reflected in the project’s SECAP review note. Projects with environment and social category 
“C” and climate risk “low” do not require any further analysis.  
25 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
•  All  category  B  projects  must  have  a  SECAP  review  note,  including  a  matrix  of  the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) at the design stage. The identified social 
and  environmental  risks  and  opportunities  management  measures  must  be  reflected  in  the 
project  design  and  the  project  design  report.  The  ESMP  matrix  must  be  integrated  into  the 
project’s  implementation  manual  or  developed  as  a  stand-alone  guidance  document  for  the 
project management unit late in the design stage or early in implementation.  
•  All Category A projects must have an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
at the design stage (or relevant stage of implementation). The draft and final ESIA reports and 
other relevant documents22 must be disclosed in a timely and accessible manner at the quality 
assurance stage (or other stages during project implementation).23  
•  For  all  projects  with  a  “moderate”  climate  risk  classification,  a  basic  climate  risk  analysis 
must be conducted during the project design stage and included in the SECAP review note. 
Adaptation and mitigation measures must be mainstreamed into the project design and project 
design report.  
•  For all projects with “high” climate risk classification, an in-depth climate risk analysis must 
be  conducted  during  project  design  and  adaptation,  and  risk-mitigation  measures  must  be 
mainstreamed into the project design and project design report.  
•  Depending  on  the  scale  and  nature  of  the  potential  risks  and  impacts,  different  assessment 
tools and elements will apply irrespective of the environment and social category.  
•  Where necessary, a SECAP preparatory study can be undertaken during the development of 
RB-COSOPs or CSNs.  
•  When projects result in physical or economic displacement (affecting access and user rights to 
land  and  other  resources),  the  borrower  or  grant  recipient  should  obtain  free,  prior  and 
informed  consent  (FPIC)  from  the  affected  people,  document  stakeholder  engagement  and 
consultation process, and prepare resettlement plans or frameworks. The documents must be 
disclosed  in  a  timely  and  accessible  manner  at  the  quality  assurance  or  relevant 
implementation stage.  
•  When impacting indigenous peoples, the borrower or the grant recipient must seek FPIC from 
the concerned communities, document the stakeholder engagement and consultation process, 
and  prepare  an  Indigenous  Peoples  Plan.24  Whenever  FPIC  is  not  possible  during  project 
design, the FPIC implementation plan should specify how FPIC will be sought during early 
implementation.  The  FPIC  plan  and  related  documents  must  be  disclosed  in  a  timely  and 
accessible manner at the quality assurance or relevant stage during implementation.  
•  Consultation with communities and stakeholders must be  maintained throughout the project 
life cycle, especially in high-risk projects.  
•  When  community  health  is  significantly  affected,  a  health  impact  assessment  must  be 
conducted and mitigation measures included in the project design.  
•  When there is a significant increase in the use of agrochemicals, a pesticide management or 
mitigation plan is required.  
•  For all Category A projects and some category B projects, a project-level grievance redress 
mechanism must be established or existing formal and informal systems strengthened.  
•  Some  category  B  activities  may  require  specific  analysis  to  be  undertaken  or  an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to be developed.  
26 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
• 
 Relevant  environmental  and  social  clauses  or  covenants  must  be  included  in  the  financing 
agreements  for  projects  requiring  ESIAs,  technical  studies,  FPICs,  ESMPs  and  frameworks 
during project implementation.  
• 
 For some category A projects, an ex post ESIA may be required at the completion stage.  
 In line with good practice, SECAP ensures early consultation with communities and stakeholders that 
must be maintained throughout the life of the project, especially in high-risk projects.  
This  edition  includes  additional  guidance  material  to  further  assist  in  project  design  and 
implementation.  These  include  terms  of  reference  and  a  set  of  guidance  statements.  For  RB-
COSOP/CSN  designs,  Country  Programme  Management  Teams  may  choose  to  conduct  a  SECAP 
preparatory study to provide a better understanding of the environmental, social and climate change 
risks that might potentially affect the proposed IFAD programme.  
The procedures are the product of a broad consultation process that has involved staff from IFAD and 
selected resource persons from multilateral and bilateral development agencies. The implementation 
of  SECAP,  since  January  2015,  and  consultations  with  partners  have  played  an  important  role  in 
updating  these  procedures  and  in  order  to  align  them  with  those  of  other  multilateral  financial 
institutions  and  country  priorities and to  ensure  their consistency  with  IFAD’s  quality  enhancement 
and quality assurance processes. Continuous communication and  
collaboration  with  borrower  countries,  partners  and  IFAD  staff  in  the  Programme  Management 
Department, as well as systematic monitoring and assessment of the effectiveness of the procedures, 
are  essential  to  successful  implementation  and  improvement.  It  is  expected  that  this  approach  will 
continuously  result  in  further  updating  these  procedures  to  enhance  quality-at-entry  in  IFAD 
operations.  
Relevant SECAP Guidance Statements 
Rural Finance (Guidance statement 12) Developing inclusive rural financial systems and fostering 
innovations to increase the access of poor people in rural areas to a wide range of financial services 
and  sound  financial  institutions  is  central  to  IFAD’s  mandate  and  key  to  agricultural  and  rural 
livelihoods development. IFAD concentrates on rural microfinance, which refers to the provision of 
financial services to people with low incomes in rural areas for both on- and off-farm activities.  
IFAD-financed operations in rural finance focus on developing inclusive financial systems, working 
with  and  building  capacity  of  its  partners  at  each  level  of  the  sector  (see  paragraph  7)  to  build  the 
sustainability of institutions and models and increase outreach to remote rural areas and marginalized 
poor people. Examples of this type of support are outlined in IFAD’s Rural Finance Policy and can 
include  promotion  of  financial  literacy  training  and  capacity-building  support  to  FSPs;  support  to 
savings-based approaches; development of second-tier institutions such as industry associations and 
apexes;  and  promotion  of  an  enabling  policy,  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  environment.  Rural 
finance programmes, projects and components could have the objective of strengthening the financial 
sector overall and/or improving financial services targeted towards another sector, such as value chain 
development related to a specific agricultural commodity.  
Any programmes or projects initiated by IFAD which support FSPs through the provision of a line of 
credit  that  are  classified  as  category  A  or  implementing  credit  operations  specified  in  category  B 
should  meet  IFAD’s  social  environmental  and  climate  standards  and  requirements,  including 
information  disclosure and  consultation.  For  subprojects  classified  as  category A,  the  borrower  will 
submit  an  Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA),  resettlement  plan  and/or  an 
Indigenous  Peoples  Plan  to  IFAD  for  clearance  before  the  subproject  approval.  The  following 
measures should be carried out before establishing a relationship with an FSP:  
27 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
FSPs should have in place or establish an appropriate environmental and social management system 
(ESMS)  commensurate  with  the  nature,  scale  and  risks  of  the  FSP’s  current  and  likely  future  loan 
portfolio to be maintained as part of the FSP’s overall management system, recognizing that the type 
and operations of FSPs vary considerably and in some cases may pose minimal social, environmental 
and  climate risks.  An  ESMS  in  a formal  FSP  should  aim  to  incorporate  the  following  elements: (i) 
environmental  and  social  policies;  (ii)  loan  screening,  categorization  and  review  procedure;  (iii) 
organizational  structure  and  staffing,  including  skills and  competencies  in  environmental  and  social 
areas; (iv) training guidance; and (v) monitoring and reporting.  
The government through its programme management unit and IFAD will assess the adequacy of the 
FSP’s capacity to manage environment and social impacts and risks related to its loan portfolio. If the 
FSP is capable, the ESMS will be agreed upon between IFAD/government and the FSP on a case-by-
case basis in line with what is appropriate and feasible in terms of: (i) the scope of application within 
FSP’s  loan  portfolio;  (ii)  the  average  loan  size;  (iii)  intended  loan  use;  (iv)  the  nature  of  standards 
required by the activities financed by the loan; (v) the FSP’s environmental and social due diligence 
procedures;  (vi)  FSP  disclosure  and  reporting  guidance;  and  (vii)  the  guidance  of  the  monitoring 
activities put in place by the programme or project (e.g. the use of performance-based agreements). 
Where  there  are  gaps  in  the  FSP’s  capacity  that  needs  to  be  addressed,  the  government  through  its 
programme management unit, IFAD and the FSP will establish a time-bound plan.  
Biodiversity (Guidance statement 1) 
The  Convention  on  Biological  Diversity  recognizes  that  biodiversity  is  about  more  than  plants, 
animals and micro-organisms and their ecosystems – it is about people and our need for food security, 
medicines,  fresh  air  and  water,  shelter,  and  a  clean  and  healthy  environment  in  which  to  live.1 
Biodiversity is essential for the maintenance of ecosystem services, such as the provision of water and 
food  and  other  services  that  are  important  to  both  the  ecosystems  themselves  and  human  life. 
Conservation of biodiversity aims to maintain global biological resources and their related services to 
meet the needs of humanity today while ensuring availability for future generations  – a fundamental 
criterion of sustainable development. Natural resource management that tries to preserve biodiversity 
focuses  on  enhancing  the  sustainable  use  of  these  resources  and  managing  protected  areas.  Losing 
biodiversity  at  the  genetic,  species  or  ecosystem  level  means  losing  opportunities  for  coping  with 
future challenges (e.g. related to climate change, energy, food security).  
Mitigation aims to eliminate or reduce the negative impacts of a project on biodiversity. Measures for 
protecting  biodiversity  must  ensure  that  local  populations  are  not  adversely  affected  by  project 
activities  and  that  they  benefit  from  environmental  opportunities.  As  a  guide,  mitigation  activities 
should follow the following order of preference:  
-Complete avoidance of adverse impact. If a project was initially classified as category A because of 
its  impact  on  a  sensitive  biodiversity  site,  an  alternative  solution  may  be  found  to    maintain  the 
project.  For  example,  a  project  that  may  need  the  significant  clearance  of  forest  resources  may  be 
located in areas where significant depletion has already occurred.  
-  Reduction  of  impacts  on  biodiversity  where  unavoidable.  For  most  IFAD  projects,  it  may  be 
necessary to carry on with a project even with its known effects on biodiversity. In such cases, it will 
be necessary to undertake further environmental and/or climate risk assessments to further understand 
the risks and access the viability of available mitigation options.  
- Restoration of habitats to their original state. This is a case whereby a project attempts to return a 
biologically  depleted  land form  into  its  original  state.  While  it  may  not  always  be  an  economically 
feasible option – restoring converted wetlands to their original form, for example – in some situations 
(such as assisted forest regeneration) it may not only be potentially successful, but also cost-effective.  
-  Relocation of affected species.  In extreme cases where a project continues in spite of its adverse 
effects, one option may be to relocate the species. This is an uncommon option and requires detailed 
28 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
studies to understand the potential impacts of such an intervention at both the original and proposed 
site. IFAD will not be undertaking this option for its projects.  
- Compensation for any unavoidable damage. This refers to a case whereby a project is allowed to 
continue  in  spite  of  its  negative  effects  to  biodiversity.  The  project,  however,  compensates  for  its 
negative  effects  on  biodiversity  by  supporting  mitigation  or  restoration  of  similar  biodiversity-rich 
habitats located elsewhere. IFAD should never use this as a stand-alone solution, but may consider it 
on a very limited scale, such as when other mitigation options have been exhausted.  
Agro-chemical (Guidance statement 2) 
Increased  food  production  is  one  of  IFAD’s  central  objectives;  the  use  of  agrochemicals  (mainly 
fertilizers  and  pesticides)  may  be  necessary  to  achieve  higher  yields  per  unit  area.  However,  the 
environmental  and  social  (including  health)  concerns  raised  by  such  use  of  agrochemicals  must  be 
carefully considered. These concerns include undesirable soil and water contamination, acidification 
of  soils,  human  health  risks,  pest  resistance,  damage  to  non-target  organisms  and  secondary  pest 
problems. For example, the use of nitrogen fertilizers on a farm has an environmental impact because 
crops recover only about half of the nitrogen supplied in global crop production, with the rest ending 
up in water resources and causing eutrophication (Eickhout, Bouwman and van Zeijts, 2006). The use 
of  agrochemicals  may  also  result  in  unacceptable  toxic  residues  on  agricultural  products  and 
unnecessary financial burdens because of over application.  
Agrochemicals are among the most important secondary sources of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
in the agriculture sector. A large share – often more than half – of the energy used in farming is for 
the  production  of  synthetic  fertilizers,  particularly  nitrogen  fertilizers  (which  produce  3.3–6.6  kg  of 
carbon equivalent per kilogram produced, transported and stored) and pesticides (Rundgren, 2011).  
The  following  paragraphs  outline  activities  for  the  prevention  or  mitigation  of  inappropriate  or 
excessive  agrochemical  application.  The  recommended  activities  and  any  additional  site-specific 
measures should be incorporated in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the 
programme  or  project.  In  operations  where  large-scale  pesticide  use  is  proposed,  such  as  for 
suppression of locust infestations, or is likely to occur because of agricultural development, a stand-
alone pest management plan may be appropriate.  
Fertilizer management:  
•  Ensure that dressings do not exceed recommended doses;  
• 
-Reduce leaching through appropriate choice of fertilizer to suit soil conditions, split 
applications and fertilizer placement;  
•  Reduce run-off through incorporation of fertilizer into soil, timing of applications to avoid 
erosive rains, and soil and water conservation measures;  
•  Limit nitrate use in sensitive watersheds serving urban areas;  
•  Select non-ammonium sources of nitrogen such as urea;  
•  Carry out liming (usually to pH 5.5 for tropical crops);  
•  Explore the potential for increasing production without the use of chemical fertilizers, 
especially using indigenous technologies, including organic fertilizers, and supporting 
integrated soil fertility systems;  
•  Promote community education on improving indigenous practices to maximize production, 
avoiding chemical fertilizers in favour of local options that are available on farm;  
•  Support crop management practices that increase the nutrients available to crops, including 
by: (i) using more organic and less inorganic fertilizer;3 (ii) increasing the efficiency of 
fertilizer use through appropriate fertilizer selection, timing and split applications; (iii) 
increasing nutrient recycling using crop residues and livestock grazing after crop4 harvest 
(mixed farming); use of nitrogen fixing trees, where feasible (agroforestry); and (iv) 
improving rotations (e.g. inclusion of legumes, multicropping);  
29 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
•  Monitor receiving water courses and soil for fertility to avoid over application of 
agrochemicals;  
Pesticide management:  
The project should be explicit about the pesticides it proposes, including those that farmers are 
expected to use when credit for input purchases is made available. For projects that entail significant 
pesticide use or have the potential to result in increased pesticide use, a pesticide management plan is 
prepared, either as a stand-alone document or as part of the Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) or ESMP. The most important criteria for assessing the environmental impact of a 
pesticide are its toxicity level and the degree of biodegradability. Consideration should also be given 
to residue-level guidance for countries that intend to export crops. Unregistered, restricted-use or 
experimental-use pesticides should be avoided, unless their use in the project has been reviewed and 
approved by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)/World Health 
Organization (WHO) Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residues.  
•  Pesticides in WHO Class la and Class lb5 should generally be avoided;  
•  For general use, the formulated product should be at a low enough concentration to be in at 
most a WHO Class II. Low-toxicity formulations should be favoured: from least toxic to most 
toxic, the options are granule, dust, wettable powder, flowable, emulsifiable concentrate, 
ultra-low volume and fumigant.  
•  Low-concentration granulars, seed dressings, bait formulations and pheromone traps 
generally present the least hazard to users and are especially suitable for small-scale farmers 
unfamiliar with pesticide use; they cause minimal environmental contamination and minimal 
adverse effects on non-target organisms.  
•  Aircraft application should be avoided whenever possible, and used only when speed in 
covering large areas is essential, such as in the emergency control of migratory pests.  
•  Safe application equipment and servicing facilities should be promoted, along with correct 
calibration of equipment. Training should be provided for personnel and farmers applying the 
pesticides.  
•  Protective clothing, including masks, gloves and boots, should be provided or promoted, 
especially for pesticides that are absorbed through the skin. However, improper use of 
protective clothing may be even more hazardous than doing without protection: unless it is 
washed, protective clothing can become saturated with pesticides – such as in the lining of 
boots and gloves – and can greatly increase pesticide absorption. Training should be provided.  
•  Training is crucial to the safety, use and cost-effectiveness of pesticides, and is recommended 
for inclusion in any project that increases the availability or accessibility of pesticides. A 
range of actors will require education: users, operators, extension officers, retailers, health 
workers treating cases of poisoning, and legislators in pesticides law.  
•  Application guidelines for pesticide use should be made clear to the borrowing country, and a 
legal document should be drawn up providing assurance that the guidelines will be followed. 
All the pesticides used in the project should be properly labelled, and all labels and 
application guidelines should be provided in the local language.  
•  Monitor water courses, soil and community health on a regular basis to ensure that pesticide 
concentrations are within legal environmental and health limits.  
Water (agricultural and domestic use (Guidance statement 7) 
Many poor rural people face severe constraints in their access to adequate quantities of good quality 
water for domestic and agricultural uses. Clean water supplies and sanitation remain major problems 
in many parts of the world, with 11 per cent of the global population lacking access to safe drinking 
water.  Worldwide,  about  780  million  people  do  not  have  access  to  an  improved  water  supply 
(UNICEF-WHO,  2012).  This  water  scarcity  is  amplified  by  increasing  levels  of  pollution.  Climate 
change is exacerbating water scarcity in some regions, while other regions will have increased or even 
excess  water  flows.  Events  such  as  droughts  and  floods  are  also  expected  to  increase  in  both 
frequency and intensity in some locations. With an increasing number of countries facing severe water 
30 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
shortages,  agriculture’s  efficient  use  of  water  to  reduce  poverty  and  hunger  is  a  significant  issue, 
which  can  be  addressed  by  putting  in  place  systems  and  investments  for  managing  water  resources 
equitably.  These  activities  need  to  be  grounded  in:  (i)  improved  governance  through  community 
empowerment; (ii) coordinated watershed- or landscape-based approaches; and (iii) sustainable use of 
water resources.  
The potential negative impacts of water investments affect several environmental and social aspects 
and include soil degradation, water quality, public health, effects on flora and fauna and disruption of 
ecosystem  services,  particularly  when  introduced  on  a  large  scale.  In  the  near  future,  accelerating 
changes in the global climate will cause major alterations in the patterns of the water cycle and the 
geographical  distribution  of  water,  with  significant  effects  on  agricultural  activities  (UNEP,  2008). 
For  poor  countries  with  limited  capacity  to  respond  to  hydrologic  variability,  climate  change  will 
make  the  achievement  of  water  security  even  more  difficult  and  costly.  Extreme  variability  of 
precipitation is expected to put 2.8 billion people at risk of water shortages (World Bank Water and 
Climate Change website).  
8. Climatic change will have significant consequences on water supply, water systems, infrastructure 
and agriculture. For example, sea level rise could lead to salinization of water supplies from coastal 
aquifers;  irrigation  demand  might  increase  because  of  decreased  rainfall  and  increased  evapo-
transpiration,  placing  additional  pressure  on  irrigation  systems;  and  soil  erosion  from  increased 
rainfall intensity could affect watershed sustainability and lead to sedimentation in reservoirs (World 
Bank,  2009),  with  impacts  on  the  operation  of  facilities.  In  addition,  the  water  supply  for  human 
communities will become uncertain – particularly water accessibility – with increased levels of water 
stress worldwide exacerbating existing conflicts over water use (UNEP, 2008).  
Unless  adequately  addressed  in  all  development  stages,  climate  change  could  undermine  IFAD’s 
investments and reduce the long-term sustainability of results. IFAD should therefore aim to reduce 
the  vulnerability  of  water  management  and  infrastructure  to  current  climate  variability  while  also 
considering the long-term effects of climate.  
IFAD  projects  dealing  with  irrigation  should  include  a  comprehensive  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Plan with all the measures deemed feasible and necessary to reduce significant adverse 
environmental,  health  and  social  impacts.  Most  measures  can  be  incorporated  in  the  project  design 
phase.  Once  remedial  measures  have  been  identified,  they  should  be  clearly  spelled  out  in  contract 
documents. Tenders should specify the environmental mitigation measures in detail, and include them 
as  work  items.  Bidders  should  be  asked  for  detailed  descriptions  and  cost  estimates  of  proposed 
remedial works. The active involvement of rural communities, and the use of a multisectoral approach 
that  considers  many  issues  –  gender,  social,  health,  and  new  concerns  such  as  energy  sources  and 
climate change – in both the planning and implementation stages will contribute to: (i) prevention of 
potentially harmful design choices; (ii) optimum use of locally available materials; (iii) sustainability 
of  service  by  involving  a  critical  mass  of  users,  operators  and  suppliers;  and  (iv)  incorporation  of 
locally adapted environmental measures.  
Rural Roads (Guidance statement 10) 
IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2015-2025 recognizes that weak and imperfect markets continue to be a 
disincentive to increased agricultural production and productivity by the rural poor. It further 
recognizes that inadequate rural infrastructure – particularly farm-to-market roads, storage facilities 
and marketplaces – is a very large part of the problem. IFAD, therefore, seeks to redress the situation 
by making an investment in productive rural infrastructure, including roads, as one of its key areas of 
thematic focus. That said, IFAD is unlikely to finance stand-alone rural road projects; it is instead 
more likely to finance rural roads as part of wider development programmes or simply as components 
of discrete agricultural development projects.  
31 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
This guidance statement is intended to help stakeholders, including country programme managers and 
Country Project Management Teams, to appreciate and avoid or mitigate the environmental risks 
associated with rural road development and to enhance prospects for environmental sustainability.  
IFAD is committed to effective and environmentally sound design, construction (and/or 
rehabilitation), operation and maintenance of rural roads to the highest possible standards of safety for 
those involved in construction and those subsequently using the road, whether by motor vehicles, 
intermediate means of transport (IMTs) or by foot. Best practices include the following mitigation 
measures:  
•  Participatory  and/or  consultative  design  of  road  sites  using  local  knowledge  –consult  local 
users  to  establish  which  tracks  (or  alignments)  offer  the  best  connections  to  travel  safely 
(flooding, rock fall, animals), as well as whose lands are affected by those alignments. The 
same  applies  to  borrow  pits  and  construction  materials.  Consult  early  to  increase  local 
participation and ownership.  
•  Align for minimum adverse impact –when the project involves the construction of a new road 
or the realignment of an existing road, consider all alternatives and select the alignment  that 
would result in the least direct and indirect negative impacts, taking account of soils, climate, 
geology,  topography,  hydrology,  ecology,  significant  historic  or  cultural  sites,  settlement 
patterns, existing land use and other socio-economic factors.  
•  Seek  free,  prior  and  informed  consent  (guidance  statement  13)  –wherever  physical 
resettlement and economic displacement cannot be avoided.  
•  Assessment of technology choice –design to optimize the use of locally available human and 
material resources, including local enterprises, contractors, artisans and materials, for ease of 
maintenance and enhance the prospects for sustainability.  
•  Design  for  road  safety  –consider  and  accommodate  all  prospective  users,  including 
pedestrians and IMTs; do not exceed the national standard design speed for rural roads; and 
provide speed bumps (with accompanying warning signs) in highly populated areas such as 
villages, schools, markets and other centres.  
•  Traffic  safety  measures  –install  road  signs  to  indicate  speed  restrictions,  hazards  (such  as 
• 
drifts), junctions and the like.  
Installation of drainage works and river crossings  –avoid interruption of subsoil and surface 
drainage patterns, especially in areas of cuttings or embankments and on agricultural land; put 
adequate  works  in  place  to  minimize  changes  in  surface  flows  and  stabilize  cuttings  with 
structures (walls, gabions, trees and so on); and provide special drainage requirements, such 
as “upslope catch water” or cut-off drains , where necessary.  
•  Simplify  drainage  measures  –simplify  the  design  of  drainage  measures  (and  enhance  road 
safety by reducing road speed) by specifying well sign-posted drifts or “Irish” bridges rather 
than culverts and bridges, wherever possible.  
Incorporate  erosion  control  measures  –carry  out  earth-moving  during  dry  periods;  protect 
vulnerable  soil  surfaces  with  mulch;  protect  drainage  channels  with  berms,  straw  or  fabric 
barriers to break flows; and establish vegetative cover as early as possible.  
• 
•  Crossing points –include animal crossing points (on busy roads or in cuttings/embankments).  
•  Choice  and  restoration  of  borrow  pits  –locate  borrow  pits  carefully  and  specify  restoration 
and drainage (where desired) as a contractual requirement.  
•  Provision  for  construction  operations  –specify  contractual  directives,  including  watercourse 
buffer  zones  (distance  allowed  should  depend  upon  soil  type  and  vegetation  cover),  for: 
prudently  dealing  with  surplus  materials,  particularly  in  mountainous,  erosion-prone  areas; 
collecting  and  recycling  lubricants;  avoiding  spills;  siting  of  construction  camps;  applying 
water or dust control chemicals to prevent water source contamination.  
•  Disease  control  –assess  disease  vector  ecology;  fill  or  drain  works  areas  to  avoid  creating 
vector  habitats;  establish  “quarantine  check  points”  at  strategic  locations  along  the  road  to 
minimize the spread of animal and plant diseases; organize HIV/AIDS sensitization activities 
and support community-based responses and institutions that may have emerged at works or 
construction camps. 
32 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Community Health (Guidance statement 14) 
Agricultural  sector  has  undergone  immense  changes  owing  to  an  improved  understanding  of  the 
health  and  safety  risks  associated  with  agriculture,  as  well  as  the  use  of  improved  technology  and 
personal protective equipment (PPE) but not in many parts of Ethiopia. There are still many areas in 
Ethiopia. Where there is a lack of knowledge about how farmers are affected by their exposures to the 
variety of health risks that they are confronted with every day. There is little medical surveillance in 
this  sector,  resulting  in  a  lack  of  credible  research  data  and  evidence.  Workers  in  the  agricultural 
sector are at greater risk of traumatic death and disabling injury.. Risks of acute pesticide poisoning 
and long-term effects of pesticide exposure, such as lymphoid malignant neoplasms, are present in a 
variety of settings where crops are grown. Respiratory disorders develop from the inhalation of grain 
dust,  other  types  of  organic  dusts,  and  work  in  animal  confinement  facilities.  Hearing  loss  is  an 
important problem in settings where machinery is in use. Skin cancers caused by sun exposure are a 
serious  problem,  and  irritant  and  allergic  dermatoses  occur  from  exposures  to  plants  and  farm 
chemicals. Zoonotic infections can cause life-threatening illness, and heat and cold stress occur from 
exposure to the elements.  
A health impact resulting from an IFAD-funded project, plan or programme is a measurable change 
on the health status of an individual, group or population, which may be attributable to the direct or 
indirect effects of an agricultural development. The impacts may be intended or unintended and may 
not become apparent for many years after prolonged exposure or due to long-term latency in the 
human body.  
The following are main health impacts related to agricultural sub-projects and  mitigation measures 
proposed to minimize impacts.  
Impact 
Waterborne diseases, e.g. 
diarrhoea, dysentery, 
cholera, typhoid, giardia  
Exposure to chemicals and 
antibiotics  
Proposed Mitigation measures 
- Avoid the use of untreated sewage effluent as a source of irrigation 
water.  
- Monitor and analyse potential irrigation water source(s) for 
microbiological contaminants and pathogens.  
- Identify sources of potential pollution, e.g. livestock drinking spots, 
laundry washing areas, community bathing areas, long drop toilets.  
- Consider safer alternatives  
Exposure to pesticides  
Consider safer alternatives.  
Traffic accidents and injuries  
Communicable diseases, e.g. 
HIV, STIs, TB, hepatitis  
Waterborne diseases  
- Design road with a hard shoulder at least 2 m wide.  
- Install speed reduction devices before villages, busy intersections, 
bus stops, schools, clinics, etc.  
- Install road safety signs.  
- Appoint a subcontractor to carry out road safety and awareness 
campaigns.  
- Advise livestock owners about the dangers of allowing cattle to 
graze on road verges and make alternative arrangements.  
- Employ local labour as much as possible.  
- Avoid overcrowding in accommodation facilities.  
- Provide adequate ablution facilities at the construction camp and at 
work sites.  
- Allow time off for regular health screening and testing.  
- Provide education and training with workers and local communities 
about communicable diseases and effective prevention.  
- Use of personal protective equipment (PPE).  
- Provision of adequate ablution facilities and field toilets.  
33 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Vector-borne diseases,  
respiratory illnesses 
(inorganic dust)  
Traumatic injuries  
Heat stroke, skin cancer,  
hypothermia  
Respiratory illnesses from 
organic dusts, endotoxins, 
moulds, bacteria, etc.;  
musculoskeletal disorders  
Disorders from exposure to 
chemicals and antibiotics;  
dermatoses  
Respiratory illnesses from 
sugar cane burning; 
bagassosis  
Traumatic injury;  
communicable diseases  
- Education and awareness training of workers.  
- Ongoing water quality monitoring.  
- Health surveillance.  
- Use of PPE and insect repellents.  
- Dust suppression.  
- Minimize amount of clearance.  
- Driver and equipment operator education and awareness 
programmes.  
- Speed control and enforcement.  
- Road safety awareness campaigns for the local communities.  
- Erection of barriers and signage around all construction sites.  
- Provide alternative routes for pedestrians, cyclists and non-
construction traffic.  
- Provide appropriate PPE.  
- Provide adequate shelter for resting.  
- Provide sufficient quantities of potable water.  
- Use of PPE.  
- Education and training on occupational health and safety issues.  
- Use of PPE.  
- Safe storage, handling and disposal of chemical containers.  
- Provide education and training on the safe use of agricultural 
chemicals.  
- Use PPE  
Driver training.  
- Speed enforcement and control.  
- HIV awareness training on causes and prevention of HIV.  
Process for implementation of SECAP  
Any assessments required during programme and project design are primarily the responsibility of the 
borrower  country,  as  is  the  case  for  programme  and  project  preparation  in  general  and  any  further 
assessment  deemed  necessary  during  the  implementation  phase.  The  assessments  will  be 
proportionate to the risks and potential impacts of the programme or project. In addition, the borrower 
shall ensure adherence to the environmental and social covenants of the financing agreement and is 
responsible  for  the  implementation  and  monitoring  of  the  ESMP  at  the  implementation  stage.  For 
category  A  projects,  the  environmental  and  social  assessments  will  be  carried  out  by  independent 
experts. IFAD will support the process to ensure that both IFAD and borrower requirements are met, 
and in ways which recognize and enhance borrower capacity.  
Environmental and Social Category 
According  to  SECAP,  three  categories  (A,  B,  C)  are  defined  based  on  the  likely  significance  of 
environmental and social concerns in relation to criteria shown below.  
Category A: The programme and project may have significant adverse environmental and/or social 
implications that: (i) are sensitive, irreversible or unprecedented; (ii) affect an area broader than the 
sites  or  facilities  subject  to  physical  interventions;  and  (iii)  are  not  readily  remedied  by  preventive 
actions or mitigation measures. 
34 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Category  B:  The  programme  and  project  may  have  some  adverse  environmental  and/or  social 
impacts  on  human  populations  or  environmentally  significant  areas,  but  the  impacts:  (i)  are  less 
adverse than those for category A; (ii) are site specific and few are irreversible in nature; and (iii) can 
be readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. While no formal 
ESIA  is  required  for  category  B  programmes  and  projects,  in  many  cases  further  environmental 
analysis could be undertaken, or in some cases an ESMF is developed during project preparation or 
implementation. Category B projects require an ESMP, which is incorporated in the SECAP review 
note in the form of a matrix, showing the output from the environmental and social analysis.  
Category  C:  The  programme  and  project  will  have  negligible  or  no  environmental  or  social 
implications  –  no  further  environmental  and  social  analysis  is  required.  Projects  in  category  C 
generally  do  not  require  additional  environmental  analysis  because  the  activities  have  positive 
environmental impacts, or negligible or minimally adverse environmental impacts:  
All projects entering the pipeline are subject to an environmental, social and climate risk screening, 
and  are  assigned  a  risk  category  for  environment  and  social  standards  (A,  B,  C)  and  for  climate 
vulnerability (high, moderate, low). 
Given  that  the  financial  support  anticipated  through  RUFIP  III  is  minimal  (micro-finance),  serious 
health and social challenges will not emerge from the programme activities per se. However, with  the 
increased  production  and  operation  of  businesses  supported  under  RUFIP  III  may  have  some 
environmental and social impact on human populations or environmentally significant areas and these 
can  be  readily  remedied  by  appropriate  preventive  actions  and/or  mitigation  measures  and  may 
require specific impact analysis to be undertaken or an ESMF to be developed.  RUFIP III therefore 
falls under category B.  
 RUFIP  III  is  not  likely  to  be  vulnerable  to  climate  risks  and  thus  voluntary  measures  could  be 
incorporated  into  the  detailed  design  and  implementation  phases  based  on  the  SECAP  project 
assessment  recommendations.  These  projects  generally  focus  on  investments  which  do  not  have  a 
direct  physical  or  geographical  interface  with  climate  hazards,  such  as  the  development  of  a 
microfinance institution. Climate vulnerability of   RUFIP III is therefore minimal and the risk due to 
climate change is low. 
Disclosure of documentation related to the SECAP process  
The  IFAD  policy  on  the  disclosure  of  documents,  approved  in  2010,  adopted  the  principle  of 
“presumption  of  full  disclosure”.  The  sharing  of  draft  and  final  ESIAs  and  other  relevant 
documents32  with  programme  and  project  stakeholders  and  interested  parties  will  be  subject  to  the 
above-mentioned  principle.  As  such,  the  documents  will  be  disclosed,  when  available,  in  a  timely 
manner  prior  to  project  appraisal  at  the  quality  assurance  stage  (or  other  key  stages  during  project 
implementation)  on IFAD’s website and in an accessible place in the programme- or project-affected 
area, in a form and language understandable to project-affected parties and other stakeholders, for the 
purposes of keeping them informed and obtaining their meaningful feedback.  
IFAD’s Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
IFAD  has  established  a  complaints  procedure  to  receive  and  facilitate  resolution  of  concerns  and 
complaints  with  respect  to  alleged  non-compliance  of  its  environmental  and  social  policies  and  the 
mandatory  aspects  of  its  SECAP  in  the  context  of  IFAD-supported  projects.  The  procedure  allows 
affected  complainants  to  have  their  concerns  resolved  in  a  fair  and  timely  manner  through  an 
independent  process.  IFAD  may  be  contacted  by  e-mail  at  SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org  or  via  its 
website.    In  addition,  IFAD  will  require  the  borrower  to  provide  an  easily  accessible  grievance 
mechanism,  process  or  procedure  to  facilitate  resolution  of  concerns  and  grievances  of  project-
affected parties arising in connection with the project (on a case-by-case basis for projects that pose 
special  risks).  Grievance  redress  will  use  existing  formal  and  informal  grievance  mechanisms, 
strengthened or supplemented as needed with project-specific arrangements, and will be proportionate 
to the risks and impacts of the project. Although IFAD normally addresses risks primarily through its 
35 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
internal  reviews  and  quality  assurance  process  and  by  means  of  project  implementation  support,  it 
remains  committed  to:  (i)  working  proactively  with  the  affected  parties  to  resolve  complaints;  (ii) 
ensuring that the complaints procedure and project-level grievance mechanism are easily accessible to 
affected  persons,  culturally  appropriate,  responsive  and  operates  effectively;  and  (iii)  maintaining 
records of all complaints and their resolutions.  
3.3 Comparison of SECAP and National Policies 
There  are  gaps  between  Ethiopian  laws  and  regulations  and  the  SECAP  in  the  requirements  for 
resettlement.  These  gaps  relate  to  the  general  principles  for  resettlement,  eligibility  criteria,  the 
notification  period  for  expropriation  and  resettlement,  and  the  procedures  required  throughout  the 
resettlement process.  
In the SECAP compensation must be completed prior to the start of the project, there are no similar 
timetables set out in Ethiopian laws or regulations. Additionally, there is no provision for relocation 
assistance, transitional support, or the provision of civic infrastructure under Ethiopian law. 
Additionally, Ethiopian law does not make any specific accommodation for squatter settlers or illegal 
settlers, other than recognition of some use-rights, such as when settlers can claim rights to the land. 
Whereas  SECAP  requires  even  illegal  settlers  be  consulted  regarding  project  implementation  and 
resettlement.  
Contrary  to  SECAP  safeguard  policies,  Ethiopian  law  makes  no  specific  accommodations  for 
potentially  vulnerable  groups  such  as  women,  children,  the  elderly,  ethnic  minorities,  indigenous 
people,  the  landless,  and  those  living  under  the  poverty  line.  These  groups  are  at  highest  risk  to 
experience  negative  effects  due to  resettlement, and  should receive  special  consideration  during  the 
preparation  of  a  resettlement  policy  framework  to  assure  that  they  can  maintain  at  least  the  same 
standard of living after displacement takes place. 
It  is  also  important  to  note  here  that  the  safeguard  document  requirements  and  instruments  such  as 
ESMF,  SEA  and  FPIC  by  IFAD  are  not  recognized  instruments  by  EFCCC.  In  this  circumstance 
IFAD safe guard requirement will prevail. 
4 Environmental and Social Setting 
4.1 General Setting 
Ethiopia  is  a  landlocked  country  situated  between  30  N  and  150  N  latitudes  and  330  E  and  480  E 
longitudes  with  a  land  area  of  1.13  million  km2.  It  has  a  diverse  topography  ranging  from  110  m 
below sea level in the Danakil depression in Afar Region to the Ras Dashen peak at 4,620 m high in 
the  Simien  highlands  of  North  Gonder  in  Amhara  Region.  Ethiopia  is  bordered  by  Sudan,  Eriteria, 
Djibouti, Somalia and Kenya.  
  Population: Ethiopia is the second most populous country in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) with over 
80 million people and a population growth rate of around 2.7% p.a. Women account for about 48% of 
the  population.  Approximately  20%  of  households  are  headed  by  women.  Almost  50%  of  the 
population is under 20 years of age. 85% of the population lives in rural area being solely dependent 
on subsistence agriculture.  
Climate: Ethiopia’s topography is characterized by large regional differences; it is considered an arid 
country,  but  precipitation  trends  exhibit  high  annual  variability.  Ethiopia  has  three  rainy  seasons: 
June–September  (kiremt),  October–January  (bega),  and  February–May  (belg).  Kiremt  rains  account 
for 50–80 percent of the annual rainfall totals, and most severe droughts usually result from failure of 
the  kiremt.  The  lowlands  in  the  southeast  and  northeast  are  tropical,  with  average  temperatures  of 
25°–30°C, while the central highlands are cooler, with average temperatures of 15°–20°C. Lowlands 
36 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
are  vulnerable  to  rising  temperatures  and  prolonged  droughts,  while  highlands  are  prone  to  intense 
and irregular rainfall.) 
 Ethiopia,  home  to  110  million  people,  is  one  of  the  world’s  most  drought-prone  countries.  The 
country  faces  numerous  development  challenges that exacerbate its  vulnerability  to  climate  change, 
including  high  levels  of  food  insecurity  and  ongoing  conflicts  over  natural  resources.  Chronic  food 
insecurity affects 10 percent of the population, even in years with sufficient rains. Roughly two-thirds 
of the population earns less than $2 per day and access to basic services is limited. Rainfed agriculture 
contributes  nearly  half  of  national  GDP  and  is  the  mainstay  of  livelihoods  for  85  percent  of  the 
population. These rural livelihood systems – crop cultivation, pastoralism and agro-pastoralism – are 
highly  sensitive  to  climate.  Food  insecurity  patterns  are  linked  to  seasonal  rainfall  patterns,  with 
hunger  trends  declining  significantly  after  the  rainy  seasons.  Climate  variability  already  negatively 
impacts  livelihoods  and  this  is  likely  to  continue.  Drought  is  the  single  most  destructive  climate-
related natural hazard in Ethiopia. Estimates suggest climate change may reduce Ethiopia’s GDP up to 
10  percent  by  2045,  primarily  through  impacts  on  agricultural  productivity.  These  changes  also 
hamper economic activity and aggravate existing social and economic problems. 
Land Use: The highlands generally have a temperate climate and cover about 50% of the total land 
area. The rest of the land is arid or semiarid. The highlands are the home of nearly 90% of Ethiopia’s 
population;  they  support  75%  of  the  national  livestock  herd;  and, they  account for  95% of the area 
under cultivation.  More than  95%  of  agricultural  production is  based  on  dry-land  farming  and  only 
1.7%  of  the  land  defined  as  “arable  and  under  permanent  cultivation”  is  irrigated.  Rainfall  varies 
throughout  the  country,  not  only  spatially  but  also  temporally.  Some  areas  of  the  south  western 
highlands experience rainfall for most of the year (March to October),  while rainfall in most of the 
rest of the country falls in the main rainy season (Kiremt  - July to September) and also in the short 
rains (Belg – March to May). Mean annual precipitation ranges from more than 2,200 mm in the south 
western highlands to less than 200 mm in the east and south east lowlands. Variation in temperature is 
driven mostly by elevation. Because of Ethiopia’s location near the equator and its elevation, seasonal 
changes in day length and incoming solar radiation are minimal and consequently have little impact 
on average temperatures.  
Of Ethiopia's total land area it is that l5 percent is under cultivation and 5l percent is pastureland. It is 
also estimated that over 60 percent of the cultivated area was cropland. Forestland, most of it in the 
south-western  part  of  the  country,  accounted  for  4  percent  of  the  total  land  area  according  to  the 
government.  These  figures  varied  from  those  provided  by  the  World  Bank,  which  estimated  that 
cropland,  pastureland,  and  forestland  accounted  for  l3,  4l,  and  25  percent,  respectively,  of  the  total 
land mass.  
There are two predominant soil types in the highlands. The first, found in areas with relatively good 
drainage,  consists  of  red-to-reddish-brown  clayey  loams  that  hold  moisture  and  are  well  endowed 
with needed minerals, with the exception of phosphorus. These types of soils are found in much of 
Ilubabor, Kefa, and Gamo Gofa. The second type consists of brownish-to-gray and black soils with 
high clay content. These soils are found in both the northern and the southern highlands in areas with 
poor  drainage.  They  are  sticky  when  wet,  hard  when  dry,  and  difficult  to  work.  But  with  proper 
drainage and conditioning, these soils have excellent agricultural potential.  
Sandy desert soils cover much of the arid lowlands in the northeast and in the Ogaden area of south-
eastern  Ethiopia.  Because  of  low  rainfall,  these  soils  have  limited  agricultural  potential,  except  in 
some  areas  where rainfall is  sufficient for  the  growth  of  natural  forage  at  certain  times  of  the  year. 
These areas are used by pastoralists who move back and forth in the area following the availability of 
pasture for their animals.  
The plains and low foothills west of the highlands have sandy and gray-to-black clay soils. Where the 
topography  permits,  they  are  suitable  for  farming.  The  soils  of  the  Great  Rift  Valley  often  are 
37 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
conducive  to  agriculture  if  water  is  available  for  irrigation.  The  Awash  River  basin  supports  many 
large-scale commercial farms and several irrigated small farms.  
Soil  erosion  has  been  one  of  the  country's  major  problems.  Over  the  centuries,  deforestation, 
overgrazing, and practices such as cultivation of slopes not suited to agriculture have eroded the soil, 
a situation that worsened considerably during the 1970s and 1980s, especially in Eritrea, Tigray, and 
parts  of  Gonder  and  Welo.  In  addition,  the  rugged  topography  of  the  highlands,  the  brief  but 
extremely heavy rainfalls that characterize many areas, and centuries-old farming practices that do not 
include conservation measures have accelerated soil erosion in much of Ethiopia's highland areas. In 
the dry lowlands, persistent winds also contribute to soil erosion.  
Most  agricultural  producers  are  subsistence  farmers  with  small  holdings,  often  broken  into  several 
plots. Most of these farmers lived in the Ethiopian Highlands, mainly at elevations of 1,500 to 3,000 
meters. There are two predominant soil types in the highlands. The first, found in areas with relatively 
good  drainage,  consists  of  red-to-reddish-brown  clayey  loams  that  hold  moisture  and  are  well 
endowed with needed minerals, with the exception of phosphorus. These types of soils are found in 
much of the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and People's Region (SNNPR). The second type consists 
of brownish-to-gray and black soils with high clay content. These soils are found in both the northern 
and the southern highlands in areas with poor drainage. They are sticky when wet, hard when dry, and 
difficult  to  work.  But  with  proper  drainage  and  conditioning,  these  soils  have  excellent  agricultural 
potential. According to the  Central Statistical Agency (CSA), in 2008 the average Ethiopian farmer 
holds 1.2 hectares of land, with 55.13% of them holding less than 1.0 hectare.  
Agriculture: is the mainstay of the economy accounting for about 42% of GDP, employing 80% of 
the  labour  force,  and  contributing  about  90%  of  export  earnings.  Smallholder  farmers  account  for 
about 96% of total agricultural production. Agriculture is dominated by a rain-fed (95%), low-input 
low-output subsistence farming system. Low agricultural productivity can be attributed, inter alia, to 
severe  land  degradation,  poor  farming  practices,  de-forestation  causing  severe  erosion,  population 
pressure (human and livestock), perceived insecurity of land tenure, and variable rainfall.  
38 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Agricultural  landscapes  are  critical  sources  of  ecosystem  services  required  by  people.  Within  a 
watershed, people living upstream and downstream are interdependent on resources such as water. In 
their efforts to secure their livelihoods, farmers may mine soils, leading to declined productivity, soil 
erosion, and increased greenhouse gases. Thedeteriorating resource base ultimately push farmers into 
poverty. Water continues to be a critical basic resource for improved productivity. Soils can contain 
water and are a main buffer against drought and floods and also climatic change through sequestration 
of atmospheric carbon. Soil and groundwater are natural, free reservoirs that hold orders of magnitude 
more water than all existing or conceivable man-made reservoirs. Good husbandry of soil, water and 
crops  (soil  and  water  conservation  measures),  enhances  agricultural  productivity,  increases 
groundwater recharge and base flows in streams.  
Crop agriculture is dominated by small-scale subsistence farmers who remain heavily dependent on 
rain (only 1 percent of cultivated land is irrigated), employ low-intensive technologies and lack access 
to services. This leaves the sector highly vulnerable to changing rainfall and other climate patterns. 
Limited  water  storage  capacity  further  increases  vulnerability  to  climate  risks.  Many  farmers  grow 
slow-maturing, high-yield “long cycle” crops that depend on two rainy seasons to reach harvest and 
are thus highly vulnerable to changes in seasonal rainfall. Most plots are less than 0.5 hectares and are 
insufficient  to  sustain  household  food  security,  much  less  generate  adequate  income,  limiting 
household  capacity  to  invest  in  improved  farming  practices  that  could  increase  climate  resilience. 
Recurring  drought  and  increasing  desertification  resulting  from  land  use  pressures  have  resulted  in 
significant losses of arable land and rendered the country increasingly dependent on food aid. Crop 
productivity  may  increase  in  the  short  term  due  to  warmer  temperatures,  but  continued 
hightemperatures will result in heat stress and crop failure. By one estimate, Ethiopia will forgo more 
than 6 percent of each year’s agricultural output if the current decline in average annual rainfall levels 
continues in the medium term.  
The  population  in  the  lowland  peripheries  (below  1,500  meters)  is  nomadic,  engaged  mainly  in 
livestock  raising.  Sandy  desert  soils  cover  much  of  the  arid  lowlands  in  the  northeast  and  in  the 
Ogaden  of  southeastern  Ethiopia.  Because  of  low  rainfall,  these  soils  have  limited  agricultural 
potential, except in some areas where rainfall is sufficient for the growth of natural forage at certain 
times of the year. These areas are used by pastoralists who move back and forth in the area following 
the availability of pasture for their animals.  
The plains and low foothills west of the highlands have sandy and gray-to-black clay soils. Where the 
topography  permits,  they  are  suitable  for  farming.  The  soils  of  the  Great  Rift  Valley  often  are 
conducive  to  agriculture  if  water  is  available  for  irrigation.  The  Awash  River  basin  supports  many 
large-scale commercial farms and several irrigated small farms.  
Soil  erosion  has  been  one  of  the  country's  major  problems.  Over  the  centuries,  deforestation, 
overgrazing, and practices such as cultivation of slopes not suited to agriculture have eroded the soil, 
a situation that worsened considerably during the 1970s and 1980s, especially in Eritrea, Tigray, and 
parts  of  Gondar  and  Wollo.  In  addition,  the  rugged  topography  of  the  highlands,  the  brief  but 
extremely heavy rainfalls that characterize many areas, and centuries-old farming practices that do not 
include conservation measures have accelerated soil erosion in much of Ethiopia's highland areas. In 
the dry lowlands, persistent winds also contribute to soil erosion.  
Livestock: Livestock production plays an important role in Ethiopia's economy. Estimates for 1987 
indicated that livestock production contributed one-third of agriculture's share of GDP, or nearly 15 
percent of total GDP. In the 2006/2007 EFY hides, skins and leather products made up 7.5% of the 
total  export  value;  live  animals  accounted  for  3.1%  of  the  total  value  of  exports  during  the  same 
period.  
39 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Although varying from region to region, the role of livestock in the Ethiopian economy was greater 
than  the  figures  suggest.  Almost  the  entire  rural  population  was involved  in  some  way  with  animal 
husbandry,  whose  role  included  the  provision  of  draft  power,  food,  cash,  transportation,  fuel,  and, 
especially  in  pastoral  areas,  social  prestige.  In  the  highlands,  oxen  provided  draft  power  in  crop 
production. In pastoral areas, livestock formed the basis of the economy.  
Ethiopia's  estimated  livestock  population  is  often  said  to  be  the  largest  in  Africa.It  is  estimated  to 
number  over  150  million  in  2007/2008.  Excluding  the  Afar  and  Somali  Regions,  there  were 
approximately  47.5  million  cattle,  26.1  million  sheep,  21.7  million  goats,  2.1  million  horses  and 
mules,  5.6  million  donkeys,  1  million  camels,  and  39.6  million  poultry.  For  the  later  two  Regions, 
estimated numbers vary greatly between conventional and aerial censuses, but total less than 15% of 
the  non-nomadic  Regions.  Though  the  raising  of  livestock  always  has  been  largely  a  subsistence 
activity, intensive, factory farm facilities are gaining in popularity.  
Ethiopia  has  great  potential  for  increased  livestock  production,  both  for  local  use  and  for  export. 
However, expansion was constrained by inadequate nutrition, disease, a lack of support services such 
as  extension  services,  insufficient  data  with  which  to  plan  improved  services,  and  inadequate 
information on how to improve animal breeding, marketing, and processing. The high concentration 
of  animals  in  the  highlands,  together  with  the  fact  that  cattle  are  often  kept  for  status,  reduces  the 
economic potential of Ethiopian livestock.  
Cattle  in  Ethiopia  are  almost  entirely  of  the  zebu  type  and  are  poor  sources  of  milk  and  meat. 
However, these cattle do relatively well under the traditional production system. About 70 percent of 
the  cattle  in  1987  were  in  the  highlands,  and  the  remaining  30  percent  were  kept  by  nomadic 
pastoralists  in  the  lowland  areas.  Meat  and  milk  yields  are  low  and  losses  high,  especially  among 
calves  and  young  stock.  Contagious  diseases  and  parasitic  infections  are  major  causes  of  death, 
factors that are exacerbated by  malnutrition and starvation. Recurring drought takes a heavy toll on 
the animal population, although it is difficult to determine the extent of losses. Practically all animals 
are range-fed. During the rainy seasons, water and grass are generally plentiful, but with the onset of 
the dry season, forage is generally insufficient to keep animals nourished and able to resist disease.  
Most of Ethiopia's estimated 48 million sheep and goats are raised by small farmers who used them as 
a  major  source  of  meat  and  cash  income.  About  three-quarters  of  the  total  sheep  flock  is  in  the 
highlands, whereas lowland pastoralists maintain about three-quarters of the goat herd. Both animals 
have  high  sales  value  in  urban  centers,  particularly  during  holidays  such  as  Easter  and  New  Year's 
Day.  
Most of the estimated 7.5 million equines (horses, mules, and donkeys) are used to transport produce 
and other agricultural goods. Camels also play a key role as pack animals in areas below 1,500 meters 
in elevation. Additionally, camels provide pastoralists in those areas with milk and meat.[21]  
Poultry  farming  is  widely  practiced  in  Ethiopia;  almost  every  farmstead  keeps  some  poultry  for 
consumption and for cash sale. The highest concentration of poultry is in Shewa, in central Wollo, and 
in northwestern Tigray. Individual poultry farms supply eggs and meat to urban dwellers. By 1990 the 
state  had  begun  to  develop  large  poultry  farms,  mostly  around  Addis  Ababa,  to  supply  hotels  and 
government institutions. Multinational agribusinesses supply these industrial poultry farms with high 
yielding breeds, such as Rhode Island Reds and White Leghorns.  
The  fact  that  the  country  achieved  MDG  4,  reducing  the  child  mortality  and  the  decline  of  HIV 
mortality has helped life expectancy to increase to 65.2 years in 2015 from 46.6 years in 1990. The 
Under 5 mortality rate and Infant mortality rate dropped from 203 and 122 in 1990 to 61.3 and 41.4 in 
2015.  The  ministry  of  health  has  achieved  this  through  the  Health  Extension  Program  by  using  a 
special implementation platform called Women Development Army.  
40 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Access to basic Services 
Education:  Prior  to  1974,  Ethiopia  had  an  estimated  illiteracy  rate  well  above  90%  and  compared 
poorly  with  the  rest  of  Africa  in  the  provision  of  schools  and  universities.  After  the  Ethiopian 
Revolution, emphasis was placed on increasing literacy in rural areas. Practical subjects were stressed, 
as was the teaching of socialism. By 2015, the literacy rate had increased to 49.1%. Recently, there 
has been massive expansion throughout the educational system. Access to primary is limited to urban 
locations  and  they  are  mostly  owned  by  the  private  sector  and  Faith  Based  organizations.  Primary 
school education consists of two cycles from grades 1 to 4 and grades 5 to 8. Secondary schools have 
two cycles from grades 9 to 10 and grades 11 to 12. Primary schools have over 90% of 7 year olds 
enrolled although only about half complete the two cycles. This situation varies from one region to the 
other and it is even worst in agro-pastoral locations, such as Somali and Afar regions, as well as in the 
growing  regions  such  as  Gambella  and  Benshangul  Gumz.  A  much  smaller  proportion  of  children 
attend secondary school and even fewer attend the second cycle. School attendance is lowest in rural 
areas due to lack of provision and alternative occupations. The school curriculum in later years covers 
more subjects at a higher level than curricula in most other countries. Low pay and undervaluation of 
teachers  contributes  to  poor  quality  teaching.  This  is  exacerbated  by  large  class  sizes  and  poor 
resources  resulting  on  poor  performance  on  national  assessments.  There  is  evidence  of  corruption 
including forgery of certificates. Many primary schools have introduced mother-tongue teaching but 
there  have  been  difficulties  where  small  minority  languages  are  concerned.  English  medium 
instruction remains a problem throughout the later years of education. Girls' access to education has 
been  improved  but  early  marriage  decreases  their  attendance.  Girls'  educational  attainment  is 
adversely affected by gender stereotypes, violence, lack of sanitary facilities and the consequences of 
sexual  activity.  Jimma  University  is  addressing  some  problems  women  experience  in  higher 
education.  TVETs  have  introduced  competence  based  assessments  although  many  lack  adequate 
resources. Teacher training has been up-graded. All higher education has been expanding but this has 
not been accompanied by sufficient expansion in staffing and resources. There have been difficulties 
in  introducing  BPR  with  poorly  paid  university  staff  supplementing  their  incomes  where  possible. 
Universities need to match training to market demands. All colleges and universities suffer from the 
same  disadvantages  as  schools.  Library  facilities  are  poor,  classes  are  large  and  there  is  lack  of 
equipment. 
Ethiopia  has  made  enormous  strides  in  education  provision  over  the  last  decade.  Primary  school 
enrolment increased from 2.871 million in 1990-91 to 9.537 million in 2003-2004, a more than three-
fold increase. At the secondary education level, enrolment increased from 453 985 in 1990-91 to 780 
205 in 2003-04, a 70% increase. Higher education has increased from 31 000 students before 2000 to 
172  522 in  2003/2004, a  five-fold  increase.  Despite  the  tremendous increase in primary  enrolments 
over the past decade, Ethiopia nevertheless faces serious and increasing challenges. Due to the high 
rate of population growth, it may in fact have to more than double its present enrolments to achieve 
primary  education  for  all.  The  largest  percentage  of  out-of-school  children  is  in  the  rural  areas.  A 
comparison of rural and urban enrolment in 2003/2004 indicates that 68.9% of primary enrolment was 
in  rural  areas  and  31.1%  in  urban  areas.  However  over  80%  of  Ethiopia's  population  lives  in  rural 
areas. And even for those who manage to get into school, only 72% of rural children make it to Grade 
3,  and  25%  up  to  Grade  8.  The  gender  gap  in  Ethiopia  is  also  significant,  at  about  18  and  12 
percentage  points  difference  for  primary  and  first  cycle  secondary  schooling.  At  higher  education 
levels there is as much as a 50 percentage points difference in the enrolment of women as compared 
to men. In order to achieve gender parity, specific steps that favor girls' admission to teacher training 
institutes, colleges and universities have been taken in the last seven years.  
Health:  Inaccessibility,  water  shortages,  and  infestations  of  disease-causing  insects,  mainly 
mosquitoes, prevented the use of large parcels of potentially productive land. In Ethiopia's lowlands, 
for example, the presence of malaria kept farmers from settling in many areas.  
Ethiopia is the second most populous country in sub-Saharan Africa, with a population of over 94.1 
million  people.  As  of  the  end  of  2003,  the  United  Nations  (UN)  reported  that  4.4%  of  adults  were 
41 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
infected  with  human  immunodeficiency  virus/acquired  immune  deficiency  syndrome  (HIV/AIDS); 
other estimates of the rate of infection ranged from a low of 7% to a high of 18%. Whatever the actual 
rate,  the  prevalence  of  HIV/AIDS  contributed  to  falling  life  expectancy  since  the  early  1990s. 
According  to  the  Ministry  of  Health,  one-third  of  current  young  adult  deaths  are  AIDS-related. 
Malnutrition  is  widespread,  especially  among  children,  as  is  food  insecurity.  Because  of  growing 
population pressure on agricultural and pastoral land, soil degradation, and severe droughts that have 
occurred each decade since the 1970s, per capita food production is declining. According to the UN 
and  the  World  Bank,  Ethiopia  in  2005  suffered  from  a  structural  food  deficit  such  that  even  in  the 
most productive years, at least 5 million Ethiopians require food relief.  
The health service sector at woreda level is expected to provide basic health services to mothers and 
children.  In  addition,  a  woreda  health  center  makes  provision  of  basic  health  services  that  help  to 
prevent communicable diseases, provide basic medications and provide basic health package services. 
A  woreda  administration  has  a  role  to  monitor  the  basic  health  services  delivered  to  citizens  in  the 
locality. 
The most common problems in health services are unavailability of health professionals, shortage of 
basic drugs and health services, unavailability of sufficient and quality health equipment and facilities. 
Implementing partners through involving the community and with appropriate application of social 
Accountability  tools  can  increase  citizens’  knowledge  of  the  government’s  policies  regarding  the 
government basic health service planning, budgeting and delivery. 
 The under-five mortality rate has declined from 166/1000 live births in 1996-2000 to 123/1000 live 
births in 2001-2005. It is projected to decline further to 85/1000 live births in 2009/10. The trends in 
infant mortality and under-five mortality rates for Ethiopia between 1986 and 2010 are shown in the 
table  below.  Although  current  levels  are  still  high,  the  trends  are  quite  encouraging.  According  to 
estimates from the Ethiopian Demographic and Health Surveys (2000 and 2005), the infant mortality 
rate declined from 97 per 1000 live births during the period 1996-2000 to 77 in 2001-2005 and it is 
projected to decline to 45 by the year 2009/10. About 90% of the under-five mortality is attributable 
to pneumonia, neonatal causes (pre-maturity, asphyxia and sepsis), malaria, diarrhea and measles. On 
the other hand, malnutrition and currently HIV/AIDS are the major underlying causes. 
In  terms  of  disease  burden,  major  causes  of death  are  infectious  diseases  (TB, respiratory  illnesses, 
malaria, gastro-intestinal infections, meningitis, AIDS and leishmaniasis). Nutritional disorders rank 
among  the  top  problems  affecting  the  population in general  and  children  and  mothers  in  particular. 
Malaria is the major cause of morbidity and mortality in the country with an estimated 4 to 5 million 
cases and with proportional mortality rates of 13 to 35% and case fatality rates of 15 to 17% in health 
facilities every year. The HIV epidemic has taken off rapidly over the last two decades and prevalence 
was  estimated  at  4.4%  of  the  adult  population  is  2003.  At  present,  the  epidemic  is  considered 
stabilized in urban areas with a slight increase in rural areas. The ICPD+15 country report by Ethiopia 
indicates that the number of persons who received HIV counseling and testing rose from 448 241 in 
2005 to 2.3 million in 2007; the number of HIV patients receiving ART services increased from 900 
to  122  243;  and  the  number  of  those  who  received  services  in  the  prevention  of  mother  to  child 
transmission increased from 2 208 in 2005 to 12 000 in 2007. The major factors that fuel the spread of 
the  HIV/AIDS  include:  poverty,  low  level  of  literacy,  stigma  and  discrimination,  gender  disparities 
and  the  existence  of  commercial  sex,  population  movement  including  rural-urban  migration,  and 
harmful traditional practices. HIV/AIDS in turn exacerbates the poverty situation, thereby creating the 
vicious circle of aggravating the ulnerability of individuals and communities. The estimated burden of 
tuberculosis amounts to 196/100 000 for 2003, and its proliferation is largely attributed to the chronic 
high  rates  of  malnutrition  (worsened  by  frequent  severe  droughts),  overcrowding,  physical  stress, 
emotional anxiety and the high prevalence of HIV/AIDS.  
The most recent national estimate shows that over 1 million people were living with HIV in Ethiopia 
in  2008,  and  HIV  prevalence  is  estimated  at  2.2%  (7.7%  urban  and  0.9%  in  rural).  Women  and 
children constitute the group most affected by the epidemic. About 59% of people living with HIV in 
the country are female, 68 136 children under age 15 years are living with the virus, 79 183 pregnant 
women are HIV-positive and 14 093 HIV-positive births are expected to occur from positive pregnant 
42 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
mothers.  In  2008,  there  were  an  estimated  5  459  139  orphans;  886,820  of  these  children  were 
orphaned due to AIDS.  
Although some progress has been recorded in the health indicators in the country in general, major 
reproductive  health  indicators  reveal  a  state  of  extremely  poor  health  status.  The  average  maternal 
mortality  ratio  for  the  period  1994-2000  was  871  deaths  per  100,000  live  births,  which  declined  to 
673 by 2005 (EDHS, 2000, 2005). Skilled attendance at birth is at a low rate of about 8%, and only 
5%  of  babies  born  are  delivered  in  health  facilities.  Only  10  %  of  mothers  receive  post-natal  care. 
About  25,000  women  die  every  year  due  to  complications  related  to  delivery,  and  500,000  are  left 
with  complications,  including  obstetric  fistula.  It  is  estimated  that  abortions  account  for  about  50 
percent of total gynecological and obstetric admissions in the country.  
Excess to basic services 
Water supply and sanitation: Typical problems of the water and sanitation service in any woreda of 
the country as assessed in ESAP1 are inadequate budget allocation for the sector, poor accessibility, 
availability and quality of water supply and inadequate maintenance of the water supply, etc. In some 
cases,  despite  there  is  somehow  sufficient  infrastructure  for  the  water  supply,  there  is  a  poor 
management system of the water supply due to limited communication between the service providers 
and service users. 
Rural Road: In most woredas of the country, inaccessibility, poor quality and poor maintenance of 
rural  roads  are  common  problems,  in  which  social  accountability  initiatives  can  play  a  role  for 
improvement. The CSOs through working together with the respective woreda officials, can mobilize 
the  community,  while  woreda  administrations  provide  baseline  data  to  the  regional  government  on 
accessibility, service level and demand of the rural roads service sector in the locality. 
4.2 Environmental and Social Setting Specific to the Regions  
The baseline environmental and social conditions are described hereunder on the basis of the fact that 
the locations of the project are distributed in the whole country. Therefore, the approach followed in 
this  case is  that,  since  these  locations  could  be  anywhere, it  is  better  to  describe  the  environmental 
situations  of  the  Regions  that  totally  form  the  bulk  of  the  country.  That  is,  the  environmental  and 
social  descriptions  do  not  refer  to  specific  project  sites.  The  country  is  composed  of  nine  regional 
states. Description of the bio-physical environment and social baseline situations of these regions are 
described below. 
4.2.1 Afar National Regional State 
(a) Bio–Physical Environment 
Afar region  lies  in  the arid  and semi-arid  climatic  zone  within the  Great  Rift Valley  of  East  Africa 
with irregular drainage systems and depressions. It lies in the geographic location between 8049’ and 
14030’ N latitude and 39034’ to 42028’east longitude. The land area of Afar Region is about 94,817 
km2, and is divided into five Zones with 32 Weredas and 401 Kebele administrative structures. 
Topography 
The  topography  of  the  Afar  region  varies  from  hilly  escarpment  in  the  western  and  southern  edges 
with an altitude of 1,000  – 1,500 masl to low plain land areas in the north east and south east. The 
altitude  of  the lowlands fall  between 0  and 1,000  masl  while there are  some  areas  below  sea level. 
Over 95% of the Afar Region lies in the altitude range below 1,000 masl. About 8% of the total land 
area lies below sea level. This region is also known for its lowest altitudinal location (depression) in 
the  world,  having  depths  as  low  as  114  meters  below  sea  level  in  the  Danakil  depression  in  the 
northern part of the region. 
Climate 
43 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The  region is one  of  the  areas  having  high  temperature and low rainfall. Temperature in the  region 
ranges  from  a  mean  maximum  temperature  of  42.5oC  in  the  area  of  Doubti  Woreda  and  mean 
minimum temperature of 17.8oC in the high altitude zone at Gewane. The area has moisture index of 
less than 0.25 and receives mean annual rainfall of 200 mm. 
Severe dry season occurs in May and June at regional level. This season has the hottest temperature. 
The main rainy season occurs between July and September, while short rain stays between March and 
April. Rainfall ranges from 500 mm on the western edges of the regional state to 200 mm in the lava 
plains to the eastern part of the region. 
Geology and Soils 
According to geological map of Ethiopia (1996), the geological formation of the area includes: 
•  Afar series; mildly alkaline basalt with subordinate alkaline and pre-alkaline silicics (rhyolitic 
dome and flows and ignimbrites). 
•  Basalt  flows,  spatter  cones  and  hyaloclastites,  (a)  Transitional  type  between  alkaline  and 
tholeitic. (b) Alkaline olivine basalt. 
•  Undifferentiated alluvial, lacustrine and beach sediments. 
•  Alkali granite and syenite. 
•  Rhyohitic  Volcanic  centres,  obsidian  pitchstone,  pumice  ignimbrite,  tuff  subordinate 
truchaytic flows (alkaline and pre-alkaline composition), and 
•  Alluvial and lacustrine deposits: Sand silt clay diatomite, limestone and beach sand. 
The major soils of the region in general include: 
•  Fluvisols /12.57 %/, which are fertile and easy to work with ( this soil type is found along the 
river courses), 
•  Leptosols  /20.60  %/  (found  along  plateau  margins  and  steeper  slops)  that  have  rocky 
characteristics, 
•  Eutric Regosols /18.88 %/ (found on gentle /undulating/ rolling, moderate to high relief hills), 
•  Eutric Cambisols and Vertic Cambisols /8.06 %/, and 
•  Solonchaks /18.72 %/ which are typical soils that develop in arid climatic conditions and most 
plants cannot grow on them. 
The  soils  of  the  region  have  limited  fertility  value.  The  fertile  soils  of  the  region  include  fluvisols 
found adjacent to major stream courses. 
Vegetation Cover and Wildlife 
The vegetation cover of Afar in general is sparse and the area is prone to desertification. Over 70% of 
the  land  area  in  Afar  region  is  bare  land.  The  main  vegetation  types  in  the  region  include  the 
following: 
Juniperous olea forest rising to less than 7m in height; 
• 
•  Riparian Woodlands/ forest, species constituting varieties of acacia trees; 
•  Shrub land; predominantly acacia species and prosopis; and, 
•  Bush land; the dominant species include acacia and balanites species. 
Wildlife resources of the region are rich. Wildlife of the area is those that are most adaptive creatures 
to the arid and semi-arid lands of the region. 
Land use / Land cover 
As  of  1999, the  major  portion  of  the  land  in the  region  is  bare land  (70.09%  of  the  Region’s  area) 
followed by shrub land (13.68% of the Region’s area).  
Water Resources 
44 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
There are number of rivers in the region including: Awash, Mille, Kessem, Kebena, Awura, Gulina, 
Dawie, Borkena, Telalk, Woama, Alaa and other streams. The other major water sources of the region 
are  Lakes.  There  are  twelve  relatively  large  lakes  and  five  ponds  in  the  region.  Two  of  the  largest 
lakes are Afdera Lake and Abe Lake which are found in zone 1 and 2 of the Region. The smaller ones 
include Lake Asahle, Lake Dalol, and Lake Gemeri. Groundwater is also the major source for potable 
water supply in the region. 
(b) Socio-economic Environment 
Population, Religion and Ethnic Group 
As per the estimations made by the CSA, for the year 2016 (July), the total population was estimated 
to  be  1,769,002  with  a  male  population  of  969,001  and  female  population  of  800,001.  In  the  same 
period,  the  rural  population  the  urban  population  was  estimated  to  be  comprised  81.5%  and  18.5% 
respectively. The population density is 21.6 persons/square kilometre on an average. The major ethnic 
groups of the regional state include Afar, Amhara, Tigray and others. The dominant occupation in the 
Region is pastoralism. Over 90% of the population is pastoralist community. Afar Region is one of 
the pastoral areas in Ethiopia, where extensive herding is practiced. 
 Cultural Heritage and Tourism 
Afar region is rich in cultural assets. The archaeological findings from the Region have revealed that 
it  is  one  of  the  cradles  of  mankind.  The  hominid  relic  of  the  world  renown,  “Lucy”,  was  found  in 
Hadar  area  of  the  Region.  This  site  is  considered  as  an  attraction  area  for  scientific  research  to 
decipher  or  figure  out  man’s  origin.  The  research  sites  such  as  Hadar  and  the  middle  Awash,  that 
consist  fossil  and  handicraft  remains  of  human  ancestors,  are  attractive  destinations  for  tourists  all 
over the world. 
There  are  potential  for  tourist  attraction  in  the  area,  including  paleo  anthropologic  and  wildlife 
resources  as  well  as  the  Afar  traditional  way  of  life.  Ertele  and  the  Afar  depression  are  sites  of 
scientific research both of natural science as well as human civilization. 
The  Yangu  Dirasa  National  park,  the  Awash  National  Park  hosts  number  of  wildlife  species  for 
tourism and biodiversity conservation. 
The economic benefits from such tourism also termed as ‘paleotourism’ has not yet developed. But it 
could  be  known  that  eleven  new  sites  have  been  identified  to  be  considered  for  research  and 
eventually for ‘paleotourism’. 
4.2.2 Tigray National Regional State 
(a) Bio-Physical Environment 
Topography 
Topography of Tigray Region is mainly the extension of the central highland and associated western 
lowlands  and  is  divided  into  two  major  blocs;  the  eastern  bloc  comprises  of  highlands  while  the 
western bloc is predominantly lowland. Altitudes range from 500 meters up to 3,900 meters above sea 
level. It is situated between 12015' N and 14057' N latitude and between 36059' E and 400 E longitudes 
with an estimated area of 53,638 km2.  
 Climate 
Tigray Region falls within 6 ecological zones (desert, Kola, Woina Dega, Dega and Wurch). Part of 
the  Tigray  regional  state,  that  is,  the  eastern  and  southern  zones,  where  Mekele  is  situated  receive 
peak rain in April and August, whereas the western and central part receive single maximum rainfall 
between  June/July  to  August/September  and  for  the  north  western  part,  the  wet  period  runs  from 
April/ May to October/November. The mean annual rainfall for the region ranges from 600 mm in the 
north-eastern part to 1,600 mm in the western part of Welkait Wereda. Temperature ranges between 
45 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
160 C and 200 C in the eastern and central highland part while in the lowlands of the western zones it 
is 380C to 400C. 
Geology and Soil Type 
The  geology  of  Tigray  comprises  low-grade  Metamorphic,  Paleozoic  and  Mesozoic  rocks.  Tertiary 
volcanic,  quaternary  deposit  and  acidic  to  basic/  ultra  basic  intrusions  are  also  some  of  geological 
feature of the region.  
Major  soil  types  of  the  region  identified  in  a  study  conducted  in  1976  is  quoted  by  the  Bureau  of 
Planning  and  Economic  Development  (Report  of  1998)  as:  orthic  Acrisels,  chromic  and  Eutric 
cambisols, Humic cambisols, Vertic cambisols and Vertic luvisols, Eurthic fluvisols, dystric nitosols, 
Eutric Nitosols, Euric rogosols, Haplic Xerosols, Cambic Arenosols, and chromic Andisols. 
Water Resources 
There are three major river basins and a valley in the Tigray Region: Tekeze basin, Mereb basin, Afar 
basin and Angereb valley. Some of the surface water sources comprise Tekeze River, Sure River, Mai 
Tell  River  and  Mai  Hitsatsa  River.  Groundwater  source  is  abundant  and  is  the  major  water  supply 
source in the area. 
Vegetation and Wildlife 
Due to human interference and early settlements in this part of the country, the major vegetation has 
been  destroyed.  Accordingly,  the  vegetation  cover  of  the  region  is  divided  into  forest,  woodland 
savannah and grassland regions. 
The  plant  species  include  Acacia  trees  mixed  with  savannah,  juniperus  trees  mixed  with  savannah, 
and  mixed  deciduous  woodland.  The  vegetation  cover  of  the  north-western  zone  of  the  region 
comprises of grass land, scattered bush and scrub covered and dense forest covered land. There are 
protected  forest  areas  in  Tahitay  Adiabo  and  Atsgede  Tsimbela  Weredas  of  western  zone.  This 
includes  Maikohni  forest  area,  Adi  Tsetser,  Adi  Ascere  areas  and  Enda  Tanki  protected  site.  The 
region has varied wildlife species including hyena, tiger, monkey and fox. 
 (b) Socio- Economic Environment  
Population, Ethnicity and Religious Groups 
According to the population estimates of the CSA, for July 2016, the total population of Tigray was 
5,151,998  out  of  which  2,539,997  were  estimated  to  be  male  while  the  remaining  2,612,001  were 
female.  In  terms  of  this  estimate,  74.2%  were  rural  inhabitants  while  the  balance,  i.e.  25.8%  was 
urban inhabitants.The density in Tigray Region in this time was 116 persons /square kilometre. There 
are a number of ethnic groups that inhabit the Region. Tigray being the major ethnic group, there are 
also Kunama, Saho, Agew, Argoba and others in smaller proportions. 
 Cultural and Historical Heritage 
Tigray has rich cultural and historical resources and high potential for the tourism industry. In Tigray 
Region,  the  colossal  obelisks,  rock-hewn  churches,  ruined  temples,  palaces,  mosques,  church 
paintings,  stone  inscription  and  manuscripts  are  some  of  the  ancient  Ethiopian  properties  that  have 
tourist attraction values. The Axum Obelisks, the rock-hewn churches are the major tourist attractions 
of the Region. 
4.2.3 Amhara National Regional State 
(a)Bio - Physical Environment 
 Topography and Climate 
46 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The  Amhara  National  Regional  State  has  diverse  topographic  features,  with  rugged  mountains, 
extensive  plateau  and  scattered  plain  separated  by  deeply  cut  gorges,  steep  slopes  and  cliffs.  The 
elevation varies from 600 masl at Matera up to 4,620 masl at Raps Dashed. 
The Amhara National Regional State is located between 90 N and 130 45' North latitude and 360 to 
40030' East longitude. It is bounded by Tigray in the north, Oromia in the south, Benishangul Gumuz 
in the west and Afar region in the east. The Regional State has a land area of about 161,828 km2 (15% 
of the land area of Ethiopia). 
 Climate 
The climatic condition of the Region is divided into temperate (Dega), subtropical (Woina Dega) and 
arid (Kola) agro-climatic zones. Mean annual rainfall of the Region varies from 700 mm to over 2,000 
mm and the temperature range is between 100 C and 260 C. There are two rainy seasons, while short 
rain occurs during March, May, and April, heavy rain is during June, July and August. 
Geology and Soils 
The Precambrian rocks, Cenozoic rocks and Mesozoic rocks cover most part of the Amhara Region. 
The  soil  of  the  region  includes:  Arthic  Acrisds,  cambisols,  Rendizinas,  phaeozems,  Lithisols, 
Aluvisds, and vertislols. Soil erosion is the major environmental degradation problem in the Region 
due  to  lack  of  vegetation  cover  and  rugged  topography.  Soils  in  the  Region  are  highly  eroded  as 
compared to other parts of the country. According to a study conducted in 1984 E.C, the quantity of 
soil loss in Amhara Region was estimated at 1.1 billion tons per year. This accounts for 58% of the 
total annual soil loss of the country in general during the time. 
Water Resources 
There is an abundant water resource in the Region. The major water resource basins in the region are 
the Abay River /Blue Nile/, Tekeze River and Awash River basins. There are also several lakes like 
Lake  Tana,  Lake  Zengena  and  Haik.  Ground  water  resource  is  abundant  and  it  is  the  major  water 
supply source in the region. 
Vegetation and Wildlife 
The  natural  forest  in the  Region  is  heavily  depleted  and  degraded  by  intensive  human  interference, 
mainly for agricultural purpose and for energy (firewood) production. Currently less than 10% of the 
total estimated forest area is considered to be natural forest in the Region. The rest are scattered wood 
lots (planted by individual farmers on different land use types) and plantation forests (those that have 
been planted for different purposes). 
Indigenous  tree/shrub  in  the  area  include:  olea,  africana,  Juniperous  procera,  podocarpus  falcatus, 
Acacia species, hygenia abyssinica, ximenia american and Ficus though some of these are diminishing 
in the area due to human activities. 
Wildlife availability among other factors depends on the extent of vegetation cover of a given area. 
Parks of the Siemen Mountains are preserved for the most endangered species, such as Walia Ibex, 
Siemen Fox, Gelada Baboons and different species of birds, most of which are endemic to Ethiopia. 
Endangered bird species in the region include: Harwood, Francolin and Ostrich. 
The  Siemen  Mountain  National  Park  and  protected  areas  of  main  bird  sanctuaries  like,  Lake  Tana, 
Ankober  -Debre  Sina  mountain,  Awi  Zone,  Choke  Mountain,  Fogera,  Guasa/  in  Menze/,  Jama  and 
Jara valley, Middle Abay valley, Gofa Forest are found in the region. 
Land Use/ Land Cover 
As  of  2002,  the  Region  is  largely  covered  by  grazing  land,  which  is  followed  by  cultivable  land 
having 30% and 28.2% respectively of all the area coverage of the region during the time.  
(b) Socio-economic Environment 
47 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Population, Ethnic and Religious Group 
As per the population estimates of the CSA, in July 2016 the Region’s total population was estimated 
to  be  20,769,985,  which  constituted  10,401,995  males  and  10,367,990  females.  In  the  same 
estimation, the rural population was estimated to be 83.2% whereas the urban population constituted 
16.8%. The population density of the region during this period was 119.8 persons/ square kilometre. 
Socio-Cultural and Historical Heritage 
The  Amhara  Region  is  rich  in  cultural  and  historical  heritages.  Very  old  Monasteries,  rock-hewn 
churches, palaces and castles are found in the region. The Lalibella Rock-hewn Churches, the Gondar 
Castle that are registered as International Cultural Heritage sites are found in this Region. There are 
several  monasteries  in  Lake  Tana  Islands,  which  is  also  the  origin  of  Blue  Nile  (Abay)  River.  The 
Blue Nile Falls is found just few kilometres downstream of the Regional Capital, Bahir Dar, which is 
a tourist attraction site. 
4.2.4 Oromia National Regional State 
(a) Bio- Physical Environment 
 Topography and area 
The  Oromia  National  Regional  State  is  located  in  the  central  part  of  the  country  and  extends  from 
south-east, bordering with Kenya in the south part and up to the Sudan border in the western part. It 
has an area of 353,690 km2 (32 % of the country). Oromia National Regional State lies between 30 40’ 
N and 100 35’ N latitude and 340 05’ E and 43011’ E longitude. 
The topographic features of the Region have been characterized by immense geographical diversity 
consisting of high rugged contoured mountains dissected by the great African Rift Valley. The high 
mountains  include  Tulu  Dimtu  in  Bale  (4,307  masl),  Kecha  (4,245  masl),  Ankolo  (4,300  masl)  in 
Arsi, Gara Mulat in East Hararge (3,492 masl) and Bada Roge in Shewa (3,350 masl). 
The Regional State has topographic features of mountainous and rolling terrain in the north-western 
and north-eastern parts, valleys and gorges in the central and eastern, flat and plain land in the south 
and south-eastern part. Altitude in the Region varies from 500 masl in the south eastern part to 4,300 
masl in the central and north western parts. 
 Climate 
 The east and southern parts are dominated by arid climate while the central and north western parts 
are more of temperate climate. The lowlands (500 - 1,500 masl) experience mean annual temperature 
of 200 C – 250C, areas of altitude 1,500 - 2,300 masl have mean annual temperature of 150 C – 200 C, 
while the highland areas (2,300 - 3,300 masl) have mean annual temperature range of 100 C – 150 C. 
Mean annual rainfall ranges between 200 mm in the south east to 2,000 mm in the north western part 
of the Region. 
 Geology, Physiographic Divisions and Seismicity 
The major part of Oromia falls in the Great Rift Valley of East Africa and is tectonically unstable. It 
appears  to  be  a  zone  of  volcanic  and  seismic  activities.  There  are  six  physiographic  sub-regions  in 
Oromia:  the  Rift  lakes  plain,  the  transitional  scrap  slopes,  the  young  lava  plain,  zone  of  ancient 
crystalline rocks, the central lava highlands and massifs and zone of Mesozoic sedimentary rocks. The 
geology of the region consists of: Rocks of the Precambrian era, Rocks of the Paleozoic era, Rocks of 
the Mesozoic era, and Rocks of the Cenozoic era. 
 Soil 
The major soil types of the area constitute Luvisols, Andosols and Fluvisols commonly found in the 
plain  lands  of river banks and  lake  shores.  Andosols are formed  from  volcanic ash  parent  material. 
48 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
They are light, loose, porous and  have high drain capacity and easily eroded by rain or wind action. 
Andosols have limited agricultural value. Luvisols on the other hand are good for agriculture. 
Water Resource of the Region 
There  is  an  abundant  water  resource  including  surface  and  ground  sources.  Oromia  possess  three 
major  drainage  systems  or  river  basins:  Rivers  that  drain  to  the  Blue  Nile  (Abay)  and  the 
Mediterranean Sea, Rivers that drain to the Indian Ocean and the Rift Valley Closed drainage system. 
Major rivers in the country like Blue Nile (Abay), Jemma, Muger, Guder and Anger Didessa, Awash, 
Gibe,  Wabe  Shebele,  Dawa,  Genale,  Weyb,  Dabuss,  traverse  the  Oromia  Region.  Most  of  the  rift 
valley  lakes in  Ethiopia, like  Lake  Langano,  Zeway,  Abiyata, and  Shalla are  found  in  Oromia. The 
wetland ecosystem of these water bodies has significant environmental and socioeconomic values. 
 Vegetation Cover and Wildlife 
Oromia region possesses most of flora and fauna types found in Africa, and several endemic species. 
There are about 12 million ha of woodland and bush land covering 32% of the Region. There is also 
70 percent of the national forest priority areas located in Oromia: the Munesa (1,385 ha), Tiro Boter 
Becho (8,500 ha), Menagesha Suba (9,000 ha) are set aside as Nature Reserves. 
The region has dense forest cover in the central, south western and western areas, while southern and 
south-eastern areas are covered mainly by sparse vegetation, bushes and scrubs. The vegetation types 
are  varied  including  Coniferous  forest,  broad  leaved  forest,  woodland  and  savannah,  grassland, 
riverine forests and wetland vegetation. 
There  are  parks  and  protected  sites  in the  region,  including  Awash  National  park  (partly)  Abijatta–
Shala  National  Park,  Bale Mountain  National  Parks, Yabelo  mountains,  Controlled  hunting  zone  of 
Borena,  wildlife  Reserves  (Sanctuaries)  of  Babile,  Senkele,  and  Yabelo.  There  are  also  Game 
Reserves  in  Arsi,  Bale and  Borena  with  over  20  Main  Bird  Sanctuaries. Those parks  and  protected 
areas host variety of wildlife and important bird species Wide varieties of wild animals exist in the 
Region.  They  include,  Mountain  nyala,  the  Giant  molerat,  Ethiopian  Wolf,  Minilik’s  Bushbuck, 
Bohor  reed  buck,  Grey  duiker,  Oribi,  Klipspringer,  Grant’s  Gazelle,  Greater  Kudu,  Lesser  kudu, 
Swayen’s  hartebeest,  Gerenuk,  Burchell’s  Zebra,  Warthog,  Giant  forest  hog,  Bush  pig,  Colobus, 
Monkey,  Anubis  baboon,  Spotted  hyaena,  Serval  cat,  Lion,  Leopard,  Golden  jackal  and  African 
Hunting dogs. 
(b) Socio-economic Environment  
 Population, Ethnic and Religious Group 
For the year July 2016, the CSA estimated the total population of Oromia Region as 34,575,008 that 
comprised of 17,345,004 male and 17,230,004 female. In this estimation, the urban population and the 
rural population constituted 85.2% and 14.8% respectively. Ethnic group residing in the region is also 
varied, the majority being Oromo, followed by Amhara, and several other ethnic groups. The density 
of the population is 106.8 persons / square kilometre. 
 Archaeological and Cultural Heritages 
The Sof Oumar Cave, the Aba Jiffar palace, etc are found in the Oromia National Regional State as 
sites of cultural heritage. The Sof-Omar caves in central Bale, with their galleries of polished white 
cone and chamber of columns are the incredible natural phenomena of great interest and beauty. The 
palace of Aba Jifar in Jimma is another historical attraction.  
In  general,  Oromia  National  Regional  State  is  rich  in  tourist  attraction  resources  that  could  be 
categorized in to the following major categories- 
•  Natural forests with wide range of wild plant species; 
•  Wild animals and birds of various species including endemics; 
•  Several rivers with their multiple spectacular waterfalls; 
•  Rift valley lakes and highland crater lakes; 
49 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
•  Magnificent landscape scenery (mountain chains, river gorges); 
•  Diversified local cultures with their distinct ethnography, art, traditional practices; 
•  Historical heritages; and, 
•  Natural wonders of unique forms. 
4.2.5 Benishangul Gumuz National Regional State 
(a) Bio-Physical Environmental Conditions 
Topography 
The  Region  is  stretched  along  the  western  escarpment  of  Ethiopia  between  Gambela  Region  in  the 
south, the Sudan to the west and Amhara and Oromia Regions to the northeast and east. Benishangul-
Gumuz  National  Regional  State  has  an  altitude  ranging  from  600  masl  up  to  2,000  masl  and  has 
topography dominated by river valleys which join the Abay River before it enters the Sudan. 
The areas around Wonbera are characterized by rugged mountain ranges like Gassangassa mountain 
range, Bedessa & Kushaya Mountains. The road route traverses flat terrain from the Guba side while 
the segment from the Wonbera side has rolling terrain & hilly topographic feature. 
Climate 
The climatic condition of the area is varied, like most part of the country. It has climatic condition of 
85%  Kola  (Hot  climate),  10%  Woina  Dega  (Semi  –Temperate)  and  8%  has  Dega  (Temperate) 
climatic conditions. The annual rainfall in Metekel zone of the Region ranges from 600 mm to 1,450 
mm.  The  rainy  season  stays  from  April/May  up  to  October/November.  The  dry  period  is  between 
February and April. Annual temperature of Metekel zone ranges between 180C and 400C. 
Geology and Soils 
The  geological  formation  of  the  area  is  characterized  by  Tulu  Dimtu  Groups  and  Tonalities.  Meta 
Basalt,  Meta  Andesine,  green  schist,  phyllite,  Meta  conglomerate,  quartzite  and  Marble,  precious 
materials like Gold are also available in the area. 
The  regional  soil  is  fertile  and  has  high  agricultural  potential  with  favourable  agro-climatic 
conditions.  It  is  estimated  that  911,876  ha  of  land  in  the  region  has  potential  for  agricultural 
development, out of which only 233,200 ha could be cultivated. 
Water Resources 
The region has high water resource potential. Abay/Blue Nile, Didessa and Beles Rivers are among 
the major water sources in the region. There are over 32 perennial rivers in the Metekel Zone, most of 
which have potential for irrigation.  
Vegetation and Wildlife 
Benishangul-Gumuz  National  Regional  State  is  endowed  with  a  variety  of  natural  resources.  Over 
50% of the land is covered with natural forest, which also has commercial value. The woodlands in 
the Region are the Doqma woodland, the Sudanian woodland, palms and bamboo and riverine forest. 
Benishangul-Gumuz region lies in the Abay and Baro drainage basin and is one of the few areas that 
still have significant part of its landmass covered by natural vegetation. It is estimated that 55% of the 
land is covered by Bamboo, broad-leaved deciduous woodlands, acacia & cacao woodlands. Riverine 
forests are predominantly found along the river courses. Some of the tree species found in the area are 
endemic ones for Ethiopia. 
The  Region  has  varied  wild  life  species.  Wild  animals  including  Elephant,  Giraffe,  Rhinoceros, 
Hippopotamus,  Buffalo,  Roan  antelope  and  Hartebeest,  Lion,  Tiger,  Patas  monkey  and  Anubis 
baboon  are  found  in  the  region.  Estimates  indicate  the  availability  of  about  40  species  of  larger 
mammals and estimated bird species of 500-550. Game Reserve and main bird Sanctuary of Dabus is 
found in the Region. 
50 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Land use/Land cover of the Region 
As  of  2002,  Woodland  and  scrublands  have  the  two  largest  shares  of  land  use  with  49%  and  28% 
respectively. 
(b) Socio-economic Environment  
Population, Ethnic and Religious Group 
The number of population estimated for July 2016 by the CSA was 1,033,999 i.e. 524,000 male and 
509,999  female.  As  per this  estimation, the  rural  population constituted  79.2% while the  remaining 
20.8%  was  estimated  to  be  urban  population.  The  density  of  the  population  in  the  Region  is  18.5 
persons/square kilometre. There are a number of ethnic groups that inhabit the Benishangul Gumuz 
Region.  The  major  ethnic  groups  are  Berta  (26.7%),  Gumuz  (23.4%),  Shinasha  (6.9%),  Amhara 
(22.2%),  Mao  (0.8%)  and  Oromo  (12.8%).  The  major  religious  groups  are  Orthodox  Christianity 
(34.8%), Traditional Religion (13.1%), Protestants (5.9%) and Islam (44%). 
4.2.6 Gambela National Regional State 
(a) Bio-physical Environment 
Topography 
The Gambela National Regional State is situated in the south-western part of Ethiopia at 70 N - 8 0 17’ 
North  latitude  and  33  0  E  -  32  0  2’  East  longitudes.  The  altitude  of  Gambela  lies  between  300  and 
2,500 masl. 
Climate 
Gambela  is  subdivided  into  three  agro  ecological  zones:  Woina  Dega,  Kola  and  desert  agro  – 
ecological Zones. 
In  general,  the  Region  has  warm  temperature  ranging  from  270C  to  330C.  However,  temperature as 
high as 450C occurred in March and as low as 100C in January had been recorded. 
The average annual rainfall varies according to the different altitudes. Areas of 400 - 500 masl of the 
western  part  receive  900  mm  -  1500  mm,  while  areas  over  2,000  masl  (eastern  part)  have  average 
rainfall ranging from 1,900 to 2,100 mm. 
 Geology and Soils 
The Gambela Region falls within the Baro-Akobo River Basin which consists primarily of basement 
crystalline with eastern upland covering tertiary lava in some places and Quaternary sediments in the 
lowlands to the west. 
Mineral resources of the area include gold, tungsten, granite, crude oil and construction material. The 
area is dominantly covered by alluvial and lacustrine deposits: silt, sand, clay, diatomite, limestone, 
Enticho sandstone, Glacials, Gura and Filo formations and sand stones.  
The soils of the region are divided into two major classifications as upland soils and fluvisols (along 
the river course). The soil fertility is very high and not been exploited much. 
Vegetation and Wildlife 
Gambela Region is endowed with vast natural resources. The main habitats of Gambela Region are 
forests, woodlands, swamps and rivers. Out of the total area 25% of the land is covered with forest. 
Savannah, tropical forests and seasonally flooded grass plains also inhabit the area. The eastern part of 
the  region  is  covered  with  natural  high  forest.  Woodlands,  bush  lands  and  Savannah  woodlands 
inhabit the central plain lands of the region with altitudes below 600 masl. 
The  dominant  tree  species  include:  Acacia,  Cambretum  species,  Terminalia  coxifera,  Sonogisus 
reiccarpa,  Kegelio  africanas,  and  Albizia  cordiaria.  From  grass  species;  Beckeropsis  uniseta  and 
51 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Hyparrhenia  rufa  are  some  to  mention.  Abobo-Gog  natural  forest  is  one  of  the  58  most  important 
natural  forests  classified  as  National  Forest  Priority  areas  by  the  Ethiopian  forestry  action  plan  (as 
reported in the Baro - Akobo master plan study). There are also four other sites in the region that are 
identified as natural forest areas. 
The Gambela National park, Mago National park and three controlled hunting areas: Jikawo, Akobo 
and Teyu sites are found in the region. The Gambela national park is the largest park in the country 
and accounts for 20% of the land area of the region. The remaining controlled hunting areas of Jikawo 
and Teyu also occupy similar sizes of land area. 
Those areas are habitat for over 300 bird species of which 100 are migratory and over 60 mammals. 
The  major  wildlife  species  conserved  in  the  lowland  plain  are;  Roan  antelope,  White-ear  kob,  Nile 
lechwe, Topi, Elephant, lion, Leopard, hippopotamus, Warthog, Giraffe, Defas, Water buck, Buffalo, 
Pig,  Civet,  Lelwel  Hartebeest,  etc.  Reptiles  such  as  Tortoise,  fish  (Nile  perch)  and  Crocodile  are 
found in the Region.  
Nile  lechwe  and  the  White  eared  kob  are  unique  to  that  area.  They  are  also  trans-boundary  that 
migrates between Ethiopia and South Sudan. 
Land Use and Land Cover 
The  major  settlement  area  is  the  riverbanks  for  both  urban  and  rural  communities.  Due  to  this 
situation, the  population  is  frequently  affected  by  flood  calamities.  As  of  2000,  the  two  major  land 
uses  were  open  wood  land  and  disturbed  forest  with  a  percentage  share  of  41%  and  20.87% 
respectively. 
Wetlands and Water Resources 
Gambela  Region  is  the  wettest  and  best  watered  area  in  the  country.  There  are  five  major  rivers, 
namely,  Baro,  Akobo,  Itang,  Gillo  and  Alwero  Rivers  that  are  also  trans-boundary.  There  are  also 
several lakes and ponds in the Region such as, lakes Tata, Wagan and Nitang which are cut-off lakes, 
so called because they have been formed when bends, branches and arms of the main river have been 
cut-off by sediments or changes in the direction of the main river channels. 
These water sources feed the Gambela flood plain, which is the largest low laying wetland in the Baro 
-  Akobo  River  Basin.  Both  migratory  and  residential  birds  inhabit  the  wetland  and  are  one  of  the 
tourist attraction sites in the area. 
The  flood  plain  of  the  two  rivers,  Gillo  and  Akobo  form  important  wetland  ecosystems.  Wetlands 
support  a  wide  range  of  biotical,  hydrological,  and  physical  processes  which  result  in  ecosystem 
function and the provision of valuable goods and services. 
(b) Population and Ethnic Group 
According  to  the  population  estimates  made  by  the  CSA,  as  of  July  2016,  the  Region’s  total 
population  was  estimated  to  be  422,002  having  220,000  males  and  202,002  females.  The  rural 
population  as  per  this  estimated  constituted  66.8%  and  the  urban  population  constituted  33.2%. 
Linguistically  the  population  comprises  mainly  of  Omotic,  Cushitic  and  Nilo-Saharan,  although 
Semetic origin also exists. The major ethnic groups are Agnuaq, Nuere, Megengir, Coma and Oppo. 
The population density of the region in 2011 was about 12.4 per square kilometre.  
4.2.7 Somali National Regional State 
(a) Bio-physical Environment 
Topography 
The Somali National Regional State is located between 40 and 110 North latitude and between 400 and 
480 East longitude in the eastern part of Ethiopia, which lies to the southeast of the Great African Rift 
Valley.  The  region  has  entirely  flat  terrain  except  some  hills  with  gentle  slopes  around  Jigjiga  and 
Togo Wuchale, and along major river courses. The altitude ranges between 500 to 1,600 masl. The 
major land area of the region falls below 900 masl. 
 Climate 
52 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The rain in the Region has been generally low, unreliable and unevenly distributed. When rain occurs 
it is torrential and is of high intensity. The annual rainfall is between 200 mm  and 530 mm for the 
Region  as  a  whole.  The  mean  annual  rainfall  is  425  mm.  The  annual  potential  evapo-transpiration 
ranges from 1,800 mm in the lowlands to 800 mm in the highlands. 
The major part (60% to 80%) falls within hot and arid climate. Temperature ranges between 200 C and 
450  C.  The  region  is  characterized  by  strong  wind  circulation,  which  can  cause  and  aggravate  soil 
erosion  and  water  moisture  losses.  The  mean  annual  wind  speed  varies  between  1.8  miles/  sec  in 
highlands and 3.6 miles/sec in the lowlands. 
Geology and Soil Type 
The  geology  of  the  Region  is  dominated  by  alternating  limestone,  shale,  anhydrite,  dolomites  and 
marl.  The  land  surface  is  sandy  and  often  coated  with  reddish  soil  and  calcareous  crust  typical  of 
desert area. Minerals like edible salt, gold and natural gas also occur in the region. 
The dominant soil types of the region are Yermsol, Xerosols, Regosols, and solonchakes. Minor parts 
have fluvisols and Vertisols, Cambisols and Luvisols. Soil erosion has been a serious problem in the 
region and is caused by the action of wind and water. 
Water Resources 
The region is divided into four basins: the eastern Ogaden basin, the Wabe Shebele basin, the Genale 
Dawa basin and part of the Awash River basin. The area receives a bi-modal rain fall: March - May 
and September - November. Most of the streams in the region are ephemeral and are characterized by 
short  duration  and  high  intensity  of  flood.  However,  perennial  rivers  like  Wabe  Shebele,  Weyb, 
Genale and Dawa are also available in the region. 
Vegetation and Wildlife 
Endemic flora species in the Somali region represent 25% of the flora in Ethiopia, of which 18% are 
unique to the region. Among the largest plant families are graminacea, leguminacea, and euphorbicea. 
The main climax vegetation classes in the region are: acacia based woodlands, acacia comiphora bush 
lands, evergreen scrubland and riparian forest. 
There are  also a  number  of  mammals,  birds, reptiles,  amphibians,  fishes  and invertebrates  uniquely 
adapted  to  the  arid  and  semi-arid  conditions.  Wildlife  animals  include  lion,  hyena,  leopard,  fox, 
hunting dogs, crocodiles and various types of snakes. Hunted wild animals include Bicids, Balango, 
Goodir,  Dabatag,  Zebra,  Baboon,  Hippopotamus,  Ostrich,  Monkey  and  Elephant.  There  are  also  a 
number  of  birds  such  as,  degodi  lark,  little  winged  dove,  Somali  short  billed  crombec,  Jubaland 
weaver, little brown bustard and white winged collared dove. 
Land use / Land cover 
Grassland and scrubland are the two types of land use with land coverage of 56.8% and 22.2% of the 
Region’s total area. Most of Somali Region is arid and semi but unlike Afar Somali region have many 
rivers  (Wabeshebele,  Genale  and  Weybe  Rivers)  partly    harnessed  for    irrigation  to    sustainably 
produce food crops to pastoral and agro-pastoral communities of the region. 
(b) Population and Ethnic Group 
The  total  population  estimates  of  the  Region  conducted  by  the  CSA  for  the  year  July  2016  was 
5,598,002  i.e.  3,023,000  males  and  2,575,002  females  respectively.  The  rural  population  of  the 
Region in the same year constituted about 85.5% while the urban population comprised about 14.5%. 
The  Somali  Regional  State  is  divided  into  nine  administrative  zones,  53  Weredas  and  67  urban 
centres. Majority of the population are pastoralists and the social organization of the Somalis is based 
on clanship. The region is sparsely populated with an average density of 12 persons per km2. 
Somali and Issa are the majority ethnic group, while Oromo, Amhara and Gurage are also found in the 
urban areas. 
The settlement pattern of the Somalis is characterized as group and temporary. In areas suitable for 
agriculture, Somalis settle permanently. The seasonal availability of water and pasture as well as the 
53 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
rapid  exhaustion  of  the  pasture  owing  to  overgrazing  often  causes  mobility  of  the  pastoralist 
population.  
 Societal Aspects 
The  social  organization  of  the  Somali  society  has  a  pyramidal  structure  formed  by  lineage 
segmentation levels. The segment levels are known as: Reer, Jilib, Qabil and clan families or group. 
Each lineage segment constitutes a separate social and political unit having definite members with a 
territory under it (SNRS, conservation strategy, 1999, cited in EEPCo, 2011). 
The Somali are predominantly pastoralists and their settlement pattern and their life style is influenced 
by the same mode of occupation. They are mobile in settlement, which is mainly guided by the need 
of their cattle herds. As a result, a densely populated area at one season can be easily deserted at other 
times. The Somali have divided themselves into two major lineages of Sab and Somali. The former 
constitutes hunters, gatherers, and agriculturists. 
Among the pastoralists, mostly wealth is not held by individuals but by families. Water and pasture is 
commonly  owned.  Agriculture  plots  are  held  by  families.  Craft  heritages  produced  by  the  low  cast 
Sab are generally made for own use, few are sold to tourists. Since the Somali nomadic pastoralists 
have  been  isolated  from  the  central  highlands,  there  has  been  much  lesser  degree  of  acculturation. 
Moreover, there is lower degree of economic integration, transportation and communication. 
Division  of  labour  among  the  Somali  is  based  on  gender  differentiation.  Women  are  exclusively 
responsible for job  like  building  nomadic  huts,  preparing  food,  collecting  firewood,  fetching  water, 
milking  cows  and  small  ruminants  etc.  While  males  are  culturally  assigned  to  perform  out  –  door 
tasks like herding, watering, farming and mediating. 
Livestock is the major economic earning for the Somali population. The rural population earns 40% 
of  their  income  from  livestock,  26%  from  crop  production,  14.4%  from  trade  and  7.4%  from  gifts 
availed from others (IPS, July 2000, cited in EEPCo, 2011).  
4.2.8 Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Regional State (SNNPR) 
(a) Bio-physical Environment 
Topography 
The  Southern  Nations,  Nationalities  and  Peoples’  Region  lies  on  surface  area  of  117,500  km2.  The 
Regional State is located between 40 25’and 80 20’ North latitude and 340 20’ - 380 50’ East longitude. 
Altitude  ranges  from  400  masl  in  the  southern  part  up  to  4,200  masl  in  the  northern  part  of  the 
regional state. The physiographic feature of the region is divided in to highlands in the north and rift 
valley and lowland in the south. 
Climate 
The region’s climatic conditions vary from place to place. It has semi-desert climate in the southern 
extreme of the Kenya border, tropical climate in the northern highlands, and warm temperate in the 
mountainous  areas  of  north  Omo  zone.  The  mean  annual  temperature  and  mean  annual  rainfall  are 
24oC and 600mm respectively, in the semi desert climatic zone, the warm temperate climatic zone of 
North Omo has mean annual temperature of less than 180C and mean annual rainfall of 2,500 mm. 
Soils Type 
The soils of the region constitute: 
  Luvisols and phaeozens that cover most of the zones of the region; 
  There  are  also  Lithosols,  Arenosols  and  Regosols,  fluvisols,  Andosols,  Vertisols  and 
Cambisols; and, 
  Soil fertility is high in the region and is suitable for cereals, root crops, coffee and vegetables. 
Vegetation and Wild life 
The Region is characterized by dense natural forest and rich wildlife resources. The forest resource is 
mainly  situated  in  Kafa  and  Bench  Maji  Zones  and  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Region.  The  most 
common  groups  of  vegetation  include  broad  leaved  deciduous  woodland,  evergreen  scrubs,  dry 
evergreen Montana forest and grasslands, acacia – commiphora woodland. 
There  are  several  National  Parks  in  the  Region.  They  include  Nech  Sar,  Mago  and  Omo  National 
Parks, Tama wildlife reserve and Chew Bahir wildlife reserve and all the rest of the southern parts are 
54 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
designated as controlled hunting areas except a small section between Akobo and Omo in which the 
wildlife ranges from birds to big mammals. 
The wildlife of the region include: Giraffe, Common eland, Buffalo, Elephant, Greater kudu, Lesser 
kudu,  Burchell’s  zebra,  Grant’s  Gazelle,  Guenther’s  Dikdik,  Crocodile,  Hippopotamus,  Swayne’s 
Hartebeest,  Orbi,  Bohor  Reedbuck,  Genet,  African  Hunting  dog,  Black  backed  jackal,  Colobus 
monkey, Oryx, Lion, Gerenuk and Ostrich. 
Water Resources 
There are abundant water resources both from surface and sub surface sources. Surface water resource 
of the Region include rivers like Omo River, Dincha, Gojeb, Segen Gibe River, Bilate River, Awash 
River, While Rift valley lakes like Hawassa Lake, Chamo Lake and Abaya Lake are also found in the 
region. 
(b) Socio-economic Environment  
 Population and Ethnic Groups 
As per the population estimates of the CSA made for the Region for July 2016, the total population 
was  estimated  to  be  18,719,008  with  9,278,004  male  and  9,441,004  female.  The  percentage  of 
population  lived  in  rural  areas  in  the  same  year  was  83.9%  whereas  the  remaining  16.1%  lived  in 
urban areas. The population density in the Region is 159.1 persons per square kilometre. 
The region is known for its diverse ethnic composition. There are about 45 ethnic groups residing in 
the Region, constituting over 50% of the total ethnic groups of Ethiopia. 
Most of the populations living in the rural areas of the Region are mainly dependent on agriculture 
and  pastoralist  economy,  while  trade  and  other  businesses  are  the  principal  practices  in  the  urban 
areas. 
 Cultural and Historical Heritage 
There are cultural heritage sites like the Tiya monuments and the Omo valley archaeological site. 
55 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
5 Consultation with Stakeholders and Communities  
During  the  preparation  of  this  ESMF,  the  study  team  carried  out  consultation  with  stakeholders, 
project  beneficiaries, officials and experts from relevant line  Ministries, the RUSSACOs and MFIs. 
The consultation was aimed to gather their views and expectations from the proposed project.  
Specific objectives of the consultations include the following: 
•  To share fully the information about the proposed project, its component and its activities;  
•  To  obtain  information  about  the  needs  and  priorities  of  the  communities,  as  well  as 
information about their reactions to the proposed project  activities;  
•  To inform communities about various options on relocation and rehabilitation;  
•  To obtain cooperation and participation of communities in activities required to be undertaken 
for resettlement planning and implementation;  
•  To  ensure  transparency  in  all  activities  related  to  land  acquisition,  compensation  payment, 
resettlement and rehabilitation;  
•  To  obtain  qualitative  as  well  as  quantitative  information  on  viable  income  generation  and 
livelihood interventions to which PAPs could be engaged in order to restore their income and 
livelihood in a self-sustaining manner; and, 
•  To inform local authorities of all the potential impacts, agreed on a cut-off-date, solicit their 
views on the project and discuss their share of responsibility for the smooth functioning of the 
overall project operations.  
As part of conducting the ESMF of RUFIP III consultation process is mandatory and essential. In this 
respect, officials and experts in Hawassa Zuria  Woreda from SNNPRS and Adis Zemen Woreda in 
the Amhara Region had been consulted from 3 to 9 March 2019. Discussion had also been made in 
the same period with officials and experts with micro finance institutions at head office, and branches 
in  Bahir  Dar  and  Hawassa  towns.  Site  visits  and  discussions  were  held  with  beneficiaries  in  Addis 
Zemen and Hawassa  Zuria. 
The various meetings that were held with stakeholders and project beneficiaries provided prevailing 
project implementation challenges, capacity needs, potential impacts of the proposed project and the 
respective recommendations for anticipated impact management.  
The mission met different organizations and stakeholders in Addis Ababa and have made field visits 
to Amhara and SNNPR regions.   During the field visits the mission interacted with four MFIs, two 
cooperative unions and three RUSACCOs.   Consultation was made with DBE, AEMFI and FCA at 
the federal level and WB. At the regional level consultation was made with AEMFI, Amhara Regional 
Cooperative Agency, ACSI, RuSACCO of Soser RuSACCO Union, Reb RuSACCO Union and with 
the project beneficiaries at Addis Zemen and Soser RuSACCO Union at Dangla in Amkara region and 
with  SNNPR  Regional  Cooperative  Agency,  SIDAMA  CHALAL  RuSACCO  Union  and  SIDAMA 
MFI of SNNPR at the regional level. The mission shared its preliminary findings in a meeting on 15 
March 2019 with DBE and implementing partner of RUFIP II.   
During the consultation gaps in funding projects activities the absence of  monitoring system and data 
base of IFAD projects, the need for co-financing to fill the gaps, how to handle drought and climate 
change shocks, how to fill the liquidity gap, availability of insurance  to reduce  shock during death, 
payment extension or exemptions during drought, loan loss provision ,  synergy with ongoing projects 
by  different  institutions,  frequency  of  drought,  promotion  of  certain  financial  products    for 
diversifying business to improve livelihood , promoting saving as risk mitigation was also raised and 
discussed. 
Consultation Feedback from RUFIP II Beneficiaries  
During RUFIP II, the focus was on strengthening of MFIs, building and improving the rural financial 
cooperatives  (RUSACCOs)  and  their  unions,  capacity  building  of  staff  of  FCA,  NBE  and  others.    
61 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
The studies carried out from time to time and the field mission interactions reveal that a significant 
proportion of the clients have come out of poverty and generate viable incomes. The study revealed 
that from livelihood improvement, there were significant social payoffs arising from RUFIP II. Two 
studies conducted on RUFIP II in 2017 indicated there is income and asset gains besides improving 
the quality of life of the project beneficiaries’. Despite the considerable gender disparity in financial 
institution outreach in the country, RUFIP II has enabled both women and men to participate in the 
programme and benefit from the incremental credit.  Of the 5.7 million households that RUFIP II has 
supported in outreach, 45% are females and 55% males.  
RUFIP  II  enhanced  increase  in  climate  resilience  as  it  enables  households  to  engage  in  adaptive 
interventions.  Linkages  have  been  developed  between  RUFIP  II  and  other  IFAD-funded  initiatives 
promoting micro- insurance innovations, with the objective to increase resilience, strengthen capacity 
to manage risks and improve the livelihoods of poor rural households who depend on off-farm and 
on-farm income. 
Beneficiaries  of  RUFIP  II  during  the  consultative  meetings  are  supportive  of  the  previous 
programme  since  it  has  provided  them  communities  with  a  number  of  benefits  by  enhancing 
household  incomes  and  strengthening  of  self-reliance.  The  RUFIP  II  beneficiaries  during  the 
meeting ppointed out the contribution of the programme towards improvement of their social well-
being  and  they  requested  to  the  team  of  consultants  to  continue  providing  similar  financial 
assistance    through  RUFIP  III,  but  this  time  with  additional  budget  to  help  the  diversify  their 
business  
The  support  given  to  RUFIP  II  clients  by  Development  Agents  who  have  been  trained  in  natural 
resource  management  contributed  to  the  moderate  improvement  in  the  environment  and  the  natural 
resources of the project target areas. RUFIP II clients who are mostly farmers are generally aware of 
natural resource management.  
 But  there  were  also  some  continuing  challenges  when  implementing  RUFIP  II.  The  challenges   
include gaps in funding projects activities, the absence of  monitoring system and data base of IFAD 
projects, the need for co-financing to fill the gaps, means of  handling  drought and climate change 
shocks, means of filling  the liquidity gap, availability of insurance  to reduce  shock during death, 
payment extension or exemptions during drought, loan loss provision.,  synergy with ongoing projects 
by  different  institutions,  frequency  of  drought,  promotion  of  certain  financial  products    for 
diversifying business to improve livelihood and  promoting saving as risk mitigation.   
During  the  RUFIP  III  consultation  meetings  issues  such  as  gaps  in  funding  projects  activities,  the 
absence of monitoring system and data base of IFAD projects, the need of co-financing, synergy with 
ongoing  projects  by  different  institutions,  means  of  filling  the  liquidity  gap  were  raised  by  the 
RUSSACOs and MFIs whereas the   availability of insurance to reduce shock during death, payment 
extension  or  exemptions  during  drought  and  loan  loss  provision  was  raised  by  the  project 
beneficiaries.  To fill the financial gaps it was proposed to create synergy and cooperation with other 
institutions such  as  the  World  Bank  for  co-financing  some  of  the  project  activities  relevant to  their 
mandate. 
6 Environmental and Social Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
RUFIP III is country wide project and  end line investments from beneficiaries are expected to have 
impact  on  the  natural  resources  in  one  way  or  another.  Project  activities  financed  by  RUFIP  III 
resources  in  the  form  of  investments  by  MFI  and  RUSSACO  clients  such as  food  crop  production, 
livestock rearing and agro-process/value addition on some agricultural products will have impacts on 
the  surrounding  natural  resources.  Impacts  may  include    ground  water  pollution  and  soil 
contamination due to excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides, soil erosion due to farming of steep 
slope/  marginal  land,    lowering  of  ground  water  levels  due  to  excessive  water  use  for  irrigation, 
contamination of food and  water bodies   due to improper use/storage of   agro chemicals, breeding 
ground    for  insect  vectors  due  to  lack  of  proper  drainage,  shortage  in  animal  fodder    due  to    over 
62 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
grazing,  over  grazing  due  to  increase  in  animal  population,  deforestation  due  to  expansion  of 
agricultural land, pollution of surface and ground water and release of pungent smell due to release of  
animal wastes, power shortage  due to additional energy demand for agro processing and  health risks 
due to improper use of agro-chemicals. 
To minimize such environmental and social concerns Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) will be 
conducted to assess the nature and magnitude of impacts on the natural resources. Depending on the 
results of the assessment the national EIA and SECAP Guidelines project activities will be  classified  
as category A, B or C and full ESIA study for category A and partial EIA for category B will have to 
be conducted . There is no need to conduct EIA study for category C project activities. Based on the 
outcome of the EIA studies various mitigation measures will be proposed to minimize impacts. The 
EIA study reports will have to be approved by the regional office responsible for environment. 
Ethiopia is strongly affected by climate change. A more sustainable management of natural resources 
is  therefore  crucial  for  the  country’s  ability  to  face  the  challenges  of  the  future.  Climate  change 
impacts include more frequent and longer drought periods, and flooding due to erratic rainfall. This 
poses  great  challenges  for  agricultural  production,  particularly  in  dry-land  areas  such  as  Afar  and 
Somali States. Other parts of the country are also vulnerable and affected by the more unpredictable 
climate. Degradation of lands weakens access to water and reduces soil quality. Deforestation is also 
taking place at an accelerating pace.  
Beneficiary  farmers  targeted  through  RUFIP  III  lack  knowledge  of  how  to  adapt  agricultural 
production  to  more  varied  climatic  circumstances.  They  also  have  little  access  to  new  and  locally 
adapted seeds.  
Government  of  Ethiopia  has  planned  a  climate-resilient  green  economy  as  a  development  strategy. 
This  development  direction  promotes  environmental  protection,  reducing  fossil  fuel  consumption 
which releases greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.  
To minimize impact due to climate change the Ethiopian Government gives high priority to education 
in  climate-robust  agricultural  methods.  This  involves  use  of  new  and  more  varied  plants  and 
supporting farmers rebuild degraded lands by means of soil protection systems such as terracing, tree 
planting and the development of various systems that conserve water resources. 
The  following  section  elaborates  positive  and  negative  impacts  associated  with  RUFIP  III  project 
activities.  
  6.1 Positive impacts 
It  is  anticipated  that  the  activities  supported  by  this  project  will  deliver  significant  social 
benefits, provided that they are planned in an inclusive manner, and are designed to ensure a 
distribution of benefits to vulnerable groups. Social benefits cannot be guaranteed, and there 
is a requirement to ensure that project activities are planned and operated in a manner which 
maximizes benefits. In this regard, although the project aims to provide support to the rural 
poor, it should also take cognizance of other vulnerable groups, such as the elderly, disabled, 
youth and children, and ensure their participation in ongoing consultation. 
The RUFIP III will have short-term positive socioeconomic impacts as it will provide employment to 
skilled and unskilled workers, employed by the micro-credit recipient entrepreneurs. In the long term, 
the success of these businesses can further improve the overall employment situation. Specific socio-
economic benefits include:  
•  Demand for skilled and unskilled labor;  
• 
Increase in income for local communities; and  
63 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
• 
Indirect  employment  opportunities  through  the  provision  of  required  services  to  the  
entrepreneurs  
In the context of the programme, entrepreneurs are to obtain finance for implementing the business 
plans that they have developed in the priority sectors of the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP), 
namely  agri-business  sectors.  In  the  short-term,  this  provides  these  entrepreneurs  that  received 
financial credit opportunities for realizing/implementing their business.  
6.2 Negative Impacts  
The exclusion list should be the first step to avoid negative impacts of RUFIP III. In RUFIP III, sub- 
projects with the following activities will be automatically excluded from the programme. 
•  Project  Activities  with  the  potential  for  significant  conversion  or  degradation  of  natural 
habitats without appropriate mitigation of anticipated impacts 
emitting pollutants to water, air and land and  degrading forests,  
any project  situated within green area designated by each municipality,  
• 
• 
•  Any project or activity that will be implemented in disputed land,  
•  Any project that would result in the displacement of people or requires resettlement,  
•  Any project that is not consistent with the project description at time of project negotiations, 
unless  subsequently  agreed  to  with  the  PCMU  at  DBE,  along  with  the  development  of  an 
appropriate level of environmental and social management capacity.  
•  Any  project  or  activity  involving  the  procurement  of  pesticides  not  allowable  under  IFAD 
guidelines,  
•  Any  project  or  activity  that  does  not  meet  the  legal  requirement  of  the  country,  including 
gazetted environment, health and safety legal requirements,  
•  Any project or activity that is not compliant with the international convention that Ethiopia 
has ratified,  
•  Any project or activity, where children under 18 years of age are employed.  
•  Project activities that will block the access to water points and grazing etc. used by others; 
•  Project  activities  that  will  cause  encroachment  to,  and  adversely  affect,  important  natural 
forest 
reserve; 
reserves,  wetlands,  national  parks  or  game 
habitats ; 
(  e.g.,  wildlife  reserves;  parks  or  sanctuaries;  protected  areas;    natural  habitat  areas,  forests 
and 
any  other 
ecologically/environmentally sensitive areas); 
-Project  activities  that  will  impact  on  physical  cultural  resources  (archaeological  sites; 
religious monuments or structures; natural sites with cultural values; cemeteries; graveyards; 
graves; and other sites of significance) 
-Project activities that will be located in protected areas and ecologically sensitive sites; 
-Project activities that would disadvantage to community members ; 
-Project  activities 
environmental and social issues; 
-Project  activities  that  will  contravene  international  conventions  such  as  child  labor  and 
forced labor; 
-Project activities that cause large-scale physical disturbance of the site or the surroundings; 
international  and  regional  conventions  on 
that  will  contravene 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 As described in the eligibility criteria under annex 1, RUFIP III funded activities will not be eligible 
for funding if displacement and resettlement is involved. Hence, this has not been considered as an 
adverse social impact of the project. Moreover, it may not be economically viable to resettle project 
affected  persons  (PAPs),  given  that  the  financial  support  anticipated  through  RUFIP  III  is  minimal 
(micro-finance) and serious health and social challenges will not emerge from the project activities. 
However, in line with, for instance, the increased production and operation of businesses supported 
under  RUFIP  III,  the  following  social  and  health  impacts  are  anticipated.  RUFIP  II  funded  project 
64 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
activities such as agricultural activities for food crop production (modernization of farming), livestock 
rearing and agro-process will continue to receive credit from RUFIP III. These project activities are 
expected  to  impose  the  following  adverse  impacts  on  the  biophysical  and  socio-economic 
environment.   
(a)  Impact on the Socio-economic Environment  
Health impacts due to poor storage and use of agro-chemicals  
Agro chemicals such as fertilizers and pesticides will be used by farmers to enhance their agricultural 
production. If these agro chemicals are not properly used, stored and/or disposed of farmers will be at 
risk of chemical exposure, and moreover these agrochemicals may contaminate food and water bodies 
and  adversely  affect  public  health  if  consumed.  To  minimize  such  adverse  health  effects  training 
should  be  given  to  farmers  to  properly  store  and  use  the  agro-chemicals.  The  following  safety 
procedures should be maintained to minimize   impacts of agro-chemicals.  
  Translate the manufacturer’s instructions into local language and follow instruction for proper 
storage. 
  Keep chemicals in their original containers and do not pour into smaller bottles. 
  Do not remove labels from containers. 
  Do not store liquid chemicals above solids. 
  Store animal feeds, seeds and fertilizers separately from other chemicals. 
  Safe use of agrichemicals 
  Suggestions for the safe use of chemicals include: 
  Ensure anyone using agricultural chemicals is suitably trained to use both the chemical and 
any equipment required for application; 
  Use chemical decanting kits to reduce the risk of spills and splashes while mixing chemicals; 
  Only mix the quantity of chemical required for the task at hand; 
  Make sure the decanting and mixing area is well ventilated. If this is not possible, ensure that 
recommended personal protective equipment (PPE) is worn for enclosed environments; 
  Follow the manufacturer’s instructions on the label; 
  Always wear recommended protective clothing such as chemical-resistant gloves, overalls, 
goggles and appropriate facemasks or a respirator;  
  Triple rinse equipment after chemical application and dispose of the rinse water 
appropriately;  
Intensification of malaria  
Increased  prevalence  of  consequent  health  implications  (both  for  employees  and  the  surrounding 
community)  may  be  associated  to  some  businesses  supported  by  RUFP  III.  For  example,  malaria 
could  be  intensified  in  the  small  scale  irrigation  schemes  due  to  the  formation  stagnant  water,  site 
suitable for the breeding  of mosquitoes. The following  measures should be taken to control malaria 
intensification.  
  Avoid mosquito breeding sites by draining ponds and  standing waters; 
  Wear clothing such as long-sleeved shirts and pants  when working outdoors; 
  Spraying clothing with repellents ; 
  Use of impregnated mosquito nets during night; 
 
sensitization of farmers and communities that may be exposed to stagnant water 
Power shortage due to establishment of small agro-processing plants   
Establishment  of  agro–processing  plants  will  demand  additional  energy  and  may  create  power 
shortage in the community. The local administration should plan in advance to avail additional power 
that  will  adequately  address  power  demand  of  the  proposed  agro-processing  plants  in  order  not  to 
compromise  power  supply  to  the communities. The use  of  solar  energy  and  inverters  during  power 
shortage should also be encouraged to minimize power shortage impact. 
65 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Impact on air quality 
Any leakage, bad odors, from poultry, animal rearing and fattening could contribute a potential impact 
on the Air Quality of the area. These operations may pollute the air resulting in increases in bronchial 
and eye disorders. Pungent smell from agro processing, animal fattening, slaughter houses and from 
poultry is expected to be released to the surrounding communalities. The following measures should 
be taken to prevent odor and bad smell from these sources. The following measures should be taken to 
minimize impacts:  
  Remove manure from the building as often as possible; 
  Remove spoiled feed regularly; 
  Remove dead animals and dispose promptly;  
  Avoid excess moisture in stacking sheds since excess moisture increases the amount of odor 
generated due to anaerobic decomposition; 
Occupational health and safety and child labour  
Occupational health and safety issues will arise during the programme implementation periods. This 
may result from improper use and lack of availability of the required Personal Protective Equipment 
(PPE). Availability and proper use of PPE by the programme beneficiaries, contractors, laborers who 
are engaged in the construction, installation and operation and maintenance  shall be  regularly 
monitored and ESMF should provide guideline for the  officers or teams at regional level to ensure 
availability and proper use of the PPE..  
Investment being made by beneficiaries of RUFIP III may use child labor due to lack of awareness 
on  the  Child  Labour  Proclamation  and  the  negative  impact  of  child  labor.  RUFIP  III  end 
beneficiaries of the investment should respect the national Proclamation No. 377/2003 which states 
that  children  under  age  of  14  will  not  be  employed  and  young  workers  (14  to  18  years)  shall  not 
perform work that is likely to jeopardize their health or safety.  
Impact on cultural heritage 
End line investments that will be made using resources from RUFIP III accessed through MFIs and 
RuSSACCOs should not affect any cultural heritage. During implementation period, it is important 
to  ensure that  proposed  investments  do  not  have  an effect  on a  place  or  building  having  aesthetic, 
anthropological,  archaeological,  architectural,  cultural,  historical  or  social  significance  or  special 
value for present and future generations. In order to minimize or avoid such impacts, all necessary 
measures should be considered at the planning phase and due attention should be paid  to cultural 
heritages sites during screening of the programme activities and  close consultation should be made 
with relevant institutions when encountered with chance finds at the time of  implementation of the 
proposed investment. The relevant screening checklist is depicted in annex 6. 
Social conflicts due to water use 
Conflict  may  arise  between  farmers  upstream  and  downstream  due  to  water  use  for  irrigation  or 
domestic  purposes.  It  will  be  important  to  maintain  an  environmental  flow  that  will  not  adversely 
affect the ecological balance and downstream water use for irrigation and domestic purposes. The site 
of the proposed investment and the ecology downstream is not known and it will be very difficult at 
this  stage  to  specify  minimum  environmental  flow,  though  a  rule  of  thumb  of  10%  to  20%  of  the 
mean annual flow can be assumed. 
Impact on project implementation due to lack of consultation with the community  
Although  the  proposed  sub  project  activities  are  integrated  with  the  individual  beneficiaries,  it  is 
essential  to  consult  stakeholders  including  all  the  community  members  that  reside  within  the  sub 
project  area  from  the  outset..  This  improves  the  level  of  relevant  stakeholder  participation  and 
ultimately  would  enhance  the  sense  of  ownership  of  the  sub-project  by  the  locals  in  general  and 
beneficiaries  in  particular.  It  is  quite  evident  that  usually  poor  participation  in  preparation  and 
implementation  of  projects  would  result in  unsustainability  of  projects.  It  is  therefore  of paramount 
66 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
importance  to  create  awareness  among  the  communities  on  the  benefits,  negative  impacts  and  their 
expected roles in advance to minimize impacts and sustainably manage  project activities .  
Impact on the Biophysical Environment  
Pollution due to increased use of fertilizers and pesticides 
Increase in yields of staple food-crops, commercial crops such as cotton, sugar and soya, fruits and 
vegetables will probably need an increased use of fertilizers and pesticides. Unsafe use of fertilizers 
and  pesticides  leads  to  the  pollution  of  soils,  rivers,  streams,  shallow  aquifers  and  ground.  In  this 
context, the programme will synergize with other IFAD projects in Ethiopia in irrigation, food crops, 
horticulture,  dairy,  natural  resources  management  for  them  to  not  only  provide  starter  kits  to  the 
farmers but will train them in the proper application and storage of agrochemicals.   To minimize such 
impacts of these inputs farmers should receive these inputs after creating awareness of the effects of 
these  inputs  on  ground  water  and  the  resulting  public  health  consequences.  It  is  also  important  to   
encourage   farmers to use manure (organic fertilizer) and apply integrated Pesticide management to 
fight agricultural pests. 
Air Quality 
Air quality may be reduced as a result of emissions from agro -processing. Clean technology should 
be used to minimize emission from the agro-processing plants 
Soil erosion due to expansion of farm land  
Activities  like  excavation  and  digging  works  during  agricultural  expansion  will  involve  clearing  of 
existing vegetation within the homestead, which may contribute to the loss of plant cover to a certain 
degree  and  this  will  result  in  a  disturbance  of  topsoil  and  cause  of  micro  level  erosion.  Similarly, 
farmers may expand their farm land to steep slopes and marginal lands. Areas that are at high risk for 
erosion due to steep slopes or erodible soils can be alternatively used for forage production or grazing 
and steeply sloped lands under cultivation can be converted to perennial plantation to minimize soil 
erosion.  Wooded  areas  with  poor  soils  and  steep  slopes  should  be  left  in  their  natural  state  to 
minimize soil erosion.  
Loss of soil Fertility  
The  increase  in  the  demand  of  staple  food  production  could  lead  to  overuse  of  arable  land  which 
becomes susceptible to loss of soil fertility. Farmers should receive training on how soil fertility can 
be maintained by changing cropping patterns, growing nitrogen-fixing crops and composting of crop 
residues to minimize loss of soil fertility.   
Ground water depletion  
Farmers benefitting from RUFIP III resources may buy water pumps to irrigate their land and produce 
crops,  fruits  and  vegetables.  Excessive  pumping  of  ground  water  for  irrigation  may  cause  ground 
water depletion and drying out of boreholes that are in use by the nearby community. Ground water 
depletion  and  its  impact  can  be  avoided/  minimized  by  keeping  recharge  –discharge  balance  of the 
catchment areas. In places where such impacts expected to occur the hydro-geologists of the Regional 
Water  Resource  Bureau  will  have  to  assist  in  conducting  recharge-discharge  balance  study  of  the 
catchment  and  based  on  the  outcome  of  the  study  communities/farmers  should  be  advised  on  the 
management and use of ground water  in a sustainable manner.   
Shortage in animal fodder and overgrazing due to increase in animal population 
Animal rearing and fattening will increase the number of animals and may result in shortage of animal 
fodder and overgrazing. Increase in the animal population will increase the likelihood of reaching the 
limits of the carrying capacity of the grazing land.  
To minimize adverse impacts the following measures can be taken. 
67 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
-Control number of animals so that it will not exceed the carrying capacity of the grazing land 
-Avoid grazing too early so that there will be enough grass in the dry season 
-Monitor rainfall patterns and growth of pasture. 
Deforestation due to expansion of agricultural land  
The availability of funds through RUFIP III may encourage farmers to expand their agricultural land 
to  the  nearby  forest  areas.  Smallholder  farmers  will  be  tempted  to  grow  crops  on  steep  slopes  and 
riverbanks or encroach to the nearby forest reserves   Farmers should be sensitized and be informed of 
the benefits of conserving forest in terms of maintaining the balance of the ecosystem.  
Loss of vegetation cover 
Activities  like  excavation  and  digging  works  particularly  for  project  activities  during  agricultural 
expansion will involve clearing and depletion of existing vegetation within the homestead, which may 
contribute  for  loss  of  plant  cover  at  a  certain  degree  and  disturbance  of  topsoil  and  cause  of  micro 
level erosion. In order to minimize loss of vegetation cover the implementing bodies and beneficiaries 
shall avoid cutting of big trees especially indigenous trees. 
Impact due to the lack of proper waste treatment and disposal facilities    
Indiscriminate disposal of solid and liquid wastes including animal dung  and expired pesticides will 
adversely affect the health and safety of the workers and the local community. Moreover processing 
of goods may have high pollution intensity due to the obsolete technology used in their small-scale 
operations  and/or  lack  of  end-of-pipe  pollution  control  systems.  Project  activities  in the leather  and 
textile  sectors  can  have  substantive  environmental  implications  (pollution),  due  to  the  nature  of  the 
processing  activities,  which  utilize  dyes  and  other  hazardous  chemicals  as  inputs.  Waste  from 
slaughter houses include both solid (carcass, bones, hooves, rumen, intestine contents, dung etc.) and 
liquid  waste  (blood,  urine,  internal  fluids  including  water  used  for  washing)  which  are  difficult  to 
break down in normal waste treatment systems.  
Depending  on  the  types  of  processing  and  character  of  waste  generated,  appropriate  waste 
management strategies need to be developed and implemented.  
Climate change induced impacts   
The decomposition of chemical compounds in landfills and the burning of synthetic materials may 
release greenhouse gases. These greenhouse gases trap heat in the atmosphere, warming it and thus 
promoting climate change. The following measures should be taken to minimize risk due to climate 
change. The following measures should be taken to minimize impact due to climate change. 
To minimize impact due to climate change the Ethiopian Government gives high priority to education 
in  climate-robust  agricultural  methods.  This  involves  use  of  new  and  more  varied  plants  and 
supporting  farmers  to  rehabilitate  degraded  lands  by  means  of  various  soil  and  water  conservation 
techniques. 
Impact on biodiversity 
Some  investment  of  the  end  line  beneficiaries  generally  will  not  have  any  adverse  impacts  on 
terrestrial  and/or  aquatic  biodiversity.  However,  there  may  be  a  case  where  big  trees  that  obstruct 
farming activities and trees and other vegetation cover could be found within and around the farms. 
Under  such  circumstances  vegetation  clearance  to  a  certain  extent  will  sometimes  be  required  and 
this may adversely affect  the biodiversity of the area to some degree. It is essential to preserve tree 
species of biodiversity importance to minimize impacts.   
Cumulative impacts of the project  
The  business  operations  supported  through  RUFIP  III  may  not  have  serious  adverse  environmental 
impacts.  However,  several  projects  in  combination,  or  in  combination  with  other  government  or 
private sector activities, could also have a larger, more significant cumulative impact. These impacts 
68 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
may be a result of the disposal of non-hazardous and hazardous wastes and chemicals, which may not 
be significant when considered individually, but significant when considered collectively.  
Minimizing  cumulative  impacts  requires  introducing  mitigation  of  the  impacts  of  individual 
businesses supported by RUFIP III and of other development activities that are currently operating in 
the project area.  
69 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
7   Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Plan  
A draft ESMP for RUFIP III is intended to ensure efficient environmental and social management of 
its  activities.  An  ESMP  translates  recommended  mitigation  and  monitoring  measures  into  specific 
actions that will be implemented by different actors.  The ESMP identifies key project activities and 
their  associated  impacts,  when  impacts  are  likely  to  occur  (project  phase),  mitigation  measures  to 
minimize  impacts,  responsible  institutions  to  implement  the  proposed  measures,  and  costs  of 
implementation.  The  ESMP  will  need  to  be  adjusted  to  the  terms  and  conditions  specified  in  any 
project funded activities. This ESMP will then form the basis to manage impacts of project activities 
during project construction and operation.  
At this stage the type and scope of the  project funded activities are not clearly defined. The type of 
impacts and proposed mitigation measures are therefore generic and will be difficult to estimate cost 
of implementation the mitigation measures monitoring at this stage.  
Table  below  presents  an  indicative  environmental  and  social  management  and  monitoring  plan  that 
can be used as a guidance to prepare ESMP of specific project activities under RUFIP III. 
71 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Table 7.1: Generic project impacts, proposed mitigation measures and institutions responsible for implementation and Monitoring 
Sector 
Potential Impacts 
Proposed Mitigation Measures 
Institution responsible 
for Implementation 
Monitoring 
health 
malaria intensification 
impact 
due  
Socio-economic 
Impact 
Power  shortage  due  to 
Establishment of small 
agro-processing plants   
Impacts due to misuse 
of Fertilizers and 
Pesticides  
Impact on air quality 
due to poultry, animal 
rearing and fattening 
-Avoid mosquito breeding sites by draining  
ponds and  standing waters; 
-Wear clothing such as for example, long-
sleeved shirts and pants  when working 
outdoors; 
-Spraying clothing with mosquito 
repellents; 
-Use impregnated mosquito nets during the 
nights; 
Plan in advance to get additional power that 
will adequately meet power demand of the   
agro processing plants and the communities. 
Farmers/ Beneficiaries 
Woreda Health Bureau 
Local administration 
MFIs/RUSACCOS 
Provide  training to  farmers  on  proper 
application and storage of agrochemicals 
Woreda Agricultural 
Office 
MFIs/RUSACCOS 
-Clean animal wastes and remove  feed 
remnants regularly; 
-Remove dead animals and dispose them  
promptly;  
-Avoid excess moisture in stacking sheds 
since excess moisture increases the amount 
of odor generated due to anaerobic 
decomposition; 
Farmers/ Beneficiaries 
Office responsible for 
environment at the 
Woreda Level 
72 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
Problem of over 
grazing due to 
increase in animal 
population 
Occupational health 
and safety and Child 
labour  
Socio-economic 
Impact 
Impact on Cultural 
Heritage 
Socio-economic 
Impact 
Social Conflicts due to 
water use and grazing 
land  
Impact on project 
implementation due to 
Lack of Consultation 
-Avoid  grazing  too  early  so  that  there  will 
be enough grass in the dry season; 
-monitor rainfall pattern and growth of 
pasture; 
-Availability and proper use of PPE by the 
project beneficiaries, contractors, laborers 
who are engaged in the construction, 
installation and operation and maintenance 
of the proposed programme  activities shall 
be in place and the availability and use of 
PPE should be regularly monitored by the  
local and regional health officers that have 
the mandate to carry out this task and the 
Project Coordination Unit will make 
random checks on  samples of investments 
to ensure proper implementation of the 
ooccupational health and safety and Child 
labour abuse 
-National labor law and IFAD Child Labor 
Abuse (CLA) should be respected 
Delineate  cultural  heritage  sites  and  make 
maximum care during construction  
for  cultural  heritage 
In the  case  of chance finds the contractor 
has  to  immediately  contact  the  office 
responsible 
for 
guidance 
-Maintain minimum flow downstream when 
pumping water for irrigation. 
-Use  customary  laws  to  resolve  conflict 
over grazing land  
Create  awareness  among  the  communities 
on  the  benefits,  adverse  effects    and  their   
Farmers / Beneficiaries 
Consultant 
Farmers / Beneficiaries  Woreda Health Bureau/ 
Kebele/ Project 
Coordination UNIT 
Farmers / Beneficiaries  Woreda Tourism Office 
Farmers/ 
Beneficiaries/communitie
s 
Woreda/ Kebele 
Administration 
73 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
with the Community  
roles    to minimize impacts and sustainably 
manage  project   
Ground water 
pollution due to 
misuse   of chemical 
fertilizers and 
Pesticides  
Create awareness among the farmer   health 
effects of these inputs when misuse, 
encourage to use manure (organic fertilizer), 
apply integrated Pesticide management to 
fight   pests. 
Soil Erosion due to 
expansion of 
agricultural activities 
to marginal land and 
steep slopes 
Loss  of soil fertility 
-Steep  slopes  or  erodible  soils  can  be 
alternatively  used  for  forage  production  or 
grazing  and  steeply  sloped  lands  under 
cultivation  can  be  converted  to  perennial 
plantation to minimize soil erosion 
- Wooded areas with poor soils and steep 
slopes should be left in their natural state. 
Provide training to farmers on how soil 
fertility can be maintained by changing 
cropping pattern, growing   nitrogen-fixing 
crops and composting of crop residues   
Impact on Bio-
physical 
Environment 
Impact on Bio-
physical 
Environment 
Woreda Agricultural 
Office/ health Office 
Woreda Environment 
Office 
Farmers/ Beneficiaries/   Woreda agricultural 
Office/ environment 
Office 
Woreda Agriculture 
Office 
Woreda Agriculture 
Office 
Excessive   
exploitation of ground 
water due to  irrigation  
activities 
Shortage in animal 
fodder and 
overgrazing due to 
increase in animal 
population 
Deforestation due to 
-Avoid over pumping of ground water 
beyond recharge- discharge balance of the 
catchment areas. 
Farmers/ Beneficiaries 
/Woreda Agricultural 
office 
Woreda Environment 
office 
-Avoid  grazing  too  early  so  that  there  will 
be  enough  grass  in  the  dry  season  and 
monitor  rainfall  pattern  and  growth  of 
pasture 
-Control animal population so that it will 
not exceed the carrying capacity of the 
grazing land 
Sensitize and  inform farmers about the 
Farmers/ Beneficieries 
Woreda Agriculture 
Office 
LLRP/Contractor 
Consultant/offices 
74 
expansion of 
Agricultural land  
Impact due to the lack 
of proper waste 
Management of 
agricultural residues     
Climate Change 
Induced Impacts and 
Shocks  
Impact on 
Biodiversity 
Cumulative Impacts of 
the Project  
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III (RUFIP III) 
benefits of conserving forest to maintain  
balance of the ecosystem 
Avoid construction on or near natural 
habitats 
Properly collect, transport and dispose such 
wastes on a site designated for this purpose.  
responsible for 
environment 
Farmers/ Beneficiaries 
Woreda environment 
office 
Rehabilitation of  degraded lands by 
Introducing soil and water conservation 
techniques such as  such as terracing, tree 
planting and the development of various 
techniques to minimize impact due to 
climate change. 
Avoid cutting of indigenous trees and 
preserve tree species of biodiversity 
importance 
Mitigation of the impacts of individual 
businesses of RUFIP III and of the other 
development activities that are currently 
operating in the project area. 
Farmers/ Beneficiaries 
Woreda environment 
office 
Farmers/ beneficiaries 
Woreda environment 
office 
Other Project owners and  
RUFIP III beneficiaries 
Woreda environment 
office 
Impact on Bio-
physical 
Environment 
Note: It will be premature to indicate cost of mitigation measures and environmental monitoring since the nature and sites of specific project activities the 
sub-projects are not clearly known at this stage. 
75 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
8 Institutional Arrangements  
This section of the ESMF describes the process for ensuring that environmental and social concerns 
are  adequately  addressed  through  the  institutional  arrangements  and  procedures  used  by  the 
programme for managing the identification, preparation, approval and implementation of sub-project 
or  investment  activities.  This  section  sets  out  the  reporting  systems  and  schedules  for  ESMF 
implementation adherence to the programme implementation period. 
In  order  to  comply  with  various  technical  and  performance  standards,  the  proposed  programme 
activities  to  be  supported  under  RUFIP  III  shall  comply  with  this  ESMF.  The  implementation, 
monitoring  and  reporting  arrangements  for  the  ESMF  have  been  worked  out  within  the  overall 
institutional structure for implementation of the  proposed programme. The implementation schedule 
for  the  ESMF  takes  into  account  all  activities  related  to  the  proposed  measures  (enhancement  and 
mitigation), the monitoring program, consultations, and institutional arrangements.  
The different actors expected to be the major players during implementation of the proposed program 
are the following: 
  Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE); 
  Regional/ Woreda level Environmental offices 
  Micro Financial Institutions; 
  Woreda Administrations; 
  Woreda Agricultural Offices; 
  Peasant Associations; 
  The Community; and, 
  Local NGOs. 
Integration and coordination of the different parties and timely follow-up is of paramount importance 
for  the  materialization  of  the  program.  The  respective  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  above 
institutions are discussed below.  
(a)  Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) 
Supporting  units  and  committees  include  Project  Management  Committee  (PMC),  Programme 
Coordination and Management Unit (PCMU) and National Rural Finance Policy Steering Committee 
(NRFPSC) have already been established under DBE to implement RUFIP I and II. The PCMU have 
already two safeguard experts. Given the geographical coverage of the RUFIP III programme the two 
experts  may  not  be  enough  to  coordinate  and  supervise  programme  activities  and  DBE  may  be 
required  to  recruit  two  more  safeguard  experts  from  its  own  recurrent  budget  to  discharge  its 
responsibility. 
 Project  Coordination  and  Management  Support  shall  be  provided  to  the  PCMU,  including  the 
provision  of  PCMU  staff,  technical  assistance,  office  equipment,  associated  software  and  vehicles; 
and study tours and training programs for PCMU staff. The PCMU is under the direct supervision of 
DBE  and  fully  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  coordination  and  management  of  the  programme. 
The PMC and NRFPSC, composed of the major national program partners, are advisory bodies. The 
former advises or supports the PCMU in discharging its responsibility diligently and the latter deals 
with rural finance policy matters and has a role in policy dialogue triggered through the RUFIP. 
AEMFI, NBE, FCA and RCPB are umbrella institutions supporting the development  and regulation 
and supervision of MFI’s and RUSACCOs and unions. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 76 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
 IFAD is the financing  institution; while MoFED on behalf the Ethiopian Government will sign the 
loan to for the proposed programme.DBE’s primary responsibility is management of the equity and 
credit funds and coordination and facilitation of the institutional development component. 
The PCMU will also work with MFIs and Regional level officials and deliver:  
•  Safeguards awareness training;  
•  Explain Checklist section based on  the SECAP;  
•  Confirm that enterprise activity designs and specifications contain environmental and social 
safeguards checks and considerations;  
•  Confirm that plans include mitigation actions where needed and monitoring responsibilities 
are recognized;  
•  Organize/facilitate on-the-job training in safeguards monitoring, inspection and information 
analysis.  
The  PCMU  will  be  trained  by  national  or  international  consultant  and  the  MFIs  will  be  trained  by 
PCMU staff that received training by the consultant.  
(b)  Regional/ Woreda level Environmental offices 
After thorough screening of the national level applications/proposals, DBE will require to submit the 
safeguards  screening  results,  their  recommendations  and  reports  to  Regional/  Woreda  level 
Environmental offices for further review, clearance and approval of the screening reports. 
The  regional  or  Woreda  level  environmental  offices  will  review  the  screening  results  and 
recommendations in the screening report, review the proposed mitigation measures, and will further 
provide feedbacks on the  specific issues  of  screening.   The  reviewing  process at  this level  may  not 
necessarily need a full scale ESIA and may decide, if an ESMP is required.  
After  review  of  the  screening  result,  the  application  might  require  a  field  appraisal  mission  to  the 
location  where  project  activity  will  be  implemented  in  order  to  obtain  additional  or  more  detailed 
information.  Moreover,  if  the  desk  appraisal  and  screening  indicates  that  the  proposed  project 
activities   have environmental and/or social concerns that are not adequately addressed in the current 
documentation,  or  if  the  application  does  not  meet  certain  criteria,  the  regional  or  Woreda 
Environmental  offices  will  require  a  field  appraisal  before  the  project  activity  application  can  be 
considered.  
 (c)  Woreda Administration Office 
•  Follow-up and assist the micro finance institutions on the repayment; 
•  Establish a task force/steering committee at Woreda level; 
•  Organize meetings and chair the Woreda taskforce/steering committee for meetings related to 
• 
the implementation of the programs, credit disbursement and repayment; and, 
In cases of land expropriation, facilitate the process of valuation and compensation committee 
meetings and payment of compensation.  
(d) Woreda Agricultural and Natural Resources Offices 
•  Support  the  selection  of  eligible  farmers,  who  among  others  adopt  improved  agricultural 
practices and have a capacity to repay the loan in collaboration with other actors;  
•  Provide  capacity  building  on  climate  resilient  agricultural  practices  and  natural  resources 
management based on the profile of beneficiaries and intended purposes of the loans; and, 
•  Support  by  providing    guidance  and  technical  assistance  to  farmers  and  beneficiaries  on 
compost  preparation  and  other  good  agricultural  practices  including  soil  and  water 
conservation measures. 
The Agricultural and Natural Resource ANR officer will report to the Regional Agricultural and 
Natural Resource and to the RUSSACOs and MFIs. 
(c)  Micro Financial Institutions 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 77 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
•  Assign focal person (s) at head office, branch office and sub-branch offices; 
•  Short  list  and  make  available  staff  members  who  are  working  in  selected  Woredas  for 
• 
training; 
In collaboration with other parties  appraise  application of   beneficiaries on the basis of the 
guidelines set; 
•  Approve and disburse loans for beneficiaries ; 
•  Provide training and awareness raising campaigns through various forms of media and other 
• 
means; 
In  coordination  with  other  relevant  federal  and  regional  bureaus,  provide  overall  technical 
support/assistance in the implementation of this ESMF for the proposed investment activities; 
•  Provide loans to potential users; 
•  Maintain profiles of loan beneficiaries;  
•  Eensure that the loans are utilized for the intended purpose; 
•  Strictly follow-up the loans disbursed according to repayment schedule and agreement; 
•  Undertake monitoring and evaluation on the overall progress of repayment, likely problems, 
and other related issues and report to DBE on a monthly basis; and 
•  Program monitoring/reporting ;  
Microfinance institutions (MFIs) will report to DBE   
(e) Peasants’ Associations in the Proposed project Areas 
•  Mobilize the society to take part in the program at Iddir meetings, religious ceremonies and 
other festivities; 
•  Undertake registration of likely beneficiaries (potential users)  so as to avail credit to them in 
collaboration with other actors; 
Involve in the assessment of the eligibility of the beneficiaries; and, 
• 
•  Report issues that are relevant to the program.  
The Peasants’ Associations will report to the RUSSACOs and MFIs 
(f) Users/Beneficiaries 
•  Contribute  certain  percentage  of  the  overall  construction/installation  as  set  by  the  relevant 
government bodies; 
•  Utilize the loan for the intended purpose; 
•  Repay the loan on the basis of the agreed repayment schedule; and, 
•  Liable to be penalized as per agreed agreements. 
(g) NGOs 
NGOs that have been in one way or another involved in similar project activities can participate for 
enhancing  the  sustainability  of  the  Programme  so  long  as  they  respect  the  rules  and  regulations  at 
federal and regional levels and the social and cultural aspects at the local level.  
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 78 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
9   ESMF Implementation, Monitoring and Reporting 
9.1   Exclusion List of IFC  
Prior to  the formal screening process IFC exclusion list indicated in annex 1 will be used  to identify  
RUFIP III project  activities that are eligible for IFAD financing.  The next step will be to    utilize an 
environmental and social screening checklist (Annex 2) to identify sub-project/investment activities 
eligible for funding under RUFIP III. The application package that is to be submitted to MFIs should 
contain the environmental and social screening checklist. The DBE specialist under the PCMU, will 
be responsible to review the checklist submitted by the loan applicants and accordingly advise on the 
subsequent actions (automatic approval, approval pending a plan for mitigation, or non- approval) to 
be undertaken by MFIs. The MFIs, with the support of the specialist will also make spot checks to 
verify on the ground that potentially approved activities on paper are in reality in compliance with the 
EHS stipulated legal requirements.  
Attention needs to be paid to the use of sound eligibility criteria that meets the SECAP Guidelines of 
IFAD in selecting and monitoring the financial intermediaries to ensure their financial and operational 
quality. In this regard, one of the important requirements is to ensure the project activities are in line 
with the legal requirements of the country.  
This  ESMF  specifies  (i)  criteria  which  help  avoid  activities  that  might  give  rise  to  unacceptable  or 
unmanageable  environmental  impacts,  and  (ii)  procedures  for  screening  that  there  will  be  no 
significant  impacts  and  for  identifying  those  that  may  require  EIA.  In  case  an  EIA  is  required, 
potential  beneficiaries  are  responsible  to  undertake  such  a  study  and  get  clearance  from  the  local 
government  authority  at  the  region  level.  In  such  cases,  the  agent  in  the  cooperatives  to  which 
resources of RUFIP III is channeled  is responsible for identifying activities requiring EIA following 
an  initial  screening  process,  while  the  competent  environmental  authorities  at  the  regional 
administration level are responsible for advising on the required level of EIA study and for ensuring 
that it is conducted to an acceptable standard.  
Moreover, taking into account SECAP of IFAD,   listing of ineligible projects is indicated in Annex 1.  
This negative list encompasses projects with any of the attributes listed below:  
•  Project  Activities  with  the  potential  for  significant  conversion  or  degradation  of  natural 
habitats without appropriate mitigation of anticipated impacts 
emitting pollutants to water, air and land and  degrading forests,  
any project  situated within green area designated by each municipality,  
• 
• 
•  Any project or activity that will be implemented in disputed land,  
•  Any project that would result in the displacement of people or requires resettlement,  
•  Any project with the potential for significant damages to cultural property,  
•  Any project that is not consistent with the project description at time of project negotiations, 
unless  subsequently  agreed  to  with  the  PCMU  at  DBE,  along  with  the  development  of  an 
appropriate level of environmental and social management capacity.  
•  Any  project  or  activity  involving  the  procurement  of  pesticides  not  allowable  under  IFAD 
guidelines,  
•  Any  project  or  activity  that  does  not  meet  the  legal  requirement  of  the  country,  including 
gazetted environment, health and safety legal requirements,  
•  Any project or activity that is not compliant with the international convention that Ethiopia 
has ratified,  
•  Any project or activity, where children under 18 years of age are employed.  
9.2 ESMF Approval and Implementation Process 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 79 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
The  ESMF  process  starts  with  the  project  activity.  This  includes  identification  of  project  activities 
based on beneficiaries’ demands and subsequent technical support and advice received from MFIs to 
prepare  their  proposal  and  loan  request  application  documents.  Based  on  the  type  and  scale  of 
selected project activities by the beneficiaries, loan applications/proposals will be submitted to DBE 
for approval. The DBE and MFI with the support from regional and Woreda offices, if required, will 
conduct desk appraisal of the proposed project activities prior to commencing the loan eligibility and 
environmental and social safeguards screening.  
The  screening  process  will  be  carried  out  against  the  pre-set  criteria  for  eligibility  of  the  project 
activities and environmental and social safeguards compliance by staff/team of experts from DBE at 
national level and by MFI Branch offices at regional and Woreda level using the screening checklist 
under annex 2. The proposed project activity   plan or loan request proposal, screening reports, and 
recommendations  will  be  complied  and  send  to  environmental  offices  for  further  review  and 
approval.  
DBE will review the plan of activities, screening results and recommendations  from MFIs and 
provide decisions of approval or  pass recommendations, if any design modifications or additional 
safeguards  instruments  are  required.  If  program  activities  of  any  significant  environmental 
concerns  are  included,  then  the  plan  document  will  be  directed  to  the  attention  of  the  DBE  or 
MFIs.  The  final  clearance  and  approval  of  the  plan  document  will  be  referred  to  the  respective 
institutions (DBE or MFIs) with all the  enclosed  environmental  and  social  screening  documents and 
final decision reports.   
As  stated  above  various  institutions  have  responsibilities  to  manage  and  complete  the  overall 
process  of  environmental  management  and  implementation  of  this  ESMF.  In  this  regard,  DBE, 
Regional  and  Woreda  bureaus  and  offices,  Regional  and  Woreda  Environmental  offices,  Woreda 
administrations,  other  relevant  line  ministries  are  major  actors  for  the  implementation  of  any 
proposed sub-projects/investments in an environmentally sustainable way.  
The ESMF also outlines that the successful implementation of the  programme activities will require 
dynamic  and  multi-disciplinary  professionals.  Therefore,  regular  short  and  tailor  made  training 
courses and workshops will be required to reinforce the capacity and skills of the direct implementers, 
stakeholders  and  beneficiaries  during  the  entire  programme  period.  The  existing  capacities  of  the 
implementing institutions, particularly DBE, MFI, PSE, Line and Sector Ministries to implement the 
ESMF and other environmental and social safeguard instruments are low.  
The program has to provide for capacity building and technical support to all relevant implementing 
agents  from  National,  Regional  and  Woreda  levels.  Thus,  to  capacitate  and  fill  the  gaps  due  to  the 
prevailing low capacity of DBE, MFI and other institutions to implement this ESMF  the development 
and  implementation  of  capacity  development  and  training  plan  is  inevitable.  The  required  capacity 
development, training and monitoring activity plan are stated under this ESMF, including the required 
budget over the six years (from 2019 to 2024) of project implementation period. Thus, for successful 
implementation  of  the  ESMF,  earmarked  budget  of  an  estimated  amount  of  540,000  US$  will  be 
required in the whole project period. This includes training on various topics, annual review and end-
program-evaluation of the impacts of the ESMF by a consultant. Apart from the allocation of money, 
integration  and  coordination  of  various  actors  both  at  federal,  regional  and  Woreda  levels  has  of 
paramount  importance  for  the  successful  realization  of  the  RUFIP  III  funded  activities.  Timely 
monitoring,  evaluation  and  follow-up  need  also  be  considered  in  an  integrated  manner  in 
collaboration with the various role players. The following steps should be followed to implement the 
ESMF.  
Step one:  planning and preparation of the project activities  
During planning and preparation of the project activities, the Implementing Partners (IPs) are required 
to  ensure  that  environmental  and  social  impacts  of  the  project  activities  owned  by  each  rural 
household  and  other  beneficiaries  are  of  small  scale  and  that    could  be  mitigated  and  minimized 
through implementations of best practice methods. Anticipated impacts and the respective mitigation 
measures under environmental impact and mitigation measures pointed out earlier will be used by IPs 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 80 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
to obtain an overview of potential environmental and social impacts that could be generated due to the 
implementation of the project activities.  
Given  that  the  numerous  beneficiaries’  applications  are  likely  to  be  submitted  for  funding,  the 
screening  and  assessment  of  environmental  and  social  impacts  is  most  effectively  applied 
simultaneously  with  the  screening  for  loan  eligibility  by  DBE  or  MFI  branch  offices.  If  the 
environmental  and  social  impacts  assessment  is  required,  project  activity  will  thus  not  be  finally 
approved until an environmental and social safeguards impact assessment has been approved.  
Based on the beneficiaries’ demand on the type of project activities, applications /proposals for loan 
request will be submitted to DBE/MFIs.  
Step Two: Desk appraisal 
Prior  to  going  to  the  sites,  a  desk  appraisal  of  the  proposed  project  activity  will  be  carried  out  to 
confirm  that  all  applications  contain  the  required  information  pertinent  to  loan  eligibility  and  for 
identification of environmental and social safeguards issues. Depending on the type of project activity 
loan request application level, desk appraisal will be conducted by the DBE /MFIs branch offices, to 
ensure that all pertinent environmental issues are identified.  
Step Three: loan eligibility and safeguards screening 
Screening  for  environmental  and  social  eligibility  will  be  done  at  the  time  when  the  beneficiaries 
submit the completed screening form to DBE or RUSSACOs/MFIs.  The beneficiaries will be assisted 
by  the  Woreda  administration  when  completing  the  screening  form.      The  DBE  or  MFIs  branch 
offices will undertake screening of   loan eligibility and environmental and social eligibility of project 
activities to ascertain that the likely social and/or environmental impacts are identified. This screening 
will be carried out by using the Environmental and Social Screening Form (Refer annex2). 
Completion  of  this  screening  form  will  facilitate  the  identification  of  potential  environmental  and 
social  impacts,  determination  of  their  significance,  assignment  of  the  appropriate  environmental 
category,  proposal  of  appropriate  environmental  mitigation  measures,  and  conduct  any  further 
environmental  assessment  work,  if  necessary.  Suitably  qualified  experts  from  DBE  /MFIs  will 
conduct the screening process and if none are available, training will be provided.  
The assignment of the appropriate environmental category to a particular project activity will be based 
on the information provided in the environmental and social screening forms (see annex 2) and on the 
SECAP  provisions.  Consistent  with  this  operational  policy,  the  activities  of  the  proposed  project 
activities may be categorized as “Category B” or Category A. Category “A” project activities will not 
be eligible to receive finance from RUFIP III budget.  
Given  the  scale  of  the  project,  some  of  the  activities  may  be  categorized  as  “Category  C”  if  the 
environmental  and  social  screening  results  indicate  that  such  activities  will  have  limited  or  no 
environmental and social impacts. Therefore, apart from screening, they do not require environmental 
safeguards  instrument  preparation.  Thus,  if  the  screening  form  has  only  “No”  entries,  the  proposed 
activity will not require further environmental assessment work, and the technical team of experts will 
recommend approval of this proposal and implementation can proceed immediately in line with IFAD 
Environmental Assessment Category “C”.  
Step Four: Submission of screening report to Regional/ Woreda level Environmental offices 
After thorough screening of the national level applications/proposals, DBE will require to submit the 
safeguards  screening  results,  their  recommendations  and  reports  to  Regional/  Woreda  level 
Environmental offices for further review, clearance and approval of the screening reports. 
Step Five: Review of screening report and appraisal by Environmental offices 
The  regional  or  Woreda  level  environmental  offices  will  review  the  screening  results  and 
recommendations in the screening report, review the proposed mitigation measures, and will further 
provide feedbacks on the  specific issues  of  screening.   The  reviewing  process at  this  level  may  not 
necessarily need a full scale ESIA and may decide, if an ESMP is required.  
After  review  of  the  screening  result,  the  application  might  require  a  field  appraisal  mission  to  the 
location  where  project  activity  will  be  implemented  in  order  to  obtain  additional  or  more  detailed 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 81 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
information.  Moreover,  if  the  desk  appraisal  and  screening  indicates  that  the  proposed  project 
activities   have environmental and/or social concerns that are not adequately addressed in the current 
documentation,  or  if  the  application  does  not  meet  certain  criteria,  the  regional  or  Woreda 
Environmental  offices  will  require  a  field  appraisal  before  the  project  activity  application  can  be 
considered.  
Table 9.1: Sample Criteria for Requiring a Field Appraisal 
Criteria 
Field Appraisal 
1.  Land  must  be  acquired 
to 
implement  project  activities  ,  an 
individual or community's access 
to  land  or  available  resources  is 
restricted or lost, or an individual 
or family is displaced  
2.  Project      activities    may-affect  a 
protected area or a natural habitat 
Determines the number of affected/displaced people and level 
of  impact on  restrict access  to any  available resources,  as  per 
the criteria stated under RPF.  
Determines  if  the  project  activities  will  adequately  avoid 
adverse  effects  on  the  protected  area  or  natural  habitat,  as 
provided for in the ESMF 
3.  project  activities    may  have  an 
impact  on  ecologically  sensitive 
ecosystems  (e.g.  of  impact  on 
wetlands) 
A field appraisal determines the scale and level of impact. The 
application may need to be revised to describe how the project 
will  avoid  or  minimize  adverse  impacts  to  ecologically 
sensitive  areas. This  may  require a  distinct  ESMP  as outlined 
in this ESMF 
4.  Project  activities    may  involve, 
or result in: 
  Diversion  or  use  of  surface 
A  field  appraisal  determines  the  scale  and  potential  adverse 
effects, and may include an ESMP as outlined in Chapter seven 
of the ESMF.  
waters; 
  Production of effluent waste;  
Depending on the field appraisal mission, the appraisal might reconsider the need for development of 
an ESMP for the project activities. DBE/MFIs are responsible for ensuring that the required ESMP is 
conducted  as  per  the  SECAP.  The  ESMP  can  be  conducted  by  a  team  of  experts  from  the 
DBE/MFI/PSE including the environmental safeguards specialist (to be recruited by the project) or by 
a consultant as deemed necessary. It should be noted that any project activities that would be rated as 
category ‘A’ will not be financed by IFAD.   
DBE,  MFIs,  PSEs,  regional  or  local  level    will  supervise  further  the  environmental  and  social 
safeguards implementation work, which may be included in the preparation of  ESMP, RAP/ARAP, 
as the situation may require. Once all the requisite documentation has been compiled, the DBE/MFI 
will make recommendations to Woreda level environmental offices for final clearance and approval.  
Steps six and seven: Approval of project activities by regional or Woreda level Environmental 
offices  
As stated in the previous step four, the completed screening form along with any additional planning 
reports and overall project activity application is forwarded to the Woreda /Regional environmental 
offices. The first step in the approval process is to determine if all the relevant information has been 
provided,  and  is  adequate.  The  Regional  environmental  offices  at  local  level  or  regional  level  will 
check if the beneficiaries and screening team have thoroughly considered all environmental and social 
issues with regards to the identification of potential adverse effects arising from the project activities 
as well as mitigating measures to adequately address negative impacts. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 82 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
The  Project  activity  may  not  be  eligible  for  funding,  if  they  have  potentially  a  negative  impact  on 
physical cultural resources, require land acquisition, or significant impacts on natural habitats, forests 
and other. Lists of project activities that may not be funded by the project are described in annex 1. 
Although  RUFIP  III  has  no  activities,  which  affect  cultural  resources  in  case  of  any  events  of  the 
potential of chance find of physical cultural resources, the contract and any activities for construction 
or installation have to include reference to procedures to follow as per the issues mentioned in annex 
5. 
The  screening  of  the  project  activity  might  result  in  a  request  for  development  of  specific  ESMP.  
Regional  or  Woreda  level  Environmental  offices  will  review  (the  ESMP)  and  make  decision  by 
approving the project activity (with or without conditions relating to implementation); recommending 
to re-design (with required and/or recommended amendments); or rejecting the project activity (with 
comments  as  to  what  is  required  to  submit  as  an  acceptable  report).  As  part  of  the  appraisal,  the 
corresponding ESMP has to be made publicly available.  
IFAD Policy on Disclosure of Information requires that ESMPs are made available for public review.  
In this regard, it is only when   ESMPs is made publicly available that the project activities will be 
reviewed.  
Step Eight: Submission of approval decision report to DBE or MFIs / Regional or Woreda level 
Environmental offices  
ESIA/ESMP  review  should  be  done  in  the  given  period  (shortest  possible  time)  to  avoid  delays  in 
project activity implementation. The result of the review and final approval will submit to DBE/MFIs 
as soon as completed. The Review report to DBE or MFIs should include but not limited to: 
 
 
the decision on each project activity whether an ESMP is required or not; 
 if an ESMP is required, the recommended scope of the ESMP clearly indicating the aspects to be 
seriously addressed, the skills required and duration of the ESMP;  
 if an ESMP is not required, include guidance on special needs such as technical guidelines on any 
of the project activities; and  
 
  Approval without conditions for those project activities  with no potential adverse impacts. 
 (Note: The final ESMP documents will be disclosed at DBE/MFI website. The local level disclosure 
of the final ESMP will be carried out using appropriate language and culturally sensitive manner.) 
Step Nine: Documentation  
DBE or MFIs after receiving the decision report from Regional /Woreda level environmental offices, 
will  compile  the  documentation  comprising  the  decisions  on  loan  eligibility  and  environmental  and 
social safeguards screening for further processing of loan effectiveness.  
Step Ten:  effectiveness of project activities  
Once the documentation is finalized, DBE/MFI will communicate the loan beneficiaries to notify the 
effectiveness  of  the  project  implementation  and  loan  award  with  all  requirements  during  project 
implementations.  
Step Eleven:  Implementation 
DBE/MFI  will  inform  appropriate  implementing  institutions/beneficiaries  to  commence  the 
implementation of various project activities, as per their proposal and notify the beneficiaries to act on 
the  decisions  and  requirements  provided  by  the  regional  or  Woreda  level  Environmental  offices, 
together with approval reports.  
Step Twelve:  Supervision and Monitoring 
The DBE, MFI and PSE will carry out supervision and monitoring, in consultation with and support 
from IFAD. 
Step Thirteen: Annual auditing  
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 83 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
As  stated  in  the  ESMF,  the  annual  auditing  and  End-of-Project  evaluation  is  the  responsibility  of 
DBE/MFI.  The  assignment  will  be  annual  auditing  and  end-of  project  evaluation  by  independent 
consultants or team of experts from Regional/Woreda Environmental offices. 
Step Fourteen: End -of-Program Evaluation 
End-of-Programme evaluation is the responsibility of DBE/MFI. The assignment will be  evaluation 
by independent consultants or team of experts from Regional/Woreda Environmental offices. 
9.3 Monitoring and reporting 
Monitoring is a continuing process throughout the life of the proposed sub- projects and investments 
under  RUFIP  III    from  installation  and  construction  phase  up  to  operation  and  decommissioning 
phase.  Its  purpose  is  to  establish  benchmarks  so  that  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  anticipated 
environmental  and  social  impacts  can  be  continually  assessed  ensuring  the  achievement  of  ESMF 
objectives.  Monitoring  of  ESMF  could  be  continuous  during  project  implementations  or  periodic 
review as annual monitoring/auditing to determine and guarantee the effectiveness of ESMF measures 
and procedures. 
The objectives of monitoring are:  
•  To alert project  implementers by providing timely information about the success or otherwise 
of  the  environmental  management  process  outlined  in  this  ESMF  in  such  a  manner  that 
changes  can  be  made  as  required  to  ensure  continuous  improvement  of  environmental  and 
social management process; and, 
•  To  make  a  final  evaluation  in  order  to  determine  whether  the  mitigation  measures 
incorporated in the technical designs and the ESMPs have been successful in such a way that 
the  pre-project  environmental  and  social  condition  has  been  restored,  improved  upon  or  is 
worse than before and to determine what further mitigation measures may be required. 
The  ESMF  implementation  indicators  to  be  monitored  during  project  implementation  include  the 
following: 
•  Number of field appraisals undertaken;  
•  Number of ESMPs developed;  
•  Number  of  written  warnings  of  violations  of  ESMPs  issued  to  Private  Sector  Enterprises, 
Microfinance  institutions,  project  contractors  and/or  the  beneficiaries  in  case  of  non-
compliances;  
•  Number  of  recommendations  from  IFAD  ,  annual  review  and  monitoring  that  have  been 
implemented by the beginning of the following year; 
•  Number of chance find procedures for physical cultural resources invoked, if applicable; 
•  Number of staff at all levels trained in the implementation of this ESMF; and, 
•  Number  of  staff  at  federal,  regional  and  Woreda  levels  attending  training  course  in  ESMF, 
RAP/RPF, ESMP, ESIA, and other safeguards instruments. 
The  ESMF  training  component  is  monitored  through  indicators  of  number  of  safeguard  specialists 
PSE,  MFI’s  staff  at  Regional  and  Woreda  level  beneficiaries  and  community  members  etc.  trained 
and the topics covered.  
Follow up on previous recommendations is monitored through the number of recommendations from 
the annual review that have been implemented. The indicators are deliberately very simple. Despite 
their  simplicity,  the  integration  of  these  indicators  provides  a  guarantee  that  the  ESMF  will  be 
implemented in full during the project implementation period. 
The Monitoring and Evaluation Team of RUFIP III Coordination Directorate of the DBE will report 
to  the  DBE  who  will  lead  and  oversee  the  implementation  of  any  corrective  measures  that  are 
required.  Monitoring  and  evaluation  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  (i)  the  ESMF  process  is  being 
implemented  appropriately,  and  (ii)  the  mitigation  measures  are  being  identified  and  implemented. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 84 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
This will enable to identify various issues that necessitate amendments in the ESMF so as to improve 
its effectiveness. 
Annual Audit 
Annual  Audit:  an  independently  commissioned  environmental  and  social  audit/monitoring  will  be 
carried  out  on  an  annual  basis  as  required.  Annual  Audit  of  the  ESMF  implementation  will  be 
undertaken by external consultants. The reviews amongst other things will assess the performance of 
the  project  against  the  procedures  described  in  this  document,  the  need  for  future  training,  and  the 
environmental and social impacts of the proposed project activities. Guidelines for annual reviews are 
included in annex 6. 
The  Annual  Audit  also  provides  a  strong  incentive  for  DBE      to  ensure  that  the  ESMF  will  be 
implemented, and the project ESMPs will be developed and implemented. An Annual Audit Report 
will include a summary of the environmental performance of the program, based on the  ESMPs and 
measures indicated in the ESMF; presentation of compliance and progress in the implementation of 
the  ESMPs;  and  a  synopsis  of  the  environmental  monitoring  results  from  individual  project 
monitoring measures (as set out in the ESMPs), at local level. 
The main tasks of the audit study will be, but not limited to: 
•  Consideration of the description of the project; 
• 
•  Verify  the  level  of  compliance  by  the  proponent  with  the  conditions  of  the  environmental 
Indicate the objective, scope and criteria of the audit; 
management plan; 
•  Evaluate the proponent’s knowledge and awareness of and responsibility for the application 
of relevant legislation; 
•  Review existing project documentation related to all project facilities and designs; 
•  Examine monitoring programs, parameters and procedures in place for control and corrective 
actions in case of emergencies; 
•  Examine  records  of  incidents  and  accidents  and  the  likelihood  of  future  occurrence  of  the 
• 
incidents and accidents; 
Inspect areas where Proposed project equipment and materials are stored and disposed of and 
give a record of all significant environmental risks associated with such activities; 
•  Examine  and  seek  views  on  health  and  safety  issues  from  the  project  staffs,  the  local  and 
other potentially affected communities; and, 
•  Prepare a list of health, safety and environmental concerns of past and on-going activities. 
The  suggested  annual  report  template  for  the  proposed  project  is  depicted  in  annex  8.  An  annual 
monitoring and evaluation report must be submitted to DBE.  
End-of-project evaluation 
Based on the comprehensive annual reviews, an end-of-project evaluation will take place, going into 
more  details  with  some  of  the  issues  raised  in  the  annual  reviews  and  the  impact  of  the  capacity 
development activities. The evaluation will be performed as per the OECD/DAC criteria of relevance, 
effectiveness, efficiency, impact, and sustainability. 
The  PCMU,  through  the  specialist  designated  within  the  DBE  Directorate  will  be  responsible  for 
monitoring applications and  approval to ensure that the checklist has been duly filled in and verified 
by  the  MFIs,  RUSSACOs    and  the  programme    beneficiaries.  Spot  checks  by    the  MFIs  and 
USSACOs  will  allow  the  PCMU  to  verify  that  the  mitigation  procedures  are  being  applied  as 
described in the Screening Checklist.  
At the Mid Term of the project, RUFIP III will undertake a comprehensive audit and prepare a report 
on  its  environmental  and  social  performance.  This  audit  report  will  be  the  basis  for  establishing 
compliance and for improving performance in this regard. It will also be an important input for the 
monitoring and evaluation of RUFIP III supported project activities. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 85 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
To  monitor  the  progress  of  the  implementation  of  the  measures  that  have  been  identified  in  this 
ESMF, annual reviews will be carried out as outlined in annex 6. The principal output of the annual 
reviews is and to summarizes the results, and provides practical recommendations. Distinct sections 
should  address  ESMF  performance  and  cumulative  impacts.  Annexes  should  provide  the  detailed 
results of the fieldwork, and summarize the number of approved projects by the respective national 
and  regional  teams  and  their  characteristics  according  to  the  annual  report  format  indicated  in  the 
annex. Copies of the annual review report should be delivered to the PCMU, to each Local, Regional 
and National Government office responsible for appraisal, approval and implementation of projects, 
and to IFAD. To ensure early detection of critical environmental and social conditions and to provide 
information  on  the  mitigation  progress  and  results,  reporting  deadlines  have  been  specified  in  the 
implementation schedule. 
Environmental  and  social  monitoring  needs  to  be  carried  out  during  the  construction  as  well  as 
operation and maintenance of the  proposed project activities    to ensure that mitigation measures 
are implemented, have the intended result, and that remedial measures are undertaken, if mitigation 
measures  are  inadequate  or  the  impacts  have  been  underestimated  within  the  environmental  and 
social aassessment (ESA). 
At  Regional  level,  the  safeguard  expert  assigned  by  the  regional  environment  office  will  be 
responsible for monitoring and reporting on the status of  ESMF implementation  throughout the 
project  duration.  S/He  will  supervise  and  review  environmental  and  social  safeguard  documents 
and issues such as environmental audit reports during implementation. He will  specifically monitor 
the following aspects: 
•  The environmental and social assessment processes (screening; ESMP preparation); 
•  The monitoring of the implementation of the mitigation measures; 
•  Monitoring of environmental and social issues and the supervision of the contractor civil 
works during the construction process; 
•  Monitoring of environmental and social issues during operations and maintenance of the 
proposed project activities after construction using the environmental indicators shown in 
the ESMF; and 
•  Submission of monitoring reports. 
The communities through their representatives will receive both compliance monitoring. This will 
be done throughout the project cycle namely: 
  During the planning phase, the communities will participate in the identification of social 
and environmental indicators for monitoring the mitigating measures; 
  During  construction  phase,  monitoring  the  execution  of  works  with  respect  to 
environmental  and  social  aspects  such  as  for  example,  verify  the  compliances  of  the  
contractors with their obligations; 
  During  operation  and  maintenance  phase,  the  overall  environmental  and  social  impact 
monitoring to alert any emerging environmental and social hazards in conjunction with 
the ongoing Proposed project activities activities. 
When  peoples  and  communities  are  affected  during  the  implementation  of  the  proposed    project 
activities, they should be included in the monitoring and evaluation exercise. 
The monitoring plan has the two components: 
  Monitoring  of  the  compliance  and  effectiveness  of  the  ESMF  and  application  of  the 
 
recommended standards; 
Impact monitoring, i.e., measuring the socio-economic impacts of the project interventions. 
Biannual review workshops will be conducted at Federal and regional levels with the objectives to: 
  Assess  project  performance  in  complying  with  ESMF  procedures,  learn  lessons,  and 
improve future performance; and 
  Assess the occurrence of, and potential for, cumulative impacts due to the proposed sub- 
projects and other development activities in the project area. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 86 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
The participants of the ESMF review workshop are project implementing agencies whose  project 
activities 
  have  environmental  and  social  concerns  and  are  responsible  for  the  ESMF 
implementation at all levels. Regional workshop will be organized by regional environment office. 
Biannual  review  workshop  will  be  organized  towards  the  end  of  the  year.  Besides,  IFAD  ,  as 
deemed necessary, will periodically conduct reviews of the implementation of the ESMF. 
 Information disclosure 
The DBE will make copies of the ESMF available in selected public places (possibly at National and 
Regional relevant government offices) for information and comments. The Proposed project activities 
will  be  announced  through  different  forms  of  media.  The  announcement  will  include  a  brief 
description of the programme, references to where and when the ESMF can be viewed, duration of the 
display period, and contact information for comments.  
For meaningful consultations between the DBE and possible project affected groups, beneficiaries and 
local  NGOs  on  all  Category  B  projects,  DBE  shall  provide  a  relevant  material  in  a  timely  manner 
prior to consultation and in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to the groups 
being consulted.  
Public Disclosure Plan 
Following the public consultation, all comments and briefs will be analyzed by DBE. The report will 
be published and made available to the concerned community  groups and to interested bodies upon 
request. 
In line with this, the ESMF will be available at the relevant institutions at all levels and be publicly 
disclosed  both  in  country  and  at  the  IFAD’s  website.  The  DBE  will  make  copies  of  the  ESMF 
available in selected public places in English and working language of the country in compliance with 
the IFAD’s Public Consultation and Disclosure Policy. It is proposed that the locations of copies are 
announced through pubic relation sections of relevant sector line Ministries, radio announcement in 
addition to press releases, as applicable.  
Any ESMPs and other safeguards instruments that will be prepared for the proposed project activities 
under the programme will also needed to be disclosed to the public. Copies of the ESMPs should be 
made available to communities and interested parties in accessible locations through local government 
authorities, (e.g. Woreda offices). Copies of the ESMPs should also be provided to the implementing 
agencies and submitted to the PCMU. This will ensure record keeping of all activities implemented 
under  the  ESMF  and  ensure  that  third  party  audits,  if  required,  have  adequate  information  when 
undertaking annual environmental and social audits. 
Disclosure of documentation related to the SECAP process  
The  IFAD  policy  on  the  disclosure  of  documents,  approved  in  2010,  adopted  the  principle  of 
“presumption of full disclosure” The sharing of draft and final ESIAs and other relevant documents 
with  programme  and  project  stakeholders  and  interested  parties  will  be  subject  to  the  above-
mentioned principle.  As  such,  the  documents  will  be disclosed,  when  available, in  a  timely  manner 
prior to project appraisal at the quality assurance stage on IFAD’s Website and in an accessible place 
in the programme or project-affected area, in a form and language understandable to project-affected 
parties  and  other  stakeholders,  for  the  purposes  of  keeping  them  informed  and  obtaining  their 
meaningful feedback.  
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 87 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
10 Capacity Building and Technical Assistance 
Effective  implementation of  the  ESMF  will  require  technical  capacity  of  implementing  institutions. 
Project  activities  implementing  bodies  need  to  understand  inherent  social  and  environmental  issues 
and  values  and  should  be  able  to  identify  the  indicators  to  properly  address  environmental  issues 
related  to  this  project.  Preliminary  capacity  need  assessment  will  have  to  be    conducted  to  identify 
strengthening  needs  on  social  and  environmental  evaluation,  screening,  mitigation  and  monitoring 
during  the  implementation  of  the  ESMF.  The  suggestions  on  training  and  capacity  development 
requirements  under  this section  are  based  on  recent observations,  and  consultations  during  the field 
visits for the preparation of ESMF.  
This chapter deals with capacity building needs of institutions that will support implementation of the 
ESMF. It states the detail training and capacity development requirement for DBE, and other regional 
and Woreda level implementing parties such as MFIs, PSE that will be directly or indirectly engage in 
the implementation of RUFIP III. This capacity development and training will support DBE and other 
institutions  to  develop  their  skills  to  sufficiently  screen,  monitor,  evaluate  and  assess  the 
environmental impact of the proposed project activities.  
The  two  environmental  and  social  safeguard  specialists  at      EDB  are  currently  monitoring 
implementation of environmental and social screening and mitigation measures of RUFIP II and other 
related projects. However, there is a need to hire additional safeguard specialists to properly monitor 
implementation of the proposed ESMF of RUFIP III to meet following objectives:   
  Ensure  the  MFIs  and  RUSACCOS      have  the  capacity  to  assist  communities  and 
beneficiaries  in  preparing  their    proposals,  and  to  appraise,  approve  and  supervise 
implementation of project activities; 
  Representatives  and  leaders  of  community  members  and  farmer  groups,  Beneficiaries, 
Institutions and associations at local levels to prioritize their needs, and to identify, prepare, 
implement and manage the environmental and social aspects of project activities; and, 
  Assist  Local  MFIs,  PSEs  and  extension  agents  by  providing  technical  support  (including 
basic  ESMP,  ESMF,  RPF,  and  RAP)  to  communities  and  farmers  in  implementing  their 
project activities in an environmental friendly and socially acceptable manner. 
At  the  national  level,  the  training  activities  in  environmental  and  social  impact  assessment  will 
include  environmental  project  screening  and  implementation  of  ESMF  and  this  training  can  be 
conducted  by  the  Environment,  Forest  and  Climate  Change  Commission  (EFCCC)  or  private 
consultants with the support of the DBE.  
As most of the project activities are expected to be small-scale and have limited impacts that can be 
easily mitigated (Category “B”) and it is anticipated that the DBE safeguard specialists will be able to 
provide the required technical assistance on environmental and social safeguards management to 
Woreda experts that have environment background. The Woreda experts on the other hand will 
provide training and awareness to Kebele focal persons. In case environmental assessments are 
beyond the capacity of the Woreda experts and Kebele focal persons, they will request assistance 
from the regional /Woreda environmental offices to undertake the training. 
 Capacity Assessment 
In  many  institutions  they  have  assigned  staff  that  that  does  not  have  the  required  qualification  to   
oversee  issues  related  to  environmental  management.  In  other  cases,  environment  personnel  are 
present  but  their  level  of  training  and  technical  capacity  on  environmental  principles  and  tools  of 
management is not sufficient. Training will therefore need to be provided at the federal government, 
local  authorities,  micro-  finance  institutions,  and  grassroots  stakeholders  that  will  in  one  way  or 
another be involved in the implementation of the ESMF. In order to strengthen the capacity of DBE 
and to ensure sound implementation of ESMF and the consequent project activities environmental and 
social  safeguard  instruments,  DBE  may  need  to  recruit  two  additional  environmental  and  social 
safeguard specialists.  
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 88 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
The  implementation  of  the  proposed  project  activities  is  expected  to  fulfill  the  safeguard  policies 
requirements stipulated in this ESMF. However, the woredas and in some case the regions have no 
capacity  to  supervise  and  implement  these  policies.  The  staff  assigned  to  implement  the  proposed 
project  activities  at  the  kebele  level  should  therefore  receive  training  on  social  and  environmental 
impact  assessment  in  order  to  properly  implement  the  safeguard  policies  and  also  carry  out  proper 
monitoring. There is also the need to provide specific training to the Development Agents (DAs) and 
to  Kebele  Development  Committee  (KDC)  that  will  be  engaged  in  the  identification,  selection  and 
approval  of  proposed  project  activities  at  the  kebele  level.  Similar  training  should  also  be  given  to 
experts  assigned  at  the  regional  level  for  them  to  oversee  proper  implementation  of  the  mitigation 
measures to minimize project impacts. 
Training and Awareness Raising 
Creating awareness among the kebele communities on the impacts and benefits and action that should 
be taken to minimize impacts of the proposed project activities is very crucial. To this effect there is a 
need to  develop  a training  plan to  build  the  capacity  of  all development  actors,  who  in  one  way  or 
another,  will  participate  in  the  execution  and supervision  of  the  project.  Depending  on  the capacity 
building needs identified during the Performance Reviews or M&E, refresher courses will also need 
to be given in the course of proposed project activities implementation. 
Areas identified for training include: 
  Training  on 
the  role 
the  community  during 
the  screening,  planning,  reviewing, 
implementation and monitoring process of the proposed project activities; 
  Training  on  environment  related  national  policies,  laws,  regulations  policies  that  should  be 
respected during the implementation of proposed project activities.; 
  Training on IFAD's SECAP for application to RUFIP III; 
  Training  on  environmental  and  social  assessment,  ESIA  approval  processes,  reporting  and 
monitoring; and preparation of environmental management plan; and 
  Conducting  regular  community  awareness  workshop  to  update  progress  and  to  create 
awareness  on  the  institutional  arrangement,  procedures  and  process  of  implementing  the 
proposed project activities ; 
Technical Assistances 
For  effective  implementation  of  the  ESMF,  technical  assistance  is  required  at  region,  Woreda  and 
local  (Kebele)  level to  build  the  capacity  of  the  local  communities,  DAs,  Woreda,  zone  and  region 
government staffs to discharge their responsibilities as per the requirements set out in this ESMF. To 
this effect general technical assistance will be given to experts at federal, regional and zonal levels. 
This  assistance  includes  training  on  monitoring  of  the  effective  implementation  of  the  mitigation 
measures set out in the ESMP and in monitoring and supervision of the ESMF implementation that 
will be carried out on a bi-annual basis. Besides the general technical assistance, a specific training on 
the general environmental management principles tailored to lower technicians and to the community 
at the grass root level will be given. 
11 Budget for the Implementation of RUFIP III 
The RUFIP III is planned to be completed in 6 years. Budget required for the implementation of 
ESMF during the 6 years project life is indicated in the table below: 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 89 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Table 12.1: Budget Estimate for the implementation of the ESMF in US$ 
No 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
3 
4 
5 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
List of activities 
Awareness creation, launching 
workshop at project 
commencement 
Awareness raising, launching 
workshop and ToT at federal level 
Awareness raising and ToT at 
regional level 
Awareness raising and ToT at 
Woreda level 
Subtotal for awareness raising 
Training 
Federal 
Regional 
Woreda 
Subtotal for advanced training 
Preparation of ESMFs 
Salary of and social and 
environmental specialist(2 in 
Number) 
Annual Review Workshops, 
supervision and monitoring and 
annual audit 
Federal level 
Regional level 
Woreda level 
Subtotal for Review and 
monitoring 
Total  
Yr 1 
Yr 2 
Yr 3 
Yr 4 
Yr 5 
Yr 6 
10,000 
40,000 
60,000 
110,000 
10,000 
40,000 
50,000 
100,000 
10,000 
4,000 
4,000 
4,000 
10,000 
4,000 
4,000 
4,000 
10,000 
40,000 
50,000 
  100,000 
10,000 
40,000 
50,000 
100,000 
10,000 
40,000 
50,000 
100,000 
224,000  104,000 
104,000 
14,000 
104,000 
4,000 
Budget Estimate for the implementation of ESMF of RUFIP III is US$ 554,000 
Note: 
Training includes the following: 
• IFAD's SECAP as well as implementation; 
• Stakeholder engagement, consultation and partnerships, EIA law, procedures, & guidelines and enforcing 
mechanisms, Application of ESMF tools (Screening checklists, ESMP, EA), their review; implementation and 
enforcement,  
• Development of mitigation measures and Environmental and Social Management Plans, Environmental 
reporting, monitoring and follow-up on the implementation of the ESMF the ESMF. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 90 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
12 Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) 
Grievance  redress  will  use  existing  formal  and  informal  grievance  mechanisms,  strengthened  or 
supplemented  as  needed  with  project-specific  arrangements,  and  will  be  aproportionate  to  the  risks 
and impacts of the project. 
Grievance redressing mechanisms have to be designed in view of the fact that programme funded 
activities  may  upset  the  existing  balance  in  society.  The  resettlement  project  will  touch  upon 
property  issues,  means  of  livelihood,  and  organization  of  social  and  spatial  aspects  that  influence 
proximity to a set of environmental, economic, social, and spiritual assets. Therefore, the grievance 
redressing  system  has  to  be  designed in  such  a  way  that it functions  in  a flexible  manner and  the 
implementing agency has to incline to a pro-poor approach in all its decisions. The GRM will have a 
working place and adequate budget for implementation. 
Grievances will be actively  managed and tracked to ensure that appropriate resolution and actions 
are  taken.  A  clear  time  schedule  will  be  defined  for  resolving  grievances,  ensuring  that  they  are 
addressed in an appropriate and timely manner, with corrective actions being implemented and the 
complainant being informed of the outcome. 
Grievances  may  arise  from  members  of  communities  who  are  dissatisfied  with  (i)  the  eligibility 
criteria,  (ii)  community  planning  and  resettlement  measures,  or  (iii)  actual  implementation.  This 
chapter sets out the measures to be used to manage grievances. 
The  grievance  procedure  does  not  replace  existing  legal  processes.  Based  on  consensus,  the 
procedures  will  seek  to  resolve  issues  quickly  in  order  to  expedite  the  receipt  of  entitlements, 
without resorting to expensive and time-consuming legal actions. If the grievance procedure fails to 
provide a result, complainants can still seek legal redress. 
A local grievance hearing committee (GHC) will be established, consisting of representatives from 
the village or town, municipality, Woreda, or Kebele administration, the displaced/affected persons, 
village  elders  or  influential  personalities  other  than  the  displaced/affected  persons,  and  the 
church/mosque  administration.  Grievances  should  be settled  amicably  whenever  possible.  That  is, 
positive discussions are made to convince the affected PAPs in the presence of the GHC.  
For r example, if  beneficiaries are unable to pay back their loans in time/default on loans since they 
are  extremely  susceptible  to  climate  risks  or  borrower  passed  away    the  local  grievance  hearing 
committee  (GHC)  will  evaluate the  seriousness  of the  risk    and    ask  for  an  extension  or  short  term 
waiver. 
However, if the resolution of a case requires additional payment any form of relocation of resources, 
the  report  shall  be  sent  to  the  appropriate  administrative  executive  for  consideration.  If  the 
administrator agrees to the recommendation, he/she shall instruct the resettlement/appropriate unit to 
implement  the  amended  provision.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the recommendation  of  the  GHC  is  such 
that it upsets legal frameworks, the aggrieved party may be advised to pursue the case in a normal 
court of law. 
According  to  proclamation  455/2005,  Article11,  subarticle1:  “In  rural  areas  and  in  urban  centers 
where an administrative organ to hear grievances related to urban land holding is not yet established, 
a  complaint relating  to  the  amount  of  compensation shall be  submitted  to  the regular court  having 
jurisdiction.” 
In  urban  areas,  a  PAP  who  is  dissatisfied  with  the  amount  of  compensation  may  complain  to  an 
administrative organ and if the PAP is still not satisfied, PAP may appeal to the regular court within 
thirty days from the date of the decision.(refer annex 10) 
IFAD  has  established  a  complaints  procedure  to  receive  and  facilitate  resolution  of  concerns  and 
complaints  with  respect  to  alleged  non-compliance  of  its  environmental  and  social  policies  and  the 
mandatory  aspects  of  its  SECAP  in  the  context  of  IFAD-supported  projects.  The  procedure  allows 
affected  complainants  to  have  their  concerns  resolved  in  a  fair  and  timely  manner  through  an 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 91 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
independent  process.  IFAD  may  be  contacted  by  e-mail  at  SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org  or  via  its 
website.  In  addition,  IFAD  will  require  the  borrower  to  provide  an  easily  accessible  grievance 
mechanism,  process  or  procedure  to  facilitate  resolution  of  concerns  and  grievances  of  project-
affected parties arising in connection with the project (on a case-by-case basis for projects that pose 
special  risks).  Grievance  redress  will  use  existing  formal  and  informal  grievance  mechanisms, 
strengthened or supplemented as needed with project-specific arrangements, and will be proportionate 
to the risks and impacts of the project. Although IFAD normally addresses risks primarily through its 
enhanced  quality  enhancement/quality  assurance  process  and  by  means  of  project  implementation 
support,  it  remains  committed  to:  (i)  working  proactively  with  the  affected  parties  to  resolve 
complaints;  (ii)  ensuring  that  the  complaints  procedure  and  project-level  grievance  mechanism  are 
easily accessible to affected persons, culturally appropriate, responsive and operates effectively; and 
(iii) maintaining records of all complaints and their resolutions.  
Communities  and  individuals  who  believe  that  they  are  adversely  affected  by  the  project  may  also 
submit  complaints  through  IFAD’s  Complaints  Procedure.  For  information  on  how  to  submit 
complaints  to  IFAD,  please  visit  https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-complaints-
procedure.  Communities  Complaints  on  SEA  can  also  be  sent  to  IFAD  using  the  link 
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/ethics). 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 92 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
13 Chance Finds  
Any  Proposed  project  activities  within  the  scope  of  the  proposed  Program,  that  will  impact  the 
cultural resources are not eligible for funding (Refer to Annex 1). In case of any possibility of chance 
find of physical cultural resources, most notably during excavation as part of construction activity the 
contractor should report to the responsible institutions for further guidance.  
Such physical cultural resources may take the form of work of art, building structures, graves or other 
sites of importance, including sites of archaeological, historical or religious significance. 
All chance finds of such physical cultural resources will lead to temporary suspension of all activity 
that  will  adversely  impact  the  cultural  resource.  Contracts  will  include  detailed  procedures  for 
ensuring the protection of the cultural resources, including cessation of activities until the significance 
of the find has been determined and until appropriate mitigating measures has been implemented. This   
contains standard provisions to be annexed to contracts that potentially will lead to chance finds of 
physical  cultural resources,  as required.  Refer annex 6  for the  details  of  how to  handle the  issue  of 
chance finds 
The  attachments  outlined  below  will  be  annexed  to  the  contract  in  case  there  is  the  possibility  of 
chance find of physical cultural resources (refer annex 6 ) . 
Attachment to contracts in case of potential chance find of physical cultural resources 
  Excavation  in  sites  of  known  archaeological  interest  should  be  avoided  as  stated  in  annex  1 
since; such project activities are not eligible for funding. Where historical remains, antiquity or any 
other  object  of  cultural,  historical  or  archaeological  importance  (including  graveyards)  are 
unexpectedly  discovered  during  construction  in  an  area  not  previously  known  for  its 
archaeological interest, the following procedures should be applied:  
a)  Stop the construction activities in the area of the chance find. 
b)  Delineate the discovered area. 
c)  Secure  the  area  to  prevent  any  damage  or  loss  of  removable  objects.    In  cases  of  removable 
antiquities  or  sensitive  remains,  a  night  guard  shall  be  present  until  the  responsible  Regional 
authorities and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism take over. 
d)  Notify  to  DBE  and  the  respective  relevant  institutions  to  contact  the  responsible  local 
authorities and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism immediately (less than 24 hours). 
e)  The Ministry  of  Culture  and  Tourism  will  be in  charge  of  protecting  and  preserving  the  area 
until deciding on the proper procedures to be carried out. This might require an evaluation of 
the  findings  to  be  performed  by  the  archaeologists  of  the  relevant  Ministry  Culture,  and 
Tourism  (within  1  week).  The  evaluation  of  the  findings  will  take  in  consideration  various 
criteria  relevant  to  cultural  heritage,  including  the  aesthetic,  historic,  scientific  or  research, 
social and economic values as decided by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. 
f)  Decisions  on  how  to  handle  the  finding  are  taken  by  the  responsible  authorities  and  the 
Ministry of Culture and Tourism (within 2 weeks). This could include changes in the location 
of  the  Proposed  project  activity  layout  (such  as  when  the  finding  is  irremovable  remains  of 
cultural or archaeological importance), conservation, preservation, restoration and salvage. 
g)  Construction  or  rehabilitation  work  will  resume  only  after  authorization  is  provided  by  the 
responsible local authorities and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism concerning the safeguard 
of the heritage. 
h)  Authorization  to  resume  work  shall  be  communicated  to  the  contractor    in  writing  by  the 
Ministry of Culture and Tourism. 
In case of delays incurred indirect relation to any physical cultural resources findings not stipulated in 
the  contract  (and  affecting  the  overall  schedule  of  works),  the  contractor/masons  may  apply  for  an 
extension of time. However, the contractor/masons will not be entitled to any kind of compensation or 
claim  other  than  what  is  directly  related  to  the  execution  of  the  physical  cultural  resources  findings 
works and protections. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 93 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
References 
Addis  Ababa  City  Administration  (no  date),  Finance  and  Economy  Development  Bureau,  Addis  Ababa 
Socio-Economic Profile, Addis Ababa 
CSA  (August  2013),  Population  Projection  of  Ethiopia  for  All  Regions  at  Woreda  Level  from  201  –2017, 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa  
FDRE (1995), Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa 
FDRE  (2002),  A  Proclamation  Provided  for  the  Establishment  of  Environmental  Protection  Organs 
(Proclamation No. 295/2002), Addis Ababa. 
FDRE (2002), Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation (Proclamation No. 299/2002), Addis Aabeba 
FDRE (2002), Environmental Pollution Control Proclamation (Proclamation No. 300/2002), Addis Ababa 
FDRE  (2005),  Proclamation  to  Provide  for  the  Expropriation  of  Land  Holdings  for  Public  Purposes  and 
Payment of Compensation (Proclamation No. 455/2005), Addis Ababa. 
FDRE (2011), Ethiopia’s Climate-Resilient Green Economy Strategy, Addis Ababa 
FDRE  (January  2003),  Guideline  Series  Documents  For  Reviewing  Environmental  Impact  Study  Reports, 
Environmental Protection Authority Addis Ababa. 
Ministry  of  Natural  Resources  Development  and  Environmental  Protection,  (October,  1994),  Natural 
Resources  Development  and  Environmental  Protection  Strategy  and  Major  Programs,  National 
Conservation Strategy Secretariat, Addis Ababa 
MOFED and EPA (1997), Environmental Policy of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa 
National  Planning  Commission  (December  2015),  Growth  and  Transformation  Plan  II,  Main  Document, 
Addis Ababa, (in Amharic) 
https://advocacy4oromia.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/an-overview-of-oromias-tourism-resources.pdf,[An 
Overview of Oromia’s Tourism Resources] 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 94 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 12: List of Proposed project activities that are not eligible for IFAD Funding 
ANNEXES 
Proposed project activities that are not eligible for funding 
Project activities that will block the access to water points and grazing etc. used by others 
Project activities that will necessitate relocation and   resettlement 
Project activities that will cause encroachment to, and adversely affect, important natural habitats  
( e.g., wildlife reserves; parks or sanctuaries; protected areas;  natural habitat areas, forests and forest reserves, 
wetlands, national parks or game reserve; any other ecologically/environmentally sensitive areas) 
Project activities that will impact on physical cultural resources (archaeological sites; religious monuments or 
structures; natural sites with cultural values; cemeteries; graveyards; graves; and  other sites of significance) 
Project activities that will be located in protected areas and ecologically sensitive sites 
Project activities that would not disadvantage  to community members. 
Project activities that will contravene international and regional conventions on environmental and social 
issues 
Project activities that will contravene international conventions such as child labour  and forced labour 
Project activities that cause large-scale physical disturbance of the site or the surroundings 
Annex 13: Environmental and Social Screening Checklists  
This section outlines the selection criteria and associated Environmental and Social Assessment procedures to 
be applied when screening Project activities under RUFIP III. 
Annex 2.1: Information for screening potential safeguards impacts 
I. Basic Data: 
Name of the Program: 
Name of the proposed project activity: 
Name of the Beneficiary: 
Address: 
Civil Works to be constructed: 
Proposed Date for Commencement of Work: 
DBE/MFI Team Representative and Address: 
Site Selection: 
II. Site Description 
Site Features 
Description 
Physical description of the site 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 95 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Proximity  to  existing  water  points,  wells  and  other 
water resources 
Presence and type of vegetation 
What is the current land use? 
Who identified the site? 
Who is the owner or user of the land? 
Who occupies the land? 
Completeness of the Application: 
Does the application document contain, as appropriate, the following information? 
Issues to be considered 
Yes  No  N/A 
Description of the proposed  project activity and where it is located 
Reasons for proposing the project activity 
The estimated cost of implementation  
Information about how the site was chosen, and what alternatives were considered 
A  map  or  drawing  showing  the  location  and  boundary  of  the  Proposed  project  activity  
including any land required temporarily during construction 
The  plan  for  any  physical  works  (e.g.  layout,  buildings,  other  structures,  construction 
materials) 
Any new access arrangements or changes to existing road layouts 
Any land that needs to be acquired, as well as who owns it, lives on it or has rights to use it 
A work program for construction, operation and decommissioning the physical works, as well 
as any site restoration needed afterwards 
Construction methods 
Resources to be used in construction and operation (e.g. materials, water, energy) 
Information  about  measures  included  in  the  Proposed  project  activity  plan  to  avoid  or 
minimize adverse environmental and social impacts 
Details of any permits required for the proposed project activity 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 96 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 2.2: Eligibility checklist for DBE or MFI at the National/Regional/Woreda/Kebele level  
Name of the Program:  
Name of the Project activity: 
Location of the subproject: Region: _____________ 
Kebele:______________ 
Person(s) who did the eligibility checklist 
          Name                                         Organization 
1. 
2. 
Zone: _____________Woreda: _____________ 
Signature                                           Date 
Answer the following questions to determine whether the Proposed project activity is eligible or not* 
Will the subproject 
Yes 
No 
cause large-scale physical disturbance on (e.g.  irrigation schemes  of more than 100 ha is 
regarded as high risk according to IFAD guideline and are therefore eligible and schemes 
above 3000 ha requires full EIA)  
block the access to or use of water points etc. used by others 
located in or adjacent to protected area, critical habitat   and other ecologically sensitive 
ecosystems 
create encroachment and/or cause significant adverse impacts to critical natural habitats 
(e.g., wildlife reserves; parks or sanctuaries; protected areas; forests and forest reserves, 
wetlands, national parks or game reserve; any other ecologically/environmentally 
sensitive areas) 
significant impact on physical cultural resources (archaeological sites; religious 
monuments or structures; natural sites with cultural values; cemeteries; graveyards; 
graves; and other sites of significance) 
Have risk on and/or exclude some members of a community, including vulnerable and 
minority groups 
Contravene international and regional conventions on environmental and social issues  
*  This  simple  checklist  can  be  used  by  DBE/MFI  as  a  format  for  fast  track  eligibility  checking  of  identified 
program activities  
Eligibility Recommendations:  
It should be noted that if your answer is “YES” to any of the questions above, your Proposed project activity is 
not  eligible  and  has  to  be  rejected  unless  the  features  can  be  avoided  by  change  of  design  and/or  other 
appropriate mitigation measures. 
Proposed project activity is eligible and approved:  
Proposed project activity is not eligible and rejected, and requires further action:  
Screening supervised and approved by: 
       Name 
 Position  
Signature 
Date: 
1.  ___________ 
______________ ___________ 
      _____________ 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 97 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 2.3. Screening checklist for environmental and social concerns needing special attention 
Name of the Program:  
Name of the subproject: 
Location of the subproject: Region: _____________ 
Kebele:______________ 
Person(s) who did the eligibility checklist 
          Name                                         Organization 
1. 
2. 
Zone: _____________Woreda: _____________ 
    Signature                                      Date 
A.  Environmental and social concern of the proposed project activity 
Feature of environmental and social concern: Will the subproject 
Yes 
No 
Comments 
Involves land acquisition, or loss of assets, or access to assets on the land  
Have chemical wastes, disposal and pollution issues 
Displace individuals, families or businesses 
Encroach any sensitive area, like wetlands, national parks 
Located in or near an area where there is an important historical, 
archaeological or cultural heritage site 
Have risk of causing the contamination of drinking water 
If  the  Proposed  project  activity    have  any  of  the  above  features  (‘Yes’  answers),  the  concerned  focal 
person/expert, within the DBE/MFIs in collaboration with those concerned  notifies the   Regional and  Woreda 
Environmental  offices  to  make  sure  that  the  necessary  procedures  and  guidelines  are  followed  and  relevant 
documents  prepared.  In  addition,  the  proposed  project  activities  have  to  be  screened  for  any  potential 
environmental and social concern as per the checklist given below  
Recommendations 
Proposed project activity needs special attention:  
Proposed project activity does not need special attention:   
Additional comments 
Screening supervised and approved by: 
       Name 
 Position  
Signature 
Date: 
1___________  ______________ ___________ 
      _________ 
B.  Checklist  for  environmental  and  social  impact  rating  for  Proposed  project  activities  of 
environmental and social concerns.  
Impact rating will be considered both in terms of consequence of impacts and probability of impacts so as to 
avoid subjective impact analysis.  
No. 
A 
Type of activity – Will the proposed project 
activity : 
If Yes, Rate of Impacts 
None  Low  Medium  High  Unkn
own 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 98 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Build or rehabilitate any rural roads? 
Build or rehabilitate any electric energy system? 
Build or rehabilitate any structures or buildings? 
Support agricultural activities? 
Be  located  in  or  near  an  area  where  there  is  an 
important  historical,  archaeological  or  cultural 
heritage site? 
Be  located  within  or  adjacent  to  any  areas  that  are 
or  may  be  protected  by  government  (e.g.  national 
park, national reserve,  world  heritage site) or local 
tradition, or that might be a natural habitat? 
Depend  on  water  supply  from  existing  reservoirs, 
weir, or other water diversion structure? 
B 
Environment – Will the Proposed project 
activity:  
If Yes, Rate of Impacts 
None  Low  Medium  High  Unkn
own 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Have risk of causing the contamination of drinking 
water? 
Cause poor water drainage and increase the risk of 
water-related diseases such as malaria or bilharzias? 
located  within  or  nearby  environmentally 
forests, 
Be 
sensitive  areas 
(e.g. 
mangroves, wetlands) or threatened species? 
intact  natural 
Create  a  risk  of  increased  soil  degradation  or 
erosion? 
Produce,  or  increase  the  production  of,  solid  or 
liquid wastes (e.g. water, medical,  and domestic or 
construction wastes)? 
Affect the quantity or quality of surface waters (e.g. 
rivers,  streams,  wetlands),  or  groundwater  (e.g. 
wells)? 
Result in the production of solid or liquid waste, or 
result  in  an  increase  in  waste  production,  during 
construction or operation? 
C 
Environment – Will the proposed project 
activity : 
If Yes, Rate of Impacts 
None  Low  Medium  High  Unkn
own 
15 
16 
Require  that  land  (public  or  private)  be  acquired 
(temporarily or permanently) for its development? 
Use  land  that  is  currently  occupied  or  regularly 
used  for  productive  purposes  (e.g.  gardening, 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 99 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
17 
18 
19 
farming, pasture, fishing locations, forests) 
Displace individuals, families or businesses? 
Result in the temporary or permanent loss of crops, 
fruit  trees  or  household  infrastructure  such  as 
granaries, outside toilets and kitchens? 
Result in the involuntary restriction of access by 
people to legally designated parks and protected 
areas?  
When considering the location of a proposed project activity, rate the sensitivity of the proposed site is as shown 
in  the  following  table  according  to  the  given  criteria.  Higher  ratings  do  not  necessarily  mean  that  a  site  is 
unsuitable. They do indicate a real risk of causing undesirable adverse environmental and social effects, and that 
more substantial environmental and/or social planning may be required to adequately avoid, mitigate or manage 
potential effects. The following table should be used as a reference.  
 Summary of site sensitivity   
Issues 
Sensitive 
Natural  habitats 
(Wetland, 
national parks)  
quality 
water 
Water 
and 
resource 
availability  and 
use 
Site Sensitivity 
Low 
Medium 
High 
natural 
habitats 
No 
present  of  any  kind,  No 
critical 
spot 
biodiversity  area,  fragile 
ecosystem 
hot 
No  critical  natural 
habitats; other natural 
habitats occur 
Presence of critical natural habitats 
present. hot spot biodiversity area, 
fragile ecosystem with in declared 
protected area  
Water  flows  exceed  any 
existing  demand; 
low 
intensity  of  water  use; 
use 
potential  water 
conflicts  expected  to  be 
low;  no  potential  water 
quality issues 
Medium  intensity  of 
water  use;  multiple 
water  users;  water 
are 
quality 
important 
issues 
Intensive  water  use;  multiple  water 
users; potential for conflicts is high; 
water  quality  issues  are  important 
Intensive  water  use;  multiple  water 
users; potential for conflicts is high; 
water quality issues are important     
Natural  hazards 
vulnerability, 
floods, 
soil 
stability/ erosion 
Flat  terrain;  no  potential 
stability/erosion 
problems;  no  known 
flood 
volcanic/seismic/ 
risks 
Cultural 
property 
Physical cultural 
resources   
No  known  or  suspected 
cultural heritage sites 
slopes; 
Medium 
some 
erosion 
potential;  medium 
from 
risks 
volcanic/seismic/ 
flood/ hurricanes 
cultural 
Suspected 
heritage  sites;  known 
in 
heritage 
broader 
of 
influence 
sites 
area 
Mountainous  terrain;  steep  slopes; 
unstable 
erosion 
potential; volcanic, seismic or flood 
risks 
soils; 
high 
Known heritage sites in project area 
Involuntary 
resettlement    
No economic or physical 
displacement    
 If  it  displaces  less 
than 200 people   
If  it  displaces  greater  than  200 
people     
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 100 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Issues 
Site Sensitivity 
Low 
Medium 
High 
 Land 
acquisition   
 No land acquisition    
 If  the  activity  takes 
less 
than  20%  of 
households land    
If the activity takes more than 20% 
of households land    
Summary of assessment (based on field visit):  
Environmental Category (B or C) of the  Proposed project activities(with justification): 
___________________________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________ 
Recommendation  
        The Proposed project activity can be considered for approval.  The application is complete, all significant 
environmental and social issues are resolved, and no further planning of  proposed project activity  is 
required: Approved without condition (Project activity is not of environmental and social concern  and is  
ready for  approved)       
           Safeguards instrument(s) required: Partial ESIA, ESMP or others (please specify)   
           ESMP required: 
               Rejected; reasons for rejection: 
           Others (specify):       
           A field appraisal is required. 
CERTIFICATION 
I/We certify that I/we have thoroughly examined all the potential adverse effects of  these project activities. To 
the best of our knowledge, the proposed project activity  as described in the application and associated planning 
reports (e.g. ESMP, RAP/ARAP,), if any, will be adequate to avoid or minimize all adverse environmental and 
social impacts. 
A Field Appraisal report will be completed and added to the file. 
Name of desk appraisal officer (print): …………………………………………………………... 
Signature: …………………………Date: ……………………………… 
Woreda Environmental offices representative  
Name: ………………………………………………………….. 
Position: ………………………………………………………… 
Signature: …………………………………………………… 
Date: ………………………………………………… 
Desk Appraisal by Review Authority: ……………………………………………. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 101 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Note:  A field appraisal must be carried out if the Proposed project activities: 
  Needs to acquire land, or an individual or community’s access to land or available resources is restricted 
or lost, or any individual or family is displaced; 
  May restrict the use of resources in a park or protected area by people living inside or outside of it; 
  May affect a protected area or a critical natural habitat; 
  May encroach onto an important natural habitat,  or have an impact on ecologically sensitive ecosystems 
(e.g. rivers, streams, wetlands); 
  May adversely affect or benefit an underserved and vulnerable people; 
 
 
Involves or introduces the use of pesticides; 
Involves, or results in: a) diversion or use of surface waters; b) construction or rehabilitation of latrines, 
septic  or  sewage  systems;  c)  production  of  waste  (e.g.  slaughterhouse  waste,  medical  waste);  d)  new  or 
rebuilt irrigation or drainage systems; or e) weirs, reservoirs or water points; and, 
  Any others to be clarified/checked at the Proposed site (please mention them). 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 102 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 14: Suggested Environmental and Social Field Appraisal Form  
Name of the Program: 
Name of the proposed Project Activity: 
Application Number:  
Part 1: Identification 
1. Name: (……………….) 
2. Location: (…………………) 
3. Reason for Field Appraisal:  
4. Date(s) of Field Appraisal: 
5. Field Appraisal Officer and Address: 
6. Extension Team Representative and Address: 
7. Community Representative and Address: 
Part 2: Description of the Proposed Project Activity 
8. Details: 
__________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________ 
Part 3: Environmental and Social issues 
9. Will the Proposed project activity: 
No 
  Need to acquire land? 
Yes     
  Affect an individual or the community's access to land or available resources?  
  Displace or result in the involuntary resettlement of an individual or family? 
If "Yes", tick one of the following boxes: 
  The  Resettlement  Action  Plan  (RAP/ARAP)  included  in  the  allocation  is  adequate.  No  further  action 
required.  
  The  RAP/ARAP  included  in  the  application  must  be  improved  before  the  application  can  be  considered 
further.  
  An RAP/ARAP must be prepared and approved before the application can be considered further. 
10. Will the subproject: 
Yes  
No 
* Encroach onto an important natural habitat? 
* Negatively affect ecologically sensitive ecosystems? 
If "Yes", tick one of the following boxes: 
  The  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP)  included  in  the  application  is  adequate.  No 
further action required. 
  The ESMP included in the application must be improved before the application can be considered further. 
  An ESMP must be prepared and approved before the application can be considered further. 
11. Will this proposed project activity involve or result in:   
       Yes                No 
  Diversion or use of surface waters? 
  Production of waste? 
  New or rebuilt irrigation or drainage systems? 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 103 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
If "Yes", tick one of the following boxes: 
  The  application  describes  suitable  measures  for  managing  the  potential  adverse  environmental  effects  of 
these activities. No further action required. 
  The  application  does  not  describe  suitable  measures  for  managing  the  potential  adverse  environmental 
effects  of  these  activities.  An  ESMP  must  be  prepared  and  approved  before  the  application  is  considered 
further. 
12. Will this Proposed project activity impact on   water supplied from an existing reservoirs or weir?  
                                        Yes                   No 
If "Yes", tick one of the following boxes: 
  The application demonstrates that a dam safety report has been prepared, the dam  is safe, and no remedial 
work is required. No further action is required. 
  The application does not demonstrate that a dam safety report has been prepared, the dam is safe, and no 
remedial  work  is  required.  A  dam  safety  report  must  be  prepared  and  approved  before  the  application  is 
considered further. 
15. Are there any other environmental or social issues that have not been adequately addressed?  
If "Yes", summarize them: 
......................................................................................................................................................... 
And tick one of the following boxes: 
Yes  
                   No 
  Before  it  is  considered  further,  the  application  needs  to  be  amended  to  include  suitable  measures  for 
addressing these environmental or social issues. 
  An ESMP needs to be prepared and approved before the application is considered further. 
Part 4: Field Appraisal Decision 
  The Proposed project activity can be considered for approval. Based on a site visit and consultations with 
both  interested  and  affected  parties,  the  field  appraisal  determined  that  the  community  and  its  proposed 
project adequately address environmental and/or social issues as required by the ESMF. 
 
 If the field appraisal identify environmental and/or social issues have not been adequately addressed, then 
recommendation will be made to amend the application.  
  All  required  documentation  such  as  an  amended  application,  ESMP,  RAP/ARAP,  will  be  added  to  the 
proposed project activity file for further consideration. 
Name of field appraisal officer (print): ..................................................................... 
Signature: ................................................Date: …………………………………… 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 104 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 15: Guideline for the preparation of site specific ESMP 
ESMPs should demonstrate that proposed environmental and social management and monitoring activities will 
encompass all major impacts and how they will be integrated into supervision. The ESMP should also describe 
proposed measures, methods, and actions to facilitate public consultation. It is important that the ESMP identify 
linkages to other  social and environmental safeguards plans relating  to the  proposed project  activities  such as 
plans  dealing  with  resettlement  issues.  ESMPs  should  be  finalized  and  approved  after  taking  into  account 
comments from Woreda Environmental offices. The IFAD safeguards team will review and provide comments 
on  draft  site-specific  instruments  (if  required)  and  monitor  the  safeguards  compliance.  Given  below  are  the 
important elements that constitute an ESMP: 
i)  Description of the subproject: Scale nature and type of proposed project activity implemented under the 
proposed programs are summarized. 
ii)  Description of Proposed project area: The Biophysical and social environmental setting of the specific 
Proposed project activity  are summarized  
iii)  Impacts:  Predicted  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts  (and  any  uncertainties  about  their  effects) 
for which mitigation is necessary should be identified and summarized. 
iv)  Description  of  Mitigation  Measures:  Each  measure  should  be  briefly  described  in  relation  to  the 
impact(s) and conditions under which it is required. These should be accompanied by and/or referenced to 
designs,  development  activities,  operating  procedures,  and  implementation  responsibilities.  Proposed 
measures and actions to facilitate  public consultations should be clearly described and justified.  Feasible 
and  cost-effective  measures  to  minimize  adverse  impacts  to  acceptable  levels  should  be  specified  with 
reference  to  each  impact  identified.  Further,  the  ESMP  should  provide  details  on  the  conditions  under 
which  the  mitigation  measure  should  be  implemented.  The  ESMP  should  also  indicate  the  various 
practicable  measures  applicable  to  the  proposed  project  activity  at  each  project  phases  (design, 
construction and/or operation). Efforts should also be made to mainstream environmental aspects wherever 
possible. 
v)  Description of monitoring program: The ESMP identifies monitoring objectives and specifies the  type 
of monitoring required; it also describes performance indicators which provide linkages between impacts 
and  mitigation  measures  identified  in  the  ESA  report,  parameters  to  be  measured  (for  example:  national 
standards,  extent  of  impacted  area  to  be  considered,  etc.),  methods  to  be  used,  sampling  location  and 
frequency  of  measurements,  and  definition  of  thresholds  to  signal  the  need  for  corrective  actions. 
Monitoring  and  supervision  arrangements  should  be  agreed  by  IFAD  and  the  client  to  ensure  timely 
detection of conditions requiring remedial measures in keeping with best practice; provide information and 
the  progress  and  results  of  mitigation  and  institutional  strengthening  measures;  and,  assess  compliance 
with National and IFAD environmental safeguard policies  
vi)  Institutional  arrangements:  Institutions  responsible  for  implementing  mitigation  measures  and  for 
monitoring their performance should be clearly identified. Where necessary, mechanisms for institutional 
coordination should be identified, as often,  monitoring tends to involve more than one institution. This is 
especially  important  for  requiring  cross-sectoral  integration.  In  particular,  the  ESMP  specifies  who  is 
responsible  for  undertaking  the  mitigation  and  monitoring  measures,  e.g.,  for  enforcement  of  remedial 
actions,  monitoring  of  implementation,  training,  financing,  and  reporting.  Institutional  arrangements 
should also be crafted to maintain support for agreed enforcement measures for environmental protection. 
Where  necessary, the ESMP  should propose  strengthening the relevant agencies through  such actions  as 
establishment of appropriate organizational arrangements; appointment of key staff and consultants. 
vii)  Implementing  schedules:  The  timing,  frequency  and  duration  of  mitigation  measures  and  monitoring 
should be included in an implementation schedule, showing phasing and coordination with procedures in 
the  overall  implementation/operations  manual.  Linkages  should  be  specified  where  implementation  of 
mitigation measures is tied to institutional strengthening and to the legal agreements. 
viii)  Reporting  procedures:  Feedback  mechanisms  to  inform  the  relevant  parties  on  the  progress  and 
effectiveness of the mitigation measures and monitoring itself should be specified. Guidelines on the type 
of information required and the presentation of feedback information should also be highlighted. 
ix)  Cost  estimates  and  sources  of  funds:  Implementation  of  mitigation  measures  mentioned  in  the  ESMP 
will involve an initial investment cost as well as recurrent costs. The ESMP should include cost estimates 
into  the  design,  bidding  and  contract  documents  to  ensure  that  the  contractors  will  comply  with  the 
mitigation measures. The costs for implementing the ESMP will be included in the design, as well as in the 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 105 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
bidding and contract documents. It is important to capture all costs – including administrative, design and 
consultancy,  and  operational  and  maintenance  costs  –  resulting  from  meeting  required  standards  or 
modifying design. 
For  each  potential  impacts  of  the  proposed  project  activity,  corresponding  mitigation  measures,  and  who  is 
responsible  for  implementation  is  indicated.  For  each  potential  environmental  and  social  impact,  there  can  be 
more than one mitigation measure. Responsibility for implementation of mitigation measures will typically rest 
with the contractor or beneficiary during construction and operation of the proposed activities. 
The monitoring section of the ESMP prescribes indicators for monitoring the environmental and social impact 
and  the  effects  of  mitigation  measures.  The  responsibility  for  this  will  typically  rest  with  the  DBE  in 
collaboration with the respective pertinent institutions. A template for ESMP is depicted in annex 5. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 106 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 16: Suggested Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) Template for the proposed 
project activities 
identification  
Name  
Region 
Zone 
Wereda 
Kebele/community 
Location GPS coordinates 
Description of the Proposed project activity 
Description of potential environmental and social impacts;  
Description  of  planned  mitigation  measures  and  monitoring  along  with  institutional  responsibilities  and 
capacity/training requirements 
Environmental and Social Management Plan-Mitigation 
Project Phase 
Project activity  Environmental Impacts  Mitigation/ 
enhancement 
measures 
Institutional 
responsibilitie
s 
Cost  
Pre-construction 
Construction 
Operation 
maintenance 
and 
Total mitigation costs 
Environmental and Social Management Plan-Monitoring 
Project Phase 
Mitigation 
measures 
Parameters 
to be 
monitored 
location 
measurem
ents 
freque
ncy 
Cost 
Institutional 
responsibilit
ies 
Pre-construction/ 
activities 
Construction/ 
activities 
Operation 
maintenance/ 
activities 
and 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 107 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Total monitoring costs 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 108 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 17: Procedures for Chance Find of Physical Cultural Resources 
 Any  Proposed  project  activities  within  the  scope  of  the  proposed  Program,  that  will  impact  the  cultural 
resources are not eligible for funding (Refer to Annex 1). In case of any possibility of chance find of physical 
cultural resources, most notably during excavation as part of construction activity the contractor should report to 
the responsible institutions for further guidance.  
Such physical cultural resources may take the form of work of art, building structures, graves or other sites of 
importance, including sites of archaeological, historical or religious significance. 
All chance finds of such physical  cultural resources  will lead to temporary  suspension  of all activity that  will 
adversely  impact  the  cultural  resource.  Contracts/Masons  will  include  detailed  procedures  for  ensuring  the 
protection of the cultural resources, including cessation of activities until the significance of the find has been 
determined  and  until  appropriate  mitigating  measures  has  been  implemented.  This  Annex    contains  standard 
provisions to be annexed to contracts that potentially will lead to chance finds of physical cultural resources, as 
required. 
The attachments outlined below will be annexed to the contract in case there is the possibility of chance find of 
physical cultural resources.  
Attachment to contracts in case of potential chance find of physical cultural resources 
If the Contractor discovers archaeological sites, historical sites, remains and objects, including graveyards 
and/or individual graves during excavation or construction, the Contractor/Masons shall: 
1:  Excavation  in  sites  of  known  archaeological  interest  should  be  avoided    as  stated  in  annex  1  since  , such  
project  activities  are  not  eligible  for  funding.  Where  historical  remains,  antiquity  or  any  other  object  of 
cultural, historical or archaeological importance (including graveyards) are unexpectedly discovered during 
construction in an area not previously known for its archaeological interest, the following procedures should 
be applied:  
i)  Stop the construction activities in the area of the chance find. 
j)  Delineate the discovered area. 
k)  Secure the area to prevent any damage or loss of removable objects.  In cases of removable antiquities or 
sensitive  remains,  a  night  guard  shall  be  present  until  the  responsible  Regional  authorities  and  the 
Ministry of Culture and Tourism take over. 
l)  Notify to DBE and the respective relevant institutions to contact the responsible local authorities and the 
Ministry of Culture and Tourism immediately (less than 24 hours). 
m) The  Ministry  of  Culture  and  Tourism  will  be  in  charge  of  protecting  and  preserving  the  area  until 
deciding on the proper procedures to be carried out. This might require an evaluation of the findings to be 
performed  by  the  archaeologists  of  the  relevant  Ministry  Culture,  and  Tourism  (within  1  week).  The 
evaluation  of  the  findings  will  take  in  consideration  various  criteria  relevant  to  cultural  heritage, 
including  the  aesthetic,  historic,  scientific  or  research,  social  and  economic  values  as  decided  by  the 
Ministry of Culture and Tourism. 
n)  Decisions  on  how  to  handle  the  finding  are  taken  by  the  responsible  authorities  and  the  Ministry  of 
Culture and Tourism (within 2 weeks). This could include changes in the location of the Proposed project 
activity  layout  (such  as  when  the  finding  is  irremovable  remains  of  cultural  or  archaeological 
importance), conservation, preservation, restoration and salvage. 
o)  Construction or rehabilitation  work  will resume only after  authorization is provided by  the  responsible 
local authorities and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism concerning the safeguard of the heritage. 
p)  Authorization  to  resume  work  shall  be  communicated  to  the  contractor    in  writing  by  the  Ministry  of 
Culture and Tourism. 
2:  In  case  of  delays  incurred  indirect  relation  to  any  physical  cultural  resources  findings  not  stipulated  in  the 
contract (and affecting the overall schedule of works), the contractor/masons  may apply for an extension of 
time.  However,  the  contractor/masons  will  not  be  entitled  to any  kind of compensation or claim  other  than 
what is directly related to the execution of the physical cultural resources findings works and protections. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 109 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 18: Guidelines for Annual Reviews 
Objectives: 
The objectives of annual reviews of ESMF implementation are two-fold: 
a)  To  assess  the  program  performance  in  complying  with  ESMF  procedures,  learn  lessons,  and  improve 
future performance; and, 
b)  To assess the occurrence of, and potential for, cumulative impacts of the proposed project activities 
The  program  management  is  expected  to  use  the  annual  reviews  to  improve  on  procedures  and  capacity  for 
integrating natural resources and environmental/social management into proposed program operations.  
Scope of Work:  
ESMF Performance Assessment  
The overall scope of the performance assessment work is to: 
a)  Assess the adequacy of the  process and procedures based on interviews with Project participants, Project 
records, and the environmental and social performance of a sample of approved project activities;  
b)  Assess the adequacy of ESMF roles and responsibilities, procedures, forms, information resource materials, 
etc.; 
c)  Assess the needs for further training and capacity building; 
d) 
Identify key risks to the environmental and social sustainability of the proposed project activities; and, 
e)  Recommend appropriate measures for improving ESMF performance. 
The following tasks will be typical: 
a)  Review  national,  regional  and  Woreda  records  of  proposed  project  preparation  and  approval  (e.g. 
applications; management in the region and Wereda; screening checklists; EMPs, appraisal forms; approval 
documents),  as  well  as  related  studies  or  reports  on  wider  issues  of  natural  resources  and  environmental 
management in the country; 
b)  On the basis of this review, conduct field visits to assess the completeness of planning and implementation 
work,  the  adequacy  of  environmental/social  design,  and  compliance  with  proposed  mitigation  measures. 
The sample  should be large enough to be  representative and include  a  substantial proportion that  had (or 
should  have  had)  a  field  appraisal  according  to  established  ESMF  criteria.  Proposed  project  activities  in 
sensitive natural or social environments should especially be included; 
c) 
Interview national, regional and Woreda officials responsible for appraisal and approval to determine their 
experience with ESMF implementation, their views on the strengths and weaknesses of the ESMF process, 
and  what  should  be  done  to  improve  performance.  Improvements  may  concern,  for  example,  the  process 
itself,  the  available  tools  (e.g.  guidelines,  forms,  information  sheets),  the  extent  and  kind  of  training 
available, and the amount of financial resources available; and, 
d)  Develop recommendations for improving ESMF performance. 
Cumulative Impacts Assessment 
This part of the annual review assesses the actual or potential cumulative impacts of  proposed project activity 
with other development initiatives on the environment, natural resources and community groups, if  applicable. 
Cumulative impacts result from a number of individual small-scale activities that, on their own, have minimal 
impacts, but over time and in combination generate a significant impact. For example:  
a)  Decline in groundwater levels or quality due to the abstraction of waters from limited natural water sources 
or wells and the introduction of numerous other small scale  project activities affecting the available water 
potential in the area; 
b)  Overwhelmed or illegal waste and dumping sites due to the inappropriate disposal of increasing amounts of 
waste materials; and, 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 110 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
c)  Attraction  of  migrant  populations  to  communities  that  have  successfully  introduced  improved  social 
infrastructure (such as schools, health  facilities or water sources) resulting in depletion of resources (e.g., 
supplies, water), etc. 
The function of this assessment is primarily as an "early warning" system for potential cumulative impacts that 
might  otherwise  go  undetected  and  unattended  to.  It  will  be  largely  based  on  the  observations  of  people 
interviewed  during  the  fieldwork,  and  trends  that  may  be  noticed  by  regional  or  Woreda  officials.  Where 
cumulative  impacts  are  detected  or  suspected,  recommendations  will  be  made  to  address  the  issue,  perhaps 
through more detailed study to clarify matters and what should or can be done about them. 
Qualifications for Undertaking Annual Reviews: 
The annual reviews shall be undertaken by an  individual or small team, with experience relevant to the likely 
issues  to  be  encountered  (e.g.  environmental  and  natural  resources  management,  land  acquisition  and 
resettlement,  livelihood restoration). They should also be  familiar  with the  methods and practices of effective 
community  consultation,  and  with  typical  methods  and  processes  for  preparing,  appraising,  approving  and 
implementing small-scale community development projects. 
Timing:  
Annual  reviews  should  be  undertaken  after  the  annual  ESMF  report  has  been  prepared  and  before  IFAD 
supervision of  the Project,  at the  closing of each  year of the  programs. It is expected that each review  would 
require 3 to 4 weeks of work and that the review report would be completed within 2 weeks of completing the 
fieldwork. 
Outputs: 
The principal output is an annual review report that documents the review methodology, summarizes the results, 
and provides practical recommendations. Distinct sections should address; 
a) ESMF performance;  
b) Cumulative impacts; and,  
C) Measures to be taken. 
Annexes should provide the detailed results of the fieldwork, arid summarize the number of approved proposed 
project activities and their characteristics according to the annual report format.  
Copies  of  the  annual  review  report  should  be  delivered  to  the  Programs  management,  to  each  national  and 
regional office responsible for appraisal, approval and implementation of the proposed project activities, and to 
the IFAD. The project management (national or regional) may also want to host national or regional workshops 
to review and discuss the review findings and recommendations. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 111 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 19: Suggested Forms for ESMF Reporting, Training and Follow-up 
This  annex  contains  three  templates  to  be  used  in  conjunction  with  monitoring  and  reporting  and  follow  for 
ESMF implementation. 
ESMF reporting form 
Title  of  the 
Proposed 
project 
activity 
Application 
received (date) 
Field 
undertaken  
appraisal 
Application 
approved  
(date if undertaken) 
(date 
approved) 
if 
ESMP 
developed 
(yes or no) 
Written 
warnings 
violation 
ESMP 
(yes/no) 
of 
of 
issued 
find 
Chance 
procedures 
invoked  
(yes or no) 
ESMF training form 
Personnel 
No. of people trained 
Training received 
Safeguard specialist/officer 
Zonal focal points 
Woreda staff 
Community members etc. 
Follow up on previous recommendations 
Recommendation  Date of recommendation 
Action taken 
Recommendation 
implemented (yes/no) 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 112 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 20: Sample Terms of Reference (ToR) for ESIA Preparation  
Based  on  the  screening  and  scoping  results,  ESIA  terms  of  reference  will  be  prepared.  The  terms      of   
reference      will      have      the      following      contents.      Please  refer  to  the  Guideline  Series  Documents  for 
for  detail  information  on  contents  and 
Reviewing  Environmental  Impacts  Study  Reports  (EPA,  2003) 
descriptions of ESIA report (EPA, 2003). 
I. Objective of the TOR: This section should state the scope of the ESIA in relation to the screening category 
and  the  proposed  program  activities.  It  needs  to  stipulate  the  process  and  the  timing  of  the  ESIA 
preparation  and  implementation  stages  in  order  to  adequately  address  the  safeguards  requirements  of  the 
GoE and the IFAD. 
II.  Introduction  and  Context:  The  ToR  needs  to  provide  information  on  program  activity  objective,  the 
name of the program activity proponent, the rational for conducting the ESIA,  specific  components  of  the 
program  activity,  program  activity  area  with  location map,  short  briefing of  social  and environment of 
settings and applicable national and international safeguard policies. 
III. Location  of  the  study  area  and  likely  major  impacts:  State  the  area  involved  and  the boundaries of 
the  study  area  for  the  assessment.  Identify  adjacent  or  remote  areas  which  should    be    considered    with  
respect  to  impacts  of  particular  aspects  of  the  program activity. 
IV. Mission/Tasks:  The ESIA study team/consultant should clearly execute the following tasks. 
Task A:   Description of the proposed  program activity:   Describe the location, size and nature of the 
program  activity,  environmental  assessment  category,  brief  description  of  program    activity    alternatives,  
time   schedule   for  phasing  of   development   (i.e. preconstruction,  construction, operation/maintenance, 
decommissioning),  and  resources  (finance,  human,  material  and  technology)  required  for  the  program 
activity, among others. 
information/Biophysical  and 
the 
Task  B:  Baseline 
baseline/biophysical and socio-economic characteristics of the environment where the program activity will 
be implemented; and area of influence. Include information on any changes anticipated before the program 
activity commences. 
social-economic  description:  Describe 
Task  C:  Administrative  and  legal  Policy  framework:  In  addition    to    the  required  administrative  and 
institutional  setup  for  the  implementation  of  the  program  activity,  this  part  needs  to  identify  pertinent 
policies, regulations and guidelines pertinent to the study that include: 
  National laws and/or regulations on environmental and social assessments; 
  Regional environmental and social assessment regulations; 
  Environmental and social assessment regulations of any other financing organizations involved 
in the program activity; 
  Relevant international environmental and social agreements/conventions to which 
  Ethiopia is a party; and, 
 
IFAD safeguards policies. 
Task  D:  Identification  of  potential  impacts  of  the  program  activity: Identify  all  potential significant 
impacts that the program activity is likely to generate. Assess the impacts from changes brought about by 
the program activity on baseline environmental conditions as described under Task B. The analysis should 
address  both  the  positive  and  negative  impacts  of  the  program  activity.  Wherever  possible,  describe 
impacts quantitatively, in terms of environmental and social costs and benefits. 
Task E: Propose Program activity alternatives: Alternatives extend to site, design, technology selection, 
construction  techniques  and  phasing,  and  operating and  maintenance procedures.  Compare  alternatives in 
terms  of  potential  environmental  and  social  impacts;  capital  and  operating  costs;  suitability  under  local 
conditions; and institutional, training, and monitoring requirements. 
Task  F:  Preparation  of  an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP):  Describe  the 
mitigation  measures  for  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts,  staffing/institutional  and  training 
requirements,  schedules,  and  other  necessary  support  services  to  implement  the  mitigating  measures. 
Provide environmental and social protection clauses for application by contractors and consultants, if any. 
The  ToR  should  state  that  the  concerned  and  affected  parties  should  agree  on  the  proposed  mitigating 
measures before they are included in the ESMP. 
Task  G:  Monitoring  Plan:  This  organizes  a  comprehensive  plan  to  monitor  the  implementation  of 
mitigating  measures  and  the  impacts  of  the  program  activities.    It  should  also  address  an  estimate  of 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 113 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
capital  and  operating  costs  and  a  description  of  other  inputs  (such  as  training  and  institutional 
strengthening) needed to implement the plan. 
V.  Qualification  of  the  ESIA  study  team/Consultant:  The  ToR  should  provide  clear  guidance  on  the 
qualification of the ESIA study team. 
VI. Duration of the ESIA Study: This should be determined according to the type of the program activity. 
VII. Preparation of the final Report: The ESIA study team/consultant will produce the final report one 
week after receiving comments from program activity proponent and concerned stakeholders. The final 
report will include comments from these institutions. 
VIII.  Suggested  Contents  of  the  ESIA  Report:  Please  refer  to  the  “Guideline  Series  Documents  for 
Reviewing Environmental Impacts Study Reports” (EPA, 2003) to get detail information on the  contents  of 
ESIA report (EPA,  2003).  The contents of  the  ESIA report should  contain the following elements. 
  Executive Summary; 
  Introduction; 
  Methodology; 
  Administrative, legal and policy requirements; 
  Description  of  program  activity  (need,  objectives,  technical  details,  size,  location  input  and 
other relevant requirements); 
  An outline of the main development alternatives; 
  Description of baseline information/environmental and socio-economic conditions; 
  An  account  of  the  prediction  and  assessment  of  each  impact  at  all  stages  of  the  program 
activity cycle for each alternative; 
  Description of  the  methodology  and techniques used in assessment and analysis of  the program 
activity impacts; 
  Description of environmental and social impacts for program activity; 
  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP)  for  the  project  including  the  proposed 
mitigation measures; 
Institutional responsibilities for monitoring and implementation; Summarized table for ESMP; 
 
  Conclusions and recommendations; 
  References; and, 
  Annexes: 
  List of Persons/Institutions met; 
  List of the ESIA study team members; and, 
  Minutes of consultations. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 114 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 21: Grievance Redress Mechanism 
IFAD  has  introduced  a  Grievance  Redress  Service  (GRS)  requiring  the  Borrower  to  provide  a  grievance 
mechanism, process, or procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of stakeholders’ concerns and grievances 
arising in connection with the project and the Borrower’s environmental and social performance.  
According  to  the  GRS  project-affected  communities  and  individuals  may  submit  complaints  regarding  IFAD 
financed  project  to  the  appropriate  local  grievance  mechanism,  or  the  IFAD’s  corporate  Grievance  Redress 
Service (GRS).  
The  table  depicted  below  shows  a  generic  grievance  redress  mechanism  that  can  be  applied  to  the  proposed 
project activities. 
Steps   Process  
Description  
1   
2   
3   
4   
5   
6   
7 
8 
Other information  
 Email 
hotline number   
address; 
Significance criteria 
Level  1  –one  off 
event;  Level  2–
is 
complaint 
widespread 
or 
repeated;  Level  3- 
any  complaint  (one 
off or repeated) that 
indicates  breach  of 
law or policy or this 
ESMF/RPF 
provisions 
Senior  management 
staff of DBE should 
sign   
Time 
frame  
 1 Day   
Identification  of 
grievance   
Face  to  face;  phone;  letter,  e-mail;  recorded 
during public/community interaction;   
Grievance 
assessed 
logged   
Significance assessed and grievance recorded 
or logged (i.e. in a log book)   
 4-7 
Days   
and 
Grievance 
acknowledged   
is 
 Acknowledgement  of  grievance 
appropriate medium   
through 
Development  of 
response   
  Grievance assigned to appropriate party for 
resolution  
  Response  development  with  input  from 
management/ relevant stakeholders 
Response  signed 
off   
Redress action approved at appropriate levels   
 7-14 
Days   
 4-7 
Days 
10-14 
Days   
 4-7 
Days   
Implementation 
and 
communication 
of response   
Complaints 
Response  
Redress  action  implemented  and  update  of 
progress  on  resolution  communicated 
to 
complainant   
 10-14 
Days   
Redress action recorded in grievance log book 
Confirm  with complainant that grievance can 
be  closed  or  determine  what  follow  up  is 
necessary 
 4-7 
Days 
Close grievance    Record  final  sign  off  of  grievance.  If 
grievance cannot be closed, return to step 2 or 
refer  to  sector  minister  or  recommend  third-
party arbitration or resort to court of law 
 4-7 
Days   
Final  sign  off    by 
Senior  management 
of DBE 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 115 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Annex 22 Institutions Consulted during the Fieldwork 
- National Bank of Ethiopia 
-Rib Saving Cooperative UNION 
-Atsedemariam primary cooperative 
-Amara Saving and Credit Share Company 
_Yesidama Beder  ena Kuteba EnterpriseVRUSSCO Office 
-Ministry of Water, youth irrigation Development  
-Project Beneficiaries of RUFIP I and II in SNNRP and Amhara Region  
Annex 12 Filled Questionnaire Related to climate Shocks  
Filled Questionnaire No.1  
 (Questionnaire for MFI's – lending profile for clients)  
1.  Does your institution have clients that are in areas affected by climate related shocks? – (these 
would include floods, droughts).   
Yes, mostly due to the lowered yield expected in the main harvest time.  
2.  If so which geographic locations and how many clients? 
Province 
South West Showa 
Woreda 
Sebeta Awas 
Number of clients 
 216 in two Kebeles 
South West Showa 
East Showa 
Malina 
Kersa 
(Lemon) 
Adama and Boset 
700 in two Kebeles 
190 in two Kebeles 
               “ 
Type of climate shock 
Crop  failure  (fall  in 
yield)  
               “ 
3.  Are  there  any  notable  trends  in  lending  related  to  climate  shocks  –  such  as  frequency? 
Severity?  
Not  frequent  and  not  as  such  severe.  There  is  some  trend  in  the  rift  valley  area  where 
Adama is part of it. What has been observed is partial crop failure not total and we hope an 
improvement in the climate than continue as it is been now.  
4.  Are  there  any  notable  trends  in  rates  of  client  defaults  during  the  time  of  climate  related 
shocks? 
Yes,  particularly  it  is  noticeable  in  agricultural  and  related  loan  clients.  As  the  primary 
source  of  loan  repayment  is  based  from  farm  and  related  activities  and  shocks  in  these 
areas not only affect their loan commitment but also their livelihoods.  
5.  Does  your  Institution  take  any  measures  to  maintain  the  portfolio  during  times  of  climate 
related shocks (such as postponement of repayment instalment, waiver of interest, writing off 
loan)? 
Yes, based on the severity of the shock. What has happened currently is partial crop failure 
and the Institution implements partial repayment schedules accordingly. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 116 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
6.  Do clients make any specific requests during or following climate related shocks? What type 
of requests? 
Yes  they  request.  The  request  includes  rescheduling  of  loan  repayments,  waiving  of 
interests, and even additional loan to withstand the shocks. 
7.  Does your institution have an Environment and Social Management System in place? 
Yes 
8.  Does your institution have any risk assessment related to climate shocks? 
Yes, through its risk and compliance department on regular and ad hoc patterns. 
9.  Does your institution have experts for Environment, Social and Climate risk management? 
Yes, dedicated staffs from Social Performance Management, Risk and compliance. 
10.  Does your institution provide any advisory services for clients and if so what type? 
Yes, timing of taking loan, on mixed cropping, is diversifying means of livelihoods, etc.   
Filled Questionnaire No.2  
(Questionnaire for MFI's – lending profile for clients) 
1.  Does your institution have clients that are in areas affected by climate related shocks? – (these 
would include floods, droughts)  
From  time  to  time  there  are  climate  related  shocks  that  our  clients  experience  in  recent 
years.  There  was  severe  drought  that  was  induced  by  El-Nino  in  2015/16;  drought  in 
2009/10;  and  2002/2003  in  all  7  branches  located in  and  around  the  rift  valley  region  in 
Oromia.  Rainfall  shortage  or  late  rainfall  incidence  are  becoming  common  almost  every 
year  or  every  other  year in  the  past  10  years.  Rainfall  variability mainly  shortage  or late 
rain seems to occur  almost  every  year  in  the  areas between  Mojo/Koka to  Ziway/Bulbula 
and we are no more giving in-kind loan of maize seed which was a success for us in the 
past and as a result we lost many customers in Meki and Ziway and Bulbula branches.    
2.  If so which geographic locations and how many clients? 
Province 
Oromia region  
Oromia region 
Woreda 
Shashemene,  Adami-
Tullu-Jido-
Kombolcha,  
Kofale, Kore  
Adami 
Tullu-Jido-
Kombolcha  (Bulbula, 
Meki, Ziway)  
Number of clients 
4,000 
3,000 
4,000 
Type of climate shock 
Drought, 
rainfall 
shortage, late rainfall;  
Frost  
Late  rainfall,  rainfall 
shortage 
3.  Are  there  any  notable  trends  in  lending  related  to  climate  shocks  –  such  as  frequency. 
Severity? 
The shocks in terms of severity have increased in recent years; rainfall shortage or late or 
early rainfall incidence has increased in frequency of occurrence. For e.g., in the last three 
cropping seasons including 2018 (Apr/May/Jun) we clearly cancelled loans for maize seed 
purchase for farmers in rift valley areas because the rain was very late. As a result we lost 
about 2,000 maize farmer clients in Meki, Ziway and Bulbula areas.  
4.  Are  there  any  notable  trends  in  rates  of  client  defaults  during  the  time  of  climate  related 
shocks? 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 117 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
Of course yes. In 2015/16, we have massive loan defaults in our Shashemene, Kuyera, Arsi 
Negelle,  Bulbula,  Ziway,  Meki,  Mojo  and  Bishoftu  branches.  In  Bulbual  branch  we  had 
default in 2014, 2015 and 2016 
5.  Does  your  Institution  take  any  measures  to  maintain  the  portfolio  during  times  of  climate 
related shocks (such as postponement of repayment instalment, waiver of interest, writing off 
loan)? 
You are forced to accept non-repayment in times of weather related shocks in one way or 
another, especially if the situation affects two or more Kebeles in rural areas. And this will 
bring a bigger problem, that is, we are often forced to close most of these affected branches 
sooner or later. Because postponement or rescheduling does not work for joint and several 
liability  groups  because  if  there  is  drought  in  on  Kebele  that  affected  just  few  farmers, 
every credit group in the Woreda will fall or disappear due to the domino effect of group 
guarantee lending method.   
6.  Do clients make any specific requests during or following climate related shocks? What type 
of requests? 
Buusaa Gonofaa has been financing input loan by giving wheat and maize seed in kind to 
farmers  since  2010  but  in  limited  branches  in  the  rift  valley  areas.  And  farmers  were 
always asking us to give them guaranteed access to these improved seeds every time, and 
aftershocks,  they  are  very  clear  that  they  will  pay  their  loans  if  and  only  if  they  can  get 
tangible guarantee for seed. We cannot guarantee farmers reliable seed supply at any time 
although  we  entered  the  business  of  in-kind  loan exactly  because  farmers can’t  get  seed, 
and if they can, it is very late or too late. Farmers tell us that the survival rate of improved 
seed  is  much  higher  than  their  traditional  seeds  during  period  of  climate  shocks  like 
rainfall shortage.  
7.  Does your institution have an Environment and Social Management System in place? 
I  don’t  even  understand  the  term.  For  social  performance  management  of  our  existing 
clients, we do have a modest mechanism, but it is focus exclusively on our clients only.  
8.  Does your institution have any risk assessment related to climate shocks? 
We don’t have much assessment practice, although in the case of in-kind input financing, 
we certainly check from the farmers about the perception of the climate situation before we 
give out the seeds in loan. Also there is no mechanism that we know to get some forecast of 
the weather situation for the coming 5 or 10 days or weeks before we disburse in-kind loan 
for seed or cash loan for fertilizer.  
9.  Does your institution have experts for Environment, Social and Climate risk management? 
No we don’t have.  
10.  Does your institution provide any advisory services for clients and if so what type? 
In few branches where we provide input loan in-kind (seed, fertilizer and agro-chemicals), 
we provide training on good farming practice on pilot scale to about 1,000 wheat and maize 
farmers  annually.  For  sure  we  have  seen  this  has  significant  implication  for  improving 
farmers’  productivity,  increase  their  income  and  hence  de-risk  our  credit  risk.  But 
unreliability of seed supply has discouraged us from taking the benefit of such investment. 
We trained farmers last year but there was no appropriate wheat seed for example.  
Filled Questionnaire No.3  
Questionnaire for MFI's – lending profile for clients  
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 118 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
1.  Does your institution have clients that are in areas affected by climate related shocks? – (these 
would include floods, droughts)= Not affected  
2.  If so which geographic locations and how many clients? 
3.  Are there any notable trends in lending related to climate shocks – such as frequency? 
Severity?  NO 
4.  Are there any notable trends in rates of client defaults during the time of climate related 
shocks? NO 
5.  Does your Institution take any measures to maintain the portfolio during times of climate 
related shocks (such as postponement of repayment instalment, waiver of interest, writing off 
loan)? NO 
6.  Do clients make any specific requests during or following climate related shocks? What type 
of requests? To design special Loan product to this area 
7.  Does your institution have an Environment and Social Management System in place? NO 
8.  Does your institution have any risk assessment related to climate shocks? NO 
9.  Does your institution have experts for Environment, Social and Climate risk management? 
NO 
10.  Does your institution provide any advisory services for clients and if so what type? NO 
Filled Questionnaire No. 4 by MFI's – lending profile for clients 
(Questionnaire for MFI's – lending profile for clients) 
1.  Does your institution have clients that are in areas affected by climate related shocks? – (these 
would include floods, droughts). Yes 
2.  If so which geographic locations and how many clients? 
Province 
(Finfine Zuria Oromia Liyu Zone) 
 (South West Shoa) 
(Finfine Zuria Oromia Liyu Zone) 
 (Arsi Zone) 
(Arsi Zone) 
Woreda 
Sebeta Hawas 
Illu Woreda 
Number 
of clients 
221 
54 
Akaki 
Tiyo 
Digelu Tijo 
565 
95 
60 
Type 
of 
climate shock 
Drought 
Floods 
Frost  
Drought 
Frost 
Frost 
& 
3.  Are  there  any  notable  trends  in  lending  related  to  climate  shocks  –  such  as  frequency? 
Severity? No. 
4.  Are  there  any  notable  trends  in  rates  of  client  defaults  during  the  time  of  climate  related 
shocks? No 
5.  Does  your  Institution  take  any  measures  to  maintain  the  portfolio  during  times  of  climate 
related shocks (such as postponement of repayment instalment, waiver of interest, writing off 
loan)? Yes, there is policy to reschedule but not as such applicable from experience.  
6.  Do clients make any specific requests during or following climate related shocks? What type 
of requests? Yes, reschedule, refinance and waiver in interest   
7.  Does your institution have an Environment and Social Management System in place? Yes 
8.  Does your institution have any risk assessment related to climate shocks? No 
9.  Does your institution have experts for Environment, Social and Climate risk management? No 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 119 
Rural Fund Intermediation Programme (RUFIP III) 
10.  Does your institution provide any advisory services for clients and if so what type? Yes, it is 
a kind of training on financial services (Debt management, saving and budgeting) and 
regular follows up of clients business. 
                              Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Page 120 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Annex 17 – Financial Management Manual 
Government of Ethiopia (GoE) 
Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE)  
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme III 
(RUFIP III) 
Draft Financial Management Manual 
June 2019
1 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
TABLE OFCONTENTS 
1  INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................... 4 
1.1  THE PROJECT .......................................................................................................................................................... 4 
1.2  THE PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AND COORDINATION ....................................................................... 5 
1.3  THE RUFIP III COST STRUCTURE AND FINANCING PLAN .................................................................. 6 
2  ACCOUNTING FOR LINE OF CREDIT FUNDS ...................................................................... 8 
3  THE RUFIP III FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CYCLE ......................................................... 9 
3.1  STEP 1: RUFIP III ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGETING ........................................................... 9 
3.2  STEP 2: COMMITTING FUNDS ...................................................................................................................... 13 
3.3  STEP 3: TREASURY FUNCTION INCLUDING THE ACCOUNTING SYSTEM ..................................... 13 
3.4  STEP 4: WITHDRAWAL APPLICATIONS .................................................................................................... 24 
3.5  STEP 5: FINANCIAL REPORTS AND AUDITING ....................................................................................... 26 
4  ANNEXURES ............................................................................................................................................. 30 
2 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
AEMFI 
AGRA 
ATA 
AOS 
AWPB 
BADEA 
CBE 
DBMS 
EFCMD 
EIB 
EU 
FAR 
FAIR 
FCA 
GoE 
IA 
ICB 
IFAD 
IGA 
ILCUF 
IPSAS 
KM 
LLRP 
M&E 
MFI 
MIS 
MoFEC 
MTR 
NBE 
PaR 
PASIDP 
PIM 
PCMU 
PP 
PPI 
PSC 
PSNP 
RuSACCO 
RCPB 
RFI 
RUFIP 
TNA 
UNCDF 
USD 
WA 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
Association of Ethiopian Micro Finance Institutions 
Alliance for Green Revolution Africa 
Agricultural Transformation Agency 
Annual Outcome Surveys 
Annual Work plan and Budget 
Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa 
Commerical Bank of Ethiopia 
Database Monitoring System 
External Fund and Credit Management Directorate 
European Investment Bank 
European Union 
Fixed Assets Registry 
Fixed Asset Issue Registry  
Federal Cooperative Agency 
Government of Ethiopia 
Implementing Agency 
International Competitive Bidding 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Income Generating Activity 
Irish Leauge for Credit Unions Federation 
International Public Sector Accounting Systems 
Knowledge Management 
Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Micro Finance Institution 
Management Information System 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
Mid-Term Review 
National Bank of Ethiopia  
Portfolio at Risk 
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development Project  
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Coordinaiton and Management Unit 
Procurement Plan 
Progress out of Poverty Index 
Project Steering Committee  
Productive Safety Nets Programme 
Rural Savings and Credit Cooperative 
Regional Cooperative Promotion Bureau 
Rural Financial Institution 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme 
Training Needs Assessment  
United Nations Capital Development Fund 
United States Dollars 
Withdrawal Appliation 
3 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
1.1 The Project 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The  Government  of  Ethiopia  (GoI)  has  requested  a  loan  from  International  Fund  for 
1. 
Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  for  implementation  of  Rural  Financial  Intermediation 
Programme  III  (RUFIP  III).  The  project  shall  be  carried  out  national  wide  with  the  lead 
agency being the Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE). 
The project will consolidate the existing base of rural financial cooperatives; from the 
2. 
Rural  Financial  Intermediation  Programmes  (RUFIP)  Phases  I  to  II.  The  development 
objective  is  to  increase  access  to  a  range  of  financial  services  and  products  to  rural 
households.  
a)  At the Micro level, the project will target 12 million clients  
b)  At the meso level, the project will be potentially available to : 
  Existing 11,260 RUFIP-supported RuSACCOs,  
  140 Unions 
  38 Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs),  
  The  project  will  also  explore  setting  up  a  guarantee  fund 
through  some  commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions  to 
provide  resources  to  RFIs  that  currently  focus  on  rural 
communities.  
Initiate  marketing  of  rural  client-friendly  insurance  products 
through RFIs, 
continue  to  support  automation  of  mangement  information 
systems (MIS) systems to improve reporting of the entire rural 
finance system. 
 
 
At the macro  level, the RUFIP III will  strengthen the regulatory bodies for MFIs and 
3. 
the RuSACCO sector which are respectively as follows : 
  National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) 
  Federal Cooperative Agency (FCA) 
RUFIP  III  components:  The  project  has  been  arranged  convenitently  under  the 
4. 
following components with the respective budget allocations: 
Component-wise funds 
allocation by component 
(USD’000) 
Component  C3  at  USD  263  million 
deserves  signifcant  attention  in 
terms  of  he  financial  management 
processes, controls  and reporting.  
4 
USD,000C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers (6%)19,505.7C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline (5%)14,635.9C3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business (86%)263,793.8C4: Programme management (3%)7,863.2305,798.686%3%-50,000.0100,000.0150,000.0200,000.0250,000.0300,000.0C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers (6%)C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline (5%)C3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business (86%)C4: Programme management (3%)USD,000-50,000.0100,000.0150,000.0200,000.0250,000.0300,000.0C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers (6%)C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline (5%)C3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business (86%)C4: Programme management (3%)USD,000USD,000 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
RUFIP  III  expenditure  categories:  By  expenditure  category  financial  resources  will  be 
5. 
invested  as  follows.    This  is  important  in  the  set-up  of  this  Financial  Management  Manual.  
This  makes  up  schedule  2 1 to  the  financing  agreement 2 .  During  the  preparation  of  the 
schedule  2,  some  categories  of  expenditures  may  be  merged;  details  will  be  outlined  in 
“categories description” of the IFAD-GoE Financing Agreement. 
Category-wise expenditure 
allocation (USD’000) 
6. 
The  financial  spread  and  diversity  of  the  above  components  and  expenditure 
categories  are  important  during  implementation.  Expenditure  categorize-wise,  over  USD 
230  million  is  going  towards  credit  and  guarantee  funds  which  is  the  same  weight  for 
component  C3:  Facilitating  funds  flow  and  diversification  of  business.    This  manual, 
therefore, has given relative importance towards the  controls around the category of credit 
and guarantee funds and component C3. 
1.2 The Project Implementation and Coordination 
7. 
The  MoF,  as  the  representative  of  the  borrower,  will  represent  GoE  on  all  matters 
pertaining  to  RUFIP  III  financial  management.  DBE,  is  the  Lead  Executing  Agency  and  will 
ensure the overall oversight for the implementation of Programme at National level with its 
roles reflected at Regional level. As a disbursement condition and as part of the PCMU, a full 
time  Finance  Manager  and  at  least  two  accountants  must  have  been  assigned.  IFAD  No 
Objection will be needed to assure the calibre of staff assigned. As these are full time staff 
of  DBE,  counterpart  funds  shall  be  used  to  cover  their  salary  costs.  Terms  of  reference  of 
RUFIP III Programme Accountant are attached. 
8. 
Coordination  at  the  highest  level  will  be  provided  by  a  Project  Steering  Committee 
(PSC). FCA has been designated as a key implementing agency for the financial cooperative 
sector. This will involve coordinating budgeting, release of funds, justification and reporting 
for all Regional Bureaus as well as FCA itself. Given the current low capacity at FCA’s finance 
directorate,  a  dedicated  accountant  will  be  recruited  competitively  on  fixed  term  contract 
basis to join the finance team for purposes of RUFIP III financial management. For each of 
the other implementing agencies, focal staff will be assigned to handle RUFIP III day to day 
financial management requirements. As there will be a small volume of transactions, these 
do not need to be fully dedicated. The Regional Cooperative Promotion Bureaus will collate 
reports  from  Unions  and  report  to  FCA,  which  in  turn  will  report  to  PCMU.As  accounting 
software set up has not been a requirement for implementing partners given the anticipated 
level of transactions, they will furnish PCMU with all the relevant documentation and reports 
on a quarterly basis to facilitate posting of transactions in the accounting software. 
1 This is after rounding off to the nearest thousand and taking 10% from each category as “unallocated category. 
2 Depending on choice of GoE this could be in SDR or USD 
5 
CategoryUSD'000Consultancies24,373    Credit, Guarantee Funds237,594  Equipment and Materials2,188      Training8,521      Salaries & Allowances1,656      Operating costs2,542      Unallocated3,076      307,638  --50,000 100,000 150,000 200,000 250,000 USD'000USD'000 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
Coordination  arrangement  for  the  biggest  component  and  expenditure  category  involving 
Line of Credit (LOC) Application process (blue line) and flow of funds (red, dashed line) for 
LOC 
1.3 The RUFIP III cost structure and financing plan 
A full set of cost tables have been prepared as part of the design process. These will 
9. 
be the framework used for AWPB preparations and general planning.  
10.  RUFIP III will be funded from multiple and parallel funding sources and it is recognised 
that this can be quite complex. Some co-financiers have varied financial reporting demands 
and, therefore, the accounting software must be set to be able to meet these multiple and 
parallel reporting demands.  
6 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
11.  The  total  cost  of  the  proposed  programme  is  estimated  at  approximately  US$305.7 
million over a six year implementation period. About USD 40 million will be initially financed 
by IFAD. EIB has committed USD 112 million towards the programme of which a part would 
be utilized for promoting lease financing among rural businesses and enterprises. European 
Union  has  finalized  a  contribution  of  USD19  million.  AGRA  has  committed  USD  1.5  million 
towards  a  guarantee  fund.  GoE  will  finance  USD  5.0  million  towards  Programme 
management  and  USD  45.0  million  to  LOC  from  reflows  of  earlier  RUFIP  loans  apart  from 
taxes.  In  addition,  discussions  are  ongoing  with  BADEA  (Arab  Bank  for  Economic 
Development  in  Africa)  for  funding  of  USD  20  million  (If  the  discussions  do  not  fructify, 
there will be a gap of  USD  20 mn, which can be filled by (i) possible additional resources 
that  become  available  in  IFAD  during  the  IFAD11  cycle;  and  (ii)  co-financing  and  lines  of 
credit  provided  by  other  development  partners  (domestic  and  foreign),  and  as  and  when 
they  emerge).  In  terms  of  local  partnerships,  the  Commercial  Bank  of  Ethiopia  and 
Ethiopian  Insurance  Corporation  are  likely  to  cofinance  USD  20  million  and  USD  15  million 
respectively. 63.7% of programme outlay will be funded from external resources and 36.3% 
from domestic resources. 
Summary Table of costs by component and financier (US dollars 000) 
Table …: Programme costs by expenditure category and financier (US dollars 000) 
Programme/project costs by component and year (US dollars 000) 
7 
Borrower/counterpartIFAD LoanIFAD GrantOther CofinanciersBeneficiariesTotalLocal (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%For. Exch.Taxes)Taxes1. C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers 2,517.512.9--14,437.274.01,599.68.2951.44.919,505.76.45,878.611,109.72,517.52. C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline 1,908.513.0--12,727.487.0----14,635.94.84,463.98,263.51,908.53. C3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business 45,000.017.14,900.01.93,993.81.5209,900.079.6--263,793.886.3-263,793.8-4. C4: Programme management 2,521.232.1--3,941.650.11,400.417.8--7,863.22.61,718.05,488.1657.1Total PROJECT COSTS 51,947.217.04,900.01.635,100.011.5212,900.069.6951.40.3305,798.6100.012,060.5288,655.15,083.1Borrower/counterpartIFAD LoanIFAD GrantOther CofinanciersBeneficiariesTotalLocal (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%For. Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment Costs A. Consultancies 3,531.413.0--20,009.973.92,762.410.2777.52.927,081.28.98,320.515,229.33,531.4B. Credit, Guarantee Funds 45,000.017.04,900.01.94,193.81.6209,900.079.5--263,993.886.3-263,993.8-C. Equipment and Materials 317.013.0--2,103.886.510.50.4--2,431.30.8855.71,258.5317.0D. Training 1,234.713.0--7,832.582.7227.12.4174.01.89,468.33.12,884.35,349.31,234.7Total Investment Costs 50,083.116.54,900.01.634,140.011.3212,900.070.3951.40.3302,974.599.112,060.5285,831.05,083.1II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries & Allowances 879.847.8--960.052.2----1,839.80.6-1,839.8-B. Operating costs 984.3100.0--------984.30.3-984.3-Total Recurrent Costs 1,864.166.0--960.034.0----2,824.10.9-2,824.1-Total PROJECT COSTS 51,947.217.04,900.01.635,100.011.5212,900.069.6951.40.3305,798.6100.012,060.5288,655.15,083.1202020212022202320242025Total1. C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers 5,359.93,959.94,063.02,833.72,115.11,174.119,505.72. C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional discipline 2,533.33,487.03,225.22,401.02,216.5772.914,635.93. C3: Facilitating funds flow and diversification of business 60,115.160,115.160,115.160,115.111,666.711,666.7263,793.84. C4: Programme management 2,508.91,339.21,336.1874.3937.5867.27,863.2Total PROJECT COSTS 70,517.168,901.368,739.466,224.116,935.814,480.9305,798.6 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
2  ACCOUNTING FOR LINE OF CREDIT FUNDS 
 Contribution  towards 
under RUFIP III 
line  of  credit 
12. As  noted  above  this  is  the  biggest 
expenditure  category.  IFAD  will  finance  a 
total  about  USD  9.1  million  from  both  the 
loan  and  the  grant.  GoE  has  committed  to 
use  the  reflows  from  RUFIP  I  and  II  to 
finance  USD  45  million  under  this  key 
category.  Other  co-financiers  will  finance 
USD  210  million.  No  doubt  that  DBE  is  best 
placed 
of 
disbursement  but  financial  controls  for  the 
particular  cannot  be  over  emphasised.  The 
donors  financing  the  biggest  amount  from 
the  line  of  credit  may  require  additional 
safeguards which will be included in the PIM 
as per their requirements 
amount 
handle 
such 
to 
13.  Before disbursing LoC funds the finance teams shall ensure that: 
  The  PCMU/  FCA  will  have  ensured  that  the  10  entry  criteria  as  detailed  in  the  PIM 
have been adhered to; 
  Ensure compliance with the 14 criteria for allocation of funds to RFIs 
  Unions  will  be  the  ultimate  clients.  RuSACCOs  cannot  apply  directly  for  funding. 
Therefore,  only  RuSACCOs  which  are  members  of  unions  will  be  funded  under  the 
LoC  and  the  fiduciary  responsibility  will  rest  with  the  Unions  regarding  the  loan 
portfolio  financial  performance.  Unions  will  have  to  access  funding  through  the  FCA 
and its RCPBs networks. 
 
It  is  MFIs  that  can  approach  DBE  for  funding  but  also  subject  to  the  criteria 
documented in the PIM. 
8 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
3  THE RUFIP III FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CYCLE 
14.  Financial  management  in  Government  Programmes  such  as  RUFIP  III  is  to  be 
established as a routine  and highly standardised process and will follow an annual cycle of 
inter-dependent  steps.  It  will  start  with  planning  and  budgeting.  In  financial  control,  any 
expenditure  incurred  outside  the  approved  budget  will  be  declared  ineligible  for  IFAD 
financing. After the AWPB is approved together with the procurement plan, the next step is 
the  process  of  committing  funds.  While  this  largely  is  a  procurement  function,  the  finance 
team will have a role to play. Following on from commitments will be the treasury functions, 
payments to eligible contractors, service providers, suppliers. The finance team will have to 
exercise  efficiency  in  turnaround  of  withdrawal  applications  to  IFAD  to  ensure  liquidity 
challenges  do  not  hamper  implementation.  The  final  routine  in  financial  management  is 
financial  reporting  and auditing.  This  manual  has  been  arranged  as  to  cover  each  of  these 
aspects of the annual financial management routine as presented in chart below. 
Chart... The RUFIP III annual financial management cycle 
3.1 Step 1: RUFIP III Annual Work Plan and Budgeting 
15.  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  is  the  key  instrument  for  RUFIP  III 
implementation  and  operational  control.  The  PCMU,  therefore,  gives  particular  attention  to 
budget  preparation  and  control.  During  day-to-day  financial  management,  an  approved 
AWPB  is  the  most  important  document,  and  the  principal  guide  on  what  to  do  and  how  to 
use resources. In the context of RUFIP III financial management, the AWPB is more than a 
guideline. It represents: 
a)  a commitment of PCMU and implementing agencies to carry out a set of 
activities, produce specific outputs and achieve certain targets; and 
b)  Agreement  by  GoE,  IFAD,  cofinanciers  that  the  planned  activities  are 
appropriate in light of the RUFIP III objectives and approval to spend the 
necessary money as specified in the annual budget. 
16.  The AWPB is a means by which Government of Ethiopia and IFAD will have provided 
“prior approval” to PCMU to spend resources on the activities included in the AWPB. It 
9 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
should be taken very serious, as any expenditure incurred outside the AWPB will be queried 
by auditors, supervision missions and will be declared ineligible for IFAD financing. 
17. 
The detailed steps to be followed in the preparation of the AWPB are included in the 
IFAD guidelines for preparation of AWPBs and progress reporting. The Procurement planning 
aspects are covered under the Procurement Manual. 
18. 
Timing: The draft AWPB should reach IFAD within two month before commencement 
of the year in question, that is, by 30 April of each year. It is equally important that AWPB 
preparation  schedule  be  in  tandem  with  Government  budgetary  process  since  RUFIP  III 
budget should pass through Government budgetary approval process and RUFIP III must be 
included in the GoE printed budget estimates. 
The  following  AWPB  preparation  schedule  is  provided  for  guidance.  It  should  be 
19. 
reviewed and modified as may be necessary by  MoF/ DBE and IFAD. 
ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGET SCHEDULE3 
Schedule 
Responsibility 
Activity/ steps 
(i)  Briefing on preparation of AWPB 
provision of guidelines and format 
to FCA, RCPBs, NBE, AEMFI and 
other implementing agencies. 
(ii) Call letter from PCMU for the 
preparation of AWPB to FCA, 
RCPBs, NBE, AEMFI and other 
implementing agencies. 
(iii) Preparation of AWPB by FCA, 
RCPBs, NBE, AEMFI and other 
implementing agencies. 
Submission of AWPB proposals to 
PCMU 
End October 
Early Nov. 
Nov/Dec. 
(iv) Preparation of consolidated 
Mid-January 
Annual Work Plan and Budget. 
(v) Review/Agreement on draft AWPB 
by participating institutions 
End January 
(vi) Review by PSC 
(vii) 
(viii) 
Finalization by PCMU 
Submission of draft AWPB 
to IFAD 
(ix) Comments from IFAD 
(x) Finalization of AWPB/Distribution 
to FCA, RCPBs, NBE, AEMFI and 
other implementing agencies. 
Early February 
Mid-February 
April 
Mid May 
End June 
PCMU M&E Officer 
supported by Finance 
Manager 
Letter drafted by M&E 
Officer and sent under the 
signature of Designated 
Coordinator/ deputy 
director DBE. 
Appointed budget officers  
within FCA, RCPBs, NBE, 
AEMFI and other 
implementing agencies  
M/E officer and Financial 
Manager with support from 
PCMU members 
Meeting called by 
Designated Coordinator/ 
Deputy Director DBE 
PSC 
 M&E Officer 
Designated Coordinator/ 
Deputy Director DBE 
IFAD CPM 
Designated Coordinator/ 
Deputy Director DBE  
Role  of  finance  offices  in  AWPB  preparation:  In  the  planning  and  budgeting 
20. 
stage, the RUFIP III finance officers perform the four functions below: 
Roles of RUFIP III finance staff in budgeting process 
3 Fiscal year in Ethiopia is from 8 July – 7 July. 
10 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
21. 
Role  1:  Avail  RUFIP  III  Budgeting  teams  the  status  of  available  balances: 
Technical coordinators/ agencies will play an important role in facilitating budget preparation 
for  activities  in  their  respective  realm.  This  does  not  however  imply  that  they  can  solely 
dispose  of  the  component  budget  as  the  respective  sub-components  are  interrelated  with 
others. RUFIP III is adopting an integrated team work programme management approach.  
RUFIP III Budgeting holders/ responsibility centres 
Planning Unit 
Budget Controller 
C1: Building capacity of institutions and customers 
C2: Improving regulation, supervision and institutional 
discipline 
C3:  Facilitating  funds  flow  and  diversification  of 
business 
C4: Programme management 
AEMFI 
NBE 
FCA  consolidating 
participating RCPBs 
PCMU  
from 
the 
Prior to the start of the planning and budgeting exercise, the Financial Manager (FM) 
22. 
based  at  DBE  provides  each  of  the  above  budget  holders  the  respective  sub-component 
status  of  available  balances  and  overall  category-wise  implications.  The  FM  does  this  by 
making  extracts  from  the  accounting  system  and  obtains  from  IFAD  client  Portal  (ICP) 
status of funds balances available category-wise. From the accounting system, the FM also 
obtains balances component-wise, including up to the major activities  as described later in 
the  manual.  The  status  of  funds  available  should  be  adjusted  by  deducting  commitments, 
WAs  in  the  pipe line  and  projected  expenditure  for  the  remaining  part  of  the  current  year. 
The adjusted information about the status of funds is provided to the above named budget 
holders  so  that  they  are  aware  of  budget  ceilings.  A  working  form  that  can  be  used  in  Ms 
Excel to determine the available balance is as given below. 
Working Form to determine status of available balances category-wise analysed 
separately for each financier: IFAD loan/grant, EIB, EU, AGRA GoE etc 
Category 
Available 
cash 
balance)4 
Less 
Commitments5 
Consultancies 
Credit, Guarantee Funds 
Equipment and Materials 
Training 
Salaries & Allowances 
Operating costs 
Total 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Less 
WA’s in 
Pipe 
Line 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Less 
Projected 
Expenses 
to the end 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Net 
Available 
Balance 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
23. 
The net available balance should also be broken down according to components, sub-
components and major activity headings so that planners are able to determine the relative 
weights for each component/ sub-component in the AWPB as illustrated in the table below. 
4 IFAD Client Portal (ICP) Statement of Funds (convert to Birr) plus balances for domestic financiers well reconciled to 
the computerized accounting system to be installed by RUFIP III 
5Take care to roll-over commitments into next year’s budget 
11 
1234Avail the technical coordinators status of available balances Quantify  other restricting factorsconsolidation and presentation of budget tablesTreasury planning 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
It is important to keep a relative balance between components so that some components do 
not lag behind.  
Working Form to deduce status of available balances budget units analysed 
separately for separately for each donor: IFAD loan/grant, EIB, EU, AGRA GoE etc 
Budget unit 
Available 
cash 
balance)6 
Less 
Commitments7 
C1: Building capacity of institutions 
and customers (6%) 
C2: Improving regulation, 
supervision and institutional 
discipline (5%) 
C3: Facilitating funds flow and 
diversification of business (86%) 
C4: Programme management (3%) 
Total 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Less 
Projected 
Expenses 
to the end 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Net 
Available 
Balance 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
24. 
Role 2: Other disbursement restricting factors: Whereas available balances may 
set the ceiling of what to include in the AWPB, there are other restricting factors. The FM will 
need  to  quantify  these  and  communicate  to  the  budget  holders/  sub-component  heads  at 
the start of the planning season; examples will include: 
  The realistic amount that can be replenished for from IFAD.  
  Time lag between commitment and disbursement.  
  Existing obligations to complete on-going tasks. 
25. 
Role  3:  Consolidating  the  RUFIP  III  AWPB:  In the AWPB there are core finance 
tables that have to be consolidated by the FM and his or her team, working closely with the 
M&E Officer. While the consolidation of the AWPB into one document will be led by the M & E 
Officer, the finance tables will be a responsibility of the FM. These tables will include: 
  Past year financial performance and cumulatively 
  Consolidated Annual Budget Summary 
  Component-wise summary 
  Category-wise summary  
  Category-wise summary by financier 
  Component-wise summary by financier 
  Detailed  Activity  based  annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  for  each  budget 
responsibility centre 
The  formats  for  each  of  the  above  summary  are  available  in  the  IFAD  guideline  for 
26. 
AWPB preparation and progress reports which will be availed to the teams. 
27. 
Treasury  planning:  This  will  be  part  of  the  AWPB  preparation.  The  FM,  as  part  of 
AWPB  processing,  will  earmark  the  bigger  items  that  can  be  paid  for  through  direct 
payments 8  and  those  that  have  to  be  paid  for  from  the  designated  /  operational  bank 
accounts.  This  will  be  translated  into  a  monthly  cash  flow  forecast  to  ensure  there  is 
sufficient liquidity even in peak periods. 
28. 
Under Work plan and budgeting IFAD supervision missions will always be interested 
6This will be as per RUFIP III accounting system 
7Take care to roll-over commitments into next year’s budget 
8 Must be above the threshold in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB). 
12 
RUFIP III 
in: 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
  Timely preparation and approval of AWPB. 
  AWPB in line with expenditure categories in Financing Agreement Schedule 2 to the 
financing agreement. 
  Financing  sources  and  implementing  agencies  for  each  category  in  the  AWPB  are 
identified. 
  Linkage between AWPB and Procurement plan.  
3.2 Step 2: Committing funds 
29. 
Commitment of  funds is largely a procurement function covered under procurement 
section  of  the  PIM.  The  finance  team  will  have  a  role  to  play  in  the  procurement  cycle 
including: 
  Providing the status of available balances ahead of each procurement launch to avoid 
over-committing RUFIP III/ GoE. This will require FM to maintain a detailed analysis 
of commitments. 
  This means contracts cannot be signed off without the FM entering them into his/her 
system. 
  The  authentication,  custody  and  execution  of  any  financial  instruments  such  as 
performance  bonds,  advance  guarantees  will  be  a  responsibility  of  the  Finance 
Manager. 
  The  financial  progress  elements  of  the  contracting  monitoring  forms  will  be  a 
responsibility of the Finance Manager. 
3.3 Step 3: Treasury function including the accounting system 
RUFIP  III’s  financial  reporting  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  International  Public 
30. 
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS)- cash basis as already adopted in Ethiopia. 
The PCMU will make use of off-shelf accounting software for maintaining its accounts. 
31. 
The software should meet the criteria below. Use of excel worksheets as was the case under 
RUFIP I and II will not be allowed.   
32. 
Some of the suggested attributes of RUFIP III accounting package will include 
STANDARD REQUIREMENT 
(a)  Multi-currency tracking & reporting 
(b)  User friendly (e.g windows driven) 
(c)  Ability  to  account  under  different  bases  of  accounting  (cash,  modified  cash, 
modified accruals) 
(d) B Budget Control features including encumbering funds at the point of commitment. 
(e)  Capacity to track the following data: 
i.  Actual 
ii.  Budget 
iii.  Life of Project  
(f)   Ability  to  track/link  to  Physical  Performance  Indicators  (e.g.  units  of  output  or 
contract completion status) as required by project) 
(g)  Ability to track and search by specific transaction references (e.g cheque #’s. P.O. 
#’s. direct payments. Voucher #’s, direct payments, Voucher #’s, etc) 
(h)  Dual charts of account (ability to track in accordance with or link to local reporting 
systems as well as donor requirements) 
(i)   Ability to support in the generation of withdrawal applications, or at least through 
export into Ms excel. 
13 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
STANDARD REQUIREMENT 
(j)   Ability to track and report on parallel multiple funding sources 
REPORTING 
Requirement 
(a)  Ability to track and report on flexible reporting cycles (e.g month, quarter, calendar 
year, fiscal year, project cumulative, etc) 
(b)  Ability to track and report by financier 
(c)  Ability to track and report by grant/loan agreement category- with exact layout of 
the components, activities and expenditure categories 
(d)  Ability to track and report by project component or activity. Capacity to customize 
reports 
(e)  Ability  to  generate  key  Financial  Management  Review    report  formats  with  a  clear 
audit trail (e.g. no additional revisions needed in a spreadsheet which would modify 
an audit trail) 
(f)   Ability to generate reports for previous periods back as 6 years (e.g. lost report) 
SECURITY 
Requirement 
(a)  Internal  Security  features  adequate  (e.g.  cannot  delete  posted  transactions, 
controlled access, password protection 
(b)  Security includes back-up and system maintenance procedures 
(c)  Security includes self-diagnostic checks to ensure integrity 
SUPPORT 
Requirement 
(a)  Support readily available for: 
i. Technical issues 
ii. Training 
33. 
Setting the chart of accounts: In setting the chart of accounts: 
  The  main  general  ledgers  codes  may  follow  the  GoE  chart  of  accounts  for  the 
purpose  of  complying  with  GoE  financial  reporting  needs  provided  the  other  fields 
can  be  set  to  respond  to  RUFIP  III  accounting  demands  component  wise,  category 
wise, financier wise etc. 
  The  off  the-shelf  accounting  system  will  be  adopted  using  other  fields  to  be  coded 
exactly  as  per  the  structure  of  components,  sub-components  and  expenditure 
categories as per the financing agreement 
  The  package  should  be  set  to  process  multi-currency  transactions  (minimum  USD/ 
Birr  reporting  including  taking  care  of  reporting  currencies  for  other  donors  if  not 
USD) 
It  should  be  set  to  produce  auto  Statement  of  Expenditures  (SoEs).  Withdrawal 
applications  shall  not  be  processed  in  parallel  to  the  selected  accounting  software 
system. 
 
  They key activities and codes allocated should be agreed with  M&E as the key ones 
that  the  latter  will  be  monitoring  from  physical  progress  side.  This  will  ensure  that 
there  is  a  convergence  between  the  Finance  Manager’s  monitoring  (financial 
progress)  and  the  M&E  Officer  (physical  progress).  This  coding  approach  will  be 
14 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
applied  consistently  across  the  entire  RUFIP  III  from  the  coding  of  the  AWPB, 
procurement  requisitions  and  other  documents,  payment  vouchers,  the  accounting 
system and M&E physical input level monitoring. 
Expenditure-attribution. Use of the accounting software will ensure the traceability 
34. 
of the funding.  This is extremely a very important area for RUFIP III given the multiplicity 
of funding sources. In this, activities will be earmarked – right from planning to be followed 
through by the accounting system up to withdrawal application  – to respective donors. The 
use of parallel bank accounts as follows has been emphasized.    
Minimum bank accounts to augment expenditure attribution9 
Bank Accounts 
A:  DESIGNATED  BANK  ACCOUNTS 
(USD) 
IFAD  Loan  and  grant-  USD  Bank 
Account 
EU-grant-USD Bank Account 
B:  OPERATIONAL  BANK  ACCOUNTS 
(ETB):  
DBE Level – Operating account 
RUFIP  I,  II  &  III-    Reflows  Bank 
Account - ETB 
RUFIP III Guarantee Scheme account 
Remarks 
Monitor  IFAD  disbursement  separately  from  EU 
grant disbursements. 
To  receive  funds  from  the  designated  account  for 
transactions  by  PCMU 
including  transfers  to 
implementing partners  
Account  already  in  existence  and  is  “ring-fenced” 
to  receive  repayments  of  loans  given  out  under 
RUFIP I & II. Such loan repayments should not be 
mixed-up  with  RUFIP  III  IFAD  loan/grant  and  EU 
Grant  funds.  Any  mix-up  result  in  difficulties  in 
the 
reconciling 
designated bank accounts. 
Account  will  be  administered  by  DBE  or  under 
oversight  of  DBE 
in  accordance  with  GoE 
arrangements acceptable to IFAD 
the  Authorised  allocation 
to 
III  Operational  Bank 
by 
RUFIP 
accounts 
to 
Implementing Institutions 
FCA Operating Bank Account - ETB 
opened 
be 
AEMFI Operating Bank Account - ETB 
Each  Region  should  open  a  specific 
Bank  Account  for  RUFIP  III  specific 
funds. 
Funds  that  will  be  transferred  to  FCA  will  be  for 
the  FCA  approved  activities  under  RUFIP  III  and 
other entities under FCA supervision. Funds to the 
Regional  Cooperative  Bureaus  will  be  channelled 
through this account. 
Funds  that  will  be  transferred  to  AEMFI  will  be 
exclusively  for  the  AEMFI  approved  activities 
under RUFIP III. 
The  lowest  RUFIP  III  bank  accounts  will  be  at 
regional  level,  there  is  no  need  to  open  specific 
bank  accounts  at  the  Unions  and  Woreda  level.  A 
system to follow-up advances made by the regions 
to  the  woredas  as  established  under  RUFIP  II  will 
continue to apply under RUFIP III. 
35. 
The  set-up  of  Selected  accounting  software  should  reflect  the  following  financing 
rules  on  activity  by  activity  basis  and  so  should  be  the  AWPBs.  Other  donors  will  require 
exacting  expenditure  attributions.  The  funds  flow  chart  below  will  be  updated  as  co-
9 More bank accounts to be opened as negotiations with other co-financing donors crystallise 
15 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
financing arrangements are affirmed. 
36. 
RUFIP III activity level coding with the respective financing rules: 
1. Capacity Development of MFIs 
A. MIS improvement of MFIs and NBE 
MIS-Project shared hardware infrastructure  
Trainings and capacity building for project 
team 
Software Upgrades for Shared Data Center and 
DR 
B. Human resources development at MFIs 
Trainings to MFIs staffs/management/board 
C. Research & Knowledge Management for 
MFI sector 
Financing Rule 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% ) 
16 
RUFIP III Funds flow chart and reporting lines                                            IFAD               GoE  Designated Account Pooled Operating account at DBE/PCMU  Beneficiaries FCA RCPA and Unions Implementing Partners Contractors Suppliers Service Providers  
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
Research and Knowledge Management 
D. Exposure visits 
Exposure visits to board of directors and 
general managers of MFIs 
Pastoralist area MFIs-exposure visit for board 
and management 
E. Social performance management 
F. Knowledge management 
Financial literacy and education 
Knowledge 
Management/documentation/conferences 
G. Strengthening AEMFI 
Strengthening AEMFI-Launching EFTRI's 
certification programmes 
Study for transforming AEMFI into apex level 
organization 
Staff Development/Trainings 
TNA for developing training programmes by 
AEMFI and EFTRI 
Institutional development/ furniture and 
computers/stationary 
Upgrading and maintaining websites of AEMFI 
and EIFTRI 
Mobility / travel 
Shorter term local consultant 
AEMFI Staff Salary (Long Term High Level local 
consultant) 
2. Capacity Building of RUSSACOs 
A. Capacity Building of RUSACCOs/ Union 
B. Member Level development 
C. Policy Makers Development Programmes 
D. Policy and product Development 
Interventions 
E. Financial integration 
Support for IT infrastructure (hardware, 
software) for RUSACCOs  
Institutional Development- Setting up 2 Apex 
level national/regional Bodies  
Linking RUSACCOs to Unions  
Setting up a training Institution of excellence 
at the National Level  
Developing  Training Institutions at Regional 
level for Financial Cooperatives-  infrastructure  
Development 
Setting up Certification System for professional 
and institutional excellence 
Pilot testing new products 
Training Need Assessment 
Viability and Transformation Impact Study 
Financing Rule 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 90% ), BEN ( 10% 
) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 90% ), BEN ( 10% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
17 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
Integrating Financial Cooperatives with 
Financial Inclusion Programme 
Integrating SACCOs/Unions with Payment 
Systems  
Integrating Unions/ SACCOs with Credit 
Information system 
Mobility Support for  Union/ RUSACCO staff 
Technical Staff Support for Unions 
3. Improved Regulation and Supervision of 
MFIs by NBE and AEMFI 
4. Improved Regulation and Supervision of 
RUSACCOs by FCA 
5. Facilitating Funds Flow and diversification 
of business 
1. External Cofinanciers 
AGRA 
BADEA 
EIB 
EU - LOC 
IFAD Grant - LoC 
IFAD Loan - LoC 
2. Domestic Cofinanciers 
Government of Ethiopia 
DBE 
Commercial Bank of Ethiopia 
Ethiopian Insurance Company 
Subtotal 
6. Program Management 
1. Equipment 
Laptops  
Specialist IT software 
Desktop Computers and peripheral devices 
Subtotal 
2. Vehicles 
Four-wheel Drive 
3. Studies 
Impact Studies 
Mid-term review (MTR) 
Project Completion Report (PCR)  
4. Workshops 
RUFIP III Launch Workshop 
stakeholders Consultation Work shop 
Steering Committee and PCMU meeting 
Financial literacy sensitization workshop 
5. Training and Study Tours 
6. Technical Assistance and Operations 
Guarantee Facility  
Insurance mainstreaming 
7  Salaries  
Financing Rule 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% ) 
GOVT 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
OTHER_COFIN ( 100% ) 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
Senior Lead Technical Staff 
IFAD_GRANT ( 100% ) 
18 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
All other salaries 
8  Operating Costs 
Records Management 
Financing Rule 
GOVT 
GOVT 
37. 
Financial  records  must  be  created  and  preserved  for  every  financial  transaction 
performed  under  the  project.  Financial  records  are  defined  as  any  financial  information 
including  written,  computer  data,  internal  forms,  e-mails,  or  any  other  form  of  storage 
information  originated  from  the  PCMU  such  as  internal  forms,  journal  vouchers  financial 
reports  (Monthly  &  quarterly)  copies  of  cheques/  EFTs  and  withdrawal  applications  etc.  or 
received  by  the  PCMU  such  as  supplier  invoices  and  receipts,  bank  statements,  IFAD 
documents etc. within the framework of the project's official activities. The objective of this 
procedure is to preserve the financial records and files for further official use by the PCMU, 
for financial audit and for review by the Fund during the supervision missions. The project’s 
financial records are the property of the DBE and cannot be removed or destroyed.  
It is important to note that in accordance with the IFAD general conditions, the GoE has 
to maintain the original records for a minimum 10 years after RUFIP III completion. 
38. 
Filing  of  the  financial  records. The Finance team will maintain chronological files 
in  which  the  financial  documents  have  to  be  filed  for  future  reference.  Filing  should  be 
performed  daily  to  prevent  the  accumulation  of  papers  and  to  ensure  that  the  financial 
records are maintained in an up-to-date manner at all times. Each financial record should be 
filed  under  its  code  in  a  chronological  order,  with  a  sequential  number  assigned  to  every 
document. Any kind of additions or amendments to the financial document should be filed in 
a  chronological  order  immediately  following  the  principal  document.  A  separate  series  of 
vouchers will be filed for each operational account opened: separately for IFAD loan/ grant 
and other donors. 
39. 
Storage  of  financial  records: The financial records of the project should be stored 
in  the  PCMU  and  FCA  for  a  minimum  of  10  years  after  the  project  completion.  The  data 
should be stored within the accounting software, as paper copies, as scanned copies and as 
computer  disc  copies.  The  key  agencies  such  as  DBE/  FCA  should  allocate  an  appropriate 
storage area for the financial records in paper format and maintain them in locked cabinets, 
safe  from  water  and  fire,  to  which  access  is  controlled  and  limited.  The  Financial  Officers 
should  also  classify  the  financial  records  as  "Confidential",  or  "General".  All  important 
correspondences should be filed. 
40. 
Archiving  of  financial  records: In order to prevent an unnecessary pile-up of files 
in  a  limited  office  space,  the  Finance  Manager  should  make  sure  that  the  financial  records 
are archived on a regularly basis. Once a year, the Finance Manager should make sure that 
the completed or inactive files are archived in a manner that will allow for easy retrieval of 
the files in case they are required at some future date.  
41. 
Back-  up  procedures:  To  avoid  the  loss  or  damage  of  financial  data,  the 
information should be kept in two copies: i) at the computer  server  of the  PCMU and ii) in 
the locked cabinets of the PCMU. Only authorised personnel should be allowed to access the 
financial records. The access of external persons is prohibited except for authorised persons 
such investigators, auditors & IFAD staff/ consultants with prior arrangement.  
Under  the  area  of  accounting  system,  IFAD  missions  will  be  looking  out  for  the 
42. 
following aspects: 
  Basis  of  accounting-  RUFIP  III  should  comply  with  the  cash  basis  of 
19 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
accounting with the required disclosures. 
  Adequacy  and  reliability  of  accounting  system-  therefore  the  project  should 
ensure  to  comply  with  the  internal  controls  around  the  Selected  accounting 
software system 
  Recordkeeping (including documentation and filing/archiving) 
  Fixed assets register maintained and reconciled 
  Adequate  documentation  and  controls  for  Information  Systems,  including 
documented accounting procedures, backup of financial records, integration of 
all sub-systems. 
  Adequacy of chart of accounts for RUFIP III accounting purposes 
  Timeliness  of  recording  transactions,  regularity  of  performance  and  approval 
of reconciliations, controls on erroneous recordings. 
  Appropriate/  adequate  accounting  and  reporting  of  counterpart  funds 
contributions  (including  tax  and  tax  exemptions)  as  well  as  beneficiary 
contributions. 
Internal controls and expenditure documentation: It is emphasised that RUFIP 
43. 
III is GoE programme and, therefore, will comply with GoE allowances for travel and 
accommodation unless otherwise specifically agreed formally between IFAD and GoE. The 
prevailing GoE field and travel related allowance rates will be applied for RUFIP III activities. 
44. 
that the following steps are performed: 
Payment Documentation: For all payments, the Finance Manager should ensure 
o  A payment request voucher should be prepared for each payment.  
o  Validation  of  invoice.  The  following  validation  checks  should  be 
performed by the Finance Manager on invoice: 
Invoice arithmetically correct; and 
 
  Quantity  and  price  recorded  on  invoice  should  be  checked 
of 
order, 
back 
completion/delivery. If there is any discrepancy identified, it 
should  be  raised  with  the  vendor  prior  to  proceeding  with 
invoice processing, 
certification 
contract, 
and 
to 
45. 
payment voucher to support validation: 
Supporting documentation: the following documents should be attached to the 
  Copy of invoice;  
  Required approvals; 
  Purchase  order,  goods  received  note  and  contract  if 
applicable; and 
  Copy of required guarantee 
Minimum documentation. To ensure that the finance unit collects all the 
46. 
supporting documents, the following checklists are provided; they should be ticked-off 
carefully and attached to each payment voucher. 
Standard Goods 
(Tick) 
In-Country Workshops 
(Tick) 
20 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
Complete  Written  Voucher,  duly 
approved 
Confirmation 
Procurement 
by 
Officer  that  the  Procurement  was 
properly  done  in  accordance  with 
GOE and IFAD procedures 
of 
from 
supporting 
relevant  No 
IFAD,  where 
Attach  Copies  of 
Objections 
applicable 
Availability 
documentation 
Contract 
Invoice 
Evidence of payment 
Bank guarantee 
Delivery  notes/reports  (Make  Cross 
Reference where bulky) 
Fund availability in 
Budget-Ensure 
Selected 
accounting software budget controls 
have been updated 
Category(ies) 
Accuracy of Computations/footings 
Reviewed 
optimality 
disbursement method 
Banking instructions 
Correspondence bank 
Percentage of financing 
the 
the 
of 
Workshops- Abroad 
(Tick) 
and 
related 
Invitations 
IFAD’s No Objection  
Availability  of  supporting 
documentation 
 Boarding 
reconciled DSA days taken 
 Back to Office Reports 
passes 
Fund availability in 
Budget-Ensure the selected 
accounting software budget 
been 
controls 
updated 
Category(ies) 
have 
Accuracy 
Computations/footings 
of 
Attendance sheets 
Attendance  sheets  should 
be reconciled to DSA paid 
of 
reconciled 
Availability  of  supporting 
documentation 
Training report 
Hotel  Receipts/  bills 
for 
meals  and  accommodation( 
should  be 
to 
attendance sheets) 
Procurement  record  on  how 
the venue was selected 
Justification 
fuel 
for  any 
refunds and related support 
Fund availability in 
Budget-Ensure 
Selected 
accounting  software  budget 
controls have been updated 
Category(ies) 
Accuracy 
Computations/footings 
Consultancies 
Timesheets  in  comparison 
with the work done;  
Attach Copies of relevant No 
Objections 
IFAD, 
where applicable 
An acceptable report  
Availability  of  supporting 
documentation 
Contract 
Invoice 
Evidence of payment 
Bank 
guarantee 
advances 
Fund availability in 
Budget-Ensure  Vote  Book 
has been updated 
Category(ies) 
Accuracy 
Computations/footings 
Banking instructions 
Correspondence bank 
from 
for 
of 
(Tick) 
47. 
Adequate segregation of duties: The RUFIP III financial management system has 
been designed to assure adequate segregation of duties. No single officer can originate and 
complete a transaction. The payment cycle for works and goods will follow the following 
pattern: 
21 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
Payments  for  Consultant  Services: There are two types of consultants' services; 
48. 
a)  Consultants  with  a  lump  sum  contract,  and  b)  Consultants  with  a  time-based  contract. 
For type (a) consultants, payments will be made against the delivery of outputs as detailed 
in their contracts. For type (b) consultants, payments will be made against the submission 
of  a  time  sheet,  a  report  on  activities  performed  and  the  assurance  (by  a  technical 
coordinator)  of  the  adequacy  of  services  rendered.  Both  time  sheets  and  reports  will  need 
the  technical  approval  of  the  technical  component  head  before  the  payment  can  be 
entertained. 
49. 
office supplies and travel related expenditures. 
Similar arrangement above to assure segregation of duties will apply for regular 
22 
Technical  Component Coordinators make payment requisitions with all supporting documents and justifications  Procurement Officer:  Prepare payment Request  Attach technical approval & other supporting documents  Attach contractor’s/ supplier invoice and Delivery Notes      Accountant   Verifies availability of budget  Reviews the status of contract monitoring forms  Reviews the status of securities (advance/ performance bonds)  Checks reliability of banking instructions  Makes entry in the computerised accounting system  Reviews the work of the Assistant accountant  Financial Controller  Checks the accuracy of payment request and supporting documents  Verify the payment request’s compliance with the contract  Reviews the work done by the Accountant  Authorises vouchers, signs off cheques or forwards direct payments  Review open entries passed by accountant and if satisfied updates the computerised system     Assistant Accountant  Prepares payment vouchers ensuring checklists in this manual and fully ticked off  Prepares cheques or types out a a withdrawal application in case of direct payment  Undertakes chronological filing in a series for each funding source disbursed on a parallel basis  Makes entries in manual registers  RUFIP III coordinator  Reviews work of Financial  Manager and Procurement Officer  Approves the payments   Request Treasury to sign  off withdrawal applications in case of direct payments    Technical Approval  by technical component coordinator  Procurement Officer:  Prepare payment Request  Attach technical approval & other supporting documents  Attach consultant’s invoice         RUFIP III Coordinator:  Review payment request & supporting documents  Passes payment  request to FM  for review and processing  Authorize and sign payment request  Finance Manager  Approve the payments and directs signs off cheques or request/ EFTs         Assistant Accountant  Prepares payment vouchers  Writes out cheques  Reviews the completed of the expenditure checklists  Undertakes fling   Accountant  Checks the accuracy of payment request and supporting documents  Verify the payment request’s compliance with the contract  Updates the accounts  software system and checks budget controls    
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
50. 
Fixed  assets  control: Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks 
to  track  fixed  assets  for  the  purposes  of  financial  accounting  and  to  ensure  preventive 
maintenance,  and  theft  deterrence.  Adequate  Fixed  asset  maintenance  also  increases  the 
sustainability of the project. 
Asset  Register. The Project must maintain a register of all (material) RUFIP III equipment. 
51. 
The asset register should record the following information for each individual piece of equipment: 1) 
Asset description, 2) Asset number, 3) Serial number of the item, 4) Officer responsible for asset, 5) 
Funding  of  asset  (IFAD,  other  donors,  Government  etc.),  6)  Location;  Date  of  purchase;  and  7) 
Estimated life.  
52. 
Asset Verification Review. The Finance Manager must ensure that a verification count of all 
equipment recorded in the fixed asset register is performed at least once a year. This should include 
the following checks: 
  Verify that all equipment is still held in the location recorded on the register; and 
  Check that equipment is still in a reasonable state of repair. 
  The assets register must contain all assets held by the PCMU/ implementing agencies 
such as FCA and those held by beneficiary communities. 
  Discrepancies between the verification exercise and the fixed asset register should be 
investigated.  Where  assets  are  missing  or  seriously  damaged,  they  should  be 
removed  from  the  asset  register.  The  removal  should  be  formally  documented  and 
approved by the RUFIP III Coordinator. 
  The verification review must be performed by different staff from those who use the 
equipment, to ensure adequate segregation of duty. 
53. 
Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel. The drivers are required to record all trips and fuel refills in 
a logbook and collect all the supporting documentation (different if fuel cards are used). The vehicle 
logbook  provides  control  over  the  use  of  the  vehicles  as  well  as  fuel  consumption.  For  official  field 
trips, a special cash provision is given to drivers to allow them to purchase fuel during the trip.  
The safety of cars is the responsibility of the recipient staff members and drivers assigned to 
54. 
the vehicles. Consequently, they must ensure that the cars are parked in a secure area when not in 
use or outside working hours. The drivers are required to monitor the maintenance of their assigned 
vehicles  under  the  supervision  of  the  administrative  assistant.  The  drivers  must  notify  the 
administrative assistant of maintenance needs (including periodic servicing) so that the cars can be 
serviced on a timely basis.  
55. 
The Finance Manager should on a monthly basis review the mileage and fuel usage as well as 
any undertaken service as reported in the log book of each car and compare these with the official 
invoices and travel authorizations etc. to make sure the numbers are accurate.  
An insurance policy must be taken by the PCMU to ensure all cars and passengers against all 
56. 
risks, including damage, theft, and fire, as well as injury and property damage to third parties.  
57. 
Under internal controls, IFAD missions will be keenly interested in the following aspects:  
(i) 
(ii) 
Segregation  of  duties-  are  the  following  functional  responsibilities  performed 
by different units or persons:  
a.  authorization of a transaction 
b.  execution of a transaction 
c.  recording of the transaction; and  
d.  custody of assets involved in the transaction. 
Clarity and adequacy of decision processes and sequence of events for control 
functions  in  project  implementation  reflected  in  the  Financial  Manual  (or 
equivalent there-of). 
23 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Adherence to Project Management manuals. 
Effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  internal  controls  over  inflows  of  funding 
sources other than IFAD. 
Adequacy  of  contract  management  (use  of  contracts  register  and  monitoring 
form) and filing there-of. 
Effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  internal  controls  over  expenditures  (full  cycle 
from  commitment,  payment,  receipt  of  good  and  services,  approval  of 
payments, classification, etc.)  
(vii)  Documentary  evidence  to  confirm  delivery  and  acceptance  of  contracted 
goods, works or services. 
(viii)  Physical  controls  over  cash,  documents  and  records.  Adequacy  of  filing 
systems. Missions will review the petty cash subject to monthly reconciliation 
as well as surprise checks; custody of cash box and control of keys. 
Adequacy of physical management of cash. 
Timely payment to suppliers and consultants. 
Eligibility of expenditures with respect to Financing Agreements. 
Legality/eligibility  of  advances  from  project  funds  and  timely  justification  for 
use thereof.  
(xiii)  Compliance  with 
financial  management  covenants 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
the  Financing 
in 
Agreements and Letter to the Borrower (LTB). 
(xiv)  Adequacy of up-to-date record keeping for fixed assets and inventories. 
(xv)  Adequacy of controls concerning project assets including: 
a.  Vehicle  and  other  assets  management  (assets  should  be  property  tagged 
and a physical inventory count done on a regular basis) 
b.  Fuel management (Drivers should maintain a vehicle log book)  
c.  Travel authorisations (including Daily Subsistence Allowance (DSA) paid to 
staff) 
d.  Adequacy of vehicles and assets insurance. 
(xvi)  Workshops:  
a.  Availability of list of participants 
b.  DSA paid to participants 
c.  Receipts for workshop expenditure 
(xvii)  Adequacy  of  controls  and  authorisation  process  for  use  of  funds  (payments, 
transfers, Cash/Bank balance management) / and other operational accounts. 
(xviii)  Banking  arrangement  and  controls  (reconciliation  of  bank  statements  with 
financial accounts). 
(xix)  Existence of a proper IT support unit in place. 
3.4 Step 4: Withdrawal Applications 
58. 
The IFAD disbursement handbook provides all the guidance and forms needed for the 
preparation  of  withdrawal  applications  including  replenishment  applications.  Those  forms 
and  guidance  are  not  reproduced  in  this  manual.  As  stated  in  the  LTB  and  the  LDH,  four 
standard disbursement procedures may be used for withdrawal of financing. 
  Procedure  I:  Advance  withdrawal 
imprest  account  with 
replenishment designation account  as has been the case under RUFIP I and 
II).  
(using 
  Procedure  II:  Direct  payment.  This  modality  is  used  for  eligible  RUFIP  III 
expenditure  to  be  paid  directly  by  IFAD,  generally  for  large  contracts,  to 
suppliers,  contractors  or  third  parties,  as  authorised  by  the  GoE  over  USD 
100,000  and  to  be  reviewed  by  IFAD  depending  on  assessment  of  the 
fiduciary risk. 
24 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
  Procedure  III:  Reimbursement.  This  is  applicable  when  eligible  RUFIP  III 
expenditures,  reimbursable  under  the  financing,  have  been  pre-financed  by 
the GoE. Such reimbursements are expected to be claimed not later than 90 
calendar days from the date of payment by RUFIP III. 
59. 
The  finance  team  must  be  efficient  in  submission  of  the  withdrawal  applications  to 
IFAD  otherwise  liquidity  can  be  a  hindrance  to  implementation.  A  tool  that  can  be  used  to 
measure  the  efficiency  of  a  replenishment  process  is  the  designated  account  reconciliation 
as shown below. Thus the designated account reconciliation should not be done as formality 
for inclusion in a WAs but should be used on a monthly basis, as a performance measure as 
illustrated below. 
Illustrating that Designated Account Reconciliation is good Treasury 
Management Tool 
 USD   Management Tips 
1  Total initial advance by IFAD 
xxx  
2  LESS: Amount Recovered by 
- 
IFAD 
3  Outstanding Advance to 
Designated Account 
4  Balance of Designated Account 
as per Bank Statement from 
the Commercial bank 
xxx 
xxx 
5  Balance on Project Operational 
xxx 
Accounts as per Bank 
Statements 
xxx 
This  reconciliation  should  give  the  trail  of 
this  advance.  The  FM  should  always  on  a 
monthly basis be interested to know the trail 
of the Authorized Allocation (AA). 
If less than 50% of the initial deposit can be 
traced  to  bank  statements,  this  can  always 
alert  the  FM  and  RUFIP  III  Coordinator  of 
lingering  cash  flow  problems  by  looking  at 
lines 4 and 5 
Total of Bank Balances 
6  Plus Total Amount claimed in 
this Application No.  
7  Plus Total Amount withdrawn 
from bank accounts not yet 
claimed 
xxx   If this amount is materially higher than 30% 
of the initial deposits it would point at laxity 
in the replenishment system. If for example, 
this  amount  is  twice  or  more  than  the 
for  replenishment,  It 
minimum  amount 
would tell PC that the FM could have lodged 
a  WA  when  expenditure 
the 
minimum  amount  of  30%  of  the  initial 
deposit  and  there  could  be  over  bulking/ 
inefficiency. 
reached 
xxx   This should cause the  RUFIP  III Coordinator 
to  demand  why  money  to  this  magnitude 
is  not  being 
has  been  withdrawn  but 
included  in  the  WA.  The  PC  should  always 
demand  for  a  schedule  of  this  amount—it 
reflects  inefficiency  and  results  in  cash  flow 
problems  to  have  large  amounts  of  money 
from bank accounts and take a long time to 
be  replenished  back.  Secondly  care  should 
be taken that this figure is not only inserted 
as  a  balancing  figure,  which  would  reflect 
that  the  designated  account  is  not  well 
managed. 
25 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
8  Plus Amounts claimed in 
previous Applications not yet 
credited at date of Bank 
Statement 
9  Minus Interest Earned 
10. TOTAL ADVANCE 
ACCOUNTED FOR 
 USD   Management Tips 
xxx  The WAs in the pipeline, if they take long to 
be  processed,  could  reflect  that  IFAD  raised 
many  queries  on  the  quality  of  the  WAs,  in 
which  case  the  RUFIP  III  Coordinator  could 
request  for  staff  training;  or  it  could  be 
delays on the side of IFAD and in which case 
the  PC  would  still  have  to  initiate  follow-up 
from  IFAD.  It  is  advisable  for  the  FM  to 
always follow the status of the WA on ICP 
xxx   If 
this 
the 
total  does  not  equal 
outstanding  initial  deposit,  the  PC  should 
demand  explanation.  It  is  so  serious  to  fail 
to reconcile the Authorised Allocation. 
to 
It  is  key  for  FM  to  know  RUFIP  III  treasury  position  at  all  time  in  order  to  better 
60. 
manage the RUFIP III’s liquidity position in a timely and efficient manner. The key goals are 
to ensure that: 
a)  There  are  sufficient  funds  in  treasury  to  meet  the  RUFIP  III’s  field  activities 
for implementation.  
b)  the  disbursement  rate  of  the  project  closely  follows  the  physical  activity 
progress; 
c)  Increase in the performance level of RUFIP III and meeting it objectives  
61. 
The key elements on project treasury position are: 
a)  Status of Designated accounts balances (Using the cash books as at reporting 
date) 
b)  Status  of  the  operation  accounts  balances  (Using  the  cash  books  as  at 
reporting date) 
c)  The status of cash in hand (Using the cash book as at reporting date)  
d)  The money value of WA with IFAD for reimbursement 
e)  The money value of WA to be submitted to IFAD 
62. 
FM should prepare regular cash and expenditures rolling monthly cash flow forecasts. 
This  will  help  to  detect  periods  of  liquidity  gaps  so  that  appropriate  adjustments  in  work 
scheduling or any other remedial actions can be taken proactively. 
3.5 Step 5: Financial reports and auditing 
Periodic  financial  progress  reports  are  a  requirement  of  the  IFAD  Financing  Agreement. 
63. 
Sufficient information must be made available about what the money is spent on, how much is spent 
and what the results are. The major financial reports include the following: AWPB, monthly financial 
reports,  periodic  financial  progress  reports,  supervision  reports,  annual  financial  statements  and 
audit reports. IFAD has now developed guidelines for Interim Financial Reporting (IFR) to guide the 
progress  reporting.  These  have  been  included  in  the  resource  pack.  The  resource  pack  includes 
guidelines for each of the following aspects. 
26 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
64. 
Under financial reporting IFAD missions will be looking for: 
  Completeness, accuracy, usefulness, and timeliness of financial reports. 
 
Interim  FM  reports  and  linkage  to  progress  reports  -  timely  preparation, 
submission to IFAD. 
  Preparation  of  reports  showing  actual  vs  budget  income/expenditure  and 
AWPB execution rate.  
  Follow up of previous aide-memoirs fiduciary recommendations. 
  Reasonable  alignment  between  disbursement  rate  of  recurrent  versus 
investment cost categories. 
AUDIT ARRANGEMENTS 
65. 
Statutory Audits: The project audit is an ex-post review of financial statements, records of 
transactions  &  financial  systems.    It  examines  the  adequacy  of  accounting  systems  &  procedures, 
capacity  to  maintain  appropriate  accounts  &  documentation  of  the  project/grant  expenditures.  The 
objective of the project audit is to provide credibility and assurance of accountability.  
66. 
In  accordance  with  the  IFAD  General  Conditions  and  the  IFAD  Handbook  for  Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of  IFAD-Financed  Projects, the  RUFIP III must  have its financial  statements 
audited by an external auditor acceptable to IFAD. The Audited financial statements need to be sent 
to IFAD no later than 6 months after the end of the fiscal year. 
a)  The  detailed  instruction  regarding  project  audit  are  outlined  in  the  IFAD  guidelines  for 
project audits available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm 
b)  The  Federal  Auditor  General  [AG]  is  empowered  by  the  Constitution  of  the  Federal 
Democratic Government of Ethiopia, to audit all Government Funds. However, because of 
the  human  resource  constraints,  with  his/her  consent,  a  private  practice  auditor  can 
always be appointed. The new changes in IFAD guidelines should be adhered to such as 
the single audit opinion but with requisite publication in widely circulated news media. 
c)  In  addition  to  the  audit  report,  the  independent  auditor  will  prepare  a  management 
letter. This will include comment and recommendations on the adequacy of the financial 
management  system,  and  on  the  system  of  internal  control.  The  management  letter 
should  also  include  a  follow  up  section  on  the  status  of  implementation  of  previous 
years’ recommendations. 
Internal  audits:  Internal  auditing  of  RUFIP  III  is  the  responsibility  of  the 
67. 
Internal  Audit  Unit  in  the  DBE.  The  internal  audit  unit  at  the  DBE  will  review  the  financial 
transactions of the Project and submit reports which will include the:- 
27 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
a)  Timeliness and accuracy of the update of the project accounting records; 
b)  Timeliness and accuracy of the reconciliation of the bank accounts; 
c)  Accuracy of project expenditure and timeliness of the preparation and submission of the 
WA’s for the replenishment of the designated accounts; 
d)  Eligibility of Loan/grant expenditure; and 
e)  Adherence  to  the  approval  and  authorisation  process,  internal  controls  and  internal 
checks, including adherence to the FDRE Procurement process and Procedures 
 In accordance with the IFAD general conditions and the IFAD guidelines for project audits, the 
PCMU must have  RUFIP III  financial statements  audited by an  External auditor  acceptable to  IFAD. 
The Audited financial statements need to be sent to IFAD no later than 6 months after the end of the 
fiscal  year.  The  detailed  instruction  regarding  project  audit  are  outlined  in  the  IFAD  guidelines  for 
project audits available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm 
28 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
29 
RUFIP III 
Draft Financial Management Manual –June 2019 
4  ANNEXURES 
The forms and accounting documents as used under RUFIP I and II have been adopted for 
RUFIP III except that manual excel worksheets will not be accepted as substitute for 
accounting software. 
--oo0oo-- 
30 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Component 1 – Building Capacity of Institutions and Clients 
Working Paper 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Component 1- Building Capacity of Institutions and Clients 
WORKING PAPERS 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
INDEX 
Nomenclature 
Particulars 
Component 
1: 
Building  Capacity  of 
and 
Institutions 
Clients 
 PART  I(component 
1.1) 
 List of Abbreviations 
Improving Capacities ,Systems and Processes in MFIs 
Paragraph 1 
Significance of Capacity -Building  
Para graph 2 
AEMFI-Organizational Status 
 Paragraph 3  
Strengths and Accomplishments of AEMFI 
Paragraph 4 
Support to AEMFI under RUFIP II-Expected Outcomes  
 Paragraph 5 
Paragraphs 6 
AEMFI’s initiatives and Progress with RUFIPII support 
Emerging Challenges of MFI sector 
Paragraph 7 
TA support for various interventions under RUFIP III-Role Expectations 
Paragraph 8 
Paragraph 9 
Annexure I 
Annexure II 
Annexure III A 
Annexure IIIB 
Annexure IV 
Annexure V A 
Annexure VB 
 Annexure VI 
Summary of envisaged activities with RUFIP III Support 
Outcomes of Expected of RUFIP III Supported interventions  
Status and functions of EIFT and EFTRI 
Summary of Purpose-wise budget sanctioned to AEMFI under RUFIP II during 2013-
19  
 List  of  Courses  ,Target  Groups  ,Duration  ,  Number  of  Participants  (with  gender 
segregations ) 
List of Courses ,Target Groups ,Duration and Number of Participants  
Focus Areas of Training Programmes Developed by AEMFI, based on TNA 
Staff Position of AEMFI  
 Staff Positioned for MIS Project 
Technical  Assistance  (TA)  Interventions  for    capacity-building  of  AEMFI,  MFIs  and 
their clients. 
PART II-Component 1.2: Improving capacities ,Systems and Processes in Financial Cooperatives 
Para graph 1 
Paragraph 2 
Federal Cooperative Agency (FCA) –Initiatives and Contributions  
Organizational Restructuring of FCA /RPCAs 
Twinning Arrangements with Irish League of Cooperative Unions Federations (ICULF) 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Paragraph 3 
Paragraph 4  
Training Need Assessment (TNA) Study 
Paragraph 5  
Training Infrastructure & Building of Apex and Regional Institutes of Excellence 
Paragraph 6  
National Financial Strategy Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) and Financial Cooperatives  
Paragraph 7 
 capacity-building Projects –Support Strategy of Agricultural Transformation Agency 
(ATA) and other agencies 
Paragraph 8  
Preparing  /Implementing  a  comprehensive  Cooperative  Development  Policy  and 
Strategy 
Paragraph 9  
Consolidation of Credit Unions and RUSACCOs 
Paragraph 10 
Training and  capacity-building Advisory Committee  
Paragraph 11 
Annexure I 
Annexure II 
Annexure III 
 capacity-building Support for FCA and Financial Cooperatives  
Center for Professional Excellence for Cooperatives (CPEC) in India 
 capacity-building interventions for RUSACCOs /Unions under RUFIP III 
 capacity-building of SACCOS n Uganda under PROFIRA 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
List of Abbreviations  
ABC 
AEMFI 
AIFE 
ALM 
AWP & B 
ACSI 
BCP 
BPE 
CDM 
DFS 
DECSI 
 EFTRI 
EIFT 
ETB 
FCA 
GOE 
HRD 
ICT 
ILUCF 
IRFTCO 
MCR 
MI 
MITC 
MIS 
MSME 
NABARD 
NFIS 
NGO 
NPA 
O&M 
ODI 
OSS 
OCSSO 
PACS 
PCMU 
RPCA 
PROFIRA 
RCT 
SPM 
TCAC 
TA 
TNA 
TOT 
UMRA 
UNCDF 
 Acquiring Basic Competencies  
 Association of Ethiopian Micro Finance Institutions 
 Alliance For Financial Inclusion 
 Assets and Liabilities Management 
 Annual Work Plan and Budgeting 
 Amhara Credit and Savings Institutions 
 Business Continuity Planning 
Business Process Engineering 
Credit and Default Management 
Digital Financial Services 
Debit Credit and Savings Institution  
 Ethiopian Inclusive Finance Training and Research Institute  
Ethiopian Inclusive Finance Technology 
Ethiopian Birr 
Federal Cooperative Agency 
Government of Ethiopia  
Human Resources Development 
 Information Communication Technology 
Irish League of Credit Union Federation 
Improving Rural Finance Inclusion Through Cooperatives 
Minimum Competency Requirement 
Micro Insurance 
 Ministry of Trade ,Industry and Cooperatives 
Management Information Service 
Medium, Small, & Micro Enterprises 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
National Financial Inclusion Strategy 
Non- Government Organization 
Non –Performing Assets 
Organization and Methods 
Organization Development Initiatives 
Operational Self –Sufficiency/ Offsite Surveillance 
OMO Credit and Savings Institution 
Primary Agricultural Credit Society  
Project Coordination & Management Unit 
Regional Promotion Cooperative Agency 
Project For Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas 
Randomized Control Trials 
Social Performance Management 
Training and  capacity-building Advisory Committee 
Technical Assistance 
Training Need Assessment 
Training of Trainers 
Uganda Micro finance Regulatory Authority 
United Nations Capacity Development Fund 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Component 1: Building Capacity of Institutions and clients  
1.  Significance of  capacity-building: 
  capacity-building of all Rural Finance Institutions (RFIs), particularly MFIs and Financial Cooperatives 
and their clients has been envisaged under component 1 of RUFIP III, with a focus on enhancement of 
institutional  and  individual  capacity,  systems  and  processes  for  efficient  and  effective  delivery  of 
financial  services  to  targeted  clients,  on  a  sustainable  basis.  Strong  RFIs  with  sound  operative 
performance would ensure financial access to vulnerable people in rural areas and thereby financial 
inclusion effectively. The institutions would be incentivized to avail “line of credit” to implement the 
programme’s  targeting  strategies,  so  as  to  provide  focused  support  to  poor  and  marginalized 
communities. The better informed clients by virtue of financial and digital literacy will be able to take 
appropriate financial decisions. Integrating Technical Assistance (TA) with financial literacy, training, 
skill  development,  Knowledge  Management,  enriching  human  resources  (HR),  management  and 
governance,  enhancing  digital  opportunities,  collection  of  data,  analysis  and  MIS,  exploring  policy 
issues,  product  development,  support  for  client  protection  and  Social  performance  management 
would facilitate fulfillment of programme objectives. These efforts will enhance donors’ partnership, 
prioritization of  capacity-building within RFIs, their greater resource allocation for such purposes, on 
a sustainable basis. With expanded outreach and financial services, RFIs would expand and diversify 
business and at the same time, would improve livelihoods and economic conditions of the targeted 
people.  
1.1 Improving Capacities, Systems and Processes in MFIs: 
Under component 1.1, improving capacity, systems and processes of MFIs would be the central focus. 
The microfinance sector in the country has grown rapidly in the last one decade and now has robust 
network  of  38  MFIs  serving  over  5  million  loan  clients  and  17  million  Savings  Bank  accounts.  The  
capacity-building  efforts,  however,  have  been  sporadic,  inadequate,  non-  strategic  and  non-
systematic. Some of the MFIs have been providing 2% of their budget (minimum required by NBE) for  
capacity-building interventions. However, the sector is characterized by non-existence of HR strategy, 
inadequacy of skilled manpower, weak systems and processes and lack of adequate innovations. To 
address  these  issues  of  the  sector  comprehensively,  the  sub-component  aims  at  giving  primary 
responsibility to AEMFI as the nodal agency to implement various  capacity-building interventions for 
MFIs envisaged. They could engage own staff and institution or engage suitable consultants, training 
institutions  at  the  decentralized  level,  University  faculties,  trainers,  researchers  and  development 
agencies.  So,  the  past  track  record  ,  present  role  and  future  perspectives  of  AEMFI  have  been 
discussed in greater detail ,while narrating the various  capacity-building interventions to be pursued 
by them with Technical Assistance (TA) of RUFIP III. 
2. Association of Ethiopian MFIs (AEMFI): 
2.1 Introduction – Organizational Status: 
AEMFI  is  a  non-profit  /non-government  organization  registered  /licensed  on  18  June  1997  by  the 
Ministry  of  Justice,  Government  of  Ethiopia  for  representing  MFIs,  created  under  the  relevant 
Proclamation,  1996.  It  was  envisaged  to  play  a  catalytic  role  in  knowledge  and  information 
dissemination,  lobby  for  development  of  enabling  environment  for  micro  finance  sector  and 
undertake training, research studies, performance monitoring and bench marking for the MIS, and 
governance.  Over  the  years,  it  has  been  engaged  in  diversified  and  value  added  activities  in  the 
microfinance  sector  with  the  support  of  the  Government  of  Ethiopia  and  several  donor  agencies 
including IFAD. It has made significant contribution for development of human capital, micro finance 
1 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
policy advocacy, financial inclusion, knowledge management and promotion of microfinance industry. 
It has set up separate companies like the Ethiopian Inclusive Finance, Training and Research Institute 
(EIFTRI)  to  give  focused  attention  to  research  and  training  and  the  Ethiopian  Inclusive  Finance 
Technology  (EIFT)  to  facilitate  technology  –based  financial  services.  The  legal  status  and  broad 
functions of these institutions are outlined in the Annexure I. While EIFTRI is wholly owned company 
of AEMFI, the later (EIFT) is owned by all MFIs and Share Company. EIFTRI is a business entity under 
AEMFI with separate staff, dedicated to research and training. Thus, AEMFI has assumed the role of 
technical  resource  organization  providing  institutional  development  support  to  the  MFI  sector.  Its 
financial  resources  for  the  activities  include  membership  fees/contributions,  fees  for  training 
programmes, conferences and exposure visits, donations/ grant for various sponsored programmes, 
building rent income and publications. 
3. Strengths and Accomplishments of AEMFI: 
3.1 Brand name: 
AEMFI  has  earned  a  brand  name  in  the  region  with  its  continued  leadership  for  the  growing 
microfinance sector in the country .Among the MFI Associations in the continent ,it has made distinct 
name in its role in convening regional conferences, bringing out research publications and arranging 
exposure visits ,etc. overseas. It has been able to forge regional Cooperation & Network development 
including  Africa  Network  (AFMIN)  overseas.  The  continued  leadership  of  its  founding  Executive 
Director (Dr.Wolday) for 2 decades had helped the process. 
3.2 Training Infrastructure: 
The  institution  is  equipped  with  good  infrastructure  in  Addis  Ababa  for  imparting  training  – 
Conference Hall, class rooms, Computer lab, library, residential accommodation for trainees, etc. It 
had set up EIFTRI on 6 July 2012 to broad base and  intensify training  and capacity-building efforts 
primarily  for  the  microfinance  sector.  The  participants  of  its  programmes,  however,  include  MFIs, 
banks, development agencies, NGOs, RUSACCOS, Government and policy-making bodies.  
3.3. Track Record of Studies& Research: 
It has been major source of data on the MF sector for studies and research as also MIX Market. It has 
conducted  baseline  surveys  and  studies  with  sponsorship  of  various  agencies  including  IFAD.  Its 
studies  and  documentation  covered  all  aspects  of  MF  sector  working.  These  include  Randomized 
Control  Trials  (RCT)  for  financial  services  (in  collaboration  with  Mannheim  University),  Status  and 
Characteristics  of  Youth  Entrepreneurship,  the  Conference  Compilations,  Occasional  Papers,  Micro 
finance  (MF)  development  Reviews,  etc.  With  the  strength  of  available  data,  it  has  been  able  to 
monitor the performance of members and measure impact of the policies and programmes. 
3.4. Advisory and Advocacy Services: 
It has been leading the MFIs in consultative processes initiated by National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) and 
Government of Ethiopia (GOE) for policy announcements, issue of regulations and legislative changes, 
having  bearing  on  MFIs.  It  has  been  member  of  various  advisory  Committees  of  GOE  and  donor 
agencies covering areas of women entrepreneurship developments, MSME, food security and housing 
finance. 
3.5. Pastoral Regions& Training Efforts: 
It was associated with in implementation of a project  of Farm Africa for Pastoral areas, mainly  for 
undertaking  capacity-building efforts in 3 pastoral regions (SNNP, Somali and Afar). It had organized 
15  types  of  training  programmes,  undertaken  exposure  visits  involving  ACSI  and  DECSI,  capacity 
2 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
development of new MFIs, Product diversification, risk management and, impact/gap assessment. The 
project would continue up to 2020.It has gained considerable experience in these areas. 
The  concept  of  Social  Performance  Management  (SPM)  was  popularized  by  it  through  various 
sensitization programmes. 
4. Support to AEMFI under RUFIP II-Expected Outcomes 
Under  RUFIP  II,  AEMFI  was  given  major  role  and  accordingly,  TA  budget  of  81.43  million  ETB  was 
sanctioned in its favor. The list of activities along with purpose-wise budget sanctioned is given in the 
Annexure II. The role expectations and outcome of the envisaged interventions are outlined below: 
a)  Facilitating enhanced mobility and business expansion in new and interior areas; 
b)  Strengthening HRD and improving professional standards and leadership talents in the MFI 
sector aligned with growth ,innovative policies and business reengineering; 
c)  Standardized MIS aligned with appropriate technology; 
d)  Bringing about technology adoption and banking software by MFIs; 
e)  Addressing ownership and governance of MFIs; 
f)  Development of micro insurance policy and operational strategies; 
g)  Business  Process  reengineering  covering  better  targeting,  increased  women  participation 
development of client-driven products, Client literacy, Client business development, improved 
social performance management, etc. 
h)  Putting in place Risk Management strategies in MFIs; 
i) 
Improved self –regulation ,covering customer protection and fair practices code, disclosure 
standards and grievance redressing mechanism; 
Improved coverage in performance review publications including bi-annual sector reviews to 
start with and leading to annual sector review by the end of the programme; 
j) 
k)  Bringing  effective  linkages with  commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions  established  for 
raising resources; 
l)  Facilitating emergence of service providers and support institutions (e.g. Rating agencies)’ and 
m)  Overall, transforming MFI sector to a sustainable, dynamic and vibrant MFI sector capable of 
expanding its outreach in depth and breath. 
Although some of the outcomes have been accomplished, many are still relevant today. 
5. AEMFI’s initiatives and progress with RUFIP Support: 
AEMFI  has  been  a  constant  partner  in  the  implementation  of  RUFIP  I  and  RUFIP  II.  RUFIP  II  had 
sanctioned a number of interventions, involving TA of ETB of 81.43 million, the details of interventions 
envisaged  are  given  in  the  Annexure  III.  Initiatives  and  progress  under  specific  interventions  are 
outlined below: 
a)  It had undertaken TNA studies (2015) and drawn Training Master Plan (2015-22) for MFIs by 
engaging  local  consulting  Company  .It  had  arranged  overseas  exposure  study  visits  and 
convened  regional  and  international  conferences  and  documented  relevant  reference 
materials.  Based  on  the  TNA  study  in  2015,  focused  areas  of  training  programmes  for  the 
different levels of management have been designed. Based on the same, training themes have 
been  identified  for  various  categories  of  personnel  of  MFIs  in  2019.  (Details  are  given  in 
Annexure IV). 
b)  It  has  organized  training  programmes  including  Training  of  Trainers  (TOT)  for  MFIs  and 
developed related modules, with support of local consulting Company (Wisdom Consult Plc) 
under RUFIP II. MFIs’ contribute 50% of the training cost for the training programmes for the 
lower  level  management.  AEMFI  has  enlisted  services  of  an  Indian  consulting  Company 
(Skydive Technologies & Consulting Plc) for conducting training programmes. Lists of Courses, 
3 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
c) 
Target Groups, Duration and Number of Participants (with Gender segregation) are given as 
Annexure III A and III B.  
It has engaged international consultant(HORUS, France) for designing MIS project for member 
MFIs, with detailed implementation plan with detailed activities, estimating budget and time 
for the activities and implementation strategies with RUFIP II support .Under the MIS project, 
MFIs are contributing600,000 US $ (42% of for the hardware and software purchases).  
d)  AEMFI  has  been  a  member  of  the  Steering  Committee  as  also  of  Project  Management 
Committee under RUFIP II.  
e)  While AEMFI could share the credit of expansion, growth and development of MF sector in 
the country, the delay in the implementation of various interventions provided for and non-
utilization of budget come to the surface. While TNA study and Training Plan could make head 
way  in  2015  and most  of the  progress  were  witnessed  during  the  last  3-4  years.  The  fund 
allocated has not be fully utilized during the project period. Based on the experience gained 
and lessons learnt in RUFIP II and in recognition of future needs of the MFIs and their clients, 
the modalities for support for AEMFI under RUFIP III should be decided.  
6. The Emerging Challenges in MF sector: 
In the training and competency- building space, several challenges have been noticed, justifying the 
increased    capacity-building  intervention  of  AEMFI,  as  discussed  in  the  Training  Need  Assessment 
(TNA) Study conducted by Golden Africa Capacity Centre PLc in August 2015. 
a)  The sector is growing very fast with increasing number of MFIs and diversification of business. 
MFIs  are  increasingly  taking  recourse  to  ICT  products  and  services  (i.e.,  CBS,  ICT  products, 
mobile  banking,  and  agent  banking),  leading  to  enhanced  customers’  expectation.  The 
knowledge,  skill  and  competence  of  the  staff  need  enhancement  commensurate  with  the 
changes in the sector. There is distinct shortage of knowledge and experience in MFIs. 
b)  There is high turnover of staff (15 to 25% as estimated by TNA study).Total staff estimated 
then was about 21000.The total employees’ strength of 34 MFIs stood at 33,465(male: 22,741 
and female 10,724) as at 31 December 2018, out of which 7.880 are Loan Officers.  There is 
need  for  fresh  training  for  the  new  recruits  and  old  staff  to  enable  them  to  take  up  new 
responsibilities and cope up with emerging challenges. 
c)  There is marginalization of MF field in the educational institutions including the Universities. 
The  students  passing  out  of  these  institutions  generally  do  not  carry  specialization  in 
microfinance. 
d)  There  are  very  limited  training  institutions  with  focus  on  micro  finance  services.  The 
institutions like NBE’s Ethiopian Institution of Financial Studies(EIFS), Ethiopian Management 
Institute,  Addis  Ababa  Chamber  of  commerce  and  Sectoral  Association,  etc.  ,do  not  give 
adequate focus to micro finance training. 
e)  ACSI, Bahar dar, DECSI, MekeIe and OCSSCO, Hawassa &Sidama have their internal training 
institutions for training their branch level/sub branch level staff. However, they can only run 
one channel for 25-30 persons at a time. 
In this background,  the TNA study referred to the above concluded “supply and demand 
shows that demand for training far exceeds the supply.” It also prepared the Training Master 
Plan for 2015-22 for AEMFI /EIFTRI to take up the training strategic interventions.  
f) 
In the light of above challenges, the following interventions are proposed to be supported under 
RUFIP III. 
4 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
7. TA Support For Various Interventions under RUFIP III-Role Expectations: 
7.1 Transforming AEMFI as an Apex institution for Training &Development of Excellence: 
There is no apex institution of excellence which can take a leadership position to direct, facilitate and 
monitor the training and  capacity-building efforts for MFIs, on a sustainable basis. The Apex institute 
is  expected  to  provide  value-added  training  programmes,  explore  and  innovate  training  approach, 
plan and execute need-based capacity –building programmes in the years to come, for furtherance of 
the sector. It is expected to develop smaller training institutions in the regions and encourage setting 
up new institutions, which could serve as satellite /affiliate institutions, supplementing the Apex. It 
could help the 3 training institutions of MFIs to improve their capability. It is expected to standardize 
training  programme  modules  and  materials  as  also  support  certification  system,  with  a  view  to 
ensuring quality standards of the institutions, programmes and trainers. It should aim at becoming 
sustainable institution, so that it could run independently without any external financial support. With 
a  view  to  facilitating  AEMFI  for  transforming  itself  as  an  institution  of  excellence  for  training 
&development,  RUFIP III would support a study for  organizational reengineering and carving out  a 
road map for the next 6 years ahead. 
7.2 Completing and taking MIS project forward 
With RUFIP II support, MFIs project is being implemented which has potential to improve significantly 
their  systems  and  processes.  A  detailed  implementation  plan  for  MIS  project  has  already  been 
prepared. Therefore, participating MFIs would be implementing the project with technical support 
and  capacity-building assistance from the Service Provider, coupled with oversight of AEMFI.NBE’s 
inspection team is expected to look in to systemic and operational aspects during onsite inspection. 
The  auditors  (internal  &external)  would  examine  the  relevant  aspects.  The  relevant  guidelines 
pertaining to Offsite surveillance System (OSS), exposure standards and reporting requirement need 
a relook. In order to ensure that MIS project is implemented in time and without hassles, it is essential 
that project is monitored scrupulously. The issue should be reviewed as a separate agenda in the MFIs’ 
Conference convened by AEMFI regularly (say once in quarter). A standing Technical Committee can 
be constituted with inclusion of the service provider and three technically competent officer-one each 
from A, B and C category of MFIs as members, NBE official as special invitee and AEMFI /EIFT as the 
convener. At the end of RUFIP III, all MFIs should continuously get the attendant benefits of the project 
and would be able to manage, maintain and update information/data whenever necessary, without 
seeking  external  support.  RUFIP  III  aims  at  timely,  effective  and  prudent  implementation  of  the 
project, leading to full internalization of the benefits by all stakeholders.  
7.3 Positioning and Developing core Faculties in AEMFI/EIFTRI: 
It is observed that AEMFI/EIFTRI does not have adequate internal faculties, leading to dependence on 
consultants/guest faculties. While taking recourse to guest/visiting faculties/subject matter specialists 
is inevitable, considering number of trainees, programmes and range of programme themes, there is 
need for core faculties, specializing in certain key disciplines. Faculties, specializing in the following 
disciplines should be positioned/groomed: 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
inspection(onsite  &Offsite),  audit(internal  &  external),  risk 
Regulation,  supervision, 
management, ALM, Prudential norms, rating, financial stability, governance and IFRS; 
Promotion, operations, product development, financial services(savings, credit, remittance, 
leasing  &  micro  insurance)  ,  Appraisal  of  loans,  portfolio  analysis/Portfolio  quality 
assessment, customers services and financial literacy; 
ICT , Digital Financial services, MIS, Communication and digital financial literacy; 
 Business Planning, Budgeting, Profitability analysis and Outcome assessment; 
5 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
V. 
VI. 
Social  Performance  Management,  Social  targeting,  Climate  Change,  Impact  assessment, 
Client Satisfaction Survey; and 
HRD –TNA, Staff Motivation, Performance measurement of staff, Staff retention, leadership 
development, O&M and ODI. 
While faculties can be facilitated for undergoing TOTs and to acquire specialization, they may, in turn, 
conduct TOT for the benefit of identified officers, who have potential and interest to handle sessions 
locally, from MFIs, at least one each from C category MFIs and two each from A & B category of MFIs 
in the identified disciplines .RUFIP III would support Faculty development of AEMFI/EIFTRI personnel 
and enable them to organize TOTs increasingly. 
7.4 Prioritizing training programmes on key areas  
AEMFI/  EIFTRI  has-been  conducting  30-35  training  programmes  in  a  year  and  expecting  funding 
support  from  RUFIP  III.  The  programmes  conducted  by  it  are  mostly  designed  in  tune  with 
recommendation of TNA study in 2015. Since the term of the training plan is 7 years (2015-22), RUFIP 
III support can be considered for TNA during2022 and accordingly future training plan can be drawn 
up to 2030.Each of the MFIs would be encouraged to make TNA and prepare training policy for the 
respective institutions. RUFIP III would support 15-20 programmes per year covering @25 officials in 
each programme in the following key areas: 
  Risk  Management  and  compliance  strategies  –  Identification,  prevention  and  mitigation 
mechanism; 
  Digital  Financial  Services(DFS),  ICT,  MIS,  Computerized  environment  -implementation,  up 
scaling and safeguards of DFS, and Financial Inclusion Strategic Framework; 
  Risk  –based  audit  and  supervision  –  Internal  Control  mechanism  ,compliance  to  audit  and 
inspection,  internalization  of  findings  (-mostly  meant  for  internal  auditors  /supervisors  of 
MFIs); 
  Social  Performance  Management(SPM)-Scope,  Social  Inclusion  and  Targeting  Strategy, 
Gender  &Youth  Main  Streaming  Strategy,  Tools  and  techniques  of  implementation  and 
measurement of SPM, rating and monitoring, PPI Survey and livelihood promotion; 
  Codes  of  standards  and  Fair  Practices,  Customers  Protection,  grievance  redressing,  Client 
 
Satisfaction and feedback; 
 Micro Finance Services-Product development, Pricing mechanism, Appraisal of Credit, Quality 
of lending, NPA management, environment protection and sustainable development; 
  Business Plan preparation, Budgeting and budget control, Profit Planning; 
  Leadership Development, Motivation and productivity, Work environment, team building and 
  Corporate Governance and strategic management. 
RUFIP III will support AMFI for conducting training programmes on the above key areas and bringing 
about greater coverage and impact of the programmes. AEMFI could selectively assess the impact of 
the  programmes  .The  programmes  would  cover  Board  /Committee  members,  CEOs,  officers  at 
different levels , and perspective trainers , depending on theme as per the TNA. 
7.5 Special Channel for Programmes for Pastoral Regions 
Considering the ongoing experience of AEMFI in implementing training and exposure programmes for 
pastoral regions and keeping in view the thrust of RUFIP III in minimizing regional imbalance, it would 
be in the fitness of things to open a channel of training and capacity –building for the officials /non-
officials of these regions. About 15 programmes per year @ 20 officers per programme attending such 
programmes would be supported by RUFIP III to enhance skill and insight of the participating senior 
Officers  of  the  pastoral  regions,  who  would  disseminate  the  learning  down  the  tiers.  The  training 
6 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
modules, wherever necessary would be developed, enlisting the services of domestic consultants with 
support of RUFIP III. 
7.6 Workshops/Seminars /Conferences: 
AEMFI has been conducting seminars, workshops and conferences at various levels, on contemporary 
themes from time to time. RUFIP III proposes to support some of the similar events, proposed to be 
conducted  by  NBE  e.g.  Credit  Guarantee  mechanism,  responsible  finance,  financial  liberalization, 
branchless banking, agency baking, are mostly policy issues. Under RUFIP II, AEMFI was earmarked 
study and piloting of securitization of loans of MFIs, greening rural finance, survey of products and gap 
analysis. There should be mutual coordination and consultation between MFIs, NBE and AEMFI, so 
that  there  is  no  duplication  of  efforts  and  the  regulator,  regulating  agencies  and  MF  Association 
collaborate in such events. RUFIP III would support AEMFI in organizing some of the events, more 
focused on experience-sharing, dissemination of field study findings and emerging operational issues. 
However,  AEMFI may  approach PCMU  for  clearance of  the  proposed  event with  broad objectives, 
programme framework, coverage and possible outcome before firming up the event. 
7.7 Exposure Visits: 
Limited number of exposure visits by MFIs, particularly Board /senior management personnel of MFIs 
would be supported, primarily to study success full institutions and their best practices with in the 
country (inside the region and outside) for cross learning. The MFIs working in difficult regions and 
upcoming MFIs, which are showing the signs of better performance, would be prioritized for exposure 
visits. Need-based exposure visit overseas would be supported very selectively, for very senior level 
officials  (mostly  combined  teams  of  GOE,  NBE,  RPCAs,  FCA,  MFIs  and  AEMFI).  The  exposure  visits 
overseas should be purposeful and result in policy –making. The exposure visits would be aimed at 
policy options in digital finance, MFI- CB linkage, Micro insurance regulation and development, deposit 
insurance and institutional protection, transformation of MFIs to other category of banks, etc. 
7.8 Studies and Research: 
AEMFI  will  be  supported  for  undertaking  field  –based  research  studies  on  emerging  themes,  e.g. 
impact of microfinance on livelihood of the poor, empowerment of women through group lending, 
Appropriate Financial and non-financial services by MFIs in pastoral region. The studies could be jointly 
conducted by domestic consultant, AEMFI research associates and MFI officials. 
7.9 Knowledge Management(KM): 
AEMFI is expected to play a critical role in knowledge  and information dissemination for MFIs and 
their clients and over all public. The  practice of bringing out  annual review of MF sector has been 
discontinued since 2017. Website is also not updated and the performance and progress of members 
are  not  available  in  the  website.  AEMFI  should  bring  out  comprehensive  review  of  the  sector 
periodically-say every quarter. It should bring out monthly e - newsletter reflecting developments of 
the sector and best practices by MFIs. Case studies and success stories can be disseminated. RUFIP III 
would support AEMFI /its affiliated Companies (I) redesigning and updating websites, ii) bringing out 
e  -  newsletters  in  English and  local  languages  and  (iii)  bringing  out  quarterly/annual  review  of the 
sector. 
7.10 
Certification System: 
AEMFI has organized Certification programme in partnership with Frank Fort School of Management 
for certifying skilled professional trainers in the industry. The efficacy of the system should be assessed 
.Certification  system  should  be  comprehensive  enough  for  certifying  training  institutions  and 
professionals.  AEMFI  should  work  for  introduction  of  Competency  Certification  System,  besides 
7 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
introducing  Professional  Certification  Courses  for  encouraging  professionalization  in  MFI  industry. 
RUFIP III would support for exploration and piloting of suitable system of Certification. 
7.11 
Financial Literacy /Digital Financial Campaign 
AEMFI  will  be  supported  to  organize  Financial  Literacy/Digital  Literacy  programmes  onsite  for  the 
benefit of MFI clients. Financial literacy tools, Videos and television and radio programmes, awareness 
literature with a focus on these clients would be developed/ disseminated by them. 
7.12 Social Performance Management (SPM): 
AEMFI  had  initiated  steps  for  popularizing  SPM  system  in  MFIs  through  training  /sensitization 
programme.  RUFIP  III  would  support  AEMFI  and  MFIs  for  institutionalization  of  SPM  concept  and 
policy  framework,  awareness  –building,  reporting  and  manual  preparation.  AEMFI  would  be 
supported for training and sensitization of MFIs  
7.13 Staff Support, Office Infrastructure & Mobility Support: 
AEMFI and its affiliates would need support for staff, their mobility, office equipment and IT tools to 
effectively participate in the project. In the context of similar support extended to it during RUFIP I 
and  II,  their  expectations  and  emerging  needs  for  effective  implementation  of  the  envisaged 
interventions , budget provisions can be provided for the following; 
a)  Remuneration for 2 specialist staff to be placed on long term in AEMFI/EIFTRI to be exclusively 
used for RUFIP III interventions; 
b)  A  4  wheeler  vehicle  to  be  exclusively  used  for  impact  assessment  studies,  training 
programmes , financial literacy interventions and monitoring interventions at the field level 
c)  Provision of Office equipment, IT tools and training tools for EIFTRI/ AEMFI. 
The  present  staff  position  of  AEMFI  as  also  details  of  staff  engaged  in  MIS  project  are  given 
Annexure VA and VB respectively. 
7.14 Relationship between AEMFI, EIFTRI & ETIFT: 
The relationship between AEMFI, EFTRI and ETIFT should be clearly defined and the accountability 
of each of the agencies under RUFIP III should be spelt out. This would ease the implementation 
process, programme management and monitoring /reporting arrangements. 
8. Summary of envisaged Activities with RUFIP III Support: 
In view of the  past  record of accomplishment  in RUFIP I and II, the core  strength and potential of 
AEMFI, it should be entrusted with following role and functions in RUFIP III: 
a.  AEMFI should be supported to complete the implementation of MIS project, pilot test and 
replicate in all MFIs and steer the system to stabilize and operate on sustainable basis, so to 
enable  the  sector  to  reap all  benefits.  All  technical, operational  and  training  requirements 
would be addressed by ETIFT. 
b.  AEMFI/EIFTRI is envisaged to assume the role of an apex training and development institution 
of  excellence  at  the  end  of  the  project,  to  become  the  nucleus  of  training  efforts  &would 
provide value added training services. RUFIP III would facilitate a study to carve out road map 
for its transformation . 
c.  AEMFI to undertake fresh TNA study in 2022 and accordingly prepare Training plan up to 2030. 
It is to encourage each of the members to undertake TNA periodically in future and making 
training policy and plan as a part of corporate strategy. 
8 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
d.  RUFIP III would support faculty development within AEMFI/ EIFTRI through TOT programmes 
so  to  have  specialized  faculty  in  6  core  areas  identified  and  these  faculties,  apart  from 
organizing training programmes (15-20 programmes in a year) on prioritized themes identified 
would undertake TOT for 1-2 identified potential faculties in each of MFIs.  
e.  A  special  channel  will  be  opened  in  AEMFI/EIFTRI  to  organize  10-15  special  programmes 
annually (both onsite & offsite), especially for pastoral regions. 
f.  RUFIP III will support AEMFI (as also NBE) for organizing seminars/workshops/conferences. 
While NBE would be undertaking such events primarily for policy –oriented themes, AEMFI on 
sharing field experiences/studies Operational &strategic issues. NBE, AEMFI and MFIs should 
have mutual consultation and collaboration for identifying /firming up issues and organizing 
the programmes. AEMFI is to approach with relevant  details (theme,  programme  contents 
and  outcome)  PCMU  before  finalization.  Same  approach  should  be  taken  for  conducting 
studies on identified themes.  
g.  RUFIP III would support exposure visits, primarily with in the country, for upcoming MFIs and 
those working in difficult regions, with a view to having cross learning of the best practices in 
MF sector. Exposure visit overseas will be very limited and would be for policy exploration and 
be  confined  to  the  combined  team  of  senior  officials  representing  all  agencies-GOE,  FCA, 
AEMFI and NBE. 
h.  AEMFI  will  be  supported  to  play  greater  role  in  Knowledge  management  and  information 
dissemination. It has to revamp and update data /information regularly in its websites. It has 
to bring out comprehensive review report on MFIs on quarterly and annual basis. It has to 
compile  case  studies/success  stories  and  circulate  in  e  -  newsletter  in  English  and  local 
language . It has to conduct field studies on the impact of microfinance on livelihoods of the 
poor households. 
i.  AEMFI has introduced Certification of Trainers’ System in collaboration with Frankfurt School 
of Management. The  certification should  be  broad  based  to  cover  all  professionals  and  all 
training  institutions.  The  efficacy  of  the  system  should  be  assessed  before  replication. 
Alternatively, other systems would be explored. 
j.  AEMFI would be supported for conducting financial literacy/Digital Literacy programmes for 
the benefit of MFI clients in various regions. They would be required to develop innovative 
financial literacy tools, radio/TV programmes in local language and focus in difficult regions. 
k.  AEMFI would be supported for accelerating implementation of SPM practices in MFIs 
l.  AEMFI will be given limited support for IT tools, office equipment, placement of specialist staff 
and mobility for furtherance of RUFIP III interventions. 
The list of various capacity-building interventions for AEMFI, MFIs and Clients to be supported 
under RUFIP III is given as Annexure VI. The estimate budget for TA for the purpose is 7.8 USD 
M $. The details of budget (Physical and financial) under each of the interventions year-wise 
from 2020 to 2025 have been computed and given in an excel sheet separately.  
9 .Outcomes expected of the supported interventions: 
  Transformation of AEMFI to Apex institution of excellence; 
  Development  of  Core  Faculties  with  in  AEMFI  and  a  pool  of  faculties  in  identified 
disciplines; 
  Stabilization of MIS in all MFIs; 
  Training intensification in pastoral regions; 
  Popularization of Digital Financial Services;  
  Periodic Review of MF sector; 
  Strengthening of prudential regulation, supervision, audit, risk management ,rating and 
governance and self- regulation; 
  Social Performance Management, Customer protection and social targeting get sharper 
focus 
9 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
  Financial Literacy campaign intensified 
  Certification System in place’ 
  Financial Inclusion gets boost 
10 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Annexure I: 
Status of EIFT and EFTRI 
1.1 Ethiopian Inclusive Finance Technology (EIFT): 
Ethiopian Inclusive Finance Technology as a Share Company was established in 2014 to provide ICT 
and  related  technology services  to  financial  institutions  in  general  and  microfinance  institutions  in 
particular. The company was first initiated by the Association of Ethiopian Microfinance Institutions 
(AEMFI) and five bigger Regional Microfinance institutions in the country (ACSI, ADCSI, DECSI, OCSSCO, 
and OMO) and later on joined by other MFIs. The mission is to provide and facilitate ICT and related 
services which enable the MFIs to contribute their part to the growth and transformation plan of the 
country. 
1.2 .Major Functions: 
Implementation and management of Shared Service Centre; 
  Facilitation of Agent &Mobile Banking 
 
  Linking MFIs with Centralized Credit Reference Bureau; 
  Software Development to meet diverse needs of MFIs 
  To support core banking system of MFIs in Ethiopia. 
1.3. It is associated with technology-service providers and programmes .e.g., ICT PLC, AFDB, Safety Net 
Programmes, Mjobs, Delaphone Technology Ltd 
2.1 The Ethiopian Inclusive Finance Research and Training Institute (EIFTRI) 
It was established by AEMFI as income generating wing of the Association. It is fully owned by AEMFI. 
Cognizant  to the  human capital development limitation in the country, AEMFI had established the 
Ethiopian Inclusive Finance Training and Research Institute in order to fill the existing gap. Its building 
is  located  near  AEMFI.  The  building  consists  of  offices,  training  rooms  and  bedrooms  for 
trainees/visitors; EIFTRI is providing its short term training programs at its own building. It has plans 
to introduce professional courses and certification programmes. It aims to “to support the inclusive 
finance sector with all the necessary skills and knowledge by greatly contributing to the development 
of human capital and economic growth of the country”. 
2.2 Core Activities 
 
 
 
 
 
Training 
Research 
Fund Raising and Management 
IT support for MFIs 
Knowledge Management- Resource Center 
3. Relationship between the Organizations: 
  EIFT is a separate company established by MFIs with their shares. Hence, it is a share company 
working  on  technology  related  matters  to  finance.  As  a  technology  company  after  the 
completion of the MIS project being handled by AEMFI under the RUFIP it will be transferred 
to EIFT. For this purpose, a MoU is to be executed between AEMFI and EIFT. Otherwise, in 
terms of personnel it has no relation with AEMFI. 
  With regard to EFITRI, it is a research and training institution established under AEMFI It is 
.working as a business entity. It has the same board but different staff members as it requires 
different professionals unlike the AEMFI staff who are more facilitators and managers. As a 
11 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
training and research unit under AEMFI, its resources are being strengthened. They have the 
plan to promote it so to conduct training even in diploma and above levels. 
12 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Annexure II 
Association of Ethiopian Microfinance Institutions (AEMFI) 
MFIs and AEMFI  
Summary of Budget for activities under RUFIP_II  
2013-2019 
Activities 
Improvement of MIS 
Technical Equipment and Software 
Sub total 
Human Resource Development  
Board Level Training  
Top management training 
Middle level management training 
Lower Level Management Training  
Training manual preparation and revision 
Subtotal 
Research and Knowledge Management 
Specific Studies 
Survey of products & gap analysis  
Study  and  piloting  of  securitization  of 
loans of MFIs 
Greening Rural Finance 
Subtotal 
Financial Literacy Support 
Consultancy and ToT for Financial Literacy 
Financial Literacy Media 
TOT Costs 
SPM Scaling up 
Sub Total 
Knowledge management 
Knowledge Management  
Sub Total 
Strengthening AEMFI 
Strengthening  AEMFI-Launching  EIFTRI’s 
short  term  certification  or  shorter  term 
training programmers 
Computers, desks and printers 
Enhanced Mobility-Vehicle 
Budget 
Remark 
 2,92,02,040.00  
 2,92,02,040.00  
 36,27,000.00  
 36,81,000.00  
 40,50,000.00  
 65,82,000.00  
 12,00,000.00  
 1,91,40,000.00  
 39,60,000.00  
 10,00,000.00  
 10,00,000.00  
 59,60,000.00  
 5,80,000.00  
 12,81,200.00  
 1,60,000.00  
 6,00,000.00  
 26,21,200.00  
 13,00,000.00  
 13,00,000.00  
12,60,000 
2,17,800 
25,00,000 
13 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Short term and long term Consultant  
AEMFI Staff Salary (Long Term High Level 
local consultant) 
AEMFI Staff training 
33,12,000 
1,51,20,000 
,00,000 
Sub Total 
Grand Total 
2,32,09,800 
 8,14,33,040.00  
0 
 -  
14 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Annexure III  
A List of Courses, Target Groups, Duration & No. of Participants (with gender segregation) 
Course 
Date 
Target Group 
No. 
Participants 
of 
Male 
Female 
Total 
S. 
N
o 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
7 
8 
9 
Training Workshop on CT 
& LA Tech 
May  21-
23, 2018 
Board 
managers 
and  High-level 
Refresher  Training  on 
SPM,  PPI  and  Client 
Protection/Responsible 
Finance 
here) 
(SPM  merged 
May  24-
26, 2018 
Board 
managers 
and  High-level 
Corporate  Governance 
and 
Strategic 
Management 
May  30  - 
June 
1, 
2018 
Board 
managers 
and  High-level 
Risk  Management  and 
Compliance for MF 
May  14-
16, 2018 
Board 
managers 
and  High-level 
21 
21 
12 
13 
Leadership  and  Team 
Building 
May  17  - 
19, 2018 
Middle level management  27 
5 
2 
3 
2 
6 
IFRS-1st round 
May  7-16, 
2018 
 High-level managers 
32 
12 
IFRS-2nd round 
May  21-
26, 2018 
Middle level managers and 
officers 
34 
4 
9 
36 
16 
8 
4 
The  Role  of  MFIs  and 
Financial Inclusion 
June  4-5, 
2018 
Board 
managers 
and  High-level 
 Financial 
Analysis 
Performance 
June  11  - 
13, 2018 
Middle level managers  
10 
Internal Controls 
June  18-
20, 2018 
Supervisory  and  middle 
level management  
11  HR 
Planning 
and 
Development 
June  25-
27, 2018 
Supervisory  and  middle 
level management 
12  Micro Insurance 
June  4-6, 
2018 
Supervisory  and  middle 
level management 
6 
15 
26 
23 
12 
16 
29 
44 
38 
9 
44 
20 
6 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
13  Business Plan Preparation 
June  4-7, 
2018 
Supervisory  and  middle 
level management 
21 
1 
14 
 Entrepreneurship 
June  11-
13, 2018 
Supervisory  and  middle 
level management 
5 
15  Financial 
Inclusion  and 
Basics of MF 
June  18  - 
20, 2018 
Supervisory  and  middle 
level management 
12 
16  Customer 
MFIs 
Services 
in 
June  21-
23, 2018 
Supervisory  and  middle 
level management 
7 
3 
1 
22 
5 
15 
8 
17 
IFRS-3rdround 
18  Strategic 
management/Adav 
Leadership 
Total 
Ave.  participants  per 
training 
June  4-9, 
2018 
June  25  - 
27, 2018 
Middle 
operation 
level  managers- 
32 
13 
45 
Board 
managers 
and  High-level 
7 
1 
8 
311 
59 
370 
21 
16 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Annex IIIB: 
 List of Courses, Target Groups, Duration& No. of Participants 
Course 
S. 
No 
First Round Training 
Date 
Target Group 
No. 
of 
Participants 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Strategic Management 
Jan 22-24 
Board and High-level managers 
22 
Inclusive Financial Service 
Jan 25-27 
Board and High-level managers 
16 
Corporate governance 
Jan 29-30 
Board and High-level managers 
19 
Risk  Management 
Compliance 
Risk  Management 
Compliance 
and 
Feb 1-2 
Board and High-level managers 
19 
and 
Feb 5-7 
Board and High-level managers 
17 
6 
Strategic Management 
Feb 5-7 
Middle level management 
7  Management 
System 
Information 
Feb 5-7 
Lower level management 
Sub Total 1st Round Training 
Second Round Training 
8 
The Role of MFIs in Financial 
Inclusion 
Feb 12-13 
Board,  High  level  management, 
managers and officers 
9 
Product development 
Feb 12-14  Middle level management 
10 
Business plan preparation 
Feb 19-22 
Supervisory management  
11 
Financial Literacy 
Feb 19-21 
Supervisory management  
12 
Saving Mobilization 
Feb 26-28 
Supervisory management  
13 
Internal Control 
March 5-7 
Lower level management 
14 
Credit  Operations  &  Risk 
Management 
March  12-
14 
Middle level management 
Sub Total 2nd round training 
Total 
Ave. participants per training 
19 
16 
128 
15 
14 
17 
17 
22 
23 
13 
121 
249 
18 
17 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Annexure IV: 
 Focus Areas of Training Programmes Developed, based on TNA 
Based on the TNA, the following are the major focus areas of the training program for the different 
levels of management by EIFTRI:  
For the Board of Directors management level 
  Risk Management and Compliance for MFIs* 
For the Top Management level 
  Strategic Management* 
  Risk Management and Compliance* 
 
Inclusive Financial Services* 
For the Middle Management Operation level 
  Strategic Management+ 
  Credit and Operation Risk Management* 
  Operations Management and Control+ 
  Electronic Banking+ 
For the Middle Management-Support level 
  Motivation and Work Culture Management+ 
  Performance Appraisal+ 
  Management Information Systems+ 
For the Lower Level Management –operation level 
  Customer Service for MFIs* 
  Saving Mobilization* 
 
Islamic Finance* 
  Team building and Time management + 
At the Supervisory Management- Support Level 
  Recruitment and selection+ 
  Saving Mobilization* 
  Credit processing & management+ 
  Marketing of financial services+ 
For the Officers and Other Employees: Support level 
Islamic finance* 
Internal control* 
 
 
  Computerized accounting system+ 
  Motivation and Team building * 
For the Entry Level Employees: Operation-level 
  Saving mobilization* 
  Credit processing & management+ 
18 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
  Marketing of financial services+ 
For the Entry Level Employees: Support-level 
  Financial Inclusion and Basics of Microfinance* 
  Business Plan preparation * 
  Microfinance Services in Ethiopia+ 
  Customer service in MFIs* 
Notes:  
* = denotes those existing training modules that will be reviewed and revised. These are a total of 16 
focus areas. 
+ = denotes those training modules that will be developed. These are a total of 14 focus areas.  
19 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Annexure VA: 
 Staff Position of AEMFI 
ANNEXURE V B: 
ASSOCIATION OF ETHIOPIAN MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS (AEMFI ) 
ASSOCIATION OF ETHIOPIAN MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS (AEMFI ) 
Staff Position 
Shared MIS Project under RUFIP II programme  
S. No 
Staff list  
1 
Job Titles 
Executive Director’s Office  
 Serial No 
1.1 
 Designation 
Executive Director 
 Staff 
Number 
1 
1.3 
1 
2 
2 
2.1 
3 
2.2 
4 
2.3 
5 
2.4 
6 
2.5 
2.6 
3 
4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
Admin Assistant 
 Project Manager 
Sub Total 
 Business team leader 
Program Team 
Program Manager 
Technical team leader 
Financial Performance Monitoring Officer 
System & Network Admin. 
Rural Finance & Food security Officer 
 Process Analyst 
SACCO Officer 
 Data- base Administrator 
Micro & Small Enterprises and Value Chain Officer 
Total Staff 
MIS Officer 
Sub Total 
Social Performance Team 
Social Performance Manager 
Finance and Administration Team 
Admin and Finance Officer 
Accountant 
Driver/Purchaser 
Security Guard 
Office Assistant 
Sub Total 
Total 
1 
 1 
2 
 1 
1 
 1 
1 
 1 
1 
 2  
1 
 1 
1 
 7 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
1 
9 
18 
20 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Annexure VI: 
TA Interventions for   capacity-building  of AEMFI, 
MFIs and their Clients 
Institution 
ETIFT/AEMFI/MFIs 
Theme 
Improvement  of 
MIS in MFIs 
MFI/ pastoral MFIs  Human  Resource 
Development  for 
MFIs 
AEMFI and MFIs 
Research 
Studies 
and 
and 
training 
Intervention 
software 
hardware 
development; 
and  
capacity-building,  development 
of Data Centre 
Training  on  identified  themes 
relevant  to  RUFIP  III,  ToT  (for 
trainers  from  MFIs),  training 
module preparation, workshops 
and seminars. 
Special  Chanel 
Region  on 
(onsite and offsite) 
Studies on identified themes(4) 
for  Pastoral 
identified  themes 
By whom 
Service  provider  engaged 
by AEMFI/ETIFT/AEMFI 
EFTRI 
provider/consultants 
/Service 
Service providers/ national 
and 
international 
consultants 
Learning 
Best 
Practices  ,policy-
making 
and 
strategic 
interventions  
 Exposure-study  visits  with  in 
Ethiopia  and  overseas-  special 
programmes 
Pastoral 
regions, Impact studies 
for 
AEMFI  with  support  of 
MFIs 
and 
Consultancy/development 
institutions  
, 
Board  of  Directors 
General 
and 
Managers 
, 
Managers  of  all 
MFIs 
including 
pastoral  MFIs  and 
top  officials  of 
policy-making 
institutions 
(overseas) 
MFIs 
Clients/user 
institutions 
,particularly MFIs 
Social 
performance 
management 
Financial  Literacy 
Campaigns 
AEMFI  
Strengthening 
AEMFI 
Manual  Development 
training 
and 
AEMFI  &Service  Provider 
identified 
and 
 AEMFI 
providers/agencies 
identified 
service 
National 
service providers 
level 
technical 
Literacy 
programmes, 
documentary 
radio 
films, 
publications, 
programmes, 
regional/national/international 
conference(4)  for  awareness- 
building, 
Knowledge 
management  
EFTRI certification programmes, 
study, 
trainings,  TNA  study 
,Institutional  development  for 
upgrading  EFTRI  as  an  apex 
institution  of  training  for  MFIs, 
upgrading 
and  maintaining 
websites  of  AEMFI  and  EIFTRI, 
supporting long and short term 
consultants 
various 
interventions 
for 
21 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
PART II-Component 1.2 Improving capacities, Systems and processes in financial Cooperatives: 
1.  Federal Cooperative Agency (FCA) - Initiatives& contributions: 
FCA has been a key partner in implementation RUFIP I and II since its inception. FCA was created under 
Proclamation  in  2002  with  developmental,  supervisory  and  regulatory  powers  with  respect  to 
cooperative  sector.  It  has  been  an  effective  link  with  the  cooperatives  in  the  Regions,  Zones,  and 
Weredas, which are governed by regional statutes. FCA has been member of the Steering Committee, 
Project Management Committee, Sub-Committees, & thereby, facilitating resolution of issues of all 
regions  under  RUFIP  II.FCA  implemented  twinning  arrangements  with  Irish  League  of  Cooperative 
Unions  Federation(  ILCUF)  ,which  conducted  a  series  of  studies  ,  on  all  important  aspects  of 
functioning, regulation, supervision and development of Financial Cooperatives had made important 
recommendations. The training programme modules, documents, manuals and toolkits prepared by 
ILCUF through the studies are helpful for  capacity-building of personnel of financial cooperatives. The 
very participation of officials of FCA, RPCAs, Credit Unions and RUSACCOs for more than 2 years had 
provided considerable insights and exposures to the participating officials. FCA ,RPCA and financial 
cooperatives  improved  the  data-base  and  reporting  system,  enabling  them  to  prepare  their 
Institutional Annual Work Plan and Budgeting(AWP&B) , applying for credit and grant in the prescribed 
manner. The periodic training of auditors, inspectors and supervisors did improve  audit, inspection 
and supervision process to a certain extent. The  establishment of  separate Directorate in  FCA and 
RPCAs for Financial Cooperatives brought the financial management and governance of RUSACCOs 
and Unions in to sharper focus. FCA started implementing from 2017, MIS project for RUSACCOs and 
Unions through a service provider. The MIS project involves MIS customized for 40 selected Unions 
along with training for the Union operational staff. The project financially supported positioning of 
two staff at Wereda level, thereby strengthened monitoring and mentoring RUSACCOs’ working, to a 
certain extent. Further, mobility of staff at Wereda, Union, RPCA and FCA levels with the provision of 
motor cycles and four wheelers with project funding helped in monitoring and guidance down the 
tiers. Support was provided to eligible stakeholders with IT infrastructure (laptop, computers). Above 
all, liquidity support was provided to RUSACCOs and Unions during the project. 
2.  Organizational Restructuring: 
It  was  provided  in  the  RUFIP  II  design  report  that  a  “review  of  the  organization  of  rural  financial 
cooperative department at Federal, Regional, Zonal and Wereda levels should be made, advising on 
structuring the department with adequate terms of reference and functions, staffing patterns, etc for 
supporting a stable, sound and sustainable rural financial sector that would be a well functional rural 
financial subsystem in the Ethiopian rural financial markets”. FCA had conducted study on Business 
Process Engineering (BPR), bringing out revised organizational structure, staffing pattern at FCA level 
and other levels in the  regions and estimating staff at various  levels.  FCA had  accordingly effected 
organizational  restructuring,  bringing  about  creation of  separate  Financial  Cooperative  Directorate 
within  FCA,  to  give  focused  attention  to  Financial  Cooperatives.  It  was  to  ensure  that  similar 
organizational arrangements need to be put in place in all regions. However, separate architecture for 
audit, inspection and supervision has not been created. Audit, inspection and supervision continued 
to be attended by the same staff for other kinds of societies including multi-purpose societies. Under 
RUFIP III, the follow up action for separating Financial Cooperatives in FCA departmentation in terms 
of audit, inspection, and supervision from other cooperatives – dedicated arrangements in terms of HR 
for regulation, audit and accounting would be pursued. A feasibility study, if needed may be supported 
under RUFIP III. Present Organogram of FCA is given in the Annexure I. 
3. Twinning Arrangements with ILCUF: 
Under RUFIP II, the twinning arrangement with Irish League Cooperative Union Federation (ILCUF) was 
implemented, which culminated study of various important aspects of policy, regulation& supervision, 
22 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
capacity-building  and  financial  services.  ILCUF  had  brought  out  19  study  reports  ,covering 
(i)Accounting Manual,(ii) Introduction to SACCCOs (Part I &II),(iii) Book-keeping Manual,(iv) PEARLS 
ratio,(v)  Internal  Audit  (vi)  External  audit  ,(  vii)  Credit  Management  &Loan  Officer  Manual  ,  (viii) 
Governance ,(ix) Financial Product Development and (x) Training of Trainers(ToT). They had conducted 
the Training Need Assessment (TNA) at the levels of FCA, RPCAs, Credit Unions and RUSACCOS. They 
had also looked at regulatory and supervisory systems and organizational structures. As these study 
reports were brought about from latter part of 2015, FCA had started examining and internalizing the 
findings,  during  the  subsequent  years  from  2015.ILCUF  has  been  working  with  FCA  to  assist  the 
Organization  in  choosing  and  developing  institutional  arrangements  for  strengthening  RUSACCO 
movement, based on the studies. ILCUF is currently engaged in the pursuit of setting up of national 
and regional federations and related aspects. Under RUFIP III, FCA’s twinning arrangement with ILCUF 
may be supported for initial 2 years to implement need-based interventions and to conduct studies in 
the new and emerging areas. 
4.  Training Need Assessment (TNA): 
TNA  study  (2015),  which  was  conducted  in  Tigray,  Amhara,  Somali,  Oromia  and  SNNPR  regions  by 
ILCUF under the twinning arrangements with RUFIP II support had identified and prioritized several 
important needs of staff and management at various levels. The areas flagged for training included (i) 
Book-keeping  ,accounting  &financial  management  (ii)  PEARL,  Risk  management,  (iii)Governance, 
regulation and cooperative principles,(iv) accounting, audit, inspection &internal control,(v) Savings 
promotion and credit management,(vi) Business planning ,sustainability and budgeting ,(vii)MIS and 
IT ,(viii) Micro insurance &(ix) Social Performance Management(x) System Development. The study 
had  identified  several  constraints  in  delivery  of  training,  which  included  staff  turnover,  lack  of 
appropriate  training  material,  training  personnel,  logistics,  budget/funding  and  prioritization  by 
supporting  institutions.  The  constant  changes  in  trainees  due  to  staff  turnover  and  changing 
Boards/Committees  added  to  the  need  for  reinforcements  of  training  and  mentoring.  The  study 
emphasized  training  programmes  for  (i)  Acquiring  Basic  Competencies  (ACB),  (ii)  Continuing 
Professional Developments (CPD) and (iii) Minimum Competency Requirements (MCR). The study had 
focused the needs of various instruments of  capacity-building-(i)institutional training,(ii) Training of 
Trainers,(iii) On the Job training(learning by doing),(iv) Coaching and mentoring, (v) Exposure visits 
&experience- sharing (vi) Communication skill (vii) Competency transfer(learning through peers),(viii) 
Repeat/refresher programmes. Although certain follow up training efforts have been taken by FCA, 
with the support of ILCUF, much more needs to be done for developing appropriate training policy, 
systems and strategies, designing suitable training plans, implementing programmes effectively and 
evaluating  the  impact  of  the  interventions.  Other  modes  of    capacity-building  and  Knowledge 
Management (other than classroom training) have not been adequately tried. Under RUFIP III, some 
of the related interventions, which make the  capacity-building more sustainable, may be supported. 
Since  TNA  was  undertaken  in  2015  under  RUFIP  II  and  TNA  is  being  undertaken  with  support  of 
Improving Rural Finance Inclusion Through Cooperatives (IRFITCO), a fresh TNA can be supported in 
2022.  A  system  may  be  developed  for  annual  updating  of  TNA  by  FCA/RPCAs  through  structured 
feedback  in  online  mode.  As  and  when  the  national  /regional  federations  are  set  up,  they  can 
institutionalize it, on a systematic basis. 
5. 
 Training Infrastructure & Building of apex/regional training institutes of excellence: 
Training  is  supported  by  a  National  Training  Coordinator  at  the  FCA  level  and  is  supplemented  by 
Regional Training Coordinators in several regions (e.g. Amharic, SNNPR, and Somali).All the training 
programmes  supported  under  RUFIP  II  were  organized  at  FCA,  regional,  Zonal, Union  and  Wereda 
levels by the officials (designated as subject matter experts) of FCA, RPCA at regional and zonal levels. 
They train staff at the Zonal and Wereda levels and are primarily responsible for on-going  capacity-
building support to the RUSACCOS and Unions. Training infrastructure at the decentralized levels is, 
23 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
however, weak. Development of Faculties / professional master trainers at the grass root level is the 
major challenge. Sometimes, faculties from the academic institutions are invited as guest speakers. 
ARDAITA, which was expected to assume as an institute of excellence to provide leadership role in 
terms of designing, planning, developing and adding values has not been involved in training efforts 
for financial cooperatives. They do not have any channel for financial cooperatives or expertise for the 
financial cooperatives. ARDIATA has the potential in terms of infrastructure, but they have limitations 
and have not been built up on federal pattern, so to have decentralized units in regions for training 
delivery. AEMFI is totally dedicated to MFIs and has limitations. Ethiopian Institute of Financial Studies 
(EIFS)  is  devoted  to  banking  and  other  NBE  regulated  entities  totally  .An  institutional  design  with 
decentralized training outfits in regions is necessary for sustainable capacity-building interventions for 
financial  Cooperatives.  Instead  of  carrying  out  of  capacity-building  interventions  on  ad  hoc  basis, 
institutional  architecture  for  capacity-building  of  all  stakeholders,  on  a  sustainable  basis,  for  the 
financial Cooperatives segment should be evolved/ set up at the national and decentralized levels. 
The current efforts for setting up of the national and regional federations are intended to fulfill the 
need for suitable training institution(s) for delivery of value added training services, on a sustainable 
basis. Proposed federations are envisaged to be technically and financially equipped to meet liquidity, 
training, information and policy advocacy requirements of the sector. Considering the magnitude of 
training  programmes  and  other  types  of  capacity  –building  interventions  undertaken,  ideally  one 
training institution at the national level and one each at the regions should be set up to ensure quality 
standards . If those kind of institution-building efforts are planned and executed, a training certification 
system, based on the Indonesian and Indian models can be piloted, with the support of RUFIP III. The 
joint  Bank  Indonesia,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  then  GTZ  programme  on  Promotion  of  Small 
Financial Institutions (PRoFI) had, as part of their efforts to support the development of a sound and 
viable  microfinance  sector  in  Indonesia,  had  established  a    capacity-building  scheme,  the  CERTIFF 
system.  It  was  very  successful.  Based  on  that  learning,Centre  for  Professional  Excellence  in 
Cooperatives (CPEC) was set up in 2009 ,with GIZ support, in Bankers Institute of Rural Development 
in  Cooperative  Credit 
(  BIRD  ),India  (www.birdcpec.in)to  streamline  the  training  system 
Structure(CCS), which would ensure availability of professional staff with Cooperatives ,for efficient 
delivery of banking and financial services .Introduction of the system for professionalization of CCS 
and Certification process is conceptually a part of overall training strategy visualized for sustainability 
of  cooperative  reform  programme  in  India.  A  brief  note  on  the  concept,  modus  operandi  and  the 
benefits of CPEC is given in Annexure I .The institution can be further studied through exposure-study 
visit through RUFIP III support. While RUFIP III would support setting up of any exclusively SACCO- led 
federations at the national and regional levels, which serve as institution of excellence for training and 
development, until such institutions are set up and made operational, FCA may identify suitable service 
provider to assume leading role in training plan and its implementation by a twinning arrangement as 
suggested in earlier paragraph. 
6. 
 National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) and Financial Cooperatives: 
Ethiopia had adopted National Financial Inclusion Strategy framework (2015-20) in 2015 and had set 
various benchmarks and strategies to achieve the committed targets. It has been member of AIFE and 
has been to signatory to Maya Declaration. In 2014, it was estimated that 78% of the population are 
financially excluded and under NFIS, it had, therefore, set a target to reduce the exclusion level to 60% 
by 2020. Although financial cooperatives facilitate financial inclusion through their credit, savings and 
insurance services and they are statutorily regulated and supervised by FCA/RPCA, their progress in 
this direction is not computed for financial inclusion as they are not deemed as regulated entities. To 
quote  NFIS  document,” Moreover, there  was  about 18000  Savings  &  Credit  Cooperative  Societies, 
spreading throughout the country, mainly rural areas. The number of accounts held by the members 
of Savings & Credit Societies, which is estimated to be around 1.8 million was not computed in this 
figure, but will be considered for the purpose of monitoring and follow up of financial inclusion level, 
as  data  about  the  sector  become  more  reliable.”  While  RUFIP  III  would  support  strengthening  of 
24 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
regulation & supervision of financial cooperatives and also  its  data-base/MIS, as  a policy advocacy 
measure, FCA should take up the issue at appropriate level for the sector’s inclusion in NFIS data and 
support mechanism. 
7. 
  capacity-building Projects–Support Synergy from ATA & other Agencies: 
Agricultural  Transformation  Agency  (ATA)  has  been  implementing  a  RUSACCO  sector    capacity-
building programme with support of FCA and UNCDF and has drawn a 5 year road map in 2015. The 
project  has  6  components  ,e.g.  (1)Business  Area  and  Production  Promotion,(2)    capacity-building 
diagnostic  framework,(3)  Other  priority  Strategic 
interventions,  (4)  Policy  and  Regulatory 
enhancement (v) Preparation of road map for implementation of governance and management &(6) 
Monitoring and evaluation. They had estimated US $ 21-27 million for most priority intervention and 
additional US$ 7-10 million for other priority interventions. The broad objectives of their project are 
as under: 
a)  Business  area  and  product  promotion  to  quickly  enhance  the  products  and  services 
offered by RUSACCOs; 
b)  Roll out of a standardized  capacity-building (i.e. diagnostic and inventory prioritization) 
programme to plan, prioritize and coordinate  capacity-building efforts with individual 
RUSACCOs and drive collection of data for regulatory oversight activities; 
c)  Prioritize  strategic  interventions  for  government  and  other  partners  to  execute 
programmes to rapidly build sector capacity; 
d)  Strong implementation of governance and management by FCA and associated parties 
to drive change in the sector, and 
e)  Monitoring & evaluation of the road map implementation. 
In view of the  commonality of thrust  in    capacity-building, there  should be  coordination 
between RUFIP III and ATA’s  capacity-building efforts, so that there is no duplication. It is 
reported  that  they  are  working  in  five  regions  (e.g.,  Oromia,  Tigery,  SNNP,  Somali,  and 
Afara). 
Notwithstanding  the  broad  objectives,  their  main  focus  is  identifying  capacity  gap  and 
prioritizing intervention areas. NGOs like Self Help Africa works with SACCOs in  capacity-
building  interventions.  Agra  Tera  has  interventions,  but  very  limited  in  scope.  In  PCDP, 
HBAP, etc. programmes have interventions related to  capacity-building of RUSACCOs.  
RUFIP  III may  coordinate  with all donor-driven /private  sector-  led projects  / ATA having 
bearing on  capacity-building of financial cooperatives, for possible synergy. 
8.  Preparing/  implementing  a  comprehensive  Cooperative  Development  Policy  and 
Strategy: 
There  is  no  consolidated  and  comprehensive  policy  document  for  cooperative  sector  including 
financial cooperatives. FCA was in the process of collecting /consolidating scattered policy documents 
for  ease  of  reference  and  substantiation.  As  policy  frame  –work  should  precede  the  strategy 
formulation  and  statute  -making,  a  comprehensive  and  forward-looking  policy  frame-  work  for 
Cooperative Development for the country should be evolved and all regional authorities should be 
persuaded to adopt the same, with necessary modifications as per local requirement. It would be more 
appropriate, if they could evolve separately financial cooperatives development policy (2020- 
25), through a consultative process with all stakeholders. 
9. 
 Consolidation of Unions & RUSACCOs: 
During the 16 years of RUFIP I & II, RUSCACCO movement has reached new heights in terms of number 
(12263 RUSACCOs & 124 Unions) with client base of 1 million. The strategy under RUFIP III would be 
25 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
strengthening  of  the  existing  RUSACCOS/  Unions,  with  sustainable  viability,  prospects  of  greater 
business scale, diversification, profitability and social performance. In that context, the various studies, 
policy& product explorations, HRD, customer’s education, digital infrastructure and funding support 
would be facilitated under RUFIP III. Strengthening of regulatory and supervisory arrangements would 
be supported. It would be worthwhile to look at  capacity-building intervention strategy undertaken 
and  lessons  learnt  under  IFAD’s  PROFIRA  project  in  Uganda  .The  Status  and  Risk  Assessment  of 
institutions is essential for their proper capacity –building intervention . The gist of background and 
learning is given in the box below: 
BOX: Capacity Development Approach in Uganda under PROFIRA:  
 After many years of consultation and negotiation, Ugandan Parliament had passed Tier 4 MFI and Money Lenders 
Act in 2016. Under the Act, Micro Finance Regulatory Authority (UMRA) had been set up. UMRA’s role is to bring 
greater  financial  discipline  and  prudential  behaviour  to  Tier  4  institutions  by  way  of  addressing  the  problems  of 
collapse, dormancy, fraud and mismanagement that have bedeviled SACCCO sector in particular and undermined 
public confidence. In Uganda like growing number of countries, has adopted legislation to integrate SACCOS in to 
formal financial sector as licensed, prudentially supervised financial institutions. Under IFAD’s Project for Financial 
Inclusion in Rural Areas (PROFIRA), systemic risks in the SACCO sector can be gauged from the level of PAR, OSS, and 
governance and business volumes. SACCOs are classified under A, B and C with no current risk, one risk, and two or 
more risks respectively.  Under the project, the  service providers (SP) are providing Credit &Default Management 
(CDM) and six other packages of training. Within purview of the Standardized Training Module, residential and online 
training programmes have been evolved and implemented. Under the Residential –Onsite programmes , issues like(i) 
financial  management  ,(ii)savings  and  other  product  development  and  (iii),strategic  planning  are  covered  ,while 
under the Online programmes , (i):Financial literacy (ii) Governance and Business Development Skills are imparted. 
Under the project , it has been learnt that the  capacity-building could ,indeed ,strengthen sustainability and growth 
in SACCOS that are already at a reasonable level of sustainability .Such results ,on the other hand ,may not be realized 
for SACCOS that are having difficulty covering their cost and their recovering their loans . The status and risks of the 
institutions need to be assessed. Their experience demonstrates that it cannot be assumed that all SACCOS can be 
benefited without initial assessment of their readiness to respond to training and extent to which they must prioritize 
resolving critical risks. The further details of background and progress are given in Annexure III. 
10. Training &  capacity-building Advisory Committee: 
Considering various strategic interventions suggested/supported for training and  capacity-building of 
HR  of  the  FCA  system  under  TA  component  and  also  Credit  support  to  be  made  available  through 
Unions for financing RUSACCOs for on lending to members, it is suggested that a standing Training & 
capacity-building Advisory Committee (TCAC) may be constituted by FCA with the following objectives 
and members. National Training Coordinator may be the convener of the Standing Committee: 
1)  Director , FCA, Chairman 
2)   Director, Ethiopian Institute of Studies, BE 
3)  Director , ARDITA 
4)   Executive Director, AEMFI 
5)  2 RPCA Directors (by rotation) 
6)  Professor of Cooperative Banking , Addis University 
7)   National Training Coordinator, Convener 
8)  The Service Provider, special invitee 
Objectives: 
A)  To review the progress , trends, and impact of various  capacity-building interventions ; 
26 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
B)  To  guide  FCA  and  other  partners  for  value  additions  and  qualitative  improvement  of  the 
programmes; 
C)  To suggest changes in strategies of implementations & contents of the programmes, based on 
studies and feedback; 
D)  To discuss the findings of the studies conducted for policy development and designing training 
modules ; and  
E)  Any other matter relevant to the above 
11. Capacity-building support for Cooperatives-Summary 
Under RUFIP II, technical assistance was provided for training and capacity –building of all key officials 
involved  in  policy-  making,  promotional  activities,  regulation,  supervision,  audit  and  governance. 
Under RUFIP III, in the light of expansion and growth of Unions & RUSACCOS, focus would be laid on 
consolidation of the existing institutions and enabling them to have competitive advantage to serve 
the target people in rural areas. They should be sustainably viable. All RUSACCOs and Unions would be 
classified under business parameters including audit class, business volume, profitability and clients 
served.    capacity-building  support  would  be  available  under  the  existing  programmes  with  a  new 
orientation,  exposure  visits,  conference/workshops,  for  limited  persons.  Mentoring,  guidance, 
feedback,  reporting  etc.,  would  be  facilitated  through  improved  MIS  and  online  communication. 
However, new and emerging areas would be studied and training strategies redrawn, besides financial 
literacy for members. The focus would be laid on quality and effectives of interventions, training of 
trainers, training infrastructure development, feedback and impact assessment, training certification, 
standardization of training institutions. For FCA, RPCAs, Unions, and RUSACCOs, training of supervising 
officials, auditors, accountants, policy -making officials including Board of directors would be covered 
under  Supervision  &  regulation  Component.  The  critical  areas  like  training  certification  system, 
budgeting  profit  planning,  Business  Continuity  Planning  (BCP),  risk  management,  internal  control, 
SPM,  governance  enrichment,  new  products  and  services  (,  e.g.  Micro  insurance,  digital  financial 
services,  linking  with  informal  group,  agency  service,  value  chain  financing,  ,  financing  pastoral 
communities  ,  women  and  youth  ,  customer  protection,  codes  of  standards  and  fair  practices  and 
financial  inclusion)  would  be  focused  in  training  interventions.  Appropriate  Financial  literacy  for 
members would be supported. Studies would be conducted to explore the possibility of integration of 
RUSACCOs/Unions with payment system, credit reference bureau, etc. 
Accordingly,  the TA of11.5 M US$  for various    capacity-building  interventions  have been envisaged 
under RUFIP III as given in the Annexure II. The details of budget (financial & physical) for each of the 
interventions year –wise for the project period have been calculated and given a separate excel sheet 
in the prescribe proforma. 
 Annexure I: 
 Centre for Professional Excellence for Cooperatives (CPEC) - An overview 
Creating a cadre of professionally competent persons in the Cooperative credit institutions, ensuring 
institutions’ adherence to basic banking principles and developing Human Resources capabilities for 
business  development  and  diversification  were  major  challenges  before  the  cooperative  credit 
structure in India. To address these challenges, a Centre for Excellence for Cooperatives (CPEC) was 
set up in Bankers’ Institute for Rural Development (BIRD), in India. CPEC was established with technical 
assistance of NABARD-GIZ-Rural Finance Institutions Programme (RFIP), on the lines of the Indonesian 
experience. BIRD is an institution of training excellence set up by National Bank for Agriculture for 
Rural  Development  (NABARD),  which  is  the  apex  development  bank  of  the  country,  dedicated  to 
integrated  rural  development.  After  closure  of  NABARD-GIZ  –RFIP  from  2015,  CPEC  continues  to 
function in BIRD. 
27 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
 The broad objectives of the institutional architecture of CEPEC were as under: 
Objectives:  
  To develop system to standardize and accredit the decentralized training system, leading to 
quality standard for training and course curricula ; 
  To encourage professionalism in the individuals in Cooperative Credit Institutions and develop 
building of professional competence in the sector ; 
 To put in place performance –oriented staff and management in the institutions;  
 
  To develop process of accreditation of training institutions, put in place certification of courses 
,programmes and cooperative professionals, and 
  To coordinate training efforts of Cooperative Training Institutions (CTIs)’ in the decentralized 
cooperative training system. 
Strategic Interventions: 
a) 
It extends accreditation to training institutions, which ensure desired standards of training 
and conform to the parameters of accreditation, developed by it. 
c) 
b)  It  has  instituted  a  system  of  Certification  of  professional  competencies  of  Trainers  / 
Cooperative Staff and Officials and students. It conducts examinations for certification. 
It  facilitates  preparation  of  standard  training  materials,  study  kits.  It  conducts  studies, 
research,  Training  Need  Assessment  (TNA),  Consultation  meets,  seminars  and 
conferences for designing training courses and materials. 
e) 
d)  It  has  finalized  several  training  modules,  study  kits,  examination  patterns,  rules  and 
regulations  for  trainers’  certification.  It  has  developed  Certified  Trainers  for  financial 
Cooperatives, Certified Cooperative Bankers, Certified leaders and Secretaries of Primary 
Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACS).  
It has developed Distance Learning Programmes for perspective candidates and also has 
been conducting examinations for trainers of member institutions, employees and open 
candidates.  It  has  set  enrolment  process  for  institutions  and  individuals  and  specified 
passing criteria for various levels of examinations. The papers cover (i) Accounting and 
Audit,  (ii)  Business  Management,  (iii)  Bank  Management,  (iv)  Indian  Economy  and 
Cooperative Credit System. 
f)  CPEC has evolved specialized training programmes for Chief Executive Officers (CEO) and 
senior  executives  covering  management,  governance,  business  planning  and 
development. 
It conducts Training of Trainers (TOT) programmes regularly. It also assesses continued 
adherence to parameters by the accredited training institutions through periodic reports, 
visits and verification. 
g) 
Thus,  CPEC  is  dedicated  to  encouraging  professionalism  in  the  Short  Term  Cooperative  Credit 
Structure in India. 
28 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
Annexure II: 
TA for  capacity-building of RUSACCOs/ Unions/ FCA and RPCAs 
Institution 
Theme 
Intervention 
RUSACCO/ 
Union/ FCA 
 capacity-building  of  RUSACCOs 
and Unions 
TOT,  Exposure  Visit, 
Refresher training 
RUSACCOs  & 
Unions  &their 
members 
RUSACCO 
&Unions 
RUSACCO 
&Unions 
FCA 
RUSACCOs/ 
Unions 
Financial Literacy 
Customer Protection 
Social 
Management 
Performance 
Awareness 
Training 
Awareness 
Training 
Awareness 
Training 
cum 
cum 
cum 
Impact assessment studies 
Studies 
FCA and RCPA 
Development  of  Policy  and 
strategy , learning best practices  
visits 
Exposure 
- 
Internal  and  Overseas, 
Conferences 
and 
workshops 
By whom 
 Internal experts of 
FCA,RPCAs 
and 
institutions 
identified  
Subject 
matter 
specialist /Trainers 
/ 
from 
identified agency 
RPCA 
 Identified Agency 
 Identified Agency 
Service Provider  
 Service  provider 
to  be 
identified 
engaged 
and 
under  a  twinning 
arrangement 
development 
and 
Product 
Policy=  New  financial  services 
and  products;  digital  financial 
service, 
guarantee 
schemes 
Institutional Development 
deposit 
FCA and RCPA 
Studies  and  preparing 
policy  and  operational 
framework 
 Service  Provider 
(s) 
RUSACCOs 
IT Infrastructure 
Hardware and Software 
Development. 
FCA 
Setting  up  SACCO-based  Apex 
National/ Regional bodies 
Study 
,exposure 
,preparatory measures 
Service Provider 
 Service  provider 
to be identified  
 Identified  Unions 
RUSACCOs 
and 
and 
intermediary 
agency 
Service Provider 
Service Provider 
Reimbursement 
of 
Communication &other 
Expenses  
Study  &  preparatory 
framework  and related 
support services 
up 
Setting 
/strengthening  existing 
Institutes 
Explorations 
,preparatory  &support 
measures 
for  Service Provider 
RUSACCOs 
&Unions 
RUSACCOs 
,Unions 
RPCA 
FCA, 
RUSACCOs, 
Unions 
 FCA ,RPCA  
Linking  RUSACCOs  to  Unions-
improving 
communication, 
capacity of RUSACCOS 
up 
level 
of 
for 
Setting  up  National 
training institute of excellence 
Setting 
Training 
Financial 
institutions 
Cooperatives  at  decentralized 
levels 
Setting  up  Certification  System 
for 
and 
professional 
institutional excellence 
29 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
 FCA /RPCA 
 FCA/RPCA 
 FCA/RPCA 
FCA/RPCA 
 FCA 
 FCA 
RUSACCOs/ 
Unions 
Unions 
Pilot testing new products 
Training Need Assessment 
Viability  and  Transformation 
,Impact  Studies  for  Unions  and 
RUSACCOs 
Integrating 
Financial 
Cooperatives  with  Financial 
Inclusion Programme with their 
participation  
Integrating SACCOs/Unions with 
Payment Systems 
Integrating  Unions/  SACCOs 
with Credit Information system 
Developing 
certification systems 
Training 
product 
and 
New 
development 
testing 
Study  
Provider 
Unions/ 
Service 
and 
RUSACCOs 
Service Provider 
Study  
Service Provider 
initiatives  and 
initiatives  and 
 Policy 
developmental 
measures , 
 Policy 
technology 
development  
 FCA  and  service 
Providers 
 Service Providers 
Policy  initiatives  ,Study 
and 
technology 
development 
Service Provider 
Mobility  Support  for  Union/ 
RUSACCO staff 
Purchase 
motorcycles 
of 
FCA 
Technical  Staff  Support 
Unions 
for 
Recruitment  of  one 
technical staff each for 
Unions 
with 
FCA/RPCA 
support of Unions 
30 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
ANNEXURE III: 
 capacity-building for SACCOs in Uganda under PROFIRA 
Progress of SACCO  capacity-building (as of April 2018) 
TABLE 
Standardized Training Module 
No.  of  SACCOs 
Targeted 
SACCOs 
Trained 
Persons 
Trained* 
Completion 
Rate 
RESIDENTIAL 
Credit & Default Management 
1. Financial Management  
Savings  &  Other  Product 
2. 
Development 
3. Strategic Planning 
ON-SITE 
4. Financial Literacy 
5. Governance 
6. Business Development Skills 
453 
330 
330 
330 
330 
330 
330 
361 
330 
300 
200 
256 
247 
223 
1444 
1320 
80% 
100% 
1200 
23,000 
29,440 
28,405 
25,645 
91% 
61% 
78% 
75% 
68% 
*Estimates based on 4 persons (Board and staff) per SACCO for residential trainings and 115 targeted 
for on-site. 
BACK GROUNDOF SACCO DEVELOPMENT 
:Based on SACCO census data for 2013, 453 SACCOs were identified that could meet the somewhat 
moderated  criteria  for PROFIRA  support, while  another 46 were  identified  as  needed  “turnaround” 
support to address a specific problem (such as fraud or governance) and referred to the Department 
of  Cooperative Development  in  the  Ministry  of Trade,  Industry  and  Cooperatives  (MTIC)  for  action. 
Many  of  those  that  qualified  for  training  have  succeeded  in  expanding  their  membership  and 
operations and moved closer to sustainability.  
PROFIRA was designed to pilot such support, including upgrading MIS systems to the level needed for 
off-site supervision, as well as capacity-building to help SACCOs achieve financial sustainability (also a 
criterion for licensing, since regulatory authorities avoid licensing unprofitable institutions for which 
they would be held accountable). IFAD made clear that continuation of such support beyond PROFIRA 
would be possible only if another agency with expertise in financial sector regulation, such as the World 
Bank, took the lead. 
It is clear that the vast majority of registered SACCOs – even the majority of those currently operating 
– do not meet the minimum criteria for a “Category A” SACCO as defined under the Act and that not 
more  than  20%  (about  900)  of  those  on  the  Register  are  actually  operational  with  a  permanent 
registration . Furthermore, many of these are facing substantial risks that may lead to dormancy or 
collapse.  It  will  be  necessary  to  clean  up  the  Register  to  eliminate  those  that  are  defunct  or  never 
completed the requirements for permanent registration in order to begin rebuilding public confidence 
31 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopa 
RUFIP-III Design Report Working Paper 2 
in SACCOs as a viable business model, before effective regulation of all those that are operational can 
be implemented.  
Once the non-existent and not fully registered SACCOs are eliminated, then UMRA and MTIC can work 
out  a  strategy  for  dealing  with  three  main  categories  of  registered  SACCOs  that  have  a  verified 
presence “on the ground”:  
(1) licensed and being supervised by UMRA;  
(2) meet  the  minimum  savings  and  capital  criteria  for  licensing  by  UMRA  but  have  not  yet 
applied or qualified for a license; 
(3) fall below the UMRA “Category A” but are operational.  
(Source: IFAD reports) 
32 
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Design report 
Component 2 – Improving regulation, Supervision and Institutional 
discipline 
Working paper 
Federal Republic of Ethiopia 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme – Phase III (RUFIP III) 
Component 2- Improving regulation, Supervision and institutional 
discipline: 
WORKING PAPERS 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
INDEX 
Nomenclature 
Particulars 
Component 2: Improving capacity and systems in NBE for Micro Finance Regulation, Supervision 
and Institutional Discipline 
 List of Abbreviations 
 PART I 
 Table  
Strengthening  Capacity  and  Systems  in  NBE  for  Micro  Finance  Regulation  and 
Supervision and Financial Discipline. 
Staff strength of the Directorates in NBE associated with regulation and supervision 
 Annexure I  
Organogram of National Bank of Ethiopia 
 Annexure II  
PART II 
 List of TA interventions to be supported for improving capacity and systems in NBE 
for MF regulation and supervision 
Strengthening  Capacity  and  Systems  in  NBE  for  Micro  Insurance  Regulation  and 
Development 
 Table No 1 
Financial Performance of Insurance Companies  
 Table No 2 
Insurance Companies Branches –Regional Distribution as at 30 September 2018 
 Annexure I 
Overview of Joint Programme of ILO & UNCDF in Ethiopia-2013-18-Highlights  
 Annexure II 
Summary of TA interventions for regulation and development of Micro insurance  
 Annexure III 
Micro Insurance Regulatory Framework in select countries 
 Annexure IV 
Select  Potential 
Programmes and Experience  
Institutions  for  Micro 
Insurance  training  and  development- 
Component 2.2: Improving capacity and systems in FCA for Financial Cooperatives’ Regulation, 
Supervision and Institutional Discipline 
 PART III  
Improving Capacity and Systems in FCA for Regulation, Supervision and Institutional 
Discipline of Financial Cooperatives 
Annexure I 
Improving Rural Finance Inclusion Through Cooperatives (ITFITCO) –Features  
Annexure II 
 Annexure III 
ILCUFS ‘s Document on Training Strategy for Regulator to RUSACCOs –A few quotes 
relating to Training Needs of Financial Cooperatives 
TA  interventions  for  FCA  for  regulation,  supervision,  and  institutional  Discipline  of 
Financial Cooperatives under RUFIP III 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Component 2 
List of Abbreviations 
ACCOSCA: African Confederation of Cooperative Savings and Credit Association 
AEMFI: Association of Ethiopian Micro Finance Institutions 
A2II : Access to Insurance Inclusion 
ANOI: Adjusted Net Operating Income 
ALM: Assets and Liabilities Management 
AML: Anti- Money Laundering 
ATA: Agricultural Technology Agency 
BCBS: Basle Committee of Banking Supervision 
BIS : Basle Institute of Supervision 
BOS: Board of Supervision 
CAGR: Compounded Annual Growth Rate 
CBS: Core Banking Solution 
CCA: Canadian Cooperative Association 
CGAP: Consultative Group to Assist the Poor 
CGFC: Capital Goods Financial Companies 
CFT : Combating Financial Terrorism 
CRAR: Capital to Risk Assessment Ratio 
DFS: Digital Financial Services 
DMFS: Directorate of Micro Finance Supervision 
DIS : Directorate of Insurance Regulation 
EIFS: Ethiopian Institute of Financial Studies 
ETB: Ethiopian Birr 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
FC: Financial Cooperatives 
FCA: Federal Cooperative Agency 
GAPP: Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
GFC: Great Financial Crisis 
GIRAFE: Governance Information management, Risk analysis, Activities, Funding, Efficiency 
GOE : Government of Ethiopia 
GTP: Growth and Transformation Plan 
G2 P: Government to Person 
IASB: International Accounting Standard Board 
IAIS :International Association of Insurance Supervision 
ILO : International Labour Organization 
ICT: Information and Communication Technology 
IFRS: International Financial Reporting Standards 
ILCUF: Irish League of Credit Unions Federation 
IRAC: Income Recognition, Asset Classification 
Asset Classification 
IRFITCO: Improving Rural Financial Inclusion Through Cooperatives 
ISAB: International Accounting Standard Boar 
KYC: Know Your Customers 
MIC: Micro Insurance Centre 
MIDP: Micro Insurance Development Programme 
MOFEC: Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation 
NAAB: National Accounts and Audit Board 
NBE: National Bank of Ethiopia 
NPA: Non –Performing Assets 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
OECD: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
OSS: Offsite Surveillance System /Operational Self-Sufficiency 
OFAG : Office of Federal Auditors General 
P2 G : Person to Government 
POS : Point Of Sales 
PEARLS : Protection, Effective Financing, Asset quality, Rates of Returns, Liquidity, Sign of 
Growth 
RBA : Risk- Based Audit 
RBS: Risk-Based Supervision 
RFI: Rural Finance Institution 
ROA : Return On Assets 
RCPB : Regional Cooperative Promotion Bureau 
ROE : Return On Equity 
RUSACCO: Rural Savings and Credit Cooperatives 
SRO : Self- Regulatory Organization 
SPM: Social Performance Management 
TA: Technical Assistance 
TNA: Training Needs Assessment 
TOT: Training of Trainers 
UNDP: United National Development Programme 
UNCDF: United Nations Capital Development Fund 
WOCCU : World Council of Credit Unions 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
PART I : Improving Capacity and Systems in NBE for Microfinance regulation 
and Supervision and Institutional Discipline 
INDEX 
Subject Matter 
RUFIP II Support for NBE 
Financial Sector Reforms and Changing Policy Environment 
Word Bank Support for Reform Strategies 
Major functions & initiatives of National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) 
Role of Micro Finance Institutions Supervision Directorate (MFISD), NBE 
Staff Strength of Directorates of NBE connected with Financial Services 
Developing a technology-based Offsite Surveillance System (OSS) 
Onsite Inspection- Technology Adoption 
Legislation and regulatory framework for Cyber Security 
Audit and Accounting System 
Audit, Accounting &Reporting Policy Environment 
Scope of Proclamation to Provide Financial Reporting 
Progress of Implementation of the Proclamation 
MFIs’ Implementation of Risk-based audit 
Process Improvement in audit 
Deposit Mobilization, Safety & insurance 
Insolvency regime and Financial Stability System 
Stress Testing 
Portfolio Quality & Delinquency Management Programme 
Trouble Assets Relief Programme 
Diversifying financial products and services 
Islamic Finance 
Securitization of Assets 
Financing against moveable Assets 
Greening Finance 
National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS)Framework 
World Bank Mission’s Identified Key Policy Action 
Broad Technical Assistance (TA) Support to NBE under RUFIP III 
Legal Framework & Financial Sector liberalization 
1 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Financial Inclusion &Digital Financial Service 
Digital Financial Services: World Bank Group (WBG) Support Vis –a-Vis RUFIP III 
Subject Matter 
Credit Infrastructure 
Customers’ Grievance Redressal 
Evolving Codes of Standards &Fair Practices 
Social Performance Management (SPM) system 
Self- Regulatory Organization (SRO) 
Fraud Control, Monitoring and Prevention 
Vigil Mechanism (Whistle Blower Policy) 
Corporate Governance 
Leasing Financing Regulation & Supervision 
Exploring transformation and upgradation of leading MFIs 
Establishment of an Apex Development Bank 
Agency Banking – Business Correspondence Model 
Documentation of Manuals and Guidelines 
Electronic File Management 
Web Page Development 
Regulation and Supervision in Pastoral Region 
Coordinating and Support Officer in NBE 
Development of Policy, Regulations and Road Map-Summary 
Annexures 
2 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
PART I 
RUFIP III-Component 2- Improving regulation, supervision and institutional 
discipline 
2.1 Strengthening capacity and systems in NBE for microfinance regulation 
and supervision 
The core strength and resilience of the financial sector in Ethiopia speaks eloquently of the prudential 
regulations and risk-based supervision led by NBE. The country has been free from any external shocks 
and systemic failures. Within the financial sector, the micro finance sector has also been prudentially 
regulated  by  NBE  and  the  sector  has  been  strong  and  stable.  The  RUFIPII  design  had  an  exclusive 
component  on  regulation  and  supervision  of  MFIs  and  accordingly,  had  incorporated  several 
interventions  aimed  at  strengthening  NBE  in  this  regard.  Subsequent  supervision/implementation 
review and support missions & Mid- Term Review missions had reviewed the progress and focused on 
scrupulous  implementation  of  the  envisaged activities.  The  broad  interventions  envisaged  and  the 
expected outcomes there-under are outlined below. 
1.  RUFIP II Support for NBE: 
Design  report  of  RUFIP  II  envisaged  support  for(a)  capacity  and  competence  enhancement  of  the 
Directorate  of  MF  Supervision  through  HRD  interventions,  support  for  purchase  of  laptops, 
development of revised and updated supervision manual ; (b) policy development through conduct of 
studies  ,seminars  and  exposure  visits  on  identified  themes  ,(c)  Knowledge  management  and 
dissemination through awareness literature, documentation, financial literacy programmes, auditors’ 
sensitization,(d) Technology upgradation in offsite surveillance,(e) facilitating MFI sector integrating 
with  payment  and  settlement,  credit  information  bureau,  branchless  banking  (f)  institutional 
development by way of setting up of Apex Development Bank and (g) promotion and development of 
micro  insurance  regulation  and  development.  The  expected  key  outcomes  of  the  proposed 
interventions were as under: 
a)  A  well  trained  staff  of  Micro  Finance  Supervision  Directorate  of  NBE,  with  enhanced  skill  and 
competence in onsite inspection and offsite surveillance (OSS); 
b)  A revised and updated Manual to conduct Risk-based supervision (RBS); 
c)  Adequate  Staff  placement  and  development  for  timely  completion  of  onsite  inspection  and 
implementation of technology –based OSS; 
d)  Policy  and  operational  system  and  policy  framework  for  MFIs  joining  the  national  Payment  & 
Settlement System and credit information system; 
e)  Bringing about an improved internal audit and statutory audit framework for audit of MFIs; 
f)  Periodical  review  of  regulations  and  regulatory  standards  to  promote  product  innovation  and 
diversification as also fostering MFI sector stability and growth; 
g)  A continued policy dialogue  and  consultative  process between NBE and other stake holders in 
RUFIP II for policy refinement; 
h)  Development of regulatory framework for Micro -insurance and promotion of the sector; and 
i)  Setting up of Apex Development Bank for supporting MFIs in capacity-building, meeting liquidity 
needs of MFIs and overall development. 
Under the budget, besides allocation for capacity building through training, exposure visits, studies 
and documentation, and for policy, system and institutional development, a budget of USD 200,000 
for  OSS,  USD  120,000  for  micro  insurance,  USD  120,000  for  branchless  banking,  USD  105,000  for 
3 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
payment&settlementandUSD45,000  for  governance  enhancement  of  MFI  was  envisaged.  Under 
RUFIP II, significant initiatives were taken for staff capacity building by way of deputing 130 numbers 
of  staff  for various  training  programmes/exposures  visits.  However,  several systemic  interventions 
remained incomplete and unimplemented. 
2.  Financial Sector Reforms and Changing Policy Environment: 
 In the financial sector of Ethiopia, there are 18 Commercial banks, 38 Micro Finance Institutions ,17 
insurance Companies (1 state-owned and 16 private), and 5 Capital Goods Finance Companies, -all of 
which are regulated by the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE). Under the Growth and Transformation 
Plan II (GTP II), NBE increased the minimum capital of private banks to 2 billion Birr ($90 million) and 
required all sixteen private banks to increase their paid up capital to 2 billion Birr by 2020. Similarly, 
MFIs  are  required  to  have  minimum  capital  of  10  million  Birr  by  2020.GOE  continues  to  prohibit 
foreign ownership in the financial sector. Foreign banks are not permitted to provide financial services 
in  Ethiopia  and  the  market  is  closed  to  foreign  retail  banks.  Recently,  GOE  has  decided  to  initiate 
reform of the financial sector along with broad economic reforms in the country. Currently, Ethiopia 
has allowed a few foreign banks to open liaison offices in Addis Ababa to facilitate credit to companies 
from  their  countries  of  origins.  The  other  liberalization  measures,  which  are  likely  to  impact  the 
financial sector including rural finance, are as under: 
a)  Opening up foreign investments for Ethiopian nationals abroad; 
b)  Changing ownership of top MFIs so as to have 100% ownership by Government; 
c)  Making moveable assets as collateral for loans; 
d)  Inclusion of MFIs and Lease companies in credit reference mechanism; 
e)  Bringing out changes in business processes, so as improve Ethiopian ranking in the ease of doing 
business from 158/179; 
f)  Private Banks to provide credit @27% of their total to DBE through NBE for facilitating lending to 
priority sector; 
g)  Amendment  to  Banking  Business  Proclamation,  consequent  to  opening  up  the  economy  to 
Ethiopian nationals abroad; 
h)  Revising  ceiling  of  SME  for  banks,  MFIs  and  Lease  Companies  facilitating  DBE  to  finance  them 
differentially; 
i)  Review of Various Proclamations (Banking business, Insurance business, Micro Finance Business, 
etc.) in the light of proposed reforms; and 
j)  Establishment of an Apex Development Bank for microfinance sector. 
3.  World Bank Support for Reform Strategies: 
The World Bank has been working with GOE and NBE for facilitating the carving out of a road map & 
formulating reform strategies. A Task Force has been constituted to carry forward the measures. The 
World Bank has been supporting NBE/GOE in the following areas: 
Increasing modernization of the Payment & Settlement System; 
a) 
b)  Opening up Ethiopian market, including financial sector; 
c)  Setting up of Capital Markets &its policy and operational framework; 
d)  Reviewing progress under Financial Inclusion Strategy and carving out a road map; 
e)  Developing framework for customer protection; 
f)  Financial Education Strategy &framework; 
g)  National Financial Capability Strategy; 
h)  Banking regulation and supervision; 
i)  Lease Capital Regulation; 
4 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
 Reform of Development Bank of Ethiopia(DBE); 
j) 
k)  Legal framework for micro finance; and 
l) 
 Insurance business including micro insurance regulation and development. 
The areas outlined above, are very vast and diversified. There is considerable scope for NBE and other 
related  agencies  to  look  for  external  support  for  policy  and  regulation  development  and  their 
operationalization.  
4. 
 Major functions & initiatives of National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE):  
NBE  Establishment  Proclamation  spells  out  the  role,  functions,  structure,  powers,  especially  with 
respect  to  its  relationship  with  Government,  banks,  insurance  companies  and  other  financial 
institutions. It has powers to issue regulations, penalties and directives. It aims to foster monetary 
stability and a sound financial system, and maintaining credit and exchange conditions conducive to 
the balanced growth of the economy. It performs the role of regulation and supervision of CBs, MFIs, 
insurance  companies, Capital Goods  Companies and Payment  and Settlement architecture. Lack of 
access to finance is a significant constraint for inclusive economic development and accordingly it has 
been undertaking policy and strategic role for financial inclusion in recent years. In 2015, NBE allowed 
commercial banks to provide mobile banking service and agent banking. Pursuant to NBE’s permit, 
many of the commercial banks added mobile and agent banking in their line of services. Important 
directives  issued  to  banks  included  licensing  and  supervision,  branch  opening,  penalty  for  non-
compliance, fraud monitoring, exposure limits, interest- free banking, etc. The organogram of NBE is 
given in the Annexure I, which reveals its diversified activities.  
4.1 Role of Micro Finance Institutions Supervision Directorate (MFISD), NBE: 
NBE  has  been  consistent  partner/stake  holder  in  the  implementation  of  RUFIP  I  and  II,  as 
strengthening of regulation and supervision of MFIs remained an exclusive component and the MFISD 
served  as  the  nodal  unit  in  the  implementation  of  various  interventions  envisaged  under  the 
component. The main objective of MFISD is to maintain a sound, safe and stable microfinance sector. 
Through its supervisory framework, there had been tremendous growth and diversification of MFIs in 
the country over the years. The Directorate has taken several initiatives for review and refinement of 
regulatory  /supervisory  processes,  tools  and  systems,  tailored  to  MFIs.  It  has  issued  a  series  of 
directives to MFIs covering areas of prudential regulations, public savings, licensing, lending discipline, 
liquidity  ,  financial  and  operational  information  reporting,  minimum  capital  requirement,  CRAR, 
mobile and agent banking, fit and proper criteria for Board & CEO, lease financing , etc. It has adopted 
risk-based supervision for MFIs and has guided MFIs to adopt risk management systems. It has put in 
It  has  been 
place  an  elaborate  consultative  process  for  finalizing  regulations/directives. 
convening/participating  in  the  National  Rural  and  Micro  Finance  Policy  Steering  Committee, 
constituted  under  RUFIP  II.  Besides  MFISD,  other  Directorates  like  Banking  Supervision,  Insurance 
Supervision, Payment & Settlement, and Financial Inclusion are also supportive of the microfinance 
sector  and  are  associated  with  various  interventions  having  a  bearing  on  the  MFIs  and  financial 
services.  The  capacity  building  of  HR  in  all  the  related  Directorates  of  NBE  is  very  important  and 
relevant in the light of C-GAP guidelines1,” to craft and enforce regulation with a financial inclusion 
objective  ,  the  regulator must  understand  the  distinctive  characteristics  of micro  finance,  including 
clients and their needs ,products ,services and institutions providing those products and services .“ 
1 Consensus Guidelines on Regulation and Supervision (2012) : 
5 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
4.2 Staff Strength of Directorates of NBE connected with Financial Services: 
The following Directorates are associated with the financial Sector, particularly with respect to the 
regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  and  financial  Inclusion.  Their  HR  position  is  as 
under: 
Table 1: HR Position of Directorates of NBE 
 Name of Directorate  
Number of Staff 
1. Micro Finance Institutions Supervision Directorate (MFISD) 
2. Insurance Supervision Directorate (ISD)  
3. Payment &Settlement Supervision Directorate (PSSD)  
4. Banking Supervision Directorate (BSD)  
5. Financial Inclusion Secretariat (FIS)  
30 
18 
39 
90 
 8  
5.  Developing a technology-based Offsite Surveillance System (OSS): 
For  effective  offsite  supervision of  MFIs,  RUFIP  II  design  had  given  considerable  focus  to  adopting 
technology-bases  OSS  in  NBE.  With  the  fund  allocation  of  USD  200,000  under  RUFIP  II,MFISD  had 
planned  for  implementation  of  the  activity  and  has  been  pursuing  the  procurement  process  of 
identifying a suitable international consultant till June 2015.An international bid was floated, leading 
to the selection of the winner technology provider. In 2015-16, they discontinued the efforts made in 
the direction and explored the possibility of procuring the Banking Supervision Application (BSA) from 
Mozambique  Central  Bank  for  adoption  by  all  supervised  entities,  including  MFIs.  The  matter 
regarding its adoption by MFIs, which would involve certain additions / changes in the software, was 
under  discussion  with  the  Mozambique  Central  Bank.  The  technology-based  automatic  OSS, 
envisaging  generation  of  broad-based  outputs  concurrently  at  the  levels  of  the  Regulator  and  the 
regulated MFIs was incorporated in the design report, based on the technology developed by the Tata 
Consultancy services (TCS) for Rural Financial Institutions(RFIs)in India. 
BSA  is  a  system  for  providing  automatic  generation  of  supervision  reports.  It  provides  web-based 
solutions  for  securing  submission,  analysis  and  report  generation.  It  envisages  stringent  data 
validation process, ensuring data quality .The system is in vogue in SADC (South African Development 
Countries),Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and  several  other  regulatory  authorities.  Since  its  inception,  the 
system had three major updates and currently it is running Version 3.0. NBE has deployed Version 3 
.0 and its pilot period ended in 31 December 2017. Considering the need for a strong OSS, as envisaged 
under Basle Principles of Supervision, and also the emerging need for periodical updating of the system, 
TA  provisions  have  been  made  under  RUFIP  III,  for  the  purpose.  Moreover,  all  training  and 
sensitizations  programmes  for  supervising  officers  of  NBE  would  discuss  OSS-  related  operational 
procedures  and  use  of  the  outputs.  Besides  the MFIs  would  be  required  to  be sensitized  about  the 
inputs to be provided, reports to be generated and expected compliance to be submitted by them in 
the programmes envisaged under RUFIP III. 
6 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
6.  Onsite Inspection- Technology Adoption: 
While technology application and automation have been built into the Offsite Site Surveillance System 
adopted by the Central Banks across the world, it is likely that technology would hold the key to the 
onsite  supervision  system  with  the  increasing  use  of  technology  in  the  supervised  institutions. 
Financial Stability Institute(FSI) has documented the experience of various Central Banks, .e.g., Central 
Bank of Republic of Austria (OENB) ,National Bank of Rwanda (BNR),BangkoSentral ng Philipinas (BSP), 
UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) , US Securities and Exchange Commission, Monetary Authority 
of Singapore, Basle Committee for Banking Supervision (BCBS) ,Accenture ,Federal System of Banking 
(FSB) and Toronto Center in this regard. These agencies have done pioneering work in data collection, 
data  reporting,  data  storing/  managing,  data  validation,  data  visualization,  cloud  computing, 
processing,  real  time  monitoring,  market  analysis  and  intelligence,  etc.  “Innovative  Technology  in 
Financial  Supervision  (SUP  TECH  and  REG  TECH)  –The  experience  of  early  Users  “2has  been 
summarized as under: 
a)  SUP  TECH  refers  to  innovative  technology  used  by  Supervised  Agencies  themselves  to  support 
supervision.  It  is the  result  of  the  emergence  of  relevant  advance  technology  in  the  economy. 
Digitization of reporting and monitoring the risks are hall marks of the new focus. 
b)  REG  Tech  is  already  a  familiar  word  in  financial  sector.  It  refers  to  application  of  innovative 
technologies  that  support  compliance  with  regulatory  and  reporting  requirements  by  the 
regulated financing institutions. 
c)  A  number  of  Financial  Sector  supervisors  are  already  using  innovative  ways  to  effectively 
implement  Risk  Based  Approach  (RBA)  to  supervision.  Early  Warning  Signal  (EWS),  centralized 
data-warehousing,  risk  indicator  dash  boards  are  being  used.  In  the  post  –crisis  regulatory 
reforms, better data reporting, growth in storage capacity, computing power and advances in data 
Science have taken place. 
d)  “Sup tech” supports core objectives of regulation and supervision. Innovative technologies can be 
applied at the design stage of new regulations to assess the potential impact of policy proposals.  
e)  The  relevant  challenges  of  Speech  include  standardization  of  data,  data  quality  and  data 
completeness,  legal,  operational  and  reputational  risks.  To  overcome  challenges,  technology- 
oriented  approach,  robust  risk-management  framework,  collaboration  with  other  partners  is 
necessary. 
Several supervisory agencies use ‘chatbots’ to answer consumer complaints automatically and provide 
virtual  assistance  to  supervised  entities.  In  the  area  of  data  analysis,  the  key  areas  like  market 
surveillance, misconduct analysis, and macro prudential supervision are carried out. Many Sup Tech 
applications help in detection of possible AML (Anti-Money Laundering) and CFT violations. Neural 
networks  can  be  used  to detect  liquidity crisis.  Machine  learning,  image  recognition  and  language 
processing are being increasingly used. Some of the concluding remarks of the authors of FSI as under 
are significant. 
a) 
Innovative  technologies,  together  with  increased  data  availability  create  scope  to  strengthen 
financial supervision; 
b)  Sup Tech for data collection purposes is likely to benefit both supervisor and supervised agencies, 
which need to appreciate the risks and limitations of Sup tech. They need to be cautious of growing 
data knowledge gap. 
c)  Management support is critical in exploring the opportunities and benefits of Suptech; 
d)  Supervised agencies engaged in Suptech need specialized human resources; 
2 Dark Broeders and Jerry Perenio (July 2018) 
7 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
e)  The  use  of  Suptech  reinforces  the  case  for  further  improving  risk  management  of  supervisory 
agencies; 
f)  The  supervised  agencies  can  learn  from  each  other,  it  is  important  to  seek  opportunities  for 
collaboration.  
In the light of the above, there is enormous scope of technology application in various onsite inspection 
processes. However, for MFIs, as compared to commercial banking, there are limitations, which need 
to be kept in view. The TA support for NBE has been envisaged under RUFIP III for the following: 
1)  Development of IT tools for automation of Onsite supervision System; 
2)  Preparation  of  Manual  for  Policy  &Procedure  for  handling  policy  formulation,  licensing  and 
onsite/offsite supervision; 
3)  A study on MIS and appropriate exposure and reporting system; 
4)  Training Programmes on Risk Management and Risk-based supervision;  
5)  Exposure Visit on operation and Regulation of digital Financial Services, and 
6)  Annual Conference of Supervising Officials of NBE. 
These  programmes  would  provide  perspectives  of  regulation  and  supervision  due  to  technology 
adoption in both at the levels of NBE and MFIs. 
7. 
 Legislation and regulatory framework for Cyber Security: 
In 2016, GOE had had passed a Proclamation on computer crimes. The proclamation deals with a host 
of issues ranging from illegal access to computers, number of criminal offences committed, preventive 
and  investigative  measures,  evidentially  and  procedure  provisions,  etc.  The  threat  and  impact  of 
cyber-attacks on the financial sector is increasing across the world and the supervisory authorities are 
increasingly looking to addressing cyber risks and threats. The financial sector is more vulnerable and 
as per the estimates, the customers of financial sector suffered 65% more cyber-attacks in 2016, as 
compared to other sectors. The supervisory framework for Cyber Security is, however, still evolving. 
Basle Stability Institute in its Policy Implementation Series has dealt with regulatory approaches to 
enhanced cyber security of banks.3 The broad guidelines suggested are as under: 
a)  Any cyber security risk framework should be aligned with overall operational risk and enterprise 
risk management strategy; 
b)  Cyber  Security  regulation  should  require  banks  to  develop  an  effective  control  and  prepare 
response framework for cyber risk; 
c)  Any  regulation  relating  to  cyber  risk  should  consider  as  starting  points  the  existing  technical 
standardization in cyber and information security; 
d)  A critical element of any regulatory framework is to promote cyber security awareness among 
staff. 
In  India,  for  instance,  the  supervisory  agencies  -  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  National  Bank  for 
Agriculture for Rural Development (NABARD)have issued very detailed guidelines to the supervised 
entities  on  addressing  the  cyber  security  menace,  in  the  light  of  laws  passed  in  the  country.  In  its 
guidelines to Cooperative Banks, NABARD emphasizes on the following: 
a)  Each bank should have Board approved Cyber Security policy; 
3 *Regulatory Approaches to Enhancing banks’ Cyber Security -by Juan Crloss ,CrisantoJermyPenio –August 
2017 
8 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
b)  Cyber security should be distinct from broader IT /IS security plan; 
c)  There should be continuous surveillance by supervised institutions; 
d)   Network and data-base security should be ensured; 
e)  Each supervised institution should frame cyber security Management Plan; and; 
f)  Supervisory reporting framework on this aspect should be enforced. 
In the light of international trends and practices, NBE needs to look at the adequacy of the existing 
laws  and should  also  frame  appropriate regulatory  and  supervisory  directives/ guidelines  for  MFIs. 
Under  TA  component,  an  exposure  study  overseas  on  operation  and  regulation  of  digital  financial 
services,  digitization  of  groups  and  also  Cyber  security  has  been  provided  for  NBE.  Other  training 
programmes and interventions on IT and digital financial services, risk management and risk-based 
supervision should also cover cyber security aspects. 
8.1 Audit and Accounting System: 
All MFIs in Ethiopia need to be audited annually, as per legal requirement. Under RUFIP I& II, focus 
was  laid  on  NBE’s  taking  steps  for  improving  audit  quality  and  effectiveness  of  the  MFIs.  The 
suggestions 
introducing  audit 
classification/rating  norms,  were  given  and  support  was  provided  for  NBE  for  conducting  annual 
sensitization programmes for auditors, etc. However, these were not given adequate attention. 
the  computerized  environment, 
like  reorienting  audit 
in 
8.2 Audit, Accounting &Reporting Policy Environment: 
The state of audit, accounting and reporting environment was studied by the World Bank and IMF, in 
2007  and  their  report4brought  out  the  gaps  in  the  statutory  provisions  (including  Commercial 
Code),the  audit  profession,  education  and  training  arrangements,  accounting  and  audit  standards, 
quality of financial reporting, etc. 
In the light of prevailing situation in the country, the following policy recommendations were made in 
the above report with a view to ensuring a holistic, multi-disciplinary approach for implementation: 
  Revise the Commercial Code 1960 and the other relevant laws and regulations for banks other 
financial institutions, ,insurance companies ,state –owned enterprises and NGOs ; 
  Enact a financial reporting law; 
  Establish a National Accountants and Auditors Board. 
  Set accounting standards ;  
  Mandate International Standards on Auditing (ISA) for all auditors; 
  Establish a strong accountancy professional body, with IFAC membership; 
  Establish a local professional and technician accountancy qualification; 
  Enhance the capacity of all regulators to enable them to effectively discharge their responsibilities 
and to handle IFRS related issues in the regulation; 
  Conduct awareness campaigns and related programs. 
 This  report  recommended  the  establishment  of  a  National  Steering  Committee  to  coordinate  the 
financial  reporting  and  auditing  reforms  and  develop  a  country  action  plan.  Pending  these  broad-
based reforms, the Office of Federal Auditor General (OFAG) had introduced certain interim measures. 
During  RUFIP  II,  design  and  supervision  reports,  it  was  emphasized  that  necessary  audit  and 
accounting reforms should be carried forward for furtherance of financial sector. 
4Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) 
9 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
8.3 Scope of Proclamation to Provide Financial Reporting: 
In  the  above  backdrop,  Ethiopia  adopted  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS)  and 
International  Standard  on  Audit  (ISA)  in  December  2014  through  enactment  of  Proclamation  No: 
847/2014. The Proclamation to provide for Financial Reporting 2014 envisaged establishment of the 
Accounting  &  Auditing  Board  of  Ethiopia;  prescribed  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards 
(IFRS), IRS for SMEs, and international Public sector accounting standards applicable to Charities and 
Societies;  mandated  audit  of  financial  statements  by  qualified  auditors;  provided  for  auditing 
standards;  &  prescribed  quality  assurance  review  of  auditors.  It  emphasizes  the  independence  of 
auditors  and  their  professional  competence  and  enforcement  of  penal  provisions  for  professional 
misconduct. It envisages setting up of a professional Accounting Body /Association of Accountants and 
an Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Ethiopia. Failure to meet the reporting mechanism will 
result in imprisonment. 
8.4 Progress of Implementation of the Proclamation: 
Although the enactment of the above Proclamation is considered as an important mile stone, several 
provisions envisaged in the Act and several recommendations of ROSC cited above have not yet been 
implemented.  Other  policy  recommendations,  such  as,  reviewing  commercial  code  (1960), 
establishing  strong  accounting  professional  body  with  IFAC  membership  and  establishing  a  local 
professional  and  technician  accountancy  qualification,  are  not  realized.  Hopefully,  the  newly 
established Accounting & Auditing Board will take steps to enforce IFRS requirements and enhance 
compliance  practices  of  reporting  entities.  It  would  take  steps  for  establishing  accountancy 
professional  institutions  to  fulfill  the  stated  objectives.  Ratified  in  2014,  the  Financial  Reporting 
Proclamation gave five years to the entire business to enter the new system. 
After the full implementation of the new system, the GAAP will be outdated. Organizations like banks, 
insurance  companies  and  public  enterprises  will  begin  using  IFRS  starting  this  fiscal  year.  IFRS  is 
considered to be the latest financial language enabling local companies to easily communicate with 
each  other  globally.  Asset  revaluation  was  a  critical  step  in  the  first  stage.  Some  banks  brought 
consultants and experts from overseas to undertake the process. In the second stage, banks will start 
using the software before reaching the reporting stage 
Addis  Ababa  University  is  expected  to  upgrade  its  accounting  curriculum  this  year  in  light  of  the 
developments. 
8.5 MFIs’ Implementation of Risk-based audit:  
With  the  adoption  of  Risk-based  supervision  for  MFIs,  there  is  an  emerging  need  for  scrupulous 
implementation  of  risk-based  audit.  So  capacity  building  of  auditors  in  this  regard  assumes 
significance. Under the modern external as well as internal audit, it is simply unrealistic to perform a 
100 % audit. The task of an external auditor is to do sample audit and to express his/her true and fair 
view on the audited institution’s financial state. 
8.6 Process Improvement in audit: 
In Germany, DGRV introduced a new audit software last year which is process-driven. The idea is to 
find out if there is an internal mechanism in place in the audited institution that is likely to identify 
mistakes on their own (internal control). When the auditor identifies such controls he/she can reduce 
the extent of auditing individual transactions. The software is designed in Canada, by the name "Audit 
Agent".  There  is  need  for  the  use  of  innovative  technology  &  software  as  audit  tools  by  auditors 
(internal & external) engaged by MFIs with the approval of NBE. 
10 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
 In this background, implementation of IFRS and IAS has assumed urgency and NBE and MFIs need to 
take  expeditious  steps  for  understanding  IFRS  &  IAS  and  internalizing  the  concepts.  RUFIP  III  has 
envisaged support for Auditors’ sensitization conferences as also Supervising’ Officers Annual meets, 
inter alia, to discuss about modalities of implementation of IFRS & IAS. The programmes should discuss 
audit  quality  and  effectiveness,  audit  planning,  strengthening  risk-based  audit,  system  audit,  audit 
process  innovation,  compliance  to  audit,  internal  audit  mechanism  and  internalization  of  audit 
findings. The TOR for related Studies and design of capacity –building programmes to be supported by 
RUFIP III should accordingly be framed. RUFIP II had enabled NBE to come out with detailed internal 
audit and external audit regulations. Although it was reported that relevant draft guidelines have been 
prepared, it is yet to be issued. RUFIP III expects appropriate guidelines, based on the study, experience 
and best practices to be issued. 
9.  Deposit Mobilization, Safety & insurance: 
 Some of the policy and regulatory measures such as statutory provisions, enabling MFIs to tap public 
deposits, prudential regulations, linking loans to savings in MFIs, branch expansion, etc., have led to 
growth  of  deposits  in  MFIs.  The  concept  of  compulsory  and  voluntary  savings  have  helped  saving 
mobilization.  MFIs  are  expected  to  cover  80%  of  their  loans  from  savings.  As  per  Growth 
&Transformation Plan II (GTP II-2015-20), MFIs are required to increase their outreach through 10,000 
branches by 2020 (from the present level of branches), so as to cover, at least, 50% of rural keels. 
Increasing thrust on financial inclusion under National Financial Inclusion  Strategy envisaging, inter 
alia,  increased  outreach,  providing  financial  services  through  savings  accounts,  developing  savings 
culture through financial literacy and introducing new savings products suited to customers’ needs by 
MFIs are likely to lead to tremendous augmentation of their deposit in the years to come. Moreover, 
Deposit insurance will have  an impact on increasing deposit  mobilization and  lowering  the risks of 
MFIs. Although deposit insurance, which provides stability, safety and reliability to deposits, has been 
provided under the statute, a deposit insurance framework has not been put in place in the financial 
sector. To quote CGAP Consensus Guidelines on Regulation and Supervision of MFIs, (page 97) – “ if a 
country requires  commercial banks  to participate in deposit  insurance scheme, then it may wish to 
consider imposing same requirement on prudentially supervised deposit-taking MFIs as well (including 
,at least, larger Financial Cooperatives).” As small depositors of MFIs, covering women, farmers, etc., 
are more vulnerable, they should be protected. In order to enable NBE to develop appropriate deposit 
insurance/safety  scheme  and  regulations, technical assistance  for the  development  of  appropriate 
regulations,  systems  and  processes  and  implementation  of  the  scheme  for  the  savers  would  be 
extended under RUFIP III. To expedite the same, an exposure study visit oversees for this purpose has 
been included in TA budget. 
 10.1 Insolvency regime and Financial Stability System: 
Ethiopia's insolvency policy framework is currently outdated and lacks many modern practices, such 
as  an  effective  reorganization  framework  for  restructuring  corporate  debt, priority  for  post-
commencement financing and a modern regime for regulating insolvency practitioners. These imply 
that once  a business  experiences financial distress, there  will be  difficulty in its survival as a going 
concern and its continuance to provide value into the economy. The ‘Doing Business 2018 Resolving 
Insolvency data’ shows that recovery level by creditors is currently less than 30 percent of the loan at 
27.7 cents on the dollar. In this situation, the creditors have inadequate incentive to lend, thereby 
leading  to  stifling  of  entrepreneurship.  Moreover,  without  efficient  recovery  mechanisms  for 
creditors, financial institutions face the risk of increasing NPA (Non-Performing Assets) in the system. 
This can lead to deteriorating level that threatens financial sector stability. The Ministry of Commerce, 
GOE is undertaking a revision of the Commercial Code which includes the Bankruptcy law. The World 
Bank  Group  (WBG)  Insolvency  Team  is  assisting  the  insolvency  drafting  team  in  finalizing  the 
Bankruptcy Code in line with best practices. Government of Ethiopia has an ambitious time-frame for 
11 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
finalizing this law and it is recognized to be a part of the strategy for financial sector liberalization, 
financial stability and ease of doing business. 
In this background, and considering the significance of the financial stability of the growing MF sector, 
TA support for NBE under RUFIP III include the following: 
a)  Documentation of Micro Prudential Assessment and Finance Sector Stability; 
b)  Documentation &Guidelines on Stress Testing Policy and Procedure for MFIs; 
c)  Training Programme on Portfolio Quality & Delinquency Management; 
d)  Exposure Study on Operation and regulation of Digital Financial Services, and; 
e)  Training on Troubled Assets Relief Programme. 
10.2Stress Testing:  
Stress tests have become well established tools for authorities to assess the resilience of individual 
banks and other financial institutions in the financial sector,subsequent to great financial crisis (GFC). 
Sector-wise stress tests differ widely in their design and implementation. Stress tests can have micro 
prudential or macro prudential policy objectives. Stress tests are most effective when their design is 
fully aligned with the policy objectives of associated units. Federal Stability Institute Insight on Policy 
Implementation5 has identified three building blocks in the set-up of any stress test and relates them 
to policy objectives. In Ethiopia, MFIs in general are not familiar with stress testing nuances. With a 
view to having greater familiarity and application of stress testing in policy and procedures, by NBE 
and MFIs, the documentation on Stress Testing and relevant guidelines as above would be supported 
under RUFIP III.  
10.3 Portfolio Quality & Delinquency Management Programme: 
It  has  been observed that performance  analysis,  based  on  recovery  performance,  profitability  and 
various other ratios (e.g. OSS, FSS, ROA, ROE, PAR, etc.) are not regularly and adequately reviewed 
and disclosed by MFIs. The programme envisaged under RUFIP III is designed for senior and middle 
management of MFIs and other financial institutions for the purpose of strengthening knowledge and 
building their capacities in the field of loan portfolio, measurement of portfolio quality, macro credit 
risk management, causes and effects of delinquency and accounting for delinquency. This would also 
bring about greater awareness for the regulator and regulated entities as also AEMFI on institutional 
performance,  portfolio  analysis  and  delinquency  management.  The  programme  could  discuss  the 
need for checking and monitoring, measuring and tracking delinquency; PAR analysis; provisioning 
policy; client exit /drop outs; credit life cycle; total quality management; group approach; etc. Besides, 
institutional performance, based on various ratios should be discussed. 
10.4 Trouble Assets Relief Programme:  
This programme  was initially designed by the  Federal Reserve  System, subsequent  to  the  financial 
crisis.  The  programme  was  intended  to  strengthen  stability  of  the  financial  sector  through 
development  of  policies,  tools  and  standards.  It,  inter  alia,  covered  monitoring  and  supervising  of 
individual institutions& their infrastructure, putting in place sufficient crisis management tools and 
temporary liquidity guarantee arrangements, evolving a capital purchase plan and introducing costing, 
pricing and accounting system , carrying out financial management and ratio analysis, and pursuing 
5 CF. Paper No12 on Stress Testing in banks –A comparative Analysis by Patricia Baudino 
,RonandGoetschMann-November 2018 
12 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
delinquency management. Thus, the programme is a customized trouble shooting programme. NBE’s 
supervisors and select MFI personnel should go through the programme, with TA support to be made 
available from RUFIP III.  
11.1Diversifying financial products and services:  
Financial  institutions  have been  empowered  to  introduce  demand-based  products  and  services,  in 
conformity  with  NBE  regulations.  The  institutions  have  been  given  autonomy  and  flexibility  to  fix 
interest rates on deposits and loans. The development and diversification of products and services of 
financial  institutions  could  include  savings,  credit,  money  transfer,  micro  insurance,  leasing,  group 
lending,  bank  linkage,  availing  of  guarantee  funds  and  introducing  business  development  services. 
There is need for organized efforts for introduction of new and innovative products, based on client 
satisfaction  survey,  capability-assessment  of  the  poor/ultra  poor,  client  profile-  building  in  various 
geographical locations. More pilots on financial services products in livelihoods promotion projects 
and  agricultural  value  chain  programmes  are  deemed  necessary,  considering  the  potential  for  up 
scaling. While replicating/up scaling good products and services, the prudential guidelines and risk-
management safeguards evolved by NBE should be kept in view by the financial institutions. Despite 
recent positive developments in the supply of financial services, there is a need for a greater diversity 
of financial products targeting the underserved segments of the society. While AEMFI and MFIs are 
expected to take necessary initiatives, under RUFIP III, NBE would be given TA support for developing 
financial products in certain key emerging areas for further development, e.g., Islamic finance leasing, 
digital payment services, micro insurance, securitization of assets and greening finance. 
11.2 Islamic Finance: 
Given the Muslim population of more  than one  third of the total population, there  is  a  significant 
demand  for  Sharia-compliant  financial  services  which  needs  to  be  further  developed.  The  formal 
directives on Islamic law compliant finance were issued by NBE in 2011. Islamic law compliant MFIs 
have  also  sprung  up  in  Afar  region.  SAMFI  is  one  such  institution,  which  has  a  vision to  become  a 
Shariat Compliant bank. Under RUFIP II, during 2018-19, a few officials were deputed for training in 
Islamic Finance to Malaysia. Further, TA for NBE for facilitating participation of their own supervising 
officers  as  also  concerned  officers  of  MFIs  in  suitable  training  programmes  on  regulation  and 
supervision  of  Islamic  financial  services  has  been  envisaged  under  RUFIP  III.  The  programmes  are 
expected to enhance the understanding of the regulator and regulated entities regarding the concept, 
product, process of implementation, regulatory and supervisory framework for Islamic financing. 
11.3 Securitization of Assets: 
The securitization of assets is a process of pooling loan receivables and selling them for related cash 
flow to third party investors as securities. This frees up capital, which can be used for fresh lending. 
The microfinance institutions which are in stress can come together to create a common pool of assets 
for doing securitization deals with banks. The common pool, essentially by smaller MFIs, is aimed at 
creating economies of scale and making it easier for banks to buy it. Bigger MFIs can contribute to the 
pool. This system would help those MFIs that are facing stress in the absence of fresh funding from 
banks  and  non  -banks  in  mitigating  the  tight  liquidity  condition.  In  Ethiopia,  necessary  legal  and 
regulatory environment needs to be created for development of securitization of assets as a financial 
instrument. With that perspective, RUFIP III envisages to support NBE for engaging appropriate agency 
for conducting a study on securitization of assets, with a view to evolving required policy, operational 
framework, regulatory guidelines and supervisory approach in this area. 
13 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
11.4 Financing against moveable Assets: 
As  a  part  of  the  reforms  and  liberalization  of  financial  sector,  NBE  is  slated  to  issue  regulations 
permitting financial institutions to finance customers against moveable assets. This changing policy 
environment  would  spur  access  to  finance  through  regulated  institutions.  In  a  survey  covering  73 
countries6,  the  impact  of  introducing  collateral  registries  for  moveable  assets  on  firms’  access  to 
finance was examined. It compared the firms’ access to bank finance in 7 countries that introduced 
collateral  registries  for  moveable  assets  against  control  groups;  firms  in  all  countries  that  did  not 
introduce  a  registry,  firms  in  a  sample of  countries matched  by  location  and  income  per  capita  to 
countries that introduced registries for moveable assets and firms in countries that undertook other 
types of collateral reforms but did not set up registries for moveable assets. Overall, the analysis finds 
that introducing collateral registries for moveable assets increases firms’ access to bank finance. There 
is evidence that the effect is larger among smaller and younger firms. In view of the significance of the 
policy  of  financing  against  moveable  assets,  impacting  access  to  finance,  support  to  NBE  for 
participation of its officers and those of select MFIs in suitable training programmes, has been included 
in the TA .The programme is expected to provide inputs on policy, operational aspects including risk 
management and supervisory safeguards and case studies, etc., on the subject. 
11.5 Greening Finance: 
 In the context of policy focus for mainstreaming biodiversity, climate change and sustainable land 
management  objectives  and  practices  into  agriculture,  there  is  an  emerging  need  for  supporting 
greening  finance  by  MFIs.  The  overall  objective  of  greening  finance  is  to  catalyze  transformative 
change to support achievement of national and global environmental benefits and conservation of 
critical biodiversity and forest landscapes. NBE &MFIs need to support harmonization between the 
country’s agricultural and environmental sector priorities and investments so that the achievement of 
national  and  global  environmental  benefits  can  be  fully  realized  without  compromising  country’s 
ability to strengthen rural livelihoods and meet its food and nutrition security. In view of the focus on 
environmental  aspects  in  RUFIP  III  design  and  also  national  and  global  priority, NBE  would  be 
supported  for  mounting  a  study  on  the  potential  and  possibilities  of  new  financial  products  for 
greening  finance  with  necessary  safeguards,  which  would  help  in  evolving  required  policy  and 
operational framework for MFIs and supervisory approaches for NBE. 
12 .1 National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) Framework: 
Under  RUFIP  II,  it  was  envisaged  to support  NBEs  for  financial  inclusion  efforts,  including  financial 
literacy.  NBE  had  been  pursuing  the  process  of  engaging  a  consultant  for  “developing  financial 
education and consumer protection strategy and implementation framework”. IFAD had approved an 
enhanced allocation from 100, 000 USD to 440,000 Usably reallocation from other interventions and 
had identified an international consultant. However, in the light of certain delays and difficulties in 
engaging the consultant under RUFIP II framework, NBE had preferred in 2015 to take recourse to the 
support  of  World  Bank,  in  line  with  the  strategy  evolved  for  National  Financial  Inclusion  Strategy 
(NFIS).  A  National  Council  for  Financial  Inclusion  (NCFI),  an  apex  policy  body  had  been  formed 
comprising  the  senior  ministers  with  the  chairmanship  of  Minister  for  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  (MOFED),  for  playing  leading  role  in  implementing  financial  inclusion  framework 
including financial literacy; the Governor, NBE is also a member. The Financial Inclusion Secretariat 
(FIS)was  established  in  NBE  for  coordination,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  Financial  Inclusion 
Strategy and to assist NCFI. This project is fully funded by international organizations, with a leading 
6Iness Love, Maria Soledad MartizezPeria and Sandip Singh 
14 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
role for the World Bank. The Financial Inclusion Strategy was ratified in January 2017 and launched in 
October 2017. It aimed at achieving universal access and use of affordable and high quality financial 
products and services and services in Ethiopia by 2025. The Strategy has 4 pillars, viz., (a) Protecting 
Consumers,  (b)Developing  suitable  Financial  Products  and  Services,  (c)Strengthening  Financial 
Infrastructure, and (d)Improving Financial Capability & Awareness. However, considering the financial 
inclusion objective of RUFIP III, IFAD’s support and participation in the Financial Inclusion framework 
including financial literacy would be relevant. 
12.2 World Bank Mission’s Identified Key Policy Action: 
Ethiopia has made good progress during the last few years in terms of expanding financial inclusion. 
However, two- thirds of Ethiopian adults still don’t have a transaction account and the country lags 
behind  its  neighboring  countries.  Based  on  the  assessment  by  using  Findex2017  data  and  in 
consultation with NBE, which has adopted G-20 high level principles to advance financial inclusion, 
the World Bank mission identified the following key policy actions: (I) digitize large-volume, recurrent 
payments, most notably, Government to Person (G2P) and Person to Government (P2G) payments; 
(ii)  promote  digital  approach  to  financial  inclusion;  (iii)  provide  an  enabling  legal  and  regulatory 
framework for digital financial inclusion;(iv) diversify financial products and services such as digital 
financial services, factoring, invoice financing; (v) put in place a consumer protection framework; and 
(vi) develop a financial capability strategy. The World Bank proposes to support NBE to develop an 
Action  Plan  for  implementing  the  above  listed  policy  actions  under  its  ongoing  technical  country 
Support programme on financial inclusion. 
12.3 Broad Technical Assistance (TA) Support to NBE under RUFIP III: 
Although the World Bank will support NBE in evolving a road map for various activities under Financial 
Inclusion Strategy Framework, the RUFIP III funds would inter alia, be directed for supporting MFIs 
and  Financial  Cooperatives,  both  from  demand  and  supply  side,  for  financial  inclusion  through 
NBE,AEMFI and FCA. Thus, suitable budget for TA is provided under RUFIP III to all the three nodal 
agencies for financial inclusion interventions including financial literacy. NBE (MFSD) is expected to 
facilitate(a)  development  of  policy,  regulatory,  strategic  and  operational  framework  for  financial 
inclusion,(b)  encouraging  innovative  financial  literacy  tools  suited  to  the  targeted  poorer  clients 
‘serviced by the MFIs and (c) Support adoption of technology-led products, services and instruments 
for furtherance of financial inclusion including digital and financial literacy. In this direction, special 
focus should be laid in the pastoral regions. NBE should also coordinate with AEMFI for facilitating 
qualitative improvement of their programmes and to ensure exchange of experience and elimination 
of duplication of efforts. Moreover, the experience in this regard should be shared with FCA through 
PCMU forum as also the proposed Board of Supervision and Training and Capacity Building Advisory 
Committee  for  FCA  &Financial  Cooperatives.  The  TA  support  forth  exposure-study  programme  on 
Digital  Financial  Services,  Boulder  MF  training,  programmes,  etc.,  envisaged  for  NBE  would  also 
provide value addition to Financial Inclusion including Digital/Financial Literacy interventions outlined 
above.  
13.1 Legal Framework & Financial Sector liberalization:  
The Government of Ethiopia had issued a number of Proclamations concerning financial sector. These 
include  (a)  NBE  establishment  Proclamation-2009,(b)  Banking  Business,2009,(c)  Micro  Finance 
Business,2010,  (d)  Money  Laundering  -Prevention  and  Suppression  2010,(e)  National  Payment 
System,2012,  (f)  Capital  Goods  Leasing  Business  -2013,(g)  Insurance  Business  -2012,(h)  Financial 
Reporting  Law  2014,&,  (i) Cooperative  Societies Proclamation 2016.  In view of the  financial  sector 
reforms envisaging liberalization of economy, there will be need for refinement of the Proclamations 
15 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
and  consequent  related  regulations.  Moreover,  separate  legislation  for  micro  insurance,  Cyber 
security; Insolvency Codes, etc., are necessary. With a view to studying the scope of amendments to 
the existing Proclamations and drafting new legislations, TA is envisaged in the RUFIP III budget. It is 
also envisaged that RUFIP III would support NBE to conduct a conference to discuss implications and 
challenges of financial sector liberalization. The Conference is expected to enable the policy makers 
and implementing agencies, particularly MFIs, to prepare themselves to face the emerging challenges. 
The whole focus of IFAD support to NBE is to strengthen its regulatory and supervisory role for MFIs 
within  the wide  ranging  financial  sector  reform  policy,  programme  and  strategy,  being  formulated 
under the behest of World Bank Mission. 
13.2 Financial Inclusion & Digital Financial Service: 
The Financial Inclusion strategy outlines digital financial services as a driver for financial inclusion. It 
envisages increase in the uptake of electronic payment by adults to 40 percent in 2020 (up from 6 
percent in 2015). To meet this target, on the supply side, the strategy envisages increasing the number 
of ATMs, POS machines, and agents. Ethiopia has around 41.1 million mobile subscribers as of 2018 
(Ethio-telecom data). But only 0.3% of adults had a mobile money account in the same year, according 
to Findex. About 13 million people with a mobile phone are unbanked. This illustrates that mobile 
phone adoption alone isn’t sufficient to drive mobile financial services. The development of regulatory 
framework, financial technology innovations, digital literacy / skill sets and institutional architecture 
are four important preconditions for promotion of digital financial service including mobile financial 
services. The mobile and agent banking directive issued in 2012 helped in starting mobile money in 
Ethiopia. There have been visible developments in this space in the banking sector in recent years in 
the country. This covers mobile banking, net banking, payment and settlements, transfer of  funds, 
branchless banking, CBS and other technology –based financial services. However, given the current 
sophistication and size of the market and in view of the experience gained over the last seven years, 
the directive needs to be revised to further develop the digital financial market. The improvements in 
the National Payment Systems and Financial Infrastructure would enable increasing participation of 
private sector in financial services; enhancing retail payment markets and enabling greater usage of 
digital payments by government and private sector. 
13.3 Digital Financial Services: World Bank Group (WBG) Support Vis –a-Vis RUFIP III: 
The scope of engagements of WBG in payment systems covers retail payments infrastructure like the 
Automated Clearing House and the National Inter-bank Switch, government payments and collections, 
remittances, payment aspects of financial inclusion (PAFI), oversight, and the development of Central 
Securities  Depository  (CSD).Despite  the  many  steps  taken  by  the  NBE  to  develop  the  oversight  of 
payment systems and services, there is room for improvement. Oversight aims at safety and efficiency 
of  payment  systems  and  services,  financial  inclusion,  financial  consumer  protection,  ensuring 
competitive  market  conditions,  avoiding  market  fragmentation,  and  keeping  trust  in  the  financial 
system as part of trust in the currency in general. The scope of development in oversight will include 
review of existing regulations, recommending updates or amendments to those regulations which will 
feed  into  the  Roadmap.  The  TA  support  from  WBG  will  also  provide  capacity building  of  payment 
systems staff at NBE, developing procedures for the oversight unit, and developing off-site reporting 
and on-site inspection processes. However, the focus of WBG support would be the commercial banks. 
The activity focusing on MFIs’ integration was envisaged in the design report of RUFIP II and an amount 
of 50,000 USD was earmarked for the purpose. MFISD had not planned for it during the initial 3 years. 
They had subsequently decided that the concerned Directorates (Directorate of Payment &Settlement 
as  also  Directorate  of  Banking  Supervision)  would  examine  the  issue  further  (including  MFIs’ 
integration with branchless banking and credit reference bureau) and take appropriate action. The 
discussions with some of the MFIs indicated that with the Common Banking Solution(CBS), being in 
16 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
place, they would be willing to join NBE-led system fully. NBE should, therefore, encourage/facilitate 
MFIs join the payment system in all its aspects, not limiting to remittance within the country. In the 
meanwhile, with the full implementation of MIS project under the auspices of AEMFI, integrating all 
MFIs,  eventually  all MFIs could be  users  and managers  of the future with respect to  the CBS.  This 
would pave the way for MFIs’ participation in the payment & settlement, branchless banking & credit 
reference systems. NBE should plan for RUFIP III support for capacity building related to the roll out 
of the system to smaller MFIs. Meanwhile, leading MFIs on their own have introduced CBS, mobile 
banking, agency banking in view of regulations already issued by NBE. The efforts have, however, been 
sporadic,  with  limited  coverage  and  effectiveness.  The  road  map  for  MFIs’  participation  and 
internalization of the interventions in branchless banking should be drawn for accomplishing financial 
inclusion  and  attendant  benefits  under  the  initiatives  outlined.  Accordingly,  TA support  to  NBE  has 
been envisaged for the following under RUFIP III: 
a)  Study for need and modalities of commercializing mF sector; 
b)  Study of Payment and Settlement system, facilitating integration of MF sector; and 
c)  Conference  on  Assessment  of  current  Status,  challenges  and  future  perspectives  of  enhancing 
branchless banking services by MFIs including policy recommendations. 
It  is  expected  that  the  above  interventions  would  enable,  enlarge,  expedite  and  enhance  MFIs’ 
participation in payment and settlement as also branchless banking. 
14. Credit Infrastructure: 
Credit  bureaus  play  a  crucial  role  in  facilitating  and  enhancing  access  to  finance,  particularly  rural 
consumers and small borrowers. The credit information on individuals or small business borrowers 
provided to lenders help in quick decision-making. Accurate and timely credit information also allows 
financial  institutions  reduce  risks,  loan  processing  time,  costs,  and  default  rates.  For  borrowers, 
detailed credit information and a modern credit reporting system often lead to lower interest rates, 
making loans more affordable and more available. Credit bureaus also support responsible lending 
practices, and help borrowers avoid over-indebtedness. These benefits of advanced credit reporting 
systems make a major contribution to increasing access to finance, accelerating credit flow to rural 
poor and speeding up economic growth. 
In  this context,  the  design report  for RUFIP II  envisaged  TA for  NBE for the purpose of contracting 
consultancy services to analyze the current position and facilitate MFIs to join the Credit Information 
Center.  However,  no  progress  was  registered  with  regard  to  MFIs’  integration  with  the  system, 
although it was technically feasible. Some of the MFIs had been taking recourse to information-sharing 
at local level and in limited scale. IFC’s Africa Credit Bureau Program is providing advisory services to 
central  banks,  national  bankers’  associations,  and  other  private  sector  stakeholders  in  several 
countries in Sub Saharan Africa. During the period, IFC had studied the system of Ethiopia under the 
programme, culminating in setting up of the Bureau with CBs’ participation. 
 Under the Ease of doing business, Ethiopia has not been awarded any marks with respect to Credit 
Reference, as it was stipulated that the Credit Bureau at NBE must report in its database at least for 
5% of the adult population. This will only be possible if the MFIs’ and CGFCs’ portfolios are reported 
to the bureau. 
The IFC programme has provided advisory support to NBE to upgrade their existing Credit Information 
Centre in to a state of art facility. The programme aims to review the legislative framework around 
credit information sharing and support awareness and sensitization campaign for all stakeholders. The 
major goal is to build the NBE’s capacity to implement  and operate the  Credit Information Centre 
Initiatives.  An  external  evaluation  of  the  Credit  information  system  in  Ethiopia  was  conducted  in 
December  2018  to  assess  the  existing  overall  service/product  provision,  technical  condition  and 
17 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
governance & management issues of the credit reference bureau of NBE; and; to identify and analyze 
gaps in line with the  international best practices. The  preliminary assessment indicates absence of 
credit information of borrowers from the existing credit reference  bureau .The consultancy service 
also  assessed  the  technical  infrastructure  of  the  potential  participating  and  existing  financial 
institutions (i.e. Banks, MFIs and CGFCs).  The documents are currently being reviewed by NBE. The 
WBG team proposed to NBE a two phase approach: Phase 1) complete the assessment of the system 
in  its  current  form  and  identify  the  gaps  and  enhancements  needed  to  continue  delivering  (in  a 
sustainable manner) credit information services to the credit providers for a reasonable time (about 
18 months), until the new complete solution can be properly deployed; Phase 2) based on the results 
of the analysis, provide assistance to NBE to design an action plan to procure a new solution using a 
public-private partnership (PPP) approach. The  specific needs of the  banking sector as well as MFI 
sector and other stakeholders that may become part of the credit information ecosystem in the future 
need to be assessed. NBE sought support to replace the current Credit Reporting application with a 
complete solution to procure the new system and an action plan to implement it. NBE shall commit 
full time resources to form several departments including IT to implement. NBE needs to be exposed 
to various scenarios of credit bureau structures through study tours and visits to countries with similar 
characteristics,  including  successful  Public  Private  Partnership  models  (Cambodia  and  Morocco). 
(Based on discussion with World Bank) 
NBE has issued a new directive (CRB/02/2019) on establishment and operation of Credit Reference 
Bureau.  NBE  could  leverage  the  directive  issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Cooperation(MOFEC) in 2018 to implement Public -Private Partnerships, to consider such ownership 
structure.  In  the  scenario,  NBE  remains  the  chair  of  the  Board  of  Directors  and  ultimate  decision 
maker; while significantly improving the Credit Bureau Operation through an experienced provider. 
Major challenges would be staff capacity building on core technologies associate with credit Bureau, 
adoption of IT service approach, inclusion of portfolios of MFIs and CG FCS in credit Bureau data- base 
a)  There is need for capacity building support on core technologies (application, database, IT service 
management) to operate and support the credit bureau system for at least the time required to 
replace it with a new complete solution. 
b)  Adopt an IT Service management approach. Stabilization of the system and inclusion of MFIs (also 
Capital  Goods  Financing  Companies  -CGFC)  portfolios  to  the  Credit  bureau  database  (a  Doing 
Business indicator for Getting Credit),procurement of additional infrastructure to facilitate system 
upgrade, allotment of Unique ID for MFIs’ borrowers and drawing a workable action plan/road 
map 
It would be desirable that RUFIP III supplements NBE and MFIs in its efforts. So, a study on Credit 
Reference Bureau –its setting up, it’s functioning and as also supervisor’s role for assessing and 
guiding MFIs has been envisaged to strengthen the process. 
c) 
d)   Conduct  a  detailed  analysis  of  MFIs  and  available  technology  to  ensure  that  data  collection 
processes and systems interfaces are workable and draft an action plan. 
It is gathered in the meanwhile that from April 2019, select MFIs have been asked to provide data to 
NBE reference bureau, on a pilot basis  
15.Customers’ Grievance Redressal: 
“The  consumers’  ability  to  lodge  complaints  and  seek  redress  is  an  important  part  of  consumer 
protection. For micro finance consumers, judicial recourse will not be a viable option for many reasons 
18 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
(including  expenses  and  time),  so  the  focus  needs  to  be  alternatives”.7A  policy  framework, 
institutional  mechanism  and  operational  system  should  be  put  in  place  to  address  customers’ 
grievances in the MFI sector. The issue was also included in the RUFIP II design report. While the sector 
and  institutional  issues of MFIs  get  addressed  at  the  level of  AEMFI,  proper  analysis,  disclosure  of 
customers’ complaints and feedback are yet to be strongly put in place. The systems that are generally 
followed  as  best  practices 
time-frame  of  addressing 
include  maintenance  of  records, 
complaints/grievances,  designating  /displaying  name  of  nodal  officers,  installing  toll  free  number, 
instituting Internal Machinery to hear grievances, constituting Standing Committee for customer’ care 
and  showing  sensitiveness,  courtesy  and  care  for  the  customers.  MFIs  do  not  have  such 
comprehensive policy and arrangements. The Boards of MFIs should review client grievance data and 
auditors should make random checks. These need to be included in the Codes of Standards and Fair 
Practices to be evolved with the initiative of NBE and AEMFI and in consultation with MFIs. NBE would 
be supported to initiate steps to create a conducive policy environment& MFIs would be facilitated 
for  setting  up  institutional  mechanism  in  this  regard.  A  under  RUFIP  III  envisages  Conference 
/Seminar/workshop on financing Consumer Protection, consumer grievances, development of codes 
of  standards  and  fair  practices  and  improvement  of  centricity  of  MFIs.  The  programmes  could  be 
participated by NBE Officers and select officers of MFIs. 
16.Evolving Codes of Standards &Fair Practices: 
With a view to instituting appropriate, fair, customer- friendly and commonly acceptable/ reasonable 
standards for financial and non-financial services in MFI sector, issue of regulations on the subject was 
emphasized  in  the  RUFIIP  II  design  report.  Generally,  Associations  of  MFIs  and  Self-Regulatory 
Organizations  (SROs)  evolve/implement  voluntary  codes  of  standards  and  fair  practices  through 
consultation mechanism. In some of the countries like India, Central Bank has taken the initiative for 
banks  and  set  up  a  separate  institution  like  Banking  Code  Standard  Board  of  India  (BCSBI).  Such 
standards could cover charges and fees for various services, norms of marketing, advertising& sales, 
etc., to avoid arbitrariness, unfair and exploitative practices in the sector. NBE should consider taking 
initiative in this direction for MFIs. AEMFI should ensure that their members accept and comply with 
the Codes of Standards and Fair Practices. MFIs can get Code of Conduct Assessment (COCA) through 
external agencies. 
17.Social Performance Management (SPM) system: 
The  SPM  principles  for  microfinance  have  emerged  from  an  industry-wide  international  initiatives 
aimed at making micro finance more effective in achieving social mission. Social goals include greater 
coverage of poor and the excluded people, improving quality and responsiveness in financial and non-
financial services, optimizing benefits for customers, enhancing social responsibility of MFIs, etc. Apart 
from giving weightage to financial performance of MFIs, focus would be laid by NBE, AMFI and MFIs 
on  their efforts  to meet  social  ends.  NBE,  MFIs  and  AEMFI  should  direct  their  efforts  to  get  MFIs’ 
business processes aligned to achieving both social and financial objectives, outcomes and benefits. 
RUFIP III would provide technical support for MFIs to get appropriate training and capacity to introduce 
assessment, monitoring system and reporting framework with regard to SPM accordingly. AEMFI has 
been associated with SPM Task Force and is in the process of sensitizing its members on the concept 
and spirit of SPM. Technical support has been envisaged for AEMFI to further enhance its efforts in 
capacity  building  of  MFIs  in  this  regard.  NBE  should  also  direct  their  efforts  to  get  MFIs’  business 
processes aligned to achieve both social and financial objectives, outcomes and  benefits. The MFIs 
need  to  be  motivated  /guided  by  NBE  to  reorient  their  efforts,  assessment  system  and  reporting 
framework with regard to SPM. The services of Rating agencies could be used for SPM assessment and 
7Consensus Guidelines on Regulation and Supervision of MFIs-CGAP-2012 
19 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
rating of MFIs. TA support to NBE under RUFIP III included Conference on Responsible Finance for NBE 
officials as also those of MFIs. 
18. Self- Regulatory Organization (SRO) 
With  a  view  to  encouraging  branch  expansion  in  rural  areas  and  excluded  regions,  NBE  needs  to 
consider relaxation in licensing norms for such difficult areas. They may consider recognizing AEMFI 
as a self-regulatory organization for promoting self-regulation and monitoring the functioning of MFIs. 
The recognition by NBE carries  considerable weightage  in the eyes of the  industry,  borrowers and 
lenders and builds up their confidence. It also increases responsiveness and compliance by member 
MFIs to the guidelines issued by the SRO. In India, Reserve Bank of India has accorded SRO status to 
Sa-Dhan and MFINs, the voluntary associations of NBFCs/MFIs, and given specific mandate to them 
for  limited  oversight.  The  concept  and  mechanism  can  be  further  studied  by  NBE.  RUFIP  III  has 
envisaged exposure study on exploration and development of SRO by upgrading AEMFI. 
19. Fraud Control, Monitoring and Prevention: 
 Fraud is a deception deliberately practiced in order to secure unfair or unlawful gain by resulting loss 
to financial institutions. Prevention, identification and control of Frauds and misappropriation have 
been  great  challenges  for  regulators  and  regulated  entities.  The  MFIs  need  to  have  fraud 
identification/detection and control strategy. Frauds do occur due to laxities in the internal control 
system  of  financial  institutions.  The  vulnerable  areas  include  collusions,  diversion  of  recovery  and 
disbursements, gaps in client entry and group meetings. Manipulation and false reporting, tampering 
of records, misappropriation, cash thefts, fake claims, unauthorized expenses, creation of ghost clients 
are  various  facets  of  frauds.  Regulators  generate  periodic  data  on  frauds  and  misappropriation 
through returns from the regulated entities. Although NBE had issued a directive on fraud monitoring 
in 2014,envisaging data reporting by MFIs to NBE, analysis of the modus operandi, putting in place 
credit risk management policy to address the incidence of frauds, and MIS are not developed by MFIs. 
Sector and institutional data should be available in the public domain. NBE should take steps to frame 
suitable mechanism for periodic review and report from strengthening internal audit and monitoring 
mechanism in MFIs. 
20. Vigil Mechanism (Whistle Blower Policy) : 
Vigil  mechanism  (other-wise  known  as  Whistle  Blower  Policy  framework)  enables  customers, 
employees  and  directors  and  all  stake  holders  to  report  their  genuine  concerns  about  actual  or 
suspected dishonesty or illegal activities or violations of law or rules /regulations of the Organization 
or  fraud  or  corruption  taking  place  in  it.  The  objective  is  to  provide  a  framework  to  promote 
responsible and secured vigil mechanism in the organization. It helps the Organization to identify and 
take appropriate action against fraud or suspected fraud, misappropriation or abuse of position or any 
other  unethical  practice.  It  encourages  employees  and  other  stakeholders to  bring  ethical  or  legal 
violations they are aware of to the notice of the internal authority, generally the Chairman of the Audit 
Committee of the Board. The term “whistle blower” originates from the practice of British Policemen 
who blow the whistle whenever they witnessed any occurrence of crime. Whistle blower could be 
employees (former or existing), customers, directors, and a member of any outside organization, who 
have the willingness to take corrective action. This kind of mechanism or policy is not in vogue in MFIs. 
It is therefore suggested that NBE should facilitate by way of guidelines for MFIs to evolve appropriate 
policy and implementation framework for the purpose. TA support for NBE includes development of 
policy in this regard. 
20 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
21. Corporate Governance: 
Three  directives  (Corporate  Governance,  External  Audit  framework  and  Internal  Audit  guidelines) 
were  drafted  and  discussed  with  both  internal  and  external  stakeholders,  but  not  yet  issued.  The 
directives in the areas of exit policy, trigger points for supervisory action, codes of standards & fair 
practices, compliance function, financial inclusion, customer protection and disclosure standards have 
not  been  evolved/issued.  NBE  may  consider  evolving  these  regulations,  if  necessary  with  RUFIP  II 
support. 
Basle  Core  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  includes,  ‘sound  corporate  governance,  which  underpins 
effective  risk  management  and  public  confidence  in  individual  banks  and  banking  system’.  Under 
RUFIP II, support was provided to NBE for a study on development of corporate governance in MFIs 
and preparation of appropriate regulatory and supervisory guidelines. Although at one stage in 2015, 
it was reported that the draft directive and guidelines were ready and would be issued shortly by NBE, 
it was later felt that further consultations with all concerned would be necessary. Subsequently the 
guidelines were not issued. It is proposed that RUFIP III would continue to provide support to MFIs to 
put  in  place  robust  governance  mechanism  and  to  NBE  to  assess  the  system  through  proper 
supervisory approach till the Corporate Governance Guidelines are issued. 
OECD  has  documented  parameters  for  corporate  governance  and  also  principles  of  Corporate 
Governance. The principles include effective governance framework, rights of shareholders, equitable 
treatment of shareholders, their role in governance, disclosures and transparency and responsibilities 
of Board. “Corporate Governance, to me, is about maximizing shareholder value legally, ethically and 
on  a  sustainable  basis,  while  ensuring  fairness  to  every  shareholder,  the  company  customers, 
employees, investors, vendor-partners, the Government of the land and the community’’.8 In India, 
there is a comprehensive Companies Law which, inter alia, contains elaborate Board responsibilities. 
A sound governance by the Board of MFIs should aim at achieving the following: 
a)  Clear  Board  Structure,  robust  Board  procedure,  coverage  &categorization  of  agenda  issues, 
proper record of minutes Greater engagement of Board with MFIs, independence of directors, a 
policy on conflict of interest; 
b)  Proper selection and appointment of directors, formation of Committees /Sub-Committees, with 
defined functions and their rules and procedures; 
c)  Adoption of code of conduct for Board, Key Performance Indicators (KPI), periodic evaluation of 
performance of Board; 
d)  Board’s  commitment  to  its  role  and  responsibility,  ensuring  responsible  finance  by  MFI, 
maintaining fairness, accountability, transparency, disclosures, customer service; 
e)  Ensuring  MFIs’  compliance  to  its  mission,  the  country’s  laws,  regulations  issued  by  Regulator, 
internal and external audit findings, terms of investors and lenders; and; 
f)  Facilitating  Policy  development,  their  implementation,  and  company’s  orderly  growth  and 
development. 
NBE, while finalizing the directives and guidelines on corporate governance, should keep the above in 
view. RUFIP III TA budget includes programmes for sensitization of Board of Directors’ of MFIs, which 
discuss best practices in corporate governance. 
8 Narayan Murthy, quoted from “ Governance Practices among MFIs in India by Micro Save -2015 
21 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
22. Leasing Financing Regulation & Supervision: 
As on 30 September 2018, the lease finance sector constituted DBE and 5 Capital Goods Lease Finance 
(CGLF) Companies that are operating in four regions, e.g., Oromia, Amhara, SNNP& Tigray and Addis 
Ababa City Administration having 50 branches. These institutions are providing capital goods financing 
services to 3,118 lessees. As on the same date, total credit in the form of capital goods finance stood 
Birr  577  million,  as  compared  to  Birr 429.3  million, demonstrating  a  34%  growth  in  one  year.  The 
sector’s total capital goods finance formed only 14.3% of the total assets. Besides, total assets and 
total capital of the sector reached Birr 2.88 billion and Birr 1.67 billion, indicating 8% and 2% growth 
respectively compared to the last year. 
GOE had issued a Proclamation on Capital Goods Leasing Business (CGLB) in 2013 .Accordingly, NBE 
had issued a series of directives on various policy and operational aspects. These directives covered 
(i)Requirement  of  licensing  of  CGLFB  in  February  2013,(ii)  Manner  of  financial  and  operational 
information reporting in March 2016, (iii) Minimum CARR(10%) in April 2016, (iv) Penalties on failure 
to comply with regulatory requirements of CGLB directives in June 2017, (v )Minimum paid up capital 
requirement directive (2nd replacement) in July 2017,(vi) Limit to CGLF to single lessee in September 
2018,(vii)Ceiling on aggregate finance to be granted to any single lessee (2.5% of the total capital of 
the Company),SMEs and others in February 2019, (viii) Capital goods modality directive in February 
2019. Under the Act/Directives, for the first time foreign companies were permitted to invest. “Foreign 
Companies permitted to invest, as defined in the directive; means capital goods companies licensed 
by  NBE  wherein  shares  are  partly  or  wholly  owned  by  foreign  nationals  or  organizations  fully  or 
partially  owned  by  foreign  nationals.”  The  aggregate  sum  of  capital  goods  finance  granted  to  and 
outstanding at any one time to any single lessee shall not exceed 2.5% (two and half %) of the total 
capital of the company.”9 
“Capital goods business includes financial lease and hire- purchase. Lessee under the agreement is 
defined as obtaining capital goods from lesser and has right to use the capital goods, against payment 
of rent on agreed period of time. Leasing is a means of providing access to finance and may be defined 
as a contract between two parties wherein one party (lesser ) provides an asset for use by another 
party (the lessee) for a specified period of time in return for specified rent. Leasing, in effect, separates 
the  legal  ownership  of  an  asset  from  economic  use  of  that  asset.”  Leasing  fosters  economic 
development and job creation by providing access to finance to micro, small and medium businesses 
that often cannot have access to other form of financing. In a country where the lease market has 
already  built  up  encouraging  competition,  lowering  of  financing  rates  and  expanding  of  financing 
volumes  can  occur.  It  leads  to  rapid  growth  in  sustainable  equipment  (i.e.,  energy  efficiency, 
renewable energy and cleaner production). Because leasing is asset-backed and generally cash flow-
based, it is a particularly relevant product to finance such equipment.10 
MFIs in Ethiopia have been doing micro leasing sporadically of small equipment on informal basis since 
1998.However;  operational  lease,  financial  lease,  and  hire-purchase  lease  have  high  potential  in 
Ethiopia. The legislation; involvement of five MFI- affiliated leasing Government Companies in Oromia, 
Afar, Somali ,Rays; besides perspectives of Private companies in view of provision for participation of 
foreign investors; and the regulatory initiatives of NBE in issue of several directives and interventions 
under  PRIME(Pastoralist  Areas  Resilience  Improvement  through  Market  Expansion)  to  address  the 
9 NBE directive, 06 February 2019 
10Leasing in Development- Guidelines for Emerging Economics- 2005-IFC 
22 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
leasing sector gaps would go a long way to expand lease eco system. Renting is more common in the 
construction sector. Leasing is limited to a few larger MFIs that lease small irrigation equipment, bee 
hives, etc., to farmers. There are, however, several bottlenecks for a vibrant leasing sector in Ethiopia, 
which  include  lack  of  funding,  technical  expertise  about  machinery  and  equipment,  accounting 
including introduction of IFRS, supplier identification, clarity about regulations, taxation, registration 
and ownership, and comprehensive training arrangement. A series of directives issued by NBE during 
the last 6 years gives evidence of the trial and error process continuing in the emerging sector. 
In  2018-19,  ten  officers  from  NBE  had  attended  a  4  days’  training  programme  on  lease  finance  in 
Turkey. In this background, an exposure-study visit has been included in the TA budget of RUFIP III to 
enable NBE, GOE, and other stakeholders for exploring  the best possible policy options, regulatory 
&supervisory framework and best practices, so as to address the various gaps indicated above. The 
training programmes by NBE and AEMFI can also enhance the awareness among all stakeholders in 
this regard. 
23. Exploring Transformation and upgradation of Leading MFIs: 
The five big- sized MFIs (ACSI, DECSI, OCSSCO, Omo and AdCSI) continued to dominate the market 
share (almost 90%) with respect to total deposits, net-loan outstanding, total assets, and number of 
clients.  The  details  of  their  performance  have  been  analyzed  in  the  demand  of  credit  analysis 
separately. The big five have been demonstrating their capacity for further growth, diversification and 
potential to reach new heights. Considering their size and capacity, a transformation policy should be 
evolved for their future. The question of upgrading these MFIs as ‘community banks’ to provide them 
scope for  expanded and diversified services  can be considered. It would need separate  statute and 
regulations. Alternatively, they can be given license as commercial banks, but with a precondition that 
they would continue to serve micro fiancé clients. Under RUFIP III, NBE can conduct a study for this 
purpose, which would facilitate policy decision –making, evolving suitable regulation, and carving out 
a strategy for their transformation. 
24. Establishment of an Apex Development Bank: 
In the design report of RUFIP II, setting up of an ‘apex development bank’ to address  the  liquidity 
problem of MFIs was emphasized and three exploratory visits to other countries were envisaged for 
the purpose, with allocation of USD 105,000.The select officials from the policy-making institutions 
had undertaken exposure visits to NABARD, India and PKSF, and Bangladesh for the purpose. However, 
top level policy-making officials of NBE and GOE had not then evinced interest. NBE and GOE have 
now desired to take a fresh look at this in the changing policy environment. Besides, certain countries 
in Asia and several countries in the ESA region have set up Apex Development banks for up-scaling 
funds flow for agriculture / rural sector. These include Tanzania Agriculture Development Bank (TADB), 
FARE (a wholesale financial institution in Mozambique), MF Support Centre (in Uganda), etc. The Vice- 
Governor, NBE during the discussions revealed that since earlier exposure visit teams did not comprise 
top level officials of the policy-making authorities, a fresh team with relevant officials will undertake 
an  exposure  visit.  The  learning  from  the  earlier  exposure  visits  and  further  exposure  visit(s),  if 
organized should be discussed in the stakeholders’ workshops, as envisaged, to facilitate participatory 
& information-based decision in this regard. 
25. Agency Banking- Business Correspondence Model: 
In India, the Reserve Bank of India (Central Bank of the country) had allowed banks in 2006 to appoint 
entities  and  individuals  as agents  for  providing  basic banking  services  in  remote  areas  where  they 
practically cannot open a branch. These agents are called Business Correspondents (BC), which are 
23 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
retail agents engaged by banks to provide limited banking services at a low cost. The basic services 
BCs  provide  at  door  step  include  saving  bank  small  deposits,  recurring  deposit,  remittance,  micro 
credit  and  general  insurance  facilities.  Thus,  door  step  delivery,  especially  cash  in  and  cash  out 
transactions,  addresses  last  mile  problem  and  accelerates  financial  Inclusion.  BC  model  is  an 
innovative technology-based banking model which enables people in remote areas to access formal 
financial institutions. In 2017-18, a BC registry portal has been launched to enable Commercial Banks 
to upload data pertaining to BCs deployed by them. Many MFIs are increasingly going in for a BC mode 
of operations as it frees them from the problem related to accessing funds from banks and financial 
institutions. It also provides them with an income source by way of commission. It eases the banks’ 
task of achieving Priority Sector target stipulated by the Central Bank. The recovery responsibility lies 
with the MFI concerned. Considering the liquidity problem of Ethiopian MFIs and the reluctance of 
Commercial Banks to serve rural areas, this model appears to be relevant. In this context, an exposure 
study  on  agency  banking  –linking  MFIs  with  CBs  has  been  included  in  TA  for  NBE,  for  policy 
explorations. Select MFIs, CBs and representatives from AEMFI, FCA and MOFED can be included in 
the visit. Other areas of learnings from India, related to TA interventions explained in the foregoing 
paragraphs are as under: 
a)  Financial inclusion strategy and the role of Central Bank; 
b)  Functioning of Self-Regulatory Authorities (SRO) recognized by Central Bank; 
c)  Working of Development Banking, particularly NABARD; 
d)  Self-Help Group-Bank Linkage Programme, particularly digitization of groups; 
e)  Apex  institute  of  excellence  in  Training  –Bankers’  Institute  of  Rural  Development  (BIRD)  and 
Training Certification System; and; 
f)  Supervision and regulation of rural financial institutions. 
26. Documentation of Manuals and Guidelines: 
With RUFIP I and II support, NBE had been facilitated in preparation of manuals and guidelines for 
reference of supervising officials, auditors and MFIs. NBE, as regulator, has been undertaking various 
policy, regulatory and supervisory initiatives to develop its own capability and also strong financial 
institutions. To this end, the Bank has issued directives that require the MFIs to increase their capital 
within the given time-frame. In the event of some of the MFIs  not  being able to comply with NBE 
regulations,  especially  on  capital  requirements  and  any  other  supervisory  prescriptions,  there  is  a 
need  for  appropriate  policy  and  strategy  for merger,  acquisition,  rehabilitation,  liquidation  or  exit, 
depending on their financial health and overall compliance capability. NBE has also conducted studies 
for  developing  regulations  for  merger  and  liquidation  of  MFIs.  With  RUFIP  III  support,  more 
documentation of manuals and guidelines would be undertaken by NBE for the guidance of their own 
officers and those of supervised entities. Besides, various studies envisaged including exposure study 
visits  and  seminars/conferences,  to  be  conducted  with  RUFIP  III  technical  support  should  be 
documented for internalization of learnings. Specific Manuals and Guidelines that would be supported 
with TA under RUFIP III are as under: 
a)  Policy & Procedure Manual for handling policy formulation, licensing, onsite inspection and Offsite 
Surveillance(including updating the existing Risk-based supervision manual); 
b)  Reorganization  &  merger  of  MFIs-  Developing  Strategies  for  crisis  management  and  problem 
resolution framework; 
c)  Stress Testing Policy and Procedure for MFIs; and; 
d)  Macro Prudential Assessment & Financial Stability ; 
24 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
With a view to enabling NBE to evolve required policy and regulations and operational guidelines for 
MFIs, technical support to NBE would be provided. Wherever necessary, hiring of suitable consultant 
will be supported. 
27. Electronic File Management: 
This  intervention  is  intended  to enable  NBE  to  develop  modern  file/record management,  build  up 
folder culture, optimize Meta data, bring file infrastructure online, build up archives, prepare backups, 
and  plan  for  retention  and  dumping  the  deadweight.  The  staff  should  familiarize  themselves  in 
creating files in logical hierarchy, developing file naming conventions, filing as they go, culling files 
regularly,  and,  making  nest  folders  within  folders.  The  support  under  RUFIP  III  will  enhance  the 
capacity of NBE, leading to efficiency, speed and scale. A consultant can be engaged by NBE for study 
and  documentation.  Under  RUFIP  II,  support  was  given  to  MFISD  for  acquisition  of  laptops  and 
processing of servers. TA support is also provided for training of supervising officials in advanced excels 
management through workshops. 
28. Web Page Development: 
It is observed that the website pertaining to the Directorate is inadequate and there is considerable 
scope  for  improvement.  The  general  public,  supervised  entities,  investors,  donor  agencies  and 
researchers look to NBE’s website for knowledge management and guidance. Critical information on 
financial performance of MFIs, concepts and developments in regulatory environment, best practices 
in  regulation  and  supervision,  study  and  research  findings,  draft  guidelines,  directives  and 
proclamations for public views, etc., should appear in the website. NBE should also encourage and 
provide support for enriching the website of MFIs and AEMFI for public good. Besides, NBE could have 
a good intranet package on Regulation+ for the benefit of internal staff of NBE. RUFIPIII has provided 
suitable TA for NBE for the purpose of development of webpage. 
29. Regulation& Supervision in Pastoral region: 
With  a  view to  ensuring closer  supervision  and  regulatory  compliance  in  the  Pastoral  regions,  it  is 
deemed necessary to have a Regional Office for pastoral regions. The Supervision Department of Bank 
of  Mozambique  (Central  Bank)  has  established  six  Regional  Hubs  /outlets  with  inspection  units  in 
different provinces to operate closer to the supervised rural finance institutions. In India, Reserve Bank 
of India (RBI) has Regional Offices in each of the major States with necessary powers and HR to, inter 
alia,  undertake  supervision  of  financial  institutions,  including  MFIs.  The  pastoral  region  financial 
institutions need differential regulatory and supervisory approach as also focused financial inclusion 
efforts.  MIS  for  financial  services  made  available  in  the  regions  should  be  developed  to  facilitate 
necessary supportive and monitoring interventions. In this back ground, TA support to NBE has been 
envisaged under RUFIP III. 
30. Coordinating &Support Officer in NBE: 
 TA support  for a large  number of interventions, involving NBE and  MFIs has  been provided  under 
RUFIP III. It is necessary to have the services of an exclusive Officer to initiate, coordinate and monitor 
the interventions for expeditious and effective implementation. Notwithstanding the positioning of 
more number of specialist staff in PCMU under RUFIP III, it would be more useful and result –oriented, 
if  a  competent  officer  is  positioned  in  DMFIS,  NBE  on  a  long  term  basis,  with  RUFIP  III  technical 
assistance. Accordingly, necessary budget has been provided for TA for the purpose. 
25 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
DBE  in  its  PCMU  RUFIP  II  second  Quarter  Performance  Report  for  the  Budget  year  2018-19  had 
outlined  challenges  in  NBE  handling  Regulation  &  Supervision -related  TA  action  which  included 
difficulty 
in  finalization  of 
procurement  process  and heavy workload with NBE. To quote, "Huge work  load to handle project 
activities as the task is being done parallel to other regular activities of the Bank". 
in  getting  adequate  response  from  consultancy  agencies, delay 
31.Development of Policy, Regulations and Road Map-Summary: 
 As  mentioned  earlier,  RUFIP  support  was  taken  by  NBE  for  participation  in  training  programmes, 
exposure  visits,  for  conducting  several  studies,  documentation  of  Manuals,  acquiring  IT  tools  and 
engagement  of  consultancy  agencies  for  various  interventions,  with  a  view  to  evolving  new 
regulations,  revising  existing  regulations  and  documentation,  for  strengthening  their  supervisory 
capacity  and  compliance  by  supervised  MFIs.  In  the  light  of  certain  unfinished  interventions,  the 
financial sector reforms, specified priority needs of NBE, the focus of RUFIP III and other emerging 
requirements as explained above, regulations, operational guidelines and road map/strategies for the 
following  should  be  expeditiously  developed  and  internalized  and  implemented  if  necessary  with 
further TA support under RUFIP III:  
a)  Development of corporate governance regulations, governance codes and manual; 
b)  Development  of  policy,  regulations,  procedures  and  road  map  for  merger,  acquisition  and 
liquidation of MFIs; 
c)  Development of crisis management and problem resolution framework for MFIs, Trigger Points 
for supervisory action and warning signals, depending on stress situations; 
d)  Stress Testing Policy and Procedure for MFIs; 
e)  Strengthening Risk management architecture in MFIs and enhancing risk-based supervision; 
f)  Guidelines for treatment of loans in case of natural calamities; 
g)  Detailed guidelines for internal and external audit of MFIs; strengthening risk-based audit; 
h)  Adoption of IFRS in MFIs; 
i) 
j)  Transformation and upgradation Policy and Procedure of MFIs-road map; assessing need, risks 
and implementation modalities of transforming MFIs in to other category of financial institutions 
including commercial banks; 
 Fraud prevention, monitoring and control; 
k)  Grievance  Redressal  mechanism  –guidelines,  Customer  protection,  Whistle  Blower  Policy  and 
guidelines; 
l)  Guidelines &Policy for self- regulation, Upgrading AEMFI as Self-Regulatory Organization(SRO): 
m)  Regulation for deposit Insurance system; 
n)  Regulation and guidelines for MFI-CB linkage; 
o)  Development of codes of standards and fair practices; 
p)  Social Performance Management rating- Development of responsible finance;  
q)  Developing policy for securitization of assets, greening finance, financing against moveable assets, 
Islamic finance, lease finance; 
r)  Upgrading MIS and evolving exposure norms and reporting system; 
s)  Review of all Proclamations, regulations and supervisory guidelines in the light of financial sector 
reforms; 
t)  Adoption of new technology in onsite inspection, offsite surveillance and audit; 
u)  Integrating MFIs with Payment and Settlement System and Credit Reference Bureau; 
v)  Regulation for digital financial services, enhancing branchless banking; 
w)  Cyber Security policy, regulations, directives and guidelines ; 
x)  Setting up of Apex Development Bank, or support to MFIs, particularly liquidity and developmental 
needs;  
26 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
y)  Development of Manuals ,documentation of Guidelines for new systems, products and services 
and policy implementation, electronic file management, web page development for DMFIS; 
z)  Setting up of regional office in Pastoral areas for better insight and supervision; 
aa) Development of new training packages for capacity building of Officials of DMFIS and other related 
Directorates of NBE, besides officers of MFIs and AEMFI, particularly in financial inclusion, digital 
literacy,  delinquency  management,  portfolio  quality  management,  risk  management,  troubled 
assets relief, etc. 
The list of TA interventions to be supported under RUFIP III is given in tabular form as Annexure II  
Hopefully, with implementation of the above interventions in a timely and effective manner by NBE, 
there  will  be  all-round  development  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  capacity,  greater  stability  of 
microfinance sector, enhanced customer satisfaction, better preparedness and resolution for any sort 
of crisis, considerable improvement of functioning of MFIs and above all, fulfillment of the objectives 
of RUFIP III. NBE and MFIs will be able to sustain the systems and processes for smooth functioning in 
changing policy environment, when RUFIP III exits in 2025. 
27 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure I 
Organogram of NBE 
28 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure II 
List of TA interventions to be supported for 
improving capacity and systems in NBE for 
microfinance regulations and supervision 
NBE - Directorate of MFI Supervision(DMFIS) 
Institution 
Clients of MFIs 
Theme 
Financial and 
Digital literacy 
MFIs 
NBE 
NBE( Officers of DMFIS & 
Other related Directorates) & 
MFIs 
NBE and MFIs 
NBE( DMFIS & other related 
Directorates) 
Support for 
Technology 
Innovation  
Policy and 
Strategic 
Interventions 
Training and 
sensitization on 
the 
operationalizatio
n and 
implementation 
of movable asset 
collateral 
registration 
system by MFIs. 
Risk Management 
and Risk- Based 
Supervision for 
MFIs. 
Regulation and 
supervision of 
29 
Intervention  By whom 
Literacy 
Programme
s 
DMFIS, Financial 
Inclusion 
Secretariat(FIS) 
,NBE ,Ethiopian 
Institute of 
Financial Studies 
(EIFS),select MFIs 
or any agency 
identified/engage
d  
NBE (DMFIS 
&Other related 
Directorates) 
NBE(DMFIS & 
Other related 
Directorates ) 
Consultant/ EIFS& 
Senior officers of 
NBE. 
Financial 
support for 
expanding 
technology 
innovations 
,with a 
focus on the 
excluded 
regions 
Developme
nt of 
strategic 
policy 
intervention
s 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Consultant/EIFS/a
ny institute 
identified 
Consultant/EIFS/a
ny institute 
identified 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
NBE and EIFS 
NBE and MFIs 
NBE and MFIs 
NBE, AEMFI, Related 
Departments 
NBE, AEMFI, FCA, MoFEC, GOE 
NBE, AEMFI,MFIs &Leasing 
Companies 
DMFIS,NBE, Commercial banks, 
AEMFI, FCA and Directorate of 
Banking Supervision, Payment 
& Settlements 
NBE, AEMFI, MFI 
 NBE , Auditors, AEMFI and 
MFIs 
Islamic financial 
service  
Boulder 
Microfinance 
Training 
Portfolio Quality 
and Delinquency 
management 
Troubled Assets 
Relief programme 
Operation and 
regulation of 
digital financial 
service ,cyber 
security and 
digitisation of 
groups 
Establishment 
and operation of 
Deposit Insurance 
Scheme for MFI 
savers  
Lease Financing 
regulation and 
Operation  
Linkage of MFIs - 
Agency banking 
by Commercial 
Banks through 
MFIs 
Development of 
self- regulation 
and institution of 
Self-Regulatory 
Organization 
(SRO) by 
upgrading AEMFI 
Adoption of IFRS 
by MFIs and its 
impact from 
Regulatory 
Perspective  
Training 
Training 
Training 
Exposure 
Visit 
External Service 
Provider 
External Service 
Provider 
External Service 
Provider 
Oversees 
organisations 
Exposure 
Visit 
Oversees 
organisation(s) 
Exposure 
Visit 
Oversees 
organisations 
Exposure 
Visit 
Oversees 
organisation(s) 
Exposure 
Visit 
Overseas 
organisations(e.g. 
Sa-Dhan, MFIN 
and RBI 
Workshops 
NBE and 
Consultant and 
Accounting &Audit 
Board of Ethiopia, 
Professional 
Accounting bodies 
for CAs 
 MFIs & Auditors 
Directorate of MFI Supervision, 
NBE& Supervisors 
Annual auditors 
‘Conference** 
Annual 
Supervisors’ 
Conference 
Conference  NBE and 
Consultant 
Conference  NBE ,DMFIS & 
Directorate of 
Banking 
Supervision  
30 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
NBE, AMFI MFIs, Commercial 
Banks 
 NBE, AEMFI and MFIs 
 NBE , AEMFI and MFIs 
 NBE and MFIs 
NBE , AEMFI and MFIs 
Workshop 
NBE and 
Consultant 
Workshop 
NBE and 
Consultant 
Workshop 
NBE and 
Consultant 
Workshop 
NBE and 
Consultant 
Workshop 
NBE and 
Consultant, 
Directorate of 
Banking 
Supervision, 
Technical Service 
Providers 
Implementation 
and 
operationalizatio
n of Credit 
Guarantee 
Scheme (CGS) 
framework on 
MFIs 
Responsible 
financing and 
financial 
consumer 
protection 
(customer 
grievances, codes 
of standards and 
fair practices and 
improving 
customer 
centricity of MFIs) 
Supervision and 
regulation of 
MFIs in the 
context of 
financial sector 
liberalization 
including Policy, 
regulation and 
Supervision 
Development 
Assessment on 
the current 
status, challenges 
and future 
prospects of 
enhancing 
branchless 
banking services 
by MFIs including 
policy 
recommendation. 
Training and 
sensitization on 
Bank Supervision 
Application (BSA)-
Possibility of 
upgrading OSS 
(Offsite 
Surveillance 
System)& 
consequent 
31 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
 NBE.(DMFIS) 
MFIs, NBE, FCA ,AEMFI 
NBE, AEMFI, 
NBE, AEMFI, MFI,MOFED,GOE 
NBE,GOE 
NBE  
NBE 
NBE, FCA 
Reporting 
Framework 
Advanced use 
and application of 
Excel application 
for Supervisors  
Conference on 
Social 
performance 
management 
Assessment on 
the need and 
implementation 
modalities of 
commercializing 
Microfinance 
sector in Ethiopia.  
Assessment on 
the need, risks 
and 
implementation 
modality of 
transforming 
MFIs into other 
form of financial 
institutions 
including into 
Commercial 
Banks.  
Assessment on 
the adequacy and 
effectiveness of 
law enforcement 
instruments and 
actions of the 
NBE on MFIs.  
A study on the 
need and 
modalities for 
setting up a 
Credit Reference 
Bureau and its 
functioning 
A study for 
evolving policy 
and system for 
securitisation of 
assets 
A study for 
developing new 
financial products 
32 
Workshop 
NBE and 
Consultant(IT 
trainer) 
Conference  NBE and 
Consultant 
Study 
Service 
Provider/suitable 
consulting agency, 
select CBs 
Study 
Suitable 
Consultant and 
NBE, select CBs 
Study 
Suitable 
Consultant  
Study 
Service Provider 
,MFIs &a few CBs 
Study 
Suitable 
consultant 
Study 
Suitable 
Development 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
NBE and AEMFI 
NBE, MFIs, MOFED 
NBE,(DMFIs ,DBS, DP&S 
Supervision) AEMFI and MFIs 
NBE 
NBE 
NBE 
NBE 
NBE(all supervision 
Directorates),CBs, MFIs, 
Related Ministries of GOE 
Study 
agency ,Related 
Ministry of GOE 
Service 
Provider/Suitable 
Technical expert 
Study 
Service Provider 
,Consultant  
Study 
IT 
intervention
s 
IT 
intervention
s 
Website 
improveme
nt 
Manual 
Preparation 
Service 
Provider/technical 
experts , Telecom 
Authorities, a few 
top MFIs 
Service Provider 
Service 
Provider/Regulatio
n expert  
Service Provider 
Service 
Provider/Consulta
nt 
Framework 
Developme
nt 
Service 
Provider/Regulatio
n Expert 
with necessary 
safeguards for 
greening finance 
A study on MIS 
and appropriate 
exposure norms 
and reporting 
systems 
A study on 
Corporate 
Governance, 
Preparation of 
regulation, 
Corporate 
governance codes  
A study on 
Payment 
Settlement 
System 
,facilitating 
integration of 
MFIs 
Electronic file and 
management 
system 
Automation of 
the onsite 
supervision 
system-
innovations and 
refinements  
Developing web 
pages for 
Directorate of MF 
Supervision  
Development of 
Policy and 
Procedure 
Manual for 
handling Policy 
formulation, 
licensing and 
offsite 
surveillance of 
MFIs 
Development of 
Crisis 
Management and 
Problem 
Resolution 
Framework for 
33 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
NBE 
NBE 
NBE,MOFED,FCA and DBE 
Regional Office 
NBE 
MFIs; 
reorganisation 
and merger of 
MFIs 
Development of 
Stress Testing 
Policy and 
Procedure for 
MFIs. 
Macro prudential 
Assessment 
Framework and 
Financial System 
Stability 
Institutional 
support for 
setting up of an 
Apex 
Development 
Bank  
Study for setting 
up of Regional 
Office of NBE in 
Pastoral Region  
Appointment of 
long term 
consultant in NBE 
for overseeing 
NBE interventions 
Policy and 
Operational 
Guidelines 
Service 
Provider/Consulta
nt /Regulation 
expert 
Service 
Provider/Regulatio
n expert. 
NBE and 
Consultant 
Preparation 
of financial 
Stability 
Reports 
Liquidity 
and 
Developme
nt Support 
Study 
NBE &Consultant, 
if needed 
Appointmen
t of 
consultant 
NBE and 
Consultant 
34 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
PART  II-  Strengthening  Capacity  and  Systems  in  NBE  for  Micro  Insurance 
Regulation & Supervision and Financial Discipline 
INDEX 
Subject matter 
Insurance sector in Ethiopia: Overview 
Comparative Financial Performance of Insurance Sector  
Regional Imbalance 
RUFIP II and Micro Insurance Regulation and Development: 
Present Policy environment:  
Joint Project of ILO / UNCDP in micro Insurance in Ethiopia (2008-13) 
Potential of Micro insurance 
Emerging challenges 
Role of Agricultural Transformation Agency (ATA) 
Possible Support under RUFIP III 
Capacity Building interventions – Broad Approach for TA to NBE: 
Separate Micro Insurance Proclamation & Regulation 
Contours of Integrated Approach for Insurance Supervisors 
World Bank‘s MI Development Programme (MIDP): Objectives 
Suggested Provisions in Micro-Insurance Proclamation and Regulation 
Overseas Exposure-Study Visits –Objectives 
Guidelines for Visits 
Training Programmes in MI: Themes, objectives and Safeguards 
Focus on Training of Trainers (TOT) Programme in MI 
Conduct of Studies – Contents and coverage 
Organizing Conferences/Seminars 
Documentation of Manuals , Guidelines and awareness literature 
Perspectives 
Annexures 
35 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
PART II 
Component 2 : Improving regulation ,supervision and Institutional Discipline 
2.1 (b) Strengthening Capacity and Systems in NBE for Micro Insurance 
Regulation , Supervision and Development 
1.Insurance sector in Ethiopia: Overview: 
In  Ethiopia,  there  are  17  insurance  companies  including  one  state-  owned  Ethiopian  Insurance 
Company  (EIC)  and  16  private  insurance  companies  operating  in  the  market.  Among  them,  7  are 
general insurer while ten of them are composite (carrying on both general and long term business) 
insurer. Since June 2016, a reinsurance Company (Ethiopian Reinsurance S.C) has been operating in 
the market. As at 31 December, 2018, the total number of branches of insurance companies stood at 
554, reflecting branch to population ratio 172,807 in the country. The ratio has improved from 180,308 
in the previous year .Moreover, 2,254 Insurance Agents, 57 Insurance Brokers,97 Loss Accessory and 
3  Surveyors  are  operating  in  the  market.  As  at  30  September  2018,  total  assets,  total  capital. 
,investment,  gross premium and net income stood at  Birr 18.45 billion ,Birr 6.43 billion, Birr 11.79 
billion, Birr 2.51 billion and 197.6 million respectively. Moreover , a growth of 23.0%,39.9% and 10.9% 
was  registered  in  total  assets  ,total  capital  and  investment  ,while  a  decline  of 5.5%  and 3.8% was 
registered in gross premium and net income ,compared to previous year’s same period.(which was 
Birr 14.99 billion, Birr 4.59 billion, Birr 10.63 billion,2.66 billion and Birr 205.5 million).  11 Insurance 
sector is fairly strong and stable. The Directorate of Insurance Supervision, NBE has been mandated 
to undertake regulatory and supervisory functions related to the sector and they have put in place 
onsite inspection and offsite surveillance system for the related institutions. 
1.1 Comparative Financial Performance of Insurance Sector: 
A comparative position of financial performance of Insurance Companies as on 31 Dec 2018 and 31 
December 2017 is given in the following table: 
Table No: 1 Financial Performance of the Insurance Sector 
Dec 2018 Vs Dec 2017 
Dec-18 
Non-Life  Life 
18,037 
5,725 
10,568 
5,204 
3,704 
71 
2,932 
1,968 
67 
646 
2,110 
600 
1,792 
295 
267 
91 
267 
102 
38 
- 
Total 
20,147 
6,325 
12,360 
5,499 
3,971 
72 
3,199 
2,070 
65 
646 
Dec-17 
Non-Life 
14,355 
4,296 
9,518 
4,738 
3,539 
75 
2,760 
1,817 
66 
477 
Life 
1,834 
354 
1,648 
279 
258 
92 
258 
91 
35 
- 
In millions Birr 
Total 
16,189 
4,650 
11,166 
5,017 
3,797 
76 
3,018 
1,908 
63 
477 
Overall  growth 
(%) 
24.5 
36.0 
10.7 
9.6 
4.6 
-5.3 
5.9 
8.5 
3.2 
35.5 
Item 
Total Asset 
Total Capital 
Investment 
Gross Premium 
Net Premium 
Retention (%) (5/4) 
Net Earned Premium 
Net Claims Incurred 
Loss Ratio (%) (8/7) 
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  Net Income 
11 Data taken from NBE 
36 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
1.2 Regional Imbalance: 
A table (Table no. 2) giving Region  –wise and insurance Company wise branch distribution is given 
below.  As  in  case of  MFIs and  commercial  banking  sector, regional  imbalance  is  evident  in  branch 
distribution of Insurance companies. Addis, Amara, Roomier and SNNP – 4 regions- had share of 89.8% 
of the branches as on 30 September 2018.  
Table No: 2 Insurance Companies’ Branches Regional Distribution as at September 30, 2018 
2.RUFIP II and Micro Insurance Regulation and Development: 
In RUFIP II framework, it was inter alia, envisaged that NBE should undertake potential assessment 
/scoping study and evolve regulatory framework for orderly development of micro-insurance sector. 
However, World Bank mounted a stock-taking study on regulatory and supervisory framework in 2012. 
GOE had issued Insurance Business Proclamation n 2012, covering all relevant aspects of insurance 
business comprehensively. However, there was no separate Proclamation or Chapter in the existing 
Proclamation for exclusively micro insurance. (Notwithstanding the advice given in the RUFIP II design 
/supervision  reports  to  the  effect).  NBE  had  finalized  the  regulation  on  micro-insurance  (,  in 
consultation with the World Bank) and issued the same in pursuance with the authority vested in it by 
Article 4(10), 4(4) coupled with Article3 (2) (a) of MF Institutions Proclamation No: 626 of 2009. MFIs 
have been operationalising their own insurance schemes, by virtue of the power vested with them 
with  regard  to  micro  insurance.  NBE  was  considering  to  issue  4  directives  via:  (a)  licensing  and 
37 
NoCompanyAAD.DAfarAmharaTigrayOromiaSNNPSBenishangul GumuzSomaliHararGambelaTotal1EIC252212618141131852NILE20116345----403Nyala151-3254-1--314NICE211-4155----375Awash271-21113----456United251-4142----377NIB261-4143----398Africa161-4233----299Global81-2111-11-1610Lion161-5342----3111Oromia191-21151----3912Abay 131-71111---2513Berhan10--1112----1514Tsehay121-3111---1915Ethio-Life & General15--1121----2016Bunna12--3111----1817Lucy12---112----1629214363288151234154253.9%2.6%0.6%11.6%5.2%14.9%9.4%0.4%0.6%0.7%0.2%100.0%Insurance Companies' Branches Regional Distribution as at September 30, 2018Total% ge 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
supervision of micro insurance agents, (b) distribution channel, (c) prudential regulation. Based on the 
study report and technical assistance , NBE had issued one directive in January 2015 on ‘Licensing, 
license  renewal  and  Product  approval  for  Micro  insurance  providers  ‘’  which  covers  regulations 
relating  to  the  organizations  exclusively  dealing  with  micro  insurance  and  those  as  an  additional 
function (like MFIs). No license has so far been issued to any company for micro insurance business 
exclusively. Although RUFIP II design and supervision reports, the commitments for micro insurance 
development  and  regulation  have  been  reiterated  to  NBE  and  a  budget  of  US  $  120,000  was 
earmarked for engagement of international consultant for the micro insurance potential assessment 
and policy development study, no support from RUFIP II has been taken recourse to. Notwithstanding 
availability of World Bank support for the ‘sector’ study in the past and their continuing support for 
agricultural insurance  development, the Directorate of Insurance  was keen to have  the support of 
IFAD  for  strengthening  capacity  of  NBE  for  regulation  and  supervision  of  micro  insurance  sector. 
Possible interventions with RUFIP II support include the following: 
 a) Exposure visit to developed micro insurance markets and where there is a well-functioning micro 
insurance supervisory regime;  
 b) Enhancing internal supervisory capacity and creating a core team specializing on MI business; 
 c) Developing a road map/strategy for the development of Micro-insurance business in the country 
in general; 
d) Preparation of Supervisory Manual; 
e) Intensifying financial literacy; and 
f) Preparing Product design and pricing models.  
 It was suggested that NBE might direct its effort for popularizing micro insurance as also putting in 
place prudential system & mechanism for effective regulation of micro insurance  sector, by taking 
recourse the above interventions, with need-based support from RUFIP II. 
3. Present Policy environment:  
In  the  absence  of  legal  framework,  issue  of  regulation  by  NBE  was  considered  irregular  and 
accordingly, the above regulation/directive was withdrawn subsequently (April 2018) .The NBE has 
been working on a project called” Promoting Inclusive Insurance in Ethiopian with the World Bank 
First Initiative”. A demand survey was conducted, products were designed and developed based on 
the survey, insurers and other stakeholders were engaged throughout the process to partly build their 
capacity and to encourage them to rollout the products. Nonetheless, the process is very slow and the 
piloting is still pending. 
4.Joint Project of ILO / UNCDP in micro Insurance in Ethiopia (2008-13): 
Joint programme on micro insurance was implemented by ILO and UNCDP in Ethiopia. The project had 
3 components – (I) Regulation &supervision, (ii) Product development and (iii) market development & 
had focused on participation of MFIs and Financial Cooperatives in the project. The broad objectives 
and activities of the  project  are given  in Annexure  I.  Considering commonalities  of focus, possible 
collaboration with the UN agencies might be explored under RUFIP III. The study under the project 
identified the following challenges: 
  Special benefits for MFIs and cooperatives might discourage the participation of insurers in 
the micro insurance market; 
  Reaching  momentum  of  agricultural  insurance  pilots  requires  joint  efforts  from  all 
stakeholders ; 
  Lack of technical capacity is a major challenge for micro insurance providers; and 
38 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
  Lack  of  consensus  between  stakeholders  hinders  a  multi-stakeholder  approach  for  local 
ownership  
With a view to supplementing RUFIP II in financial inclusion, a special project was prepared/submitted 
by ILO and UNCDP with financial outlay of US$ 20 million in 2012. The project envisaged technical and 
financial  support  covering  mapping  demand  and  supply  data  for  financial  services,  simplified  data 
reporting  system  by  cooperatives  /MFIs,  strengthening  product  development,  financial  education, 
micro-insurance, branchless banking /mobile banking /mobile money and lease financing. UNDP, WFP 
and FAO were expected to provide technical and financial support for the initiatives. Somehow, the 
collaboration with RUFIP II did not make much headway. 
5. Potential of Micro insurance: 
 Micro-insurance  service  has  been  playing  pivotal  role  in  changing  the  livelihood  of  Ethiopian 
smallholding farmers. The insurance service being provided in drought -prone areas of the country in 
collaboration with donors and micro-finance institutions has created confidence among the farming 
and  pastoral  communities  and  upgraded  the  production  and  productivity  of  low  income  farmers. 
Index- based and indemnity- based insurance packages were offered to the farmers.* "Index based 
insurance system is used for tackling drought in pastoralist society who depends on pasture for their 
animals, whereas the indemnity insurance is multi-purpose  insurance which is mostly provided for 
agro-pastoral  society  to  pay  compensations  for  accidents  relating  to  fire,  flood,  pest  and  drought. 
World Bank study brings out the increasing demand for micro insurance. To quote” the market itself 
shows  broad  potential  for  micro  insurance  purchase  by  up  to  10  million  House  hold  or  50  million 
Ethiopian. The potential could be met with a market -segmented approach.12 
6.Emerging Challenges: 
Various  crop  and  livestock  insurances  have  been  promoted  by  several  international  agencies  in 
collaboration  with  various  actors  including  insurance  companies.  In  recent  years, the  attempt  to 
introduce and expand index- based crop and livestock insurances has shown some progress even if 
the number of households remained low. Insurers are hesitant to aggressively go for micro-insurance 
service even though there is a good potential ,due to various reasons. Firstly, most of the insurers have 
no experience in micro insurance and so capacity is one of the key problems as far as insurers are 
concerned. NBE and the industry have a considerable knowledge and experience gap. The key skills, 
such as, actuarial and product development are non- existent. NBE has no actuary and this is one of 
the key skill deficiencies of the Bank. Financial support in building an internal capacity is critical to 
promote micro insurance and the mainstream insurance as well. Supervisory system proportionate to 
micro  Insurance  business  is  another  area  warranting  support.  Secondly,  lack of  strong  partnership 
between the state and private companies in developing and  promoting micro-insurance is another 
challenge. Thirdly, absence of legal frame work aimed at promoting Micro insurance is also another 
major hindrance for sector growth. Fourthly, the absence of a coordinating agency that bring together 
all actors and the state ,particularly in promoting crop and livestock and other insurances for the vast 
majority of farmers and pastoralists is another challenge. Finally, Micro insurance products require a 
different kind of business model and MFIs have such no expertise. Particularity index- based products 
12What People want: Investigating Inclusive Insurance Demand in Ethiopia- World Bank Group-2018 
39 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
are not easy to deal with even by the insurers themselves. Thus, diversification of MI products by such 
institutions is a challenge. Data-building is also another challenge.  
Companies  which  introduce  any  new  product  need  to  report  to  NBE  and  get  concurrence.  NBE 
reputedly has not received any formal application in this regard. MFIs and other cooperatives provide 
Credit life. NBE does not have concrete data on Credit life. 
7.  Role of Agricultural Transformation Agency (ATA): 
ATA has been in the forefront in popularizing and developing micro insurance. They have been doing 
pioneering work  in implementing Input  Voucher Sales  System, Ethiopia Agri business  platform and 
Micro  Insurance.  A  consortium  led  by  ATA  (under  Ministry  of  Agriculture)  with  Public  Finance 
Enterprises  ,  Kefia-Financial  Technology  agency  and  Ethiopian  Insurance  Company  had  worked  to 
promote weather, livestock, crop insurance, vegetable index policies in collaboration with insurance 
companies in mostly Oromoa and Tigray regions. MFIs, (ACSI, Omro, etc) and RUSACCOs/Unions have 
been working as agents in Amarah, SNNP and Tigray regions. A national level standing Task Force with 
ATA as lead has been constituted to work for promoting sustainable agricultural insurance policy and 
regulatory framework in the country. An insurance Facility Fund with ATA as lead has been set up for 
addressing issues of premium subsidy and guarantee fund .Four Companies are part of this fund. One 
consultant has been conducting field study on An Affordable insurance and the report is being awaited 
.Earlier Micro save  and Kefia Financial Technology had been engaged for study of micro insurance 
products.  In  view  of  the  strategic  position,  ATA  could  assume  greater  role  in  facilitation  of  micro 
insurance in future. 
8.Possible Support under RUFIP III: 
8.1 Development  of  Regulatory  &Supervisory  Architecture:  Considering  the  potential  of  micro 
insurance, particularly to improve the overall stability of low income population and to stabilize 
their income and to meet the risk management needs of such people in the vulnerable regions, 
comprehensive  support  could  be  supported  under  RUFIP  III.  Development  and  growth  of 
Microfinance sector could be possible in the country due to forward-looking legislation, a strong 
risk-based supervision by NBE and continued support by RUFIP I &II .Similarly, micro insurance 
sector  should  be  upscaled  with  a  comprehensive  support  from  RUFIP  III.  The  subcomponent 
should  also  cover  strengthening  regulation  and  supervision  by  NBE  and  regulated  entities 
including  insurer,  MFIs  and  Financial  Cooperatives.  It  is  expected  that  suitable  legislation  and 
regulation  would  be  carried  out  within  a  year  or  two.  Policy  advocacy  in  this  regard  can  be 
pursued.  The  interventions  in  the  post  –legislation/regulation  would  include  capacity  building 
efforts for policy –making officials, supervisors, officials of insurers, agencies like MFIs/Financial 
cooperatives and insured people. Sensitization programmes, training programmes and exposure 
visits for supervisors and supervised entities, customers would be supported. 
8.2 The willing insurance companies would be encouraged to develop products suitable for clients of 
MFIs and Financial cooperatives and later as distributive agents for expanding coverage of larger 
number of people in rural areas with varieties of products. Integration of RFIs with Insurer will be 
explored. The integration between insurer and RFIs would be deepened .Potential survey, new 
product development, financial literacy campaign, customer protection and impact assessment 
would be supported. 
8.3  Technology application for MIS, service  delivery, propagation and dissemination and feedback 
mechanism would be supported. Data –base for monitoring progress of micro insurance would be 
strengthened. 
8.4  Efforts may be made to include ATA in the whole endeavours. ATA’s experience, networking with 
other insurers and strategic support would be of help. 
40 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
8.5 The collaboration with ILO and UNCDF, in the back drop of their experience in micro insurance 
space in Ethiopia , should be explored. 
9.Capacity Building interventions – Broad Approach for TA to NBE: 
In the light of the above background, under RUFIP III, it is envisaged to provide technical assistance 
(TA) to NBE for exploring various policy options, to develop appropriate regulation and supervision 
framework, to enhance capacity of supervising officials, Insurers , select officers of MFIs and other 
related  policy  and  implementing  institutions  and  enhance  awareness  of  all  stakeholders  .  It  is 
proposed  that  the  Directorate  of  Insurance  Supervision  ,  NBE  should  be  the  nodal  agency  for 
implementation  of  all  interventions,  while  Directorate  of  MFI  Supervision  should  be  actively 
associated to supplement former’s efforts . The broad framework of such interventions, giving who 
should  participate  in  such  programmes  and  activities  and  whose  support  should  be  enlisted  for 
organizing identified activities are given in a tabular form (Annexure II). The supervisory officers of 
Directorate of Insurance Supervision, Directorate of MF Supervision and officers of Financial Inclusion 
Secretariat of NBE, officials of MFIs, Insurers and AEMFI would be generally the participants and the 
composition of the participants of any programme would vary depending on the theme and nature of 
intervention. The representatives of ATA, FCA and MOFED,GOE can be co-opted for exposure-study 
visits and training programmes. Among the countries, Kenya , India, Philippines and Peru are possible 
destinations for overseas learning. Support can be enlisted from the international organizations which 
have experience in Ethiopia in this regard .These include World Bank, WFP, UNCDF, JICA, ILO, ILRI and 
Kliffya Financial Technology . As far as practicable, the services of local agencies including Ethiopian 
Institute  of  Financial  Studies  (  EIFS)  should  be  enlisted  for  TA  support.  Some  of  the  overseas 
training/development institutions, Regulatory authorities and consultancy organizations ,which can 
be  tapped  for  organizing  training  programmes  ,exposure-study  visits  ,  convening  conferences 
/seminars, conducting studies and documentation are cited below for reference: 
a)  National Insurance Academy ,Pune ,India (www.insurancepune.org )  
b)  Micro Insurance Academy, (MIA),New Delhi ( headed by Dr. David Dor , Erasmus University 
Professor (mia.org.in)  
c)  KM Dastur Reinsurance Brokers Pvt Ltd (General Manager, AyandevSaha, E-mail address 
ayandev.saha@hotmail.co.uk) 
d)  Micro Insurance Centre (MIC)), General Manager, Michail J. Cord, E-mail 
address:mjmccord@microinsurancecenter.org. 
e)  Delight Professional Summits ,Nairobi, Kenya ( Daniel Cheg: Chege@deligtsummit.com)-
f) 
website: www.delightsummits.com 
. Risk shield Consultants Ltd, Managing Director, AgrotoshMookerjee, E-mail 
address: agrotosh@googlemail.com. 
g)  South African MI Regulatory Framework ,National Treasury Policy Department, Republic of 
South Africa (micro insurance @treasury .gov.za, ) 
h)  Insurance Regulatory & Development Authority (IRDA), Hyderabad, India. 
i)  Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority (TIRA).Website: www.tira...go.tz 
j)  The Access to Insurance Initiative(A2ii) ( It is a global partnership with the mission to inspire 
and support supervisors to promote inclusive and responsible insurance, thereby reducing 
vulnerability . GIZ Rural Insurance Services Programme, India had a bilateral technical co-
operation which was implemented by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) under the supervision of the Department of Financial Services (DFS), 
Ministry of Finance, and GOI. 
41 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
k) 
Institute of Actuaries of India ,Created under Act (ASI 2006) to promote ,uphold and develop 
standards of professional education ,training, knowledge ,practice and conduct among 
actuaries. 
9.1 Separate Micro Insurance Proclamation & Regulation: 
 With  a view  to  accomplishing  orderly  and  comprehensive micro  insurance  development of micro-
insurance sector in the country , it would be appropriate to frame separate and comprehensive micro 
insurance regulation backed by separate law or suitable and adequate provisions on micro insurance 
in the “ insurance business proclamation”. A well designed regulatory framework is a major factor for 
efficient and effective provision of micro insurance services. South Africa , Peru ,Philippines ,Kenya 
,Ghana, Tanzania and India have evolved good regulations, put in place institutional mechanism and 
brought  about  other  related  developmental  interventions  for  up  scaling  micro  insurance.  The 
regulatory and developmental initiatives in these countries are outlined in the annexure III. Each of 
the  countries  have  special  features  in  their  policy,  regulations  ,  institutional  safeguards  and  best 
practices in implementation. Some of International agencies have conducted studies, implemented 
developmental interventions and documented learnings and guidelines. 
9.2 Contours of Integrated Approach for Insurance Supervisors: 
International Association of Insurance Supervisors ( IAIS )and C-GAP working group had stated that 
the Insurance Supervisors could enhance certain strategic elements in their (regulator) policies and 
actions  as  under  and  thereby,  foster  an  environment  that  makes  micro  insurance  sustainable  and 
feasible in an integrated manner by combining the following aspects:13 
a)  “Developing a micro insurance policy and promoting its implementation; 
b)  Facilitating the availability of key information /statistical data in micro insurance business; 
c)  Enabling  clear  laws  and  regulations  in  accordance  with  internationally  accepted  standards 
that  encourage  insurance  coverage  for  low-income  households  and  its  compliance  while 
limiting regulatory arbitrage; 
d)  Contributing to the policy to enhance access to financial services which can be used as basis 
for discussion with legislation and also between departments and supervisors; 
e)  Contributing  policy  dialogue  with  government  so  that  social  insurance  schemes  are 
conjunction with social insurance; 
f)  Limiting moral hazards and fraud by promoting awareness and putting in place controls and 
incentives systems ;and 
g)  Promoting consumer education and raising awareness to instill an insurance culture among 
low income households.” 
13IAIS and C-GAP Working Group report -2007 
42 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
9.3 World Bank‘s MI Development Programme (MIDP): Objectives: 
World Bank had implemented Micro Insurance Development Programme (MIDP) in 3 phases (2013-
18) with the objectives of making strong foot notes in 15 carefully selected countries .Activities chosen 
from the following 5 areas: 
a)  Raise consumer awareness; 
b)  Invest in new product development and build market infrastructure; 
c)  Build public-private partnerships; 
d)  Strengthen the enabling environment; and 
e)  Catalyze investment in micro insurance providers and intermediaries 
The insurance programmes of World Bank covered life ,disability ,weather ,agriculture /crop, assets, 
health ,demand and supply. 
9.4 Suggested Provisions in Micro-Insurance Proclamation and Regulation: 
In the light of various literature on laws ,regulations and practices, the following areas are suggested 
for inclusion in the proposed proclamation and regulations in Ethiopia: 
a)  Define the general features of micro insurance ; 
b)  Define duties and responsibilities of all stake holders; 
c)  Define entry and exit norms and procedures; 
d)  Protect the customers through various provisions including their awareness, rights, access and 
grievance redressal; 
e)  Protect financial viability of the institutions ,particularly insures ; 
f)  Spell out prudential requirements of MI products; Filing of MI Products 
g)  Facilitate digital financial services , holistic risk management and smart partnerships; 
h)   Incorporate Right to information and supervisory interventions by Regulator; 
i) 
j) 
k) 
l) 
m)   Spell out Crisis resolutions  
 Prescribe Code of conduct and financial discipline ; 
 Stipulate Penal Provisions in case of non-compliance to regulations ; 
 Mandate for Capacity building of all stakeholders; 
 Define Underwriting. and 
10. Overseas Exposure-Study Visits –Objectives: 
The objectives of the three proposed exposure study visits with TA support are the following : 
a)  Development of Regulatory and Supervisory Framework: Evolving appropriate Micro Insurance 
legislation, regulations and supervisory tools ; 
b)  Learning  about  best  practices  and  products  in  micro  insurance:  Product  design  and  delivery 
mechanism,  client  protection  .The  study  visit  can  enlighten  the  team  about  institutional 
mechanism for distribution of micro insurance policies and Partnership among stake holders; 
43 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
c)  To study the approach to financial inclusion through micro-insurance up scaling, financial /digital 
literacy strategy, with focus on insurance awareness of the consumers . It will also enable them 
to explore avenues for capacity building of stake holders in micro insurance space. 
10.1 Guidelines for Visits: 
The participants for such exposure visits will include the senior officials of Directorate of Insurance 
Supervision, Directorate of MFI Supervision , MFIs, Insurers and Key Officers of FCA,MOFED,ATA and 
AEMFI  .  For  effective  exposure  visits  in  micro  insurance,  detailed  guidelines  for  micro  insurance 
practitioners are available in ILO publication.14 The following broad guidelines, specifying fundamental 
questions that should be posed during such mission:  
a) 
Institutional  Self-assessment:  Can  your  Organization  really  benefit  this  from  an  exchange 
visit?; 
b)  Learning Agenda: What do you expect to learning on the exchange visit?; 
c)  Structured Observations: How to keep afloat the torrent of new information and impressions 
in the new environment?; 
d)  Translate Observation in to Action: How to translate new insights into improving changes?; 
and  
e)  Document lessons learnt and developing a plan for implementing changes: What are the main 
findings from the exchange visit and how could this benefit the Organization? 
The exposure study visits should be treated as serious business and the lessons drawn should be taken 
forward for replication. 
11 . Training Programmes in MI: Themes, objectives and Safeguards: 
 Technical support from RUFIP III has been envisaged for organizing training programmes on emerging 
themes as under, for the benefit of all stakeholders, primarily for officers of NBE, select officers of 
MFIs, CBs and Insurers. Insurance Literacy Programmes would be for customers of MFIs . Depending 
on the theme, representatives of FCA, ATA,AEMFI and EIFS can also be facilitated for participation.  
1. 
In  Social  Performance  Management  (SPM)  in  micro  insurance-  to  ensure  SPM  through  micro 
insurance & to develop SPM parameters and to Internalize the concept in MFIs; 
2.  Product Development in micro Insurance- to familiarize with the scope of various products, on 
life events –accidents, sickness and death, agriculture and livestock (egg. - Credit Life, Index-based 
crop insurance, multi-peril crop insurance, vegetation index crop insurance , multi-level livestock 
insurance), their operational framework, prospects of innovation ,bringing cost-effectiveness and 
possible benefits. Review of products, based on demand of rural poor. Marketing of products. 
3.  Managing Partnerships between MFIs , Financial Cooperatives ,CBs and the Insurer –Developing 
agreement  and  communication  tools;  The  programme  should  enable  preparation  of  suitable 
MoUs , spelling out rights and obligations  
Inspection-Oriented Programme- developing supervisory capacity in onsite inspection and offsite 
surveillance,  risk  management,  prudential  regulations,  compliance  mechanism;  technology 
application in supervision and regulation, MIS &reporting by supervised entities; 
4. 
14Exchange Visit Guide, by Roland Steinmann to ILO, (April 2010) 
44 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
5.  Process mapping/ reengineering for MI operation and claim settlements(all insurers); Reviewing/ 
spelling  out  procedure  of  enrolling  clients,  handling  premium  collected,  application  for  claims 
,documentation, claims settlement, reporting ,extending assistance to policy holders.  
6.  NBE Programme at EIFS for micro insurance; Its seven out of 12 programmes are relevant to MI; 
7.  Programme  for  Actuarial  Development;  Actuary  science  is  essentially  about  calculation  of 
insurance  risks  and  premium  application,  based  on  mathematical  and  economic  analysis.  The 
programme  will  help  in  decision  making  in  insurance  investment,  financial  planning  and 
management. Other issues include risk management, forecasting theory, expansion of risk tables, 
computer-assisted research, secondary data analysis, economic risk analysis. 
8.  Literacy Campaign- bringing Consumer Education through application of innovative tools. 
11.1 Focus on Training of Trainers (TOT) in MI: 
Efforts should be directed for developing local trainers through TOT, so as to train up more trainees 
in a cost-effective way. The identified officers from MFIs, FCA/RPCAs, NBE, EIFS , AEMFI and potential 
Trainers  /local  service  providers  from  various  regions  can  form  the  pool  of  trainers,  who  can  be 
groomed as specialists on the identified themes . Developing trainers for (i) building actuarial expertise 
and  (ii)  putting  in  place  risk  management  strategies  would  be  given  focus.  The  Process  of  Risk 
management strategies is illustrated in the following diagram: 
Figure 1. Process of Risk Management Strategies 
45 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Source: Micro Insurance Product Development for micro insurance providers – Micro Finance Centre, 
Micro Insurance Centre, IFAD 
The ratios/concepts like Insurance claims ratio, renewal rate, promptness of claims settlement ratio 
,claim  rejection  ratio,  complaints  ratio,  poverty  outreach  ratio,  rural  outreach  ration  and  staff 
retention ratio, etc should be clarified and internalized, so that these become regular parameter for 
institutional review.  
12 Conduct of Studies – Contents and coverage: 
The  studies  on  the  identified  themes  as  under  should  be  conducted,  primarily  through  domestic 
Consultants and wherever necessary, by international consultants /agencies: 
a)  Product  development  studies;(e.g.  index/weather  insurance,  agriculture,  asset,  life  and 
disability, credit). The step by step approach for new product development process is given 
in a diagram below:  
Figure 2: Systematic Product Development Process for Microinsurance 
Source: Micro Insurance Product Development for micro insurance providers – Micro Finance Centre, 
Micro Insurance Centre, IFAD 
b)  Demand-supply  Assessment  :  This  will  aid  in mapping  the  landscape  of  micro  insurance  to 
assess market prospects and bringing out details of institutional infrastructure for supply of 
insurance services and demand projections . The findings will be helpful in development of 
market infrastructure, exploration of ways and means to meet the demand including building 
public and private partnerships.  
46 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
13. Organizing Conferences /Seminars:  
TA is envisaged to be provided for organizing Conferences /Seminars on the following themes: 
a)  Business Planning in micro insurance- Institutional Budget and Work Plan(all MFIs, Insurers); 
b)  Consumer  Protection  Tools  –  Consumer  education  for  raising  consumer  awareness  (all 
institutions); 
c)  Financial Inclusion-Insurance Products in undeveloped regions(Pastoral regions);and  
d)  Natural Disasters_ - Protection Measures including Insurance - Preventive Mechanism. 
The Conference s/Seminars on the identified themes should be organized in a structured manner with 
due planning and preparations. Further, the proceedings of the events should be documented and 
recommendations emerging out of the deliberations should be followed up with concerned agencies 
for further action. Presentation of Case studies and study findings should be encouraged. Discussions 
on client protection policies and procedures, fair and respectful treatment of clients , privacy of client 
data , complaint resolution mechanism, transparency, responsible pricing ,etc should be discussed. 
14. Documentation of Manuals , Guidelines and awareness literature:  
TA support would be provided for bringing out the following documents: 
a) 
 Manual Development: Prudential regulations; 
b)   Manual on Supervision techniques and tools;  
c)  Handbook on Tools relevant to Ethiopian Practitioners .and 
d)  Literature on MI model Products, Consumer education /protection. 
The manual on Micro Insurance Product Development for MF providers was developed under IFAD 
project facilitating widespread access to MI services managed by Michael J. Mclord, MF Centre and 
implemented  by  MI  Centre  Ltd.  A  number  of  Manuals/MI  tools,  were  developed  by  World 
Bank/UNDP  in  general  or  for  other  countries  .  However,  the  manual  and  other  tools  for  MI 
practitioners should be tailored to the needs of Ethiopia’s policy environment and institutional and 
customers’  needs.  Further,  based  on  the  new  regulations  to  be  developed  and  risk-based 
supervisory  approach  to  be  introduced,  Manuals  on  Regulation  and  Supervision  need  to  be 
prepared for use by NBE supervising officials . Besides, TA support will be provided for preparation 
of handbooks on tools for practitioners and pamphlets/awareness literatures on insurance products 
and insurance concepts for financial/digital literacy campaign . 
The programme highlights and core strength of a few overseas institutions in capacity- building in 
micro insurance are outlined in the Annexure IV. 
15. Perspectives: 
 It  is  hoped  that  micro  insurance  sector  would  grow  in  an  integrated  manner,  bringing  attendant 
benefits  to  greater  number  of  clients.  (from  present  level  of  34000  people  with  ETB  313  million) 
.During  the  implementation  of  RUFIP  III,  Directorate  of  Insurance  Supervision,  Directorate  of  MFI 
Supervision , Financial Inclusion secretariat of NBE, Insurers and MFIs need to work in a collaborative 
approach to get the above interventions implemented in timely and effective manners. Considering 
the  involvement  of  World Bank  in  the  sector  and  NBE,  there  would  be  need  for  coordination  and 
consultation between IFAD and World Bank in carry forward the suggested activities. 
47 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure I  
Overview of Joint Programme of ILO &UNCDF in Ethiopia- 2008-13-Highlights 
The Facility has engaged in micro insurance development in Ethiopia for more than five years. 
A Joint Program (JP) between the ILO and UNCDF on promoting access to micro insurance 
began operating  in  Ethiopia  in  2009.  The  initial circumstances  were  complicated:  a  lack  of 
stakeholder consensus on market development, and a closed and underdeveloped insurance 
sector  with  limited  interest  in  micro  insurance.  The  JP  has  implemented  a  wide  range  of 
activities to address some these challenges, working with various stakeholders on the macro, 
meso and micro level. Based on the findings of the micro insurance diagnostic study, an action 
plan was prepared to develop and implement the micro insurance market in Ethiopia. The 
main  focus  has  been  on  policy  and  regulation,  market  development  and  partnerships 
development. So far, we have catalysed the expansion of micro insurance with consumers at 
the  centre  of  our  activities,  and  advocacy  for  micro  insurance  with  stakeholders  including 
government, development partners and local institutions. 
Component 1: Policy and regulation 
A clear legal and regulatory framework is a prerequisite to expand and improve the provision 
of micro insurance. The efforts and activities in the regulatory area should focus on creating 
an enabling environment for the development of the micros insurance market. Initially, the 
main  regulatory  challenges  were  defining  micro  insurance,  agreeing  to  a  broad  policy 
framework and coming up with a draft of a micro insurance regulation. In particular, insurers 
couldn’t  compete  with  MFIs  that  were  allowed  to  provide  insurance  to  their  clients.  To 
address these challenges, the main activities of the Facility regarding policy and regulations 
have been: 
  Define micro insurance in the Ethiopian context. 
  Voluntary reporting on micro insurance activities by insurance companies and other 
micro insurance providers. 
  Explore possible incentives to encourage insurers to engage in micro insurance. 
 
Identifying  and promoting  technological  advancements  and  their  potential  benefits 
for micro insurance. 
  Explore  the  integration  of  micro  insurance  in  Draft  Proclamation  for  Insurance 
Supervision. 
  Develop directives on market conduct and prudential regulation on micro insurance 
business. 
Component 2: Market development 
Given the small size of the micro insurance market and its great potential, it was necessary to 
implement activities aimed at developing the market in both the supply and demand side. 
When the Facility became involved in Ethiopia, the insurance sector was scarcely focused on 
the low income market, especially because the insurance industry did not have experience 
working with this market. In addition, the main risks identified by the Ethiopian population 
(illness,  death  and  drought)  had  no  insurance  products.  Therefore,  our  endeavours  have 
48 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
focused on developing life, health and agricultural insurance products. In order to develop 
the micro insurance market in Ethiopia, the Facility has worked on these activities: 
  Promoting functional micro insurance units within existing insurance companies 
  Training Micro insurance underwriters and managers. 
  Organize a workshop for insurers about micro insurance product design. 
  Provide technical assistance on product design as requested by individual insurers. 
 
Identifying  and promoting  technological  advancements  and  their  potential  benefits 
for micro insurance. 
  Design and launch livestock insurance. 
  Support for weather index and multi-risk insurance pilots. 
  Programme  to  bundle  micro  insurance  with  savings  and  credit  for  rural  farming 
households.  
  Financial education and skills activities such as the Micelle Prison Project and Women 
in Self Employment. 
Component 3: Partnerships development 
The  low  development  of  the  insurance  market  in  Ethiopia  was  largely  due  to  the  lack  of 
partnerships among key actors. One of the initial steps to develop the micro insurance market 
was  to  find  synergies  between  actors  in  order  to  reach  a  multi-stakeholder  approach. Any 
initiative to extend insurance in the low-income market would have to be done in partnership 
with the appropriate government agencies. It was also clear that the distribution of insurance 
would  be  difficult  due  to  fragmented  and  widely  distributed  nature  of  the  population, 
therefore client networks and aggregators, such as SACCOs and MFIs, played a critical role as 
distributors of financial services. Because of this, the Facility's activities to develop sustainable 
partnerships included: 
  Twinning SACCOs, Insurers and MFIs.  
  Creation of one specialized micro insurance company. 
  Organize training on micro insurance for delivery channels and facilitate partnerships 
between insurers and delivery channels. 
  Product registration with regulator and preparation of manuals. 
Provide insurance and coop training for members of the Confederation of Ethiopian Trade 
Unions. 
49 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure II 
 TA- Summary of Interventions for Micro Insurance regulation and 
development: 
2. NBE - Directorate of Insurance Supervision (DIS) - Development of micro insurance 
Institution 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Directorate of MF 
Supervision, 
Financial Inclusion 
Secretariat, NBE, 
MFIs, Insurance 
Companies, GOE, 
FCA, AEMFI, 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Directorate of MF 
Supervision, 
Financial Inclusion 
Secretariat, NBE, 
MFIs, Insurance 
Companies, GOE, 
FCA, AEMFI,ATA 
 Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Directorate of MF 
Supervision, 
Financial Inclusion 
Secretariat, NBE, 
MFIs, Insurance 
Companies, GOE, 
FCA, AEMFI,ATA 
MFIs, NBE, 
AEMFI,FCA 
MFIs, Insurance 
Companies , 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Theme 
MI Regulatory 
Framework 
Intervention 
Exposure Visit 
MI products and best 
practices 
Exposure Visit 
Financial literacy strategy   Exposure Visit 
Social Performance 
Management in MI 
Product Development- 
Familiarization with 
operational framework 
Training 
Training 
50 
By whom 
Overseas 
organisations* 
*Agencies 
having 
experience in 
Ethiopia include 
WFP,JICA,ILRI 
and also GOE 
agency ( ATA ) 
and Kefalas 
Financial 
Technology& 
they can be 
consulted. 
Overseas 
organisations* 
*Impact 
Insurance 
Academy, 
Micro Insurance 
Centre(MIC), 
Access to 
Insurance 
Institutions(A2ii
) 
*Overseas 
organisations 
In Philippines, 
Peru, India, 
Kenya are 
perspective 
countries.  
 Suitable 
consultant or 
Rating agency 
 Suitable agency 
in Ethiopia or 
Kenya (e.g. 
Delight 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Supervision, BE, 
FCA and AEMFI 
 MFIs, Insurance 
Companies, 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
DMFIS,NBE, FCA 
and AEMFI,CBs 
MFIs, Insurance 
Companies, 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, DMFIS, 
NBE, FCA and 
AEMFI 
MFIs, Insurance 
Companies, 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, BE, 
FCA and AEMFI 
MFIs, FCA/ RPCAs, 
NBE- EIFS and 
AEMFI 
MFIs and Insurance 
Companies 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision ,NBE 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, NBE 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
&DMFIS,NBE 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, DMFIS, 
NBE, 
Managing partnership 
between MFIs, CBs and 
Insurer 
Training 
Supervision -oriented 
programme 
Training 
Process Re-engineering 
for MI operations and 
settlements 
Training 
Training of trainers 
Training 
Studies 
Studies 
Development of trainers 
in MI including 
development of Actuarial 
expertise 
General programmes on 
MFIs at EIFS 
Product Development 
(including Index /weather 
insurance, etc) 
Demand Assessment 
Handbook/ Manual for 
Supervision 
Manual on Prudential 
Regulations 
Profession 
Summit ) 
.Reputed 
consultants 
include Micro 
Insurance 
Centre, KM 
Dastur , Risk 
Shield 
Consultant, etc 
 Suitable 
Development 
agencies 
/consultant 
 Suitable 
regulatory 
Authority (e.g. 
IRDA in India) 
and EIFS,NBE 
 Suitable 
training or 
development 
institution or 
Consultant. 
 Consultant 
/Training 
institution 
EIFS 
Consultant, 
Insurer, and 
Agencies cited 
Consultant 
Manual preparation  
Consultant 
Manual preparation  
Consultant 
51 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Handbook/ Manual on 
tools relevant to 
Ethiopian MI 
practitioners 
Manual preparation  
Consultant 
Consumer Education 
Literacy campaign  
Literacy campaign  
Handbooks and pamphlet 
preparation  
Conference/Seminars/Worksho
p 
Literature on Consumer 
Protection 
Literature on how MI 
models products work  
Business Planning in 
micro insurance- 
Institutional Budget and 
Work Plan 
Consumer Protection 
tools 
Conference/Seminar/workshop  Directorate of 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, MFIs, 
DMFIS 
Clients of MFIs, 
Insurers 
Clients of MFIs, 
Insurer  
Clients of MFIs, 
Insurer 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, MFIs, 
DMFIS, AEMFI, DBE, 
DCA 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, MFIs, 
AEMFI, Insurance 
Companies, DMFIS, 
NBE 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, MFIs, 
AEMFI, Insurance 
Companies 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, MFIs, 
AEMFI, Insurance 
Companies 
 Suitable agency 
*& Insurers 
Consultant & 
Insurer 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, 
Directorate of 
Insurance 
Supervision, 
Insurance 
Companies, 
Financial Inclusion - 
Insurance Products in 
pastoral regions 
Conference/ 
Seminar/Workshop 
Natural disasters - 
Protection Measures 
Conferences and Seminars 
52 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure: III 
 Regulatory framework in select countries: 
1. South African Regulatory Framework: 
South  African  regulatory  framework  spells  out  institutional  regulation,  prudential  regulation,  micro 
insurance products , ongoing operational requirements intermediary and market conduct regulation, fit 
and  proper  criteria,  code  of  conduct,  financial  soundness  of  the  intermediaries,  commission  regime, 
requirement of simplified disclosure, consumer education and recourse implementation and transitional 
provisions ,amendments, market impact and way forward.  
2.The New features of India Micro Insurance Act : 
In March 2015, the IRDA introduced the revised Micro insurance Regulation (2015) which superseded 
the  regulations  introduced  in  2005.  All  existing  micro  insurance  products  which  did  not  meet  the 
stipulations of the new regulation were withdrawn. The new regulation makes a number of important 
amendments  including  the  guidance  on  product  development,  adjusting  the  risk  coverage  levels, 
permitting more entities to distribute micro insurance products and the training of micro insurance 
agents and their specified personnel . With respect to distribution, the new regulation enlarges the 
current  range  of  institutional  intermediaries  to  include  Reserve  Bank of  India  (RBI)  regulated  Non-
banking Financial Companies, Financial Cooperatives and Business Correspondents which have been 
appointed in accordance with the RBI Financial Inclusion Guidelines. In connection with the training, 
the  new  regulation  specifies  a  mandatory  training  period  of  25-hours  for  individuals  employed  as 
micro insurance agents (”agents and their specified persons”). Individuals selling non-life products to 
micro and small enterprises now need to undergo an additional 25 hours training. In addition, every 
micro insurance agent or sales person needs to undergo refresher training for half of the specified 
mandatory training time at the end of 3 years. In terms of risk coverage levels, the new regulation sees 
an increase in the maximum limits across previously specified risk coverage levels. This should enable 
insurers  to  target  consumers  across  the  lower  middle  income  segment,  which  remains  presently 
largely  uninsured  on  account  of  the  unattractive  (low)  coverage  limits  and  poor  access.  The  new 
regulation  also  sees  the  introduction  of  a  new  product  category, Micro  Variable  Life  Insurance 
Products,  a  hybrid  insurance  solution  comprising  of  systematic  contributions  with  term  insurance 
cover.  Lastly  the  new  regulation  no  longer  recognises  policies  sourced  as  part  of  social  security 
schemes as micro insurance, and prohibits insurance companies from including the same as part of 
their reporting on their rural and social sector mandatory targets.  
4.Philippines& Peru :Impact Insurance Facility : 
Philippines and Peru are the earliest starters in micro insurance regulation and development. The A2ii 
and ILO through their impact Insurance Facility (IIF) have commissioned the study to assess the impact 
of  micro  insurance  regulatory  framework  on  developing  inclusive  insurance  markets  by  way  of 
regulatory Impact assessment (RIA).The RIA in case of Peru and Philippines had aimed at identifying 
policy intention , policy intervention ,regulatory change due to implementation, assessing outcomes 
– what objectives achieved and what remain to be done. Assessment was made in Philippines with 
respect to supervisory tools and techniques used, prudential requirements of MI providers, product- 
related  rules  framed  ,licensing,  training,  dispute  resolution,  intermediaries,  and  adjustments  to 
supervisory tools and techniques. Similar assessment was undertaken in Peru which revealed that MI 
had  undergone  the  same  product  registration  process  as  traditional  one,  supervision  of  MI  was 
integrated across overall supervisory system, and insurer had to report on micro insurance separately.  
53 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
5.Ghana-Micro Insurance Supply and Demand Side report  
 The  National  Insurance  Commission  (NIC)  in  Ghana  is  spearheading  MI  industry  development  to 
expand insurance market and facilitate  improved access to  and the  usage of insurance  services  by 
MSMEs and low income households. A document15brought out by NIC, Grameen, GIZ and MI Centre 
reflect initiatives and progress in this regard .  
6.Tanzania Insurance Regulatory Authority (TIRA): 
TIRA was established in 2009 under the related legislation in Tanzania and has been pursuing with, 
inter  alia  ,  micro  insurance  development.  The  best  practices  developed  included  accreditation  of 
foreign  Reinsurance  brokers,  conducting  regional  micro  insurance  conference,  annual  insurance 
awards,  bacaasurance  regulation,  development  of  agri-insurance  ,  collaboration  with  FSDT,  online 
training , etc. In December 2018 the Bank of Tanzania (BOT) issued a public notice (the Notice) stating 
that  it  is  preparing  regulations  for  various  categories  of  microfinance  service  providers  (MFIs) 
identified in the Microfinance Act 2018 (the Act), and for licensing purposes.. 
15Landscape of Micro Insurance in Ghana (2015) 
54 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure IV 
Select Potential Institutions – Programmes &Experience: 
1 .National Insurance Academy (NIA), Pune, India: 
It is a premier institute, established by Government of India, devoted to equipping insurance industry 
with professional management and insurance expertise. The following programmes of the Academy 
have relevance to micro insurance: 
Implications of insurance regulations for business; 
a)  Programme in Micro and social sector insurance; 
b)  Digital Transformation in insurance; 
c) 
d)  Training in Actuarial Practices; 
e)  Product Innovations; 
f)  Auditing and accounting standards in insurance; and  
g)  Training of trainers’ (TOT) programmes 
. 2. Micro Insurance Academy (MIA), Delhi India: 
MIA is a charitable trust dedicated to training, research and advisory services for MI units serving the 
poor. It is dedicated to catalyzing demand for insurance that responds to prioritized needs of people 
in  the  rural  and  informal  sector,  through  implementation of training  programmes,  based  on  novel 
solutions for social protection and also financial literacy.  In collaboration with  Infinite  Actuary  and 
other  international  Agencies,  the  MIA  has  developed  the  following  training  programmes  having 
relevance to MI sector: 
a)  Capacity Development training-MI tool box –solution and challenges; 
b)   Online courses in Micro Insurance ( MIA in collaboration with the Infinite Actuary is providing 
c) 
online courses in MI studies;) 
Innovative development in product design, distribution and regulation (MIA ‘s business model 
of community –based micro insurance operation in health ,crop and livestock;) 
d)  Social Performance Indicators in Micro insurance; 
e)  Local Training providers –enabling quality MI training with local Service Providers; and  
f)  Performance Indicators (KPI) in micro insurance. 
3 Micro Insurance Centers, Milliman: 
M Disturb & Company Ltd., (KMD) London is a Registered Lloyd’s Broker. KMD as a Group has been 
one of the leading insurance and reinsurance brokers in the Afro Asian region. In particular to inclusive 
insurance, KMD as a Group has four decades of experience in designing and structuring a range of 
mass and micro insurance programs which includes life, crop, livestock, and personal accident and 
health  insurance  schemes.  KMD  as  a  Group  has  not only  worked  with  governments  and  donors  in 
designing  and  implementing  mass  and  universal  insurance  schemes  but  has  worked  on  policies 
objectives such as increased access to credit, improved agriculture productivity, reduced vulnerability 
and enhanced social protection.  
a)  Capacity building experience – They are actively working in the Ethiopian market and thus 
have  a  considerable  familiarity  with  the  context.  They  have  conducted  MI  trainings  in  a 
55 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
variety of formats for insurers, regulators, distribution channels, and other stakeholders in 
several  countries  globally.  Recently  MIC  has  developed  a  full  micro  insurance  diploma 
program for  industry  stakeholders  in  the  Egyptian  market.  The  program  consisted  of  12 
courses  on  topics  ranging  from  “Understanding  Clients”  to  “Business  Case  for  Micro 
insurance”. Each course ranged in length from 4 hours to 3 days and utilized interactive adult 
learning methods. They can easily adapt their experience for the Ethiopian context. 
b)  Context knowledge – They are also mid-way through a 4-year project with IFAD on developing 
risk management solutions for the rural poor in Ethiopia (also in Georgia and China), and have 
spent the last two years building a deep knowledge of the context. In addition, two years ago 
they  had  conducted  an  in-depth  research  study  on  the demand  for  micro  insurance  in 
Ethiopia for the World Bank. 
4 Ethiopian Institute of Financial Studies(EIFS),NBE : 
The  EIFS  ,NBE  has  been  conducting  various  training  programmes  on  insurance  which  included 
programmes on Agricultural Insurance (10 half days),Risk Management & Insurance (10 half days ) , 
Insurance Accounting (8 Half days) and Micro Insurance (6 half days). They have potential to conduct 
need-based capacity –building programmes on microinsurance . 
5 Delight Professional Summits, Kenya: 
It  provides  consulting  services,  organizes  knowledge  events,  undertakes  research,  designs  training 
suited to specific needs .It has been bringing African MI stake holders, policy makers, and community 
and business leaders together through conferences and summits. It has been undertaking index design 
and certification for weather index insurance and actuarial works. 
56 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
PART III 
Component 2.2 Strengthening Capacity and Systems in FCA for Financial 
Cooperative regulation and Supervision 
Component 2.(b) Improving regulation, supervision and institutional 
Discipline of FCA & financial Cooperatives: 
Subject matter 
Index 
Improving regulation, supervision and institutional Discipline of FCA & financial Cooperatives 
Regulation and Supervision of Financial Cooperatives under RUFIP II-Expected Outcomes: 
Challenges of Regulatory & Supervisory Systems for Financial Cooperatives 
New Cooperative Societies Proclamation -2016 
Audit Framework & Audit Reforms: 
Internal audit of Unions and Supervision of SACCCOs 
Introducing and internalizing IFRS 
Inspection arrangements 
Classification of Unions/RUSACCOs and Transformation Plan 
Adoption of Prudential Norm 
Improving functional MIS system& Sustainability of RUSACCOS/Unions 
Digital Financial services (DFS) 
Establishing Risk management system 
Enhancing Governance  
Instituting Regulation and Supervisory framework 
Instituting Deposit Safety &institutional Protection mechanism: 
Codes of Standards &Fair Practices: 
Customers’ Grievance Redressal & Customer Protection:  
Board of Supervision (BOS): 
Institutional Development System 
Summary of recommendations 
Annexures 
57 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
PART III 
Component 2.(b) Improving regulation, supervision and institutional 
Discipline of FCA & financial Cooperatives: 
1. 
Improving  regulation,  supervision  and  institutional  Discipline  of  FCA  &  financial 
Cooperatives: 
With  continued  expansion,  growth  and  diversification  of  RUSACCOs  and  Unions  in  the  country, 
regulatory and supervisory arrangement for the financial cooperatives assumes greater significance. 
The continued support from RUFIP I and II, with an exclusive Regulation and supervision component 
has enabled financial cooperatives in the formative years to function in prudent manner, giving the 
members  necessary  confidence  and  trust  in  the  system.  Given the  contribution  of  the  component 
during  RUFIP  I  &  RUFIP  II  phases,  there  is  need  for  RUFIP  III  to  support  to  FCA  and  Financial 
Cooperatives to have growth momentum and orderly development of the sector /institutions. 
1.1  Regulation  and  Supervision  of  Financial  Cooperatives  under  RUFIP  II-Expected 
Outcomes: 
The  expected  outcomes  included  under  the  corresponding  subcomponent  in  RUFIP  II  were  the 
following: (i) a functioning separate department for rural financial cooperatives at national, Regional, 
Zonal and Wereda levels; (ii) a separate legal code for rural financial cooperatives; (iii) regulatory and 
supervisory arrangement for rural financial cooperatives including audit framework operational; (iv) 
supervision  manual  for  rural  cooperatives  prepared  and  implemented;  (v)  a  separate  supervisory 
authority different from cooperative bureaus examined and decided upon; (vi) an updated promotion 
manual for RuSACCOS in place and implemented; (vii) evaluation report on promotion processes of 
RuSACCOS and their Unions completed; and (viii) a functioning MIS implemented. Except the manual 
preparation  by  ICULF,  and  MIS  implementation  and  capacity-building  of  auditors,  inspectors, 
supervisors, Board members, other interventions have not been accomplished. 
1.2  Challenges of Regulatory & Supervisory Systems for Financial Cooperatives: 
The  sector  is  characterized  by  the  absence  of  exclusive  legislative  framework,  lack  of  prudential 
regulation  and  supervision,  absence  of  separate  and  independent  agency  for  regulation  and 
supervision,  increasing  liquidity  constraints,  absence  of  deposit  guarantee  /  insurance  system  and 
customer protection system. Other challenges include restricted financial services to meet the needs 
of members due to lack of integration with national payment system and credit reference bureau. 
There  is  general  inadequacy/gap  of  operational  efficiency,  due  to  lack  of  automation.  Financial 
Reporting  continues  to  be  inadequate.  Inadequacy  of  training  infrastructure  makes  systematic 
dissemination, learning, innovation and training difficult. The following interventions are intended to 
address such challenges. 
2.  New Cooperative Societies Proclamation -2016: 
The new Cooperative Societies Proclamation was enacted in December 2016. It does not, however, 
cover exclusively to the Financial Cooperatives. Contrary to expectations, necessary focus on financial 
cooperatives  has not  been laid, with provisions for their transformation/up-  gradation, integration 
with financial sector, purveying all kinds of financial services with risk management and prudential 
safeguards and customer service. The Society as per the Proclamation is to provide savings, credit and 
non-life  insurance  (to  its  members  to  cover  loans  taken  by  the  deceased  member  before  full 
repayment of debt).” Thus, it does not refer to other financial services like remittance or pensions. 
58 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Provision relating to micro insurance is elaborated as under; “The Cooperative society may give micro 
insurance  service  or  enter  insurance  agreement  for  its  members.”  Micro  credit  life  insurance  for 
members includes‘ loan or savings or future savings, based on contractual agreement for the amount 
of premium paid may be done by Savings and Credit Cooperative Society.” The Article 21 (a) and (b) 
outline a series of activities to be done by primaries for members which include awareness creation, 
warehouse  service,  wholesale  inputs,  market  information/linkage,  environment  development  and 
protection,  pre-and  post-harvest  training,  advisory  services,  financial  and  technical  assistance. 
Considering future perspectives of digital financial services, with integration of RUSACCOs and Unions 
with  other  financial  institutions  in  the  changing  banking  environment,  suitable  provisions  in  the 
Proclamations should be incorporated. A separate and forward- looking legal code for rural financial 
cooperatives should be enacted, keeping in view the unique legal and regulatory requirements of the 
credit cooperatives. The legal code should facilitate them to cater all kinds of financial services, with 
related  safeguards  e.g.  deposit  insurance,  payment  and  transfer  ,risk  management  &mitigation 
,customer protection, etc Apart from policy advocacy for necessary changes in the policy & legislation, 
support for preparing road map for Integration of FCs with mainstream banking and integrating with 
payment & credit reference system may be provided under RUFIP III. Feasibility studies for the purpose 
can be funded under RUFIP III. Until separate law for financial cooperatives is enacted; the feasibility 
of issuing the comprehensive regulations for the additional functions needs examination. 
3.  Audit Framework & Audit Reforms: 
The audit framework should ensure independence, professionalism and public accountability of the 
auditors.  The  timeliness  and  quality  of  audit  and  compliance  to  audit  are  essential  for  orderly 
development of cooperatives. RUFIP II, therefore, focused on improved audit system. Without audits, 
cooperatives have  difficulties  in obtaining financial support and establishing their accountability to 
their members. Furthermore, cooperatives can only legally pay dividends to members after a certified 
auditor has declared that the Society/Union had made a net surplus. In Amarh region, it was reported 
that  76%  of  financial  cooperatives  had  been  audited.  Auditors  take  2-3  days’  time  for  audit  of 
RUSACCOs and get audit conducted once in a year, within 6 months from the closure of the accounts. 
Auditors take up to 7 days’ time for audit of the Unions. Except annual statutory audit, no other form 
of audit is in vogue. In the absence of separate set of auditors for exclusively Financial Cooperatives, 
the same set of auditors is engaged for RUSACCOS//Unions, as also others. Out of 85000 primaries in 
the country, only 12263 are RUSACCOS. The capacity- building efforts can be focused on those auditors 
who  would  be  exclusively  earmarked  for  financial  cooperatives.  They  could  specialize  in  audit  of 
financial cooperatives and thereby, work for timely and qualitative audit. The Audit Manual and the 
reports on Control Committee and Internal Audit prepared by the ILCUF contain concepts like system 
audit,  risk-based  audit,  audit  planning,  audit  opinion,  audit  work  papers,  etc.,  which  should  be 
internalized by the auditors for application. Suitable, periodic and effective training programs for new 
and  existing  auditors  should  be  imparted  for  improving  their  capacity  while  raising  the  general 
standard and quality of audits conducted. With the increasing size and diversification of the Unions, 
there is emerging need for increasing frequency of audit as also institutionalization of internal audit. 
Gradually, with increasing focus on computerization and digital financial services, risk management 
system,  audit  system  should  be  reoriented  to  risk-based  approach.  Moreover,  concept  of  strict 
adherence to “Due date” in conduct of audit, issue of audit reports, and submission of the compliance 
reports  should  be  enforced.  Auditors  should  meet  periodically  to  exchange  experience,  discuss 
common  findings  and  decide  strategies  for  audit  approach  and  focus  in  future.  In  short,  RUFIP  III 
support would aim at (a) segregation and development of cadre of Financial Cooperative Auditors, (b) 
introduction of Risk-based audit, (c) Improving audit frequency, quality and effectiveness of audit and 
compliance  system,  and  (d)  introducing  system  audit  in  later  years  with  increasing  digitization/ 
technology-based MIS. 
59 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
4. 
Internal audit of Unions and Supervision of SACCCOs: 
With the above audit reforms in view, apart from training of auditors and sensitization of auditors at 
zonal basis, RUFIP III would facilitate recruitment /placement of, at least, one officer with audit and 
accounting competence in select Unions. The broad functions of such staff are outlined below: 
a)  To supplement the efforts of the Union and  affiliated RUSACCOs  to rationalize, reform  and 
strengthen book-keeping, accounting , internal audit and inspection , compliance system and 
MIS; 
b)  To  assume  as  a  resource  person  for  the  Union  and  affiliated  RUSACCOs  for  training, 
sensitization, mentoring and guidance in the above matters &any other emerging issues; 
c)  To  periodically  visit  the  RUSACCOS  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Union  and  provide on  the  spot 
guidance to the staff and give feedback to the Union (on various  aspects  of its  functioning 
including customers service and protection); 
d)  To be linkman for RUFIP III , in facilitating the interventions envisaged under the project ,in 
relation to the Unions and RUSACCOs are implemented scrupulously; and  
e)  Any other matter as may be entrusted during the implantation of the project. 
Suitable Officer (s) would be recruited on contract basis and be continued, based on yearly performance 
review.  
5. 
Introducing and internalizing IFRS:  
Book-keeping and accounting practices in RUSACCOS/Unions need to be upgraded to facilitate MIS 
development,  digitization  and  risk-based  audit  and  supervision.  Inadequate  book-keeping  and 
financial  reporting  add  additional  burden  on  the  audit  staff.  Common  accounting  system  helps  in 
audit,  inspection,  software  use  and  consolidation  of  accounts.  Manuals  on  book-keeping  and 
accounting developed by ICULF would be helpful in this direction.  
The  international  Accounting  Standards  Board  (ISAB)  seeks  to  harmonize  regulation,  accounting 
standards, accounting procedures relating to preparation and presentation of financial statements. 
International  Financial Reporting  Standards  (IFRS)  have  been  issued  by  ISAB. Worldwide  trend  has 
been  to  adopt  the  accounting  practices  in  harmony  with  IFRS.  In  2011,  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, GOE had issued Proclamation” Financial Reporting Proclamation, requiring 
reporting  entities  to  follow  IFRS.  So,  Financial  Cooperatives  should  adopt  IFRS  in  a  time-bound 
manner. National Accounting and Audit Board was given mandate in 2014 to regulate the accounting 
auditing companies and also make efforts to get reconciled the new financial reporting standards with 
Ethiopia’s future accounting standards 
FCA should take steps to introduce IFRS, keeping in view the Accounting and Book -keeping Manuals, 
which have already been developed by ICULF. Auditors and Accountants in the Organization should be 
sensitized in this regard in the training programmes and seminars with RUFIP III support. The relevant 
training module for Auditors and Accountants may be suitably changed.  
6. 
Inspection arrangements:  
The inspectors are also common for all kinds of Societies. Inspections are still inadequate in terms of 
number, coverage and quality. The inspections are conducted mostly in response to complaints and 
reported irregularities. The inspection of the Unions is generally conducted for 3 days and RUSACCOs 
for  2  days,  the  report  is  required  to  be  issued  within  3  days  and  compliance  within  15  days.  The 
structured  framework  of  issuing  appropriate  risk-based  reports,  adhering  to  pre-determined 
frequency/  schedule,  accountability  of  the  supervised  ones  for  giving  compliance  and  financial 
reporting for offsite oversight is missing. The supervisors /inspecting officers should be endowed with 
professional  autonomy  and  competence  and  be  placed  in  adequate  number  to  discharge  their 
60 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
functions  with  respect  to  exclusively  financial  Cooperatives.  Since  no  separate  law  for  financial 
cooperatives could be enacted, comprehensive regulations need to be framed on certain important 
areas and put in place. . The Manuals for audit and inspection should be user-friendly, which would 
ease  them  in  examining,  verifying  and  probing  transactions,  reporting,  documenting  reports  and 
obtaining  necessary  compliance.  In  that  perspectives,  the  Manuals  already  prepared  should  be 
thoroughly examined, repackaged and implementation framework accordingly drawn. The auditors, 
Inspectors and supervisors should be sensitized about the implementable part of the related Manual 
(Onsite and Offsite Inspection Manual). The Audit Manual (internal and external) as also Onsite and 
offsite  Supervision/Inspection  Manuals  should  be  useful  for  the  guidance  of  the  auditors, 
supervisors/inspecting officers accordingly. The feedback of the users can be obtained in the proposed 
sensitization programmes. The audit sensitization programmes should discuss common findings, IFRS, 
audit-  related  risks  and  classification,  prudential  norms,  Audit  Compliance  system,  audit-  planning, 
audit in the computerized environment and digital financial services . 
7.  Classification of Unions/RUSACCOs and Transformation Plan: 
In the absence of any classification norms, the auditors and inspectors do not classify /rate  Credit 
Unions and RUSACCOs. Notwithstanding the series of studies conducted by ILCUF for RUSACCOs, the 
data on profitability and recovery performance are not available. Suitable classification norms should 
be evolved and implemented to signify the health of the institutions. The CAMEL, PEARL and GIRAFFE 
systems of rating are generally followed by rating agencies. For a systematic developmental action 
plan, it would be necessary to classify the financial Cooperatives and draw appropriate strategies. The 
ATA  has  developed  a  Diagnostic  tool  to  classify,  based  on  their  managerial  activities  and  financial 
performance. They have developed parameters to classify RUSACCOs in to red, yellow and green. The 
efficacy  of  this  norm  can  be  examined  for  deciding  about  its  replication.  In  Uganda,  the  Statute 
provides for clear transformation road map for RUSACCOs and Unions. So, classification norm helps in 
that process. IFAD’s PROFIRA has been supportive of this endeavor. A robust MIS, ensuring classifying 
all  Credit  Unions  and  RUSSACOS,  on  agreed  institutional  health/  sustainable  viability  parameters, 
should be used to facilitate evolving/carrying forward differential strategies for their sustainability in 
their 
a  pre-determined 
graduation/transformation  &  provide  the  opportunity  to  flag  under-performing  cooperatives  for 
capacity building and corrective measures. RUFIP III would support FCA in developing required norms 
and data-  base,  facilitating continuing classification /transformation of Financial Cooperatives. The 
data generated under the MIS project should be available for all Unions enabling implementation of 
their transformation plan. 
good-performing 
It  will  help 
societies 
frame. 
time- 
for 
8.  Adoption of Prudential Norms: 
ILCUF  has  in  one  of  their  reports  on  PEARL  and  Risk  Management  has  discussed  the  system  for 
application.  In  its  Regulation Manual  ,it  has  also  elaborated  PEARL  ( Protection,  Effective  Financial 
Structure ,Rates of Returns and Costs  and Liquidity),a system developed by WOCCU.  On the other 
hand, NBE has adopted prudential norms(CAMEL), based on Basle principles of supervision for the 
banking and MFI sectors. It would be desirable to adopt prudential IRAC norms (income recognitions, 
asset  classification,  provisioning)  under  CAMEL  (Capital,  Asset  Quality,  Management,  Earning  and 
System) or CAMELSC (with addition of Sustainability and Compliance) in phases for cooperative sector, 
and switch from the overdue to NPA criteria. As it is envisioned that Financial Cooperatives would be 
integrated with the rest of the financial sector for total financial inclusion, it would be better a uniform 
criterion is adopted. FCA should evolve necessary regulation and guide/train the RUSSACOS and Unions 
as also Supervisors/Inspectors to adopt/assimilate the NPA norms, to enable the supervised entities to 
reflect true picture of their financial position.  
61 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
9.Improving functional MIS system& Sustainability of RUSACCOS/Unions: 
MIS for financial cooperatives was weak and lacked standardization across regions, so, performance 
measurement and management tools including software and adequate reporting framework through 
ICT were necessitated. FCA had earlier attempted to classify in to large, medium and small, based on 
size of business. Later FCA in consultation with ATA was in the process of developing a framework of 
certification directives and criteria, as well as designing and setting up a structure for certifying bodies 
at federal and regional levels. After testing the criteria in early 2014 with 26 agricultural and financial 
primary cooperatives and 20 cooperatives unions in the four main regions, it was planned then to roll 
out nationally the system in 2015 and expand MIS project to other uncovered Unions in a phased 
manner.  ILCUF  was  subsequently  engaged  to  study  all  aspects  of  the  sector  under  a  twinning 
arrangement, with RUFIP II support. Strengthening data –base, standardization of data, reporting and 
disclosures at all levels and setting up of Central Data –base were pursued in consultation with ILCUF. 
Finally in 2017, FCA had approached PCMU for approval of detailed MIS project implementation plan, 
involving MIS customized for 40 selected Unions along with technical training for Union operational 
staff.  The  project  involves  procurement  of  server  by  the  supplier,  deployment,  customization  of 
software and training of staff. Out of total budget of 20 million Birr, an amount of 39940336.39 Birr is 
left  with  for  investment  before  RUFIP  II  closes  by  June  2019.  ICULF  has  studied  MIS  and  has  been 
guiding  project  implementation  through  their  association  with  the  Sanding  Technical  Committee, 
facilitating  MIS  deployment  in  Unions.  It  had  facilitated  3  days  ‘exposure  visit  to  Kenya.  Now  FCA 
proposes to implement MIS project in 12-13 Unions before the closure. In RUFIP III, it is proposed to 
support expansion of the project  to other potential 100 Unions,  based on certain selection criteria. 
However, before the expansion in the second phase, the outcome of the first phase should be assessed 
.A system audit should be undertaken, to know its conformity with technical, systemic and reporting 
framework. 
With a view to improving data generation, collection, compilation, reporting and MIS and streamlining 
operations at RUSACCO level, a few pilots can be supported under RUFIP III. Select good-performing 
RUSACCOS would be supported for acquiring IT equipments (e.g. laptops, printers and software’s). 
10.Digital Financial Services: 
Mcskinsey Global Institute (2016)16 defined “digital finance the use of mobile phones, computers, or 
cards  used  over  point-of-sale  (POS)  devices  connecting  individuals  and  businesses  to  a  digitized 
national  payments  infrastructure,  enabling  ‘seamless  financial  transactions.’  The  following  are 
included in digital financial services:  
▪  All types of financial services, such as payments, savings accounts, credit, insurance, and other 
financial products. 
▪  All  types  of  users,  including  individuals  at  all  income  levels,  businesses  of  all  sizes,  and 
government entities at all levels. 
▪  All types of providers of financial services, including banks, payment providers, other financial 
institutions, telecoms companies, financial technology (fintech) start-ups, retailers, and other 
businesses.” 
162016,Mckinsey Global Institute, Digital Finance For All: Powering Inclusive Growth In Emerging Economies, Page 2; 
accessed from web page https://www.mckinsey.com/ 
62 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
 Integration of financial cooperatives with the working of other financial institutions and technology 
providers  in  changing  environment  of  digital  financial  inclusion  is  necessary.  Computerization  and 
technology  adoption  in  financial  cooperatives  would  enhance  their  transparency,  efficiency,  and 
competitiveness. So far, RUSACCOS/Unions are manual-based/ partially computerized , not connected 
with other cooperative institutions .Some of the Unions are using accounting software in a limited 
way. Ongoing MIS project in Unions opens up new possibilities .National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) has 
issued directives on mobile banking, reference bureau, and payment system; however, the framework 
only  allows  regulated  financial  institutions  to  engage  in  the  delivery  of  M-banking  services,  etc. 
SACCOs can only be involved as another financial institution’s agents and or as clients. With a view to 
enabling the cooperatives integrating with the financial sector in a phased manner and keeping in view 
the provisions of the CS Act, FCA should initiate dialogue with NBE and move forward in a coordinated 
manner.  As  already  stated,  the  Cooperative  Societies’  Proclamation  can  be  broad-  based  with 
necessary additional provisions. The proposed Cooperative Policy document should spell out the Vision 
Plan in this regard.  
The  brand-building  through  improved  communication,  infrastructure,  system  and  service  has  not 
been  pursued  as  a  matter  of  policy  to  enhance  their  image  and  brand.  Computerization 
&communication should be, therefore, given added focus. Taking recourse to ICT, M-banking, micro 
insurance,  agent  banking,  money  transfer,  credit  reference  and  brand-building  is  a  challenge  and 
opportunity for financial Cooperatives from regulation and supervision angle. 
11.Establishing Risk management system: 
Risk  assessment,  management  and  mitigation  architecture/system  has  not  been  put  in  place  in 
Financial Cooperatives. As financial institutions, RUSACCOS / Credit Unions should adopt such systems 
and practices, keeping in view the perspective of application of risk-based supervision and audit for 
them from the regulator/auditors. The staff as also supervisors/auditors should be sensitized about 
risk assessment, management  and mitigation mechanism.  The training programmers envisaged for 
Union/RUSACCOs, particularly their auditors, inspectors and supervisors should include certain basic 
inputs on risk management-credit, operational, liquidity and market. Regulation Manual, developed 
by ILCUF has discussed Hazard risk, Control , reputation and opportunity risks and their measurement 
and mitigation. 
12. Enhancing Governance: 
In the growing trajectory of Unions&  RUSACCOS, visionary  and transformational leadership is very 
much essential. During RUFIP II, ILCUF studied the corporate governance aspects and had brought out 
Governance  Manual,  which  has  been  translated  in  Amharic  language  and  circulated.  RUFIP  II  had 
provided training and exposures for Board/Committee members. No other significant initiative has 
been  taken  for  strengthening  governance  of  cooperatives.  The  Manual  describes  role  and 
responsibilities of Board/Committees and focuses on the need for members’ participation, controlling 
decision-making and ensuring conformity with regulations, developing codes of practices and good 
governance.  It  is,  therefore,  reiterated  that  RUFIP  III  would  support  training  and  sensitization 
programmers for the benefit of members of Board & Committees for both Unions and RUSACCOs and 
provide exposure opportunity to good –working institutions, in recognition of the leadership. It would 
encourage  development  of  Governance  Codes  and  fair  practices,  internalization  of  Governance 
Manual, recognition of good leadership and promotion of financial literacy of the members including 
youth  and  women  for  grooming  leadership  in  RUSACCOS  and  Unions.  FCA  should  chalk  out  a 
governance enrichment plan for the next 5 years. 
63 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
13 Instituting Regulation and Supervisory framework: 
ILCUF has brought about Regulation Manual, bringing critical regulatory issues like risk management 
policy and system in to sharper focus. The report brings out a summary of the overview of regulatory 
objectives, activities and approaches in the federal Republic of Ethiopia. It is advisable that FCA or the 
organizational unit for regulation and supervision should put in place specific regulations or directives 
for  adherence  by  the  regulated  entities.  The  Manual  only  serves  as  a  guide  to  the  implementing 
official(s), which cannot substitute policy statements, regulatory prescriptions in the form of directives 
.Based on all study report given/Manuals prepared, FCA/ RCPAs should develop, in consultation with 
ILCUF,  directives  to  be  issued  to  SACCOS/Unions,  for  implementation.  Penalty  clauses  should  be 
stipulated  for  any  violation  of  these  directives.  The  inspectors  and  auditors  should  examine 
compliance or other-wise of these directives during the course of audit or inspection. The introduction 
of prudential regulation and supervision will need SACCO-specific proclamation in the years to come 
.The  system  and  practice  of  issuing  directives  on  various  regulatory  themes  and  ensuring  their 
compliance  by  the  supervised  entities  should  be  put  in  place.  These  regulations  might  cover 
prudential  norms,  savings,  loans,  micro  insurance,  corporate  governance,  fit  and  proper  criteria, 
capital/CRAR, liquidity, ALM, exposure norms, etc. . These can be developed, based on the studies 
already conducted. Based on Manuals, simple Inspection and Audit Hand books for day -to -day use 
by auditors and inspecting officers should also be developed.  
 14. Instituting Deposit Safety &institutional Protection mechanism: 
With a view to ensuring safety of funds and institutional protection, a framework for Deposit Safety 
and Institutional Protection was suggested in the RUFIP II design report. However, such scheme or 
deposit  insurance  mechanism  has  not  been  initiated.  The  small  depositors’  interest  should  be 
protected in the financial cooperatives through implementation of suggested mechanism. (Given in 
annexure)  .In  case,  deposit  insurance system  is  preferred,  necessary  legislation should  be  initiated. 
RUFIP III will support the study for the purpose. Similar initiative has been planned for MFIs under the 
aegis of NBE. Even, there could be joint study by one consultant. 
15. Codes of Standards &Fair Practices: 
With a view to instituting appropriate, fair, customers- friendly and commonly acceptable/ reasonable 
standards for financial and non-financial services in Financial Cooperatives sector, issue of regulations 
on  the  subject  assumes  significance.  With  the  support  of  FCA,  ILUCF  and  RPCAs  need  to 
evolve/implement voluntary codes of standards and fair practices through consultation mechanism. 
Until  Regional  and  National  Federations  are  set  up,  these  codes  might  be  administered  by  FC 
Directorate, FCA. 
16. Customers’ Grievance Redressal & Customer Protection: 
A policy framework, institutional mechanism and operational system should be put in place to address 
customers’  grievances  in  the  FC  sector.  Proper  analysis,  disclosure  of  customers’  complaints  and 
feedback are yet to be strongly put in place. The systems that are generally followed as best practices 
include  maintenance  of  records,  time-frame  of  addressing  complaints/grievances,  designating 
/displaying name of nodal officers, installing toll free number, instituting Internal Machinery to hear 
grievances, constituting Standing Committee for customer’ care and showing sensitiveness, courtesy 
and  care  for  the  customers.  FCA  would  be  supported  to  initiate  steps  to  create  conducive  policy 
environment and Union/RUSACCOs would be facilitated for setting up institutional mechanism in this 
regard.  Whistle  blower  policy,  Vigilance  mechanism  and  fraud  prevention,  eradication  and  control 
mechanism should be put in place in Financial Cooperatives (FCs) 
64 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
17. Board of Supervision (BOS): 
It was suggested under RUFIP II design/supervision reports for setting up of Board of Supervision by 
FCA  and  RPCA.  It  is  reiterated  that  Board  of  Supervision  should  be  constituted  and  the  periodic 
meetings held by Financial Cooperative Directorate, FCA with the following objectives:  
  To review the progress of inspection, audit and supervision of Financial Cooperatives; 
  To provide policy guidance and direction in the matters of regulation and supervision including 
introduction of prudential norms and risk management system;  
  To  review  the  progress  with  regard  to  setting  up  of  separate  institutional  architecture  for 
supervision ; 
  To discuss issues relating to introduction and implementation of regulatory and supervisory 
interventions and best practices in the Regions; 
  To  discuss  issues  of  supervisory  concerns  as  emanated  from  onsite  inspection  and  offsite 
surveillance; and 
  Any other matter related to the above. 
Composition:  
1)  Director General, FCA Chairman; 
2)  Director, Directorate of Micro Finance Supervision, NBE, Member 
3)  Director, RPCA (two by rotation); 
4)  One professional expert (Chartered Accountant); 
5)  Head of Audit Directorate, FCA 
6)   Head of Regional Federation (if established) 
7)  Director, Financial Cooperatives Directorate, FCA (Convener) 
The BOS should meet at least, once in a quarter. BOS should frame their own rules of functioning. 
FCA should initiate action for constituting and convening meeting of the BOS from the beginning of 
RUFIP III implementation  
18. Institutional Development System: 
18.1Establishing Regional Federation of Financial Cooperatives /Cooperative Banks: 
It would have been better, had FCA gone for separate organizational units for audit and supervision 
for  “financial  cooperatives.  In  Kenya,  separate  regulatory  authority,  entitled  SACCOS  Regulatory 
Authority  (SASRA),created  under  the  Cooperative  Societies  Act,2008  and  Cooperative  Societies 
Regulations,2010,  has  been  functioning  well  since  2012.They  have  implemented  Risk-based 
supervision(RBS) with the World Bank support. As stated in the design report for RUFIP II, “the efficacy 
of FCA in putting in place desirable regulatory and supervisory arrangement for Regional Cooperatives, 
Federations, Credit Unions and RUSACCOS needs to be assessed and accordingly, the need and design 
for separate regulatory and supervisory authority should be studied”. Accordingly. ICULF has studied 
separate regulatory and supervisory aspects and it is working with FCA for setting up of National and 
Regional Federations. Hopefully, GOE/FCA should take an expeditious decision in this regard. It was 
stated  in  the  RUFIP  II  design  report  and  reiterated  in  the  supervision  reports  ,  the  possibilities  of 
evolving/setting  up  appropriate  support  institutions  like  regional  federations/cooperative  banks 
should  be  studied/explored  to  ensure  an  efficient  rural  financial  and  developmental  cooperative 
support channel for the growing Credit Unions /RUSACCOS. FCA and ATA had engaged Rabo Bank to 
study the prospect and possible strategy of setting up cooperative bank for SACCO network. The Rabo 
bank had recommended setting up of sustainable cooperative bank with rural and financial inclusion 
65 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
focus,  with  governance-  led  by  bank’s  grass  root  client-  base  (members  and  shareholders).  The 
cooperative bank, it was viewed, will operate under a single, commercial banking license to enable 
efficient capitalization, diversification of risk and professionalization of management. The leadership 
was then favorable for setting up of Cooperative Bank under cooperative laws instead of having a bank 
under  the  commercial  laws,  regulated  by  NBE.  The  Irish  League  in  its  study  subsequently  has 
advocated  establishment  of  regional  federations  and  a  national  federation. According  to  them, 
establishment  of  a  support  network  for  Unions  and  SACCOs  initially  will  be  through  Regional 
Federations,  followed  by  the  National  Federation.  The  objectives  of  the  National  and  Regional 
federations are to (i) provide liquidity / loan portfolio support through a central finance facility; (ii) 
deliver  capacity  building  for  Unions  and  SACCOs  through  training  and  technical  support  and  (iii) 
undertake much needed representational and advocacy activities. A wide variety of other services can 
be  delivered  for  member  SACCOs  through  these  apexes.  Currently,  they  intend  to  work  with  and 
support two regional federations which are at different stages of establishment. ICULF proposes to 
work with FCA for setting up of the National Federation, with the above objectives.  
Given the challenges of financial cooperatives, four alternative structural solutions can be explored. 
Firstly, cooperative banks can be set up in the regions with affiliated SACCOS/Unions on the lines of 
the  Indian  model.  Secondly,  SACCOS  –based  Apex  as  a  regulatory,  supervisory  and  developmental 
institution primarily at the national level could be established, for evolving a 3 tier federal system. 
Thirdly, Apex Development Bank suggested &now being pursued by GOE for MFIs can also meet the 
liquidity  and  developmental  needs  of  Financial  Cooperatives.  Fourthly,  the  national  and  regional 
federations with multifarious objectives as propagated by ICULF can be considered. The pros and cons 
of  each of  the  models  should  be  studied/weighed  and  accordingly  policy  and strategy  to  promote 
appropriate  institutions  should  be  supported.  In  any  case,  the  proposed  institution(s)  should  have 
clear  sustainability  plan,  supportive  management  and  professional  expertise,  to  ensure  liquidity, 
earnings and competitive advantage. However, the preparatory process in this direction needs to be 
expedited.  As  stated  earlier,  in  the  formative  years,  RUFIP  III  would  support  FCA  in  developing 
RUSACCO  –based  apex  institution  at  the  national  level  and  one  similar  region-based  institution, 
dedicated  to  regulation,  supervision  and  audit  to  provide  independence  and  exclusiveness  for  the 
related interventions . It is already discussed the need for establishing/designating any existing training 
institution as an institution of excellence at the national level for training and capacity development, 
with supportive role for developing regional training institutions. 
18.2Linking RUSACCOS with Unions: 
For a balanced development of 3 tier system, all potential RUSACCOS should be linked to Unions, so 
as  to  ensure  smooth  flow  of  funds,  technical  assistance  and  business  guidance  from  the  Unions 
.However, only 30% of SACCOS are affiliated to Unions. Number of SACCOs should be proportionate 
to the size of areas, population and potential. FCA/RCPA needs to have consolidation plan, bringing 
viable and potentially viable financial cooperatives in to focus. It would be necessary to evolve a policy 
on  merger,  demerger,  liquidation  and  rehabilitation  and  pilot  test  the  same  before  making  the 
perspective  plan  of  consolidation  operational.  In  any  case,  sustainable  and  potentially  viable 
institutions (Union& RUSACCOs), selected for support under RUFIP III should be allowed to continue to 
function. RUFIP III would support viability study to enable FCA develop viability parameters and road 
map for future developmental strategy. 
66 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
 18.3 Other Specific Interventions: 
 A. Embarking upon Financial literacy of members: 
I. 
Linking RUSACCOS with Unions: 
Financial  literacy/education/awareness  campaign  targeting  the  members  of  financial  cooperatives 
would help in increasing demand for financial services, empowerment and informed decision-making. 
Financial Literacy tool kits were developed by FCA and adopted during 2014.Structured interventions 
for  financial  literacy  through  appropriate  agencies  by  targeting  members  of  financial  cooperatives 
would  have  attendant  benefits.  Modules  on  Digital  Finance  Literacy,  Financial  literacy  on  micro 
insurance  and  Innovative  means  of  intensifying  financial  literacy  can  be  explored.  Even  ILUCF  is 
planning to conduct studies to evolve suitable tools for financial literacy programmes. Their services 
can be enlisted. 
II.  Mobility of Staff: 
RuFIP I &II had supported vehicles (four wheelers & motor bikes) for increasing the mobility of the 
participating officials of FCA, RPCA, Unions and RUSACCOs for programme implementation. RUFIP II 
design  stated”  since  each  RUSACCO  promoter  or  accountant  is  expected  to  provide  handholding 
support to five to six RUSACCOs, she/he will require transportation facilities to effectively discharge 
her/his  duties,  implementing,  managing  and  monitoring  services.  The  programme  proposes 
supporting  the  RUSACCO  promoters  and  accountants  with  motorcycles  in  PY1  to  enhance  their 
mobility.  “Notwithstanding  the  improvement  of  connectivity  in  the  rural  areas  in  terms  of  road 
&transport, the mobility of the promoters and supervisors at the grass root level (RUSACCO, Wereda 
and Union) continues to be relevant from monitoring and handholding point of view. In the overall 
context, the following changes have been suggested for facilitating monitoring and mentoring : 
a)  The existing RUSACCOs and Unions  have  acquired greater strength and resilience for  self  –
supervision ,as compared to that in 2011; 
b)  The internal infrastructure like mobile phones and computers/ internet services have improved 
c) 
communication and connectivity between the customer, RUSACCOs and Union; 
Instead of having staff support at wereda level, it is proposed to provide technically competent 
staff at the Union level to provide monitoring, mentoring and technical guidance; 
The comparative cost of providing vehicles and providing fuel allowance instead of providing vehicles 
was assessed. The fuel and maintenance allowance @ 15000 ETB is being provided per vehicle /per 
month in other projects. It does not appear to be cost-effective. We may therefore provide motorbikes 
to good-performing Unions and RUSACCOs, to facilitate mobility for monitoring and supervision and 
technical guidance. With regard to four-wheelers, FCA, RPCAs, proposed National Federation and or 
Apex training institution can be provided on need-based manner. 
III. 
Internalization of Study Reports of ILCUF & Implementation of Findings:  
ILCUF had produced nearly 19 reports/Manuals during the period (2015-19). The list is stated below: 
1. Saving &Credit Cooperative Accounting Manual (February 2015) 
2. An Introduction to SACCOS for New or Potential Members of Primary SACCO part 1 
3. An Introduction to SACCOS for New & Potential Members of Primary SACCO part 2 
67 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
4. Audit Manual 
5. Book-Keeping Manual for RUSACCOS 
6. Internal Audit Manual 
7. SACCCO Credit Officer Manual 
8. Financial Product Development Manual  
9. Marketing Manual  
10. MIS Manual 
11. PEARLS &Risk Management Manual 
12. Regulations Manual  
13. Road Map for development of SACCCOS movement in Ethiopia 
14. SACCOS Governance Manual 
16. SACCOS Status Report 
17. Training Development Plan 
18. Training of Trainers (ToT) Manual 
19. Training Need Assessment (TNA) Manual. 
 Total  payment  made  to  ILCUF  for  these  documents  stood  at  680,186  US  $.  FCA  has  translated  4 
reports in Amharic and distributed among stake holders in the regions e.g. (1) Introduction to Savings 
and  Credit  Cooperatives 
(two  parts),(ii)Book-keeping  Manual,(iii)  Good  Governance 
Manual,(iv)SACCOS Credit Committee /Officer Manual (v) SACCOS Accounting Manual. ICULF reports 
are  generally  rich  &pregnant  with  valuable  information.  FCA  should  look  in  to  the  implementable 
aspects of various recommendations and ideas. During visit to Amhara region, it was observed that 
the  Manuals  are  not  yet  internalized.  The  training  institutions  /trainers  involved  in  the  capacity 
development efforts should be asked to help in internalization of the learnings. 
Considering the cost and efforts for various studies, it is suggested that an Internal Task Force may be 
constituted  in  FCA  to  review  periodically(say  once  in  a  quarter)  for  at  least  2  years,  the  extent  of 
implementation of the acceptable ones and direct efforts for implementation of the same in a time- 
bound manner. In this context, it is suggested that the services of ILCUF enlisted with for the following 
activities for the first two years of RUFIP III implementation to take maximum benefits from out of the 
studies and documents. 
a)  To prepare comprehensive regulations, directives and circulars on various regulatory themes 
to be issued by FCA/RPCAs; 
b)  To take exploratory and reparatory activities for setting up of the National Federation and 1-
2 Regional Federations (on Pilot basis); 
c)  To examine and pursue segregation of audit, inspection and supervision functions from FCA 
/RPCA and entrust the same to new organizational outfit; 
d)  To facilitate integration of RUSACCOs and Unions with MFIs, banks and insurance companies 
under the supervision of NBE for enabling the former to provide all financial services including 
money transfer and digital financial services; 
e)  To facilitate drafting of a new comprehensive and forward-looking proclamation for Financial 
cooperatives; 
f)  To help FCA&GOE in drafting a comprehensive Cooperative development policy (2000-25) ; 
g)  To  convert  all  Manuals  ,particularly  audit,  inspection  ,accounting  and  Book-keeping  more 
user-friendly; 
h)  To provide technical guidance to Unions for expansion of MIS project and piloting MIS project 
in RUSACCOs; 
i)  To help in strengthening linking of potential RUSACCOs with potential Unions; 
68 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
j)  To put in place the classification of RUSACCOs and Unions ,based on acceptable criteria and 
help in designing transformation plan, 
k)  To facilitate building up training infrastructure in the form of an institution of excellence at 
the national level and affiliated training outfits at regional level; and 
l)  Any other issue posed by BOS & TAC from time to time. 
. Since ICULF was involved in so many studies and they have delivered qualitative products, and 
other  projects  involving  Financial  Cooperatives,  their  continued  involvement  in  implementing 
their recommendations and also capacity development would be the best strategy to go forward. 
If they are engaged, the budget earmarked for various interventions as above will be directed for 
payment to ILCUF under a fresh twinning arrangement for first two years of RUFIP III. 
IV. 
RUFIP III and IRFITCO and ILUCF-Possible Coordination and Synergy 
IFAD funded “Improving Rural Financial Inclusion through Cooperative Project (IRFITCO”). Covering 
Ethiopia,  Tanzania,  and  Malawi.  The  project  was  designed  to  be  implemented  through,  Canadian 
Cooperative Association (CCA)  in partnership with ILCUF and African Confederation of Cooperative 
Savings  and  Credit  Association  (ACCOSCA)  during  the  period  January  2017  to  December  2021.The 
highlights  of  IRFITCO  &its  Components  and  activities  are  outlined  in  the  Annexure  I.  There  are 
commonalities  in  the  objectives,  activities  and  stakeholders  under  ITFITCO  and  RUFIP  III.  ILUCF 
continued to be associated with such activities under aegis of FCA. Thus, Irish Union has been involved 
in  Ethiopian  Sacco  movement  in  terms of  research  studies,  technical support, TNA  study,  strategic 
advice, training design and delivery. They are working with FCA on tiered regulation and supervision 
– and are currently looking at the appropriate structure for rolling out of prudential regulation and 
supervision of SACCOs. They are in the process of deliberating with partners, producing draft directives 
for tiered regulation and handbooks, and providing advice. Establishing regional federations is another 
area where they are helping regions in their going through the steps of federation registration. They 
would fast track their service delivery and buy-in into the concept. Bringing about major structural 
change  and  overhauling  the  system,  providing  capacity  building  for  all  categories  of  staff  and 
members, professionalization of the movement and R&D investment in IT, etc rest with FCA. IFAD III 
TA support would still be required for FCA and all the tiers, notwithstanding the multi- state project in 
the form of IRFITCO and involvement of ILCUF. There will be need for substantial support from RUFIP 
III and continued involvement of Irish Union to avoid overlapping and to synergize efforts in strategy 
and roll out. Prioritization of activities, earmarking of funds, sneezing of efforts by stake holders and 
implementing agencies should be undertaken at IFAD country office in consultation with PCMU and 
FCA. 
V. 
Training Need Assessment Study (TNA) in 2019 under IRFITCO Project: 
 IRFI TCO had 3 components -(1) Apex/Federation development,(2)Financial Product development and 
(3)Support to the development of the regulatory environment and overall knowledge management, 
Under the component 3 , it was envisaged to conduct a TNA to identify key training needs and Conduct 
a Training Needs Analysis(TNA) to identify key training needs and develop a Training Curriculum and 
advise on appropriate delivery channels to strengthen the SACCO movement and evolve a training 
strategy . ILCUF has in its Report on Training Strategy from Regulator to RUSACCOs – Desk, Survey and 
Interview, Research Report (March 2019), made following conclusion (paragraph 5.4): 
“The survey employed various data gathering methods to collect relevant and enough information for 
the  training  needs  assessment.  The  finding  suggests  that  there  are  huge  skill  gaps  in  the  area  of 
bookkeeping and record keeping in the RuSACCOs. Moreover, shortsightedness of the members and 
unwillingness  to  pay  for  accounting  services/employ  accountants  is  observed  in  the  cooperatives. 
69 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
These issues emanate from not appreciating the cooperatives concept very well and having a clear 
growth plan/vision for the cooperatives.  
At the woreda level, all admit that there is a capacity gap in terms of skill and number of available staff 
to support the sector. Therefore, training those targets enhancing the auditing and support services to 
cooperatives (accounting and financial management) and risk management is required.  
At regional level, skills such as PEARLS, risk management and new products are cited as important. 
Training also needs to be offered in accordance with adult learning principles. Hence, it is critical to 
improve the capacity of trainers in training delivery and designing of contents (to make contents more 
practical).  Training  is  also  said  to  be  provided  by  various  channels-  government,  training 
providers/colleges/universities  and  NGOs.  These  training  routes  however,  lack  coordination.  It  is 
recommended  that  improved  coordination  will  help  to  avoid  duplication  of  effort  and  enhance 
result/efficiency. “ 
A few relevant quotes from the above report, illustrating magnitude of training needs of the financial 
cooperatives , in this regard are given in Annexure II. 
In the light of the above, under TA budget of RUFIP III, interventions for capacity building on book-
keeping  ,accounting,  ,  audit,  financial  management  ,risk  management  ,prudential  regulation, 
governance enrichment ,training of trainers and financial literacy have been incorporated . 
19. Summary of Recommendations for support under RUFIP III:  
 1.Apart from making policy advocacy for separate Proclamation (2016) for financial cooperatives with 
necessary provisions for Integration of FCs with mainstream banking and integrating with payment 
and credit reference system , studies for the purpose can be funded under RUFIP III. 
2, RUFIP III support would aim at (a) segregation and development of cadre of Financial Cooperative 
Auditors, (b) introduction of Risk-based audit, (c) Improving audit frequency, quality and effectiveness 
of  audit  and  compliance  system,  and  (d)  introducing  system  audit  in  later  years  with  increasing 
digitization/ technology-based MIS.  
3,  FCA  would  be  supported  to  introduce  IFRS,  keeping  in  view  the  Accounting  and  Book  -keeping 
Manuals, which have already been developed by ICULF. Auditors and Accountants in the Organization 
should be sensitized in this regard in the training programmes & seminars with RUFIP III support. 
4. RUFIP III would support FCA in developing required norms and data- base, facilitating continuing 
classification for watching health of the institutions from time to time. The plan for transformation of 
Financial Cooperatives, merger& demerger,  consolidation can be  formulated accordingly  .The  data 
generated under the MIS project should be available for all Unions enabling implementation of their 
transformation plan. 
5,Suitable  Officer  (s)  would  be  recruited  on  contract  basis  and  placed  in  the  select  Unions  for 
streamlining &strengthening internal audit in the Union and providing monitoring & mentoring service 
to RUSACCOS. He or she would be continued, based yearly performance review. A second technical 
person can be supported after 2 years, based on portfolio growth and significant performance of the 
Union. 
6,As  it  is  envisioned  that  Financial  Cooperatives  would  be  integrated  with  the  rest of  the  financial 
sector for total financial inclusion, it would be better a uniform criterion of prudential norms based 
on Basle principles is adopted . FCA should evolve necessary regulation and guide/train the RUSSACOS 
and  Unions  as  also  Supervisors/Inspectors  to  adopt/assimilate  the  NPA  norms,  to  enable  the 
supervised entities to reflect true picture of their financial position.  
70 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
7. In RUFIP III, it is proposed to support expansion of the MIS project to other potential 100 Unions, 
based on certain selection criteria. However, before the expansion in the second phase, the outcome 
of the first phase should be assessed .A system audit should be undertaken, to know its conformity 
with technical, systemic and reporting framework. 
 8.,With  a  view  to  improving  data  generation,  collection,  compilation,  reporting  and  MIS  and 
streamlining operations at RUSACCO level, a few pilots can be supported under RUFIP III. Select good-
performing RUSACCOS would be supported for acquiring laptops, printers and software’s. 
 9.  The  Cooperative  Policy  document  should  spell  out  the  Vision  Plan.  The  training  programmes 
envisaged for Union/RUSACCOs, particularly their auditors, inspectors and supervisors should include 
certain basic inputs on risk management-credit, operational, liquidity and market. 
10.  RUFIP  III  would  support  training  and  sensitization  programmes  for  the  benefit  of  members  of 
Board &  Committees  for both Unions and RUSACCOs and provide exposure opportunity to good  –
working institutions, in recognition of the leadership. 
11. The system and practice of issuing directives on various regulatory themes and ensuring their 
compliance  by  the  supervised  entities  should  be  put  in  place.  These  regulations  might  cover 
prudential  norms,  savings,  loans,  micro  insurance,  corporate  governance,  fit  and  proper  criteria, 
capital/CRAR,  liquidity, ALM, exposure norms, etc.  Based  on Manuals,  simple  Inspection  and  Audit 
Hand books for day -to -day use by auditors and inspecting officers should also be developed.  
12. FCA should initiate action for constituting and convening meeting of the Board of Supervision (BOS) 
from the beginning of RUFIP III implementation. 
13. According to ILUCF, establishment of a support network for Unions and SACCOs initially will be 
through Regional Federations, followed by the National Federation. The objectives of the National 
and Regional federations are to (i) provide liquidity / loan portfolio support through a central finance 
facility; (ii) deliver capacity building for Unions and SACCOs through training and technical support and 
(iii) undertake much needed representational and advocacy activities. SACCOS –based Apex which is 
independent  &  professionally  competent  &  sustainable  and  provides  regulatory  and  supervisory 
including audit service can be supported. 
14.  Sustainable  and  potentially viable  institutions  (Union&  RUSACCOs),  selected  for  support  under 
RUFIP III should be allowed to continue to function. RUFIP III would support viability study to enable 
FCA develop viability parameters & road map for future developmental strategy  
15. Instead of having staff support ay wereda level, it is proposed to provide technically competent 
staff at the Union level to provide monitoring, mentoring and technical guidance; 
16. Considering the cost and efforts for various studies by ILUCF under the twinning arrangements, it 
is suggested that an Internal Task Force may be constituted in FCA to review periodically (say once in 
a quarter) for at least 2 years, the extent of implementation of the acceptable ones and direct efforts 
for implementation  of the same  in a time-  bound manner. In this context,  it is suggested that the 
services  of  ILCUF  enlisted  with  for  the  identified  activities  for  the  first  two  years  of  RUFIP  III 
implementation to take maximum benefits from out of the studies and documents. 
17. To improve mobility of supervisors and accountants  at Union and RUSACCO levels, motor bike 
would be provided to best performing Unions and RUSACCOs. 
71 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
A Summary of TA Support envisaged for FCA and Financial Cooperatives, under the Strengthening 
Regulation and Supervision and Institutional Discipline subcomponent is given in tabular Form in 
Annexure III . 
72 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure I 
IRFITCO: (Improving Rural Finance Inclusion through Cooperatives) – 
Features* 
Components: 
1)  Improved capacity of cooperative finance network organizations to support rural SACCOS 
including through development and improvement of innovative and replicable financial 
products and services for small holder farms; 
2)  Improved policy framework and implementation capacity of supervisory and regulatory 
agencies to protect assets of SACCO members; and 
3)  Improved knowledge –base and tools for SACCO networks, SACCOS, policy –makers, IFAD 
and other development actors to improve rural financial inclusion through cooperatives 
throughout Africa. 
Scope of the Components: 
1.  Building the technical capacity of Financial Cooperatives and financial education of their 
members 
a)  Assess the capacity gaps and training needs of relevant rural financial cooperatives 
and develop and deliver dedicated training modules; 
b)  Develop human resources best practices for continuity of expertise; 
c)  Assess client education needs and development, design and deliver client education, 
materials and financial literacy modules, particularly on savings. 
2 Introducing Innovation to financial Cooperatives: 
The type of innovation will depend on the identification of specific countries and priorities for the 
cooperative sector. Where possible, use of new technologies is particularly encouraged. Types of 
innovation envisaged are products, e.g. . . . . Digital financial services, linkages with MFIs and 
remittance providers, operative models, e.g. linkages with /creation of second tier organization. The 
key activities would be the following: 
a)  Assess the market and demand; 
b)  Identify innovative product or approach and key partners (e.g. .mobile network operator 
,apex institutions); 
c)  Develop operational plan for implementation of new product or approach; 
d)  Provide technical support to design and delivery of new products or approaches ; and 
e)  Follow up assessment and recommendations for improvement and scaling up. 
3. Knowledge Management & Policy Dialogue: 
a)  Develop best practice guidance for policy makers and regulators; 
b)  Draw lessons from the experience and translate in to new operational guidance for IFAD, 
donors, investors and governments on how to support financial cooperatives; 
c)  Publish training modules developed in component 1 and conduct TOT for roll out in 
other regions; 
73 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
d)  Implement exchange visits and workshops between countries and at different levels 
,cooperatives ,second tier institutions ,regulator and supervisors; 
e)  Disseminate lessons learnt globally to contribute to international commitment on 
financial cooperatives. 
Implementers: 
a)  The Canadian Cooperative Association(CCA); 
b)  African Confederation of Cooperative Savings and Credit Association (ACCOSCA) and 
c) 
Irish League of Credit Union Federation (ILCUF). 
Duration: 4 years (January 2017-December 2020) 
Coverage: Ethiopia, Tanzania, Malawi 
Outlay: USA $ 2660,000 IFAD grant & Co finance: 500,000 
*Project Document of IRFITCO 
74 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure II 
ILCUFS’s Document on Training Strategy for Regulator to RUSCACCOS –A few 
Quotes relating to Training Needs of Financial Cooperatives : 
High Risk of non-compliance with Legislation ,regulation and directives : 
 Section a “If only four out of ten of the people involved in the running of the SACCOs and Unions 
know the legal basis under which they operate and only three out of ten know the parameters within 
which they operate then there is a high risk of non-compliance with legislation, regulation and 
directives.”  
These results highlight the importance of immediately addressing the shortfall in skills in this area.  
Recording, Monitoring and governing Financial Aspects: 
Section B-“While many of the respondents have responsibility for completing and reviewing key 
financial areas (over 60% in all the eight key areas) the competencies required to adequately govern 
and manage those areas is low. Given that SACCOs and Unions are financial co-operatives it is of 
vital importance that the financial aspects of operations be adequately recorded, monitored and 
governed.” 
Sale of additional Products and Services- Credit Life and Micro Insurance: 
“Finally, to ensure long term sustainability and relevance to the members the SACCO/Union needs to 
know how to sell additional products/services – credit life and micro insurance. With approx. six out 
of 10 responding ‘Yes’ that they carry out these tasks it is worrying to note that only one in 10 feels 
competent to do so.”  
Inadequacies in Competence of Accountants employed performing Full accounting cycle activities 
&Ratios: 
“The accountants recruited at the primary levels are expected to perform the full financial cycle and, 
in some instances, calculate ratios. Yet, the experts at the woreda and regional level for example in 
Tigray, confirmed that, though such level of proficiency is what is expected from the RuSACCO staff, 
they are aware that the accountants cannot deliver it given their academic background and exposure 
level. Most of the accountants are high school dropouts and they have not attended any 
bookkeeping course in their classes. Therefore, with such backgrounds it is not practical to expect 
them to perform the full accounting cycle activities and ratios.  
The positive thing is that with good training support from the woreda and region level, for example, 
in Kuhiaworeda, the accountants are able now to produce trial balance.” 
Book- Keeping and Maintaining Good records 
“ On the other hand, the cooperative sector has severe financial management related issues - 
bookkeeping and maintaining of good record/documentation is a serious challenge. This has created 
a burden in the woreda cooperative staff. It was shown from the response papers of the woreda 
staff that they do not get enough training to develop their skill. “ 
75 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Annexure III 
TA Interventions for FCA for Regulation& Supervision of Financial 
cooperatives under RUFIP III 
Theme 
Capacity Building of Supervising Officers 
in FCA/ Regional/Zonal /Wereda levels 
Intervention 
By whom 
Institution 
FCA, 
Regional/Zonal/Wereda 
levels Officials 
FCA, 
Regional/Zonal/Wereda 
levels-Auditors 
FCA, 
Regional/Zonal/Wereda 
levels -Auditors 
FCA, 
Regional/Zonal/Wereda 
levels-Supervising 
officers  
FCA, 
Regional/Zonal/Wereda 
levels- Identified 
Officers based on 
demand 
Unions- Audit and 
Accountant Specially 
engaged internal audit 
– a few others from 
Union and RUSACCOS 
 Unions/select 
RUSACCOs 
RUSACCO, Union-Board 
& Committee members 
RUSACCO, Union 
Training of Auditors 
Refresher training of auditors 
Training of Inspecting Officers 
Refresher programme for Inspecting 
Officers 
Training of Internal Auditors 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Refresher Programme for Internal 
Auditors 
Sensitization of Board/ Committee 
members on Governance 
MIS Development of Unions and 
SACCOs 
Union(100) identified 
Appointment (Recruitment) of Persons 
with experience in accounting ,audit 
and supervision 
76 
Training 
Training 
Sensitization 
Programmes 
&exposures  
IT/ MIS 
Development 
In additional 
Unions and 
select 
RUSACCOS 
Contractual 
engagement 
 Internal experts 
from FCA/RPCA or 
Outside Trainers 
identified  
 Internal Trainer or 
suitable nodal 
agency engaged 
 Internal Trainers 
or suitable agency 
identified 
 Internal Auditor 
/specialist from 
FCA/RPCA, or 
Suitable agency 
 Internal Trainers 
from FCA/RPCA 
and suitable 
training agency 
identified 
 Internal Trainers 
Who have 
undergone TOT 
and Suitable 
consultant/Training 
agency identified 
by FCA 
 Subject matter 
Specialists 
 Internal Trainer 
/suitable training 
agency 
Service Providers/ 
Consultants 
specializing IT 
FCA/RPCA to 
formulate 
recruitment norms 
for one each for 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
RUFIP III Design – Working paper 2 
Engaging consultant for drafting 
regulations on Financial Cooperatives 
and enabling adoption  
Conducting studies on prudential 
norms, deposit safety and customer 
protection  
Development of Codes of Conduct 
Development of Legal Framework 
Strengthening Off site Surveillance 
100 Unions 
transparently 
Contractual** 
engagement 
FCA to engage 
suitable agency 
Study 
Study 
Study 
Study 
Consultant** 
Consultant** 
Consultant** 
Consultant** 
FCA 
FCA 
FCA 
FCA 
FCA, Unions 
** Since Irish Credit Union has conducted a number of studies under twinning arrangements with 
FCA, with support from RUFIPII, and they are still engaged under IRFITCO with IFAD support, it would 
be advisable to engage them for at least 2 more years under RUFIP III to carry forward all the 
interventions commenced, but not completed operationalization under RUFIP II. The setting up of 
National/Regional SACCO-based apex body would take over training functions from internal staff of 
FCA and RPCA. 
77 
