Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACC
AfDB
ADLI
AGRA
ASAP+
AEZ
ATI
AWPB
B2B
BMGF
BOA
BOQ
BRAM
Agricultural Commercialization Clusters
African Development Bank
Agricultural Development-Led Industrialisation
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa
Adaptation for the Smallholder Agriculture Program Plus
Agro-Ecological Zone
Agricultural Transformation Institute
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Business to Business
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
Bureau of Agriculture
Bill of Quantity
Borrowed Resources Access Mechanism
CC
CDP
CD4ARM
Climate Change
Community Development Plan
Capacity Development for Agriculture Risk management
CLA
Collaborative Learning and Adaptation
COSOP
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
COVID-19
Corona Virus Disease-2019
CRGE
Climate Resilient Green Economy
ESS
CSA
DA
DP
EIAR
EFA
EFS
EIB
EPA
ENRM
ESIA
ESMF
ESMP
FAO
FBS
FCA
FEAPD
FFS
FFV
FNCO
FPCMU
FTC
FRG
GALS
GAPs
GBV
GCF
Ethiopia Statistics Services
Climate-Smart Agriculture
Development Agent
Development Partner
Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research
Economic and Financial Analysis
Ethiopia Food System
European Investment Bank
Environment Protection Authority
Environment and Natural Resources Mapping
Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment
Environmental and Social Management Framework
Environmental and Social Management Plan
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations
Farmer Business School
Federal Cooperative Agency
Federation of Ethiopian Associations of Persons with Disabilities
Farmer Field School
Fresh Food Voucher
Food and Nutrition Coordination Office
Federal Programme Coordination and Management Unit
Farmer Training Centre
Farmer Research Group
Gender Action Learning Systems
Good Agricultural Practices
Gender Based Violence
Green Climate Fund
GDP
GHG
GII
GIS
GMF
GoE
GTM
GTP
Ha
HH
HHM
IAIP
ICB
Gross Domestic Product
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Gender Inequality Index
Geographic Information System
Gender Model Family
Government of Ethiopia
Gender Transformative Mechanism
Growth and Transformation Plan
Hectares
Household
Household Methodologies
Integrated Agro-Industrial Park
International Competitive Bidding
IGREENFIN
Inclusive Green Finance
IFC
IFAD
ICO
International Financing Corporation
International Fund for Agriculture Development
IFAD Country Office
ICRAF
International Centre for Research in Agroforestry
ICT
IGIP
INRM
IPM
IVR
IWUA
KM
LDSF
LLRP
MoA
M&E
Information Communication and Technology
Integrated Agro Industrial Parks
Integrated Natural Resources Management
Integrated Pest Management
Interactive Voice Response
Irrigation Water Users’ Association
Knowledge Management
Land Degradation Surveillance Framework
Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project
Ministry of Agriculture
Monitoring and Evaluation
MoFED
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
MRE
MTR
NAIP
Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation
Mid‑Term Review
National Agricultural Investment Plan
NAP-ETH
Ethiopia’s National Adaptation Plan
NbS
NCB
NGO
NMIS
Nature-based Solutions
National Competitive Bidding
Non-Government Organisation
National Management Information System
NOTUS
No-Objection Tracking Utility System
NPSC
OFSP
PACT
National Programme Steering Committee
Orange-Flesh Sweet Potatoes
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
PASIDP
Participatory Small-Scale Irrigation Development Programme
PASDEP
Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty
PDO
PDR
PDT
PHL
PIM
Programme Development Objective
Programme Design Report
Project Delivery Team
Post-Harvest Loss
Programme Implementation Manual
RPCMU
Regional Programme Coordination and Management Unit
RPSC
RPSF
RUFIP
SBCC
SBD
SECAP
SDGs
SNNPR
SO
SoE
SUN
TVET
UNFSS
USD
USSD
WASH
WB
WFP
LDIP
WUA
Regional Project Steering Committee
Rural Poor Stimulus Fund
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme
Social Behaviour Change Communication
Standard Bidding Document
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
Sustainable Development Goals
Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region
Strategic Objective
Statement of Expenditure
Scale-Up Nutrition
Technical and Vocational Education and Training
United Nations Forum for Sustainability Standards
United States Dollar
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data
Water Sanitation and Hygiene
World Bank
World Food Programme
Landscape Development and Investment Plan
Water Users’ Association
In line with IFAD mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender Transformative ☑ Youth Sensitive ☑ Nutrition Sensitive ☑ Persons with Disabilities ☐ Indigenous Peoples ☑
Climate Finance ☑ Adaptive Capacity
1/29
Executive Summary
Political, Economic and Social Context –  The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia’s (henceforth “Ethiopia”) economy has
faced multiple challenges in the past three years, which include the global impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, drought, global supply
shocks of key commodities and domestic conflict in the northern parts of the country. The impact of the Ukraine crisis on prices has
exacerbated the negative impacts of these challenges. The official estimate for real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in 2022 is
6.6%, while the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) project 3.0% and 3.8%,
respectively3 with a rebound growth of 4.8% estimate by UNDP, led by the services sector but with slower growth in agriculture and
manufacturing.  The Russia-Ukraine crisis is fuelling the food price inflation due to the country’s import dependency for wheat, maize,
sunflower oil, as well as fertilisers for agricultural production. There have been sharp increases in the price of fertiliser on the global
market as Russia is a major source of Urea (16%) and DAP (12%). The government has started to reduce the fuel subsidy
progressively through 2022. The key downside risks to the economic outlook include low investor confidence, in part due to the
continuing domestic conflicts, weakness in global growth, and climate change (CC).
The conflict in the northern parts of Ethiopia that include Tigray, parts of Afar and Amhara Regions has subsided since the declaration
of humanitarian truce by the Government in December 2021. There is no active war, with most parts of Afar and Amhara regions, that
were previously inaccessible now accessible.
Ethiopia’s poverty levels have reduced from 45.5 percent in 1994 to 19 percent in 2020. UNDP (2022) reports a poverty head count
ration of 25.6% in 2016, which is larger than the national ration of 23.5 and urban of 14.4%. Nevertheless, despite this positive trend
and the economic progress that Ethiopia has achieved over the years, poverty and food insecurity, as well as decent employment
remain main challenges.
Rationale for IFAD Involvement – As Ethiopia’s economic performance continues its expected recovery in 2022, coupled with a
high population growth rate, the implication is an increase in demand for agricultural products. The covid-19 pandemic and the
Ukraine-Russia war have shown the negative impacts of reliance on imported inputs and food supply due to supply logistics
disruption and increased food prices. The need to increase local production of food, especially cereals and oilseeds, and improve rural
households’ resilience to shocks has never been greater. However, the agricultural sector in general is still constrained variously and
this is preventing the sector from maximising its massive potential.
IFAD has supported the country’s efforts to boost productivity of selected agricultural commodities through investments in: a)
smallholder irrigation development (Participatory Small-Scale Irrigation Development Programme (PASIDP); b) marketing of
agriculture production; c) access to rural finance (RUFIP); and d) development in the pastoral areas (Lowlands Livelihood Resilience
Project (LLRP)). The two PASIDP phases have positively contributed towards reducing Ethiopia’s productivity gap. However, Ethiopia
remains dependent on rain-fed agriculture. Considering the high variability of rainfall and the CC-induced increases in temperatures,
closing the productivity gap and producing a surplus for the market remains a challenge.  
The IFAD investment will upscale successful interventions from PASIDP in irrigation development a improve resilience and
productivity and strengthen cooperatives while also bringing in innovative approaches. Beyond production and productivity, the
Programme will also build on PASIDP II and other development partners’ successful experiences to transform the food systems in
order to ensure access and uptake of healthy diets for all.
IFAD’s investments in access to finance for smallholder farmers have resulted in increased resilience of rural farmers. The
Programme will link with RUFIP, to improve access to financial services for the beneficiaries. The GCF financed Inclusive Green
Finance (IGREENFIN) will enhance access to finance by small-scale farmers for green investments.
The programme is ushering a new transformative agenda for smallholder agriculture, in IFAD programming, in Ethiopia. Innovative
approaches that go beyond climate sensitivity, integrate climate adaptation and mitigation, with compensation for the services that
smallholder farmer provide will be initiated, with a strong focus on regenerative agriculture.
Project Goal and Objective – The Programme’s goal is ‘to contribute to poverty reduction and improved resilience in selected
landscapes/woredas.’  The Programme Development Objective (PDO) is to ‘enable 150,000 rural households (men, women, youth
and PWDs) in selected kebeles to sustainably improve incomes, food and nutrition security and build resilience to climate shocks. The
Programme will be implemented over a seven-year period.
Geographic Area of Intervention – The Programme will be implemented in 6 regional states of Amhara, Oromia, Southern Nations,
Nationalities Peoples Region (SNNPR), Sidama, Somali and South West. The regions have been selected, in consultation with the
Government of Ethiopia, based on the following criteria: a) high rural population; b) high poverty prevalence; c) high rate of food and
nutrition insecurity; d) presence of economic opportunities relevant to the project; e) impacts of climate change; and f) natural
resources degradation. Two additional Regions (Afar and Tigray) will be included subject to: a) availability of additional funds; and b)
improved security situation in some of the target Regions as applicable.
In the selected regions, a total of 90 food insecure woredas have been prioritized based on: a) high poverty prevalence based on
inclusion in the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) (ii) no overlap with LLRP supported woredas in Somali (9), SNNPR (14) and
Oromia (35); b) highly vulnerable (hotspot) based on composite indicators (Food security, poverty, gender inequality, water,
education, agriculture); c) the level of degradation of the productive NR base (particularly soil, water and trees); d) avoid overlap with
kebeles under PASDIP II and where feasible leverage on the; and e) Synergies with AGP, WFP Fresh Food Voucher Programme in
Amhara.
2/29
Target Group – The Programme will benefit approximately 750,000 household, with the targeted participation of women, youth, and
PWD. The Programme’s primary target groups will include 50% (75,000) women, 40% youth (60,000) female and male youth
between 18‑34 years (40 percent) and 5% (7,500) persons with disability who are economically active. The primary target group will
include: a) the poor households (with land holding less than 2ha of cultivable land with limited livestock); b) pastoralists and
agropastoral engaged in less diversified traditional livelihood system and; c) persons living with a disability in the rural area; d) rural
underemployed and unemployed youths owning no or small land; and e) female headed households.
Targeting Strategy – In line with IFAD’s targeting guidelines and GoE’s ambitions, the targeting strategy will comprise: i) geographic
targeting, based on the identification of priority districts; ii) self-targeting, of poor households; iii) direct targeting of very poor and/or
marginalised households, including youth and female headed households; The targeting strategy will pay attention to drivers of
conflict at the local level in order to do-no harm. The primary safeguards against elite capture will be the self-targeting plus the
participatory identification of the poor and priority households. 
The targeting strategy will include these three aspects: a) enterprise selection: selection of commodities that have potential for
inclusion of poor households, women and youth and b) potential positive impacts on nutrition and climate change adaptation; and c)
availability of markets.
The Programme’s Development Objective will be achieved through the effective implementation of two technical components and a
third component that will focus on augmenting the capacity of communities, institutions, and contributing to a conducive policy
environment towards Programme implementation. Job creation for young women and men, including persons with disabilities, will be
a main focus of all investments in the Programme. Following is a summary of the expected focus of the different components and
subcomponents.
Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes– The Component will support: a) community-led
equitable access and sustainable use of natural resources; b) market-led and climate adapted smallholder and pastoral production
and productivity enhancement of target crop and livestock commodities; c) development of inclusive and equitable water and local
market related infrastructure; and d) improved dietary diversity. The outcome of this component will be sustainable access and
utilisation of natural resources and increased agricultural productivity.
Component 2:  Agribusiness Development– The Component will support: a) Market Access Linkage; b) Support to Young Women
and Men Agripreneurs. The outcome of this component will be strengthened capacities of farmer and pastoralist organizations to
improve access to finance and remunerative markets for small-scale women, men and young farmers and pastoralists, including those
living with a disability in the Programme areas.  
Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services– This will be a cross-cutting
component servicing the technical components and facilitating pathways for the effective and inclusive functioning of the target value
chains, from production to consumption. The Component will support: a) Institutional Strengthening; b) Policy support; and c)
implementation support services.
Theory of Change – Smallholder farmers and pastoralists face the following challenges that limit their production, dietary diversity
and market access: a) land degradation; b) limited access to water and inefficient water management; c) extension services focused
on mainly staple crops; d) vulnerability to climate change and limited access to improved climate smart technologies (inputs,
mechanisation, climate and weather information); e) inadequate access to finance; f) limited social inclusion and malnutrition;  g)
limited access to remunerative markets and  market infrastructure; h) Limited business capacities and inclusivity of Farmers’
Organisations; and i) Weak policy and institutional framework.
The Programme’s Theory of Change (ToC) is based on the assumptions that commercialization of small holder farmers and
pastoralists in drought prone areas with a depleted natural resource base, begins with inclusive community empowerment. The
Programme will develop and facilitate the household and community capacities in the targeted landscapes to develop inclusive,
nutrition sensitive, community-led, and climate-smart landscape development and investments plans. Beneficiaries will be supported
to access climate smart, inclusive technologies and infrastructure, improve nutrition and natural resource management and to develop
businesses for improved production and incomes for men women, youth in the targeted areas. The investments are expected to
contribute to: a) Improved resilience to market and environmental shocks, b) create green jobs and entrepreneurship for rural youths
and women enhanced, including for those living with a disability; e) economic empowerment, increased voice and participation in
decision-making bodies and more equitable workload for women; f) increased access to improved dietary choices and nutritious
foods;
Programme Implementation Arrangements – Management of the PACT Programme will largely follow PASIDP II management
arrangements. This will allow continuation of efforts and bring to the PACT Programme the lessons, achievements and experiences of
PASIDP II; enhance sustainability and cumulative impacts of the Programme. The Ministry of Agriculture will be the lead executing
agency (but will seek to include key agencies and private sector partners in innovative areas of the Programme). MoA will be
responsible for overseeing the overall implementation of the Programme. The MoA Minister of State will be responsible for overseeing
the overall PACT Programme coordination with support from the Directorate of Small-Scale Irrigation. The PACT Programme will be
coordinated following a decentralised government structure. Thus, the Programme’s institutional arrangements for coordination will be
specified at three levels − Federal, Regional, and Woreda. MoA will delegate the role of the lead executing agency to a Federal
Programme Coordination Unit (FPCU) that will be established at that level. 
Programme Costs and Financing – Total Programme costs are set at US$ 179.6 million over the seven-year implementation
period. A summary breakdown of the PACT Programme costs by component is shown in the below table.
Table 1: Project costs by component and sub-component
3/29
The PACT programme will be financed by the following financiers: a) IFAD, with a grant of US$78.2 million and an additional grant of
US$ 10.5 million through the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP+) ; b) the Gender Transformative Mechanism
in the context of Climate Adaptation (GTM), with a grant of US$ 5 million; c) the European Commission (EC), with a loan of US$ 16.9
million; d) a contribution of US$ 2 million from an additional financier (to be confirmed); and e) the Inclusive Green Financing Initiative
(IGREENFIN), subject to the approval from the Green Climate Fund (GCF), with a loan of US$35 million through a line of credit. f) the
Government (GOE), which will contribute with about US$ 23.9 million (including waived duties and taxes and a direct contribution); (ii)
private sector (enterprises, associations, unions, cooperatives), with an expected contribution of US$ 3.7 million (mainly through
matching grants); and (iii) beneficiaries, who are expected to provide about US$ 4.5 million (through in-kind and cash contributions). 
Programme Benefits – 
The economic and financial analysis (see details in Annex 5) shows that a wide adoption of climate-smart and improved farming
management would have important financial and economic benefits in the form of better on-farm economic returns, households’
livelihood, and reduced poverty. Results suggest significant potential for creating positive net cash flows for targeted households in
their productive activities through PACT interventions (especially for the irrigated crops), confirming attractiveness for the farmers.
Cash flows show that the households will have the capacity to cover the necessary operating costs.
Household beneficiaries would increase their financial annual net incomes; the aggregate Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) is
33.9 percent, well above the opportunity cost of capital. This shows the financial effectiveness of the planned activities and providing a
strong justification for the planned investment. On the other hand, the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is 17.7 percent, well
above the opportunity cost of capital in Ethiopia (7.9 percent). The economic Net Present Value (NPV) is estimated at about US$ 85
million over the 20-year period of the analysis. The discount rate adopted in the economic analysis is 10 percent.
The positive results depict a strong grounding as shown in the sensitivity and risk analyses for adverse situations, such as cost over-
runs, reduction of prices for the target group’s agricultural products, a reduction in the rate of adoption, as well as for all the risk
categories, included the climatic risk.
Exit Strategy and Sustainability – Elaboration of the exit and sustainability strategy has been done at the following levels:
Sustainability in the Farming Systems – Community-led environmental protection will be a key feature of the Programme that ensures
ownership and sustenance of sustainable land management practices. The landscape approach including NBs and water shed
management activities as well as climate resilient infrastructure development will ensure environmental sustainability of project
interventions;
Profitability of the Market-led Approach – Market-led production and Business to Business (B2B) linkages to be implemented by the
Programme and the benefits that accrue for the relationships created between farmers and off-takers will be a basis for sustainability
and exit of the Programme. Supporting and mentoring agripreneurs both technically and financially will also be a key sustainability
measure of the Programme;
Community Empowerment and Strengthening of Institutions – The Programme will empower communities and strengthen institutions
for sustainable management of investments under the Programme;
Investments in Human Social Capital – Interventions, such as gender transformative approaches, nutrition social behaviour changes
and youth empowerment mechanisms will be key to redress social imbalances and to build individuals, households and communities
on their livelihoods and quality of life. In addition, the policy reforms supported in Component 3 will drive the gender equality agenda
beyond the Programme’s life. The institutional capacity building that will be undertaken will ensure that skills exist to continue
supporting the Programme-initiated activities after completion.
Environment and Social Category – Based on the preliminary assessment, the environmental and social risks will be environmental
degradation and pollution, occupational health hazard, conflict, temporary and/or permanent displacement and limited access to use
of resources, complaints/grievances. Uncontrolled use of pesticides and other agrichemicals may also affect biodiversity.
Furthermore, some environmental and health related impacts may persist for a long time and some impacts can be irreversible. The
preliminary environmental and social category of the project is Substantial. Accordingly, Environmental, Social and Climate
Management Framework (ESCMF) is prepared and annexed.  In addition, plans for Free Prior Informed Consent (FPIC), Pest
Management Plan and Labour assessment and Management are prepared. Detailed Social Development Plan, including FPIC, will be
prepared during the early implementation phase once the target communities in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas are known.
4/29
Climate Risk Classification – Following the assessment and consultations undertaken during project design and based on the
reviewed climate-screening tool, SECAP 2021, the climate risk is confirmed to be Substantial. The main risks revolve around the high
exposure of rural communities in target Regions to climate change hazards and the low adaptive capacity of their livelihoods, in
particular food production systems. The frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, like droughts, floods, pest outbreaks are
projected to increase, compared with the baseline with higher losses and damages caused by a changing climate. The ESCMF
includes mitigation measures to address climatic risks and Programme impacts. Also, the IFAD's Climate Toolbox has been used for
the identification of additional measures that have embedded in Programme design to support the Climate Transformation paradigm
shift.
Implementation Readiness Plans – As a means of addressing potential start-up delays, the Programme design process has
prepared a draft Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), the associated Procurement Plan and a draft Programme Implementation
Manual. Job descriptions for the different Programme Coordination Unit positions at different levels have been provided. The IFAD In-
Country Office will engage the Government and provide any facilitation that may be needed to ensure that all conditions required for
effectiveness are timely satisfied. The institutional and implementation arrangements for the Programme will build on the existing
structures and mechanisms of PASIDP II, facilitating a quick and smooth start-up.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
Political, Economic and Social Context – The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia’s (henceforth “Ethiopia”) economy has
faced multiple challenges in the past three years, which include the global impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, drought, global
supply shocks of key commodities and domestic conflict in the northern parts of the country. The impact of the Ukraine crisis on
prices has exacerbated the negative impacts of these challenges. The official estimate for real GDP growth in 2022 is 6.6%,
while the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) project 3.0% and 3.8%
respectively[1] with a rebound growth of 4.8% estimate by UNDP, led by the services sector but with slower growth in agriculture
and manufacturing for 2023. Driven by the Ukraine crisis, inflation has increased up to 37.2% by May 2022 (double from same
period last year), driven by food inflation (43.9%), while June inflation data indicates a slight reduction to 34%. The high levels of
inflation are having increasing poverty trends and reducing the purchasing power of incomes in the country.
2.
Driven mainly by the conflict in Tigray, the exchange rate has been depreciating at about 20-25% annually since 2018. With
foreign reserves cover of less than two months, Ethiopia has a severe foreign currency shortage that puts pressure on the
foreign exchange rate of the Birr to the US dollar. Ethiopia’s stock of public debt stood at $US 56.45 billion (50.7% of GDP) at
March 2022. About 63% ($US 35.5 billion) of the debt stock is owed by the central government.
3.
Fragility Assessment: The main drivers of fragility in Ethiopia are:
Governance: There is need for improved investments in institutional capacity development and public services at all levels
and policy interventions, the voice of the poor and their ability to participate in political decision making needs to be enhanced.
Security: The conflict in the northern parts of Ethiopia that include Tigray, parts of Afar and Amhara Regions has subsided
since the declaration of humanitarian truce by the government in December 2021. There is no active war, with most parts of
Afar and Amhara regions, that were previously inaccessible now accessible. The Tigray region is still only accessible for
humanitarian assistance, with development work being restarted after an agreement between the World bank and the
government to finance rehabilitation of infrastructure through UNOPS.
Demography: This includes a projected increasing population, ethnic diversity, youth bulge, a high rural population. According
to the UN data portal (2021), Ethiopia’s current population, estimated at about 117 million people, is projected to surpass 200
million people by the end of 2049. Ethiopia’s population is growing at about 2.7 percent annually; the birth rate in Ethiopia is
36 births per 1,000 people and the fertility rate is 4.1 births per woman.
Economic development: The high inflation, combined with high unemployment and low incomes are potential causes for
instability, and may be exacerbated if the Ukraine conflict continues.
Environment, climate change and natural resources – Ethiopia remains vulnerable to inefficient natural resource
utilisation, especially water, soil and forests, as well as low resilience among smallholders to natural and man-made
disasters4.
4.
In the context of the Russia-Ukraine crisis, food price inflation is due to the import dependency for wheat, maize and sunflower
oil, as well as fertilisers for agricultural production. There have been sharp increases in the price of fertiliser on the global market
as Russia is a major source of Urea (16%) and DAP (12%). The government has started to reduce fuel subsidy progressively
during 2022. The key downside risks to the economic outlook include low investor confidence, in part due to the continuing
domestic conflicts, weakness in global growth, and climate change (CC). The Ukraine crisis provides an opportunity for
investment in the local production of wheat and oilseeds, and other value chains with market potential such as horticulture to
reduce dependency on imports.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
5/29
Poverty and Food Security – According to the Ten-Year Development plan (2021-2030), poverty levels have reduced from 45.5
percent in 1994 to 19 percent in 2020. UNDP (2022) reports a national poverty head count ratio of 25.6% in 2016, which is larger
than the national ratio of 23.5 and urban of 14.4%. Nevertheless, despite this positive trend and the economic progress that
Ethiopia has achieved over the years, poverty and food insecurity, as well as decent employment remain main challenges. The
country’s vulnerability to food insecurity strongly links to the recurring droughts, and related/associated disasters (including crop
failure, water shortages, livestock diseases, migratory pests, land degradation, low income/limited household assets, etc.).
Estimates indicate that about 10 percent of the country’s population are chronically food insecure and the percentage rises to
more than 15 percent in drought years. In rural Ethiopia, 40.4 percent of children under five are stunted, 7.5 percent are wasted
and 23.4 percent are underweight[2] (See Nutrition section below).
Smallholder Agricultural and Rural Development Context – Agriculture is the country's second largest economic sector,
contributing about 32.8 percent of the country's GDP[3] and employing more than 67 percent of the working population[4]. More
than 95 percent of Ethiopia’s agricultural output is generated by subsistence farmers who, on average, own less than 1 hectare
(ha) of cultivated land, with poor soil fertility as a result of continuous cropping and little input of nutrients and little use of
mechanisation. Subsistence mixed farming, with crop cultivation and livestock husbandry, is dominant on most farms. Heavy
reliance on oxen ploughs for tilling the land[5]. The major challenges of the agricultural sector include limited access to improved
technologies, finance, inadequate infrastructure and investment, weak institutional capacity and poor participation of the private
sector. In 2019, Ethiopia was one of the eastern Africa countries, which was affected by the desert locust outbreak, the worst in
the country since the past 25 years[6]. Recent reports have shown a significant decline in locust invasion following two years of
intensive surveillance and control.
Potentials exist in the form of extensive cultivable and irrigable land in the lowlands, huge underground and surface water
resources available in twelve river basins, huge agricultural labour force (70% of the rural population is below the age of 20). Add
to this, the presence of diverse agroecology and farming systems that enable production and harvest essentially all year round.
Ethiopia is believed to have the largest livestock numbers in Africa (Management Entity[7] with 65 million cattle, 40 million sheep,
51 million goats, 8 million camels and 49 million chickens in 2020[8] although the contribution of the sub-sector to the country’s
economic growth continues to be less significant. Challenges encountered include limited access to improved feeds and
improved breeds and breeding techniques and inadequate provision of good livestock extension services.
National Strategies, Policies and/or Programmes relevant for Pastoralism and Smallholder Agriculture, Rural Poverty
Reduction and Enhanced Food Security – The overall framework for development in Ethiopia is guided by the: a) National
Rural Development Policy and Strategies, 2003; b) National Agricultural Investment Plan (NAIP), 2021; c) Ten-Year
Development Plan (2021-2030); d) Agriculture Sector Ten-Year Plan (2021-2030); e) the Nationally Determined Contribution
(NDC, 2021); f) the Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) and the associated Climate Resilience Strategy which focuses on
the agriculture and forestry sectors; g) Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) strategy, 2020; h) Ethiopia’s National Adaptation Plan
(NAP-ETH, 2019), i) National Food and Nutrition Policy (2018) and Strategy (2020) and h) Ethiopia’s Food System
Transformation roadmap (2022).
10.
The Digital Ethiopia Strategy (2020-2025) and the Ten-Year Development Plan recognize Information Communication and
Technologies (ICTs) as key enablers for agriculture transformation. The government has developed a digital agriculture and
advisory services (DAEAS) Roadmap 2030 for Ethiopia. The roadmap is organised across three areas: a) solutions pipeline –
accelerate the development of digital innovations for priority use cases; b) digital stack – development of digital elements to
support the product development; c) enabling environment – create conducive environment to enable the digitisation of the
agriculture sector. A new Agriculture and Rural Development Policy and a Proclamation to Provide for Agriculture Production
Contracts are currently under consideration within government. These new policy and regulatory instruments will assist in the
commercialisation of smallholder agriculture.
11.
GoE is carrying forward the momentum from the 2021 Food System Summit, by creating a multi-sectoral platform in charge of
realising the six transformation pathways[9].
12.
Overall, both the Programme’s goal and development objective are consistent with the various national policy instruments and
will directly contribute to the achievement of these national policies, plans and strategies. In particular, the Programme has the
potential to contribute to 13 of the 22 game changing solutions identified in the Ethiopia Food System transformation roadmap.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
13.
14.
Climate Change (CC)– Ethiopia currently experiences an annual average temperature of 23°C, with a minimum of 11.9°C and a
maximum of 30.8°C. Mean annual temperature is projected to increase by 1.6°C until 2030, by 1.8°C until 2050 compared to
pre-industrial levels. Projected precipitation changes are uncertain, but models agree on a precipitation increase during the
second half of the century. The emission of Greenhouse Gases (GHGs) in Ethiopia was 274 MtCO2 in the baseline year of 2010
and is anticipated to increase to 403.5 MtCO2 in 2030 in the business-as-usual scenario. GoE has updated its Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDC 2021) to limit emissions to 125.8 MtCO2e through green development path.
According to the ND-GAIN Country Index[10], Ethiopia is the 20th most vulnerable and 47th least ready country to the impacts of
CC in the world. This is due to its high dependence on rain-fed agriculture and pastoralism, natural resources and low adaptive
capacity. Heavy rains, flooding, and soil erosion put both urban and rural infrastructure at risk, particularly for poor and vulnerable
groups. Impacts of CC constitute serious obstacles to the country’s continued development and poverty reduction efforts,
increasing vulnerability to risks and hazards, increasing the importance for sustainable adaptation and resilience measures[11].
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Environment – In Ethiopia, livelihoods are closely linked to natural resources. However, because of population pressure,
unsustainable use, inappropriate management, expansion of planned development (commercial farms and infrastructure
development), weakness in enforcing environmental policies and regulations, there is considerable depletion of natural resources
and environmental degradation. The major environmental issues that increase the vulnerability of Ethiopians, include: a) land
degradation including soil erosion and biodiversity loss; b) CC; c) deforestation; d) water scarcity; and e) loss of biodiversity.
6/29
Gender –Ethiopia is ranked 125th out of 162 countries on the Gender Inequality Index (GII), which reflects gender-based
inequalities in health, empowerment and economic dimensions. Contributing factors include: a) entrenched discriminatory social
norms; b) limited access to quality services, Programmes and infrastructure; and c) challenges in implementing policies and
administrative processes. In the agricultural sector, although women make up more than 40 percent of the labour force and head
approximately 25 percent of all farming households, women’s productivity is 36 percent lower than of men. Compared to men,
they have less access to land, farm inputs, extension, climate-smart technologies and financial services. The gender gap in
education and literacy is another root cause of women’s lack of economic opportunities. In Ethiopia, 7 percent of women have
attended secondary education and 48 percent are literate compared to 10 and 64 percent of men respectively. When adult
training is available, such as Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET), women enrol but struggle to attend all
sessions due to high workloads, lack of transportation, and lack of gender-sensitive spaces.
Youth – About 70 percent of the country’s population is less than 34 years old. In particular, 30 percent is between 15 to 29
years old, which falls under the Ethiopian classification of Youth. Young people in Ethiopia are faced with a multitude of
challenges, leaving them largely unemployed, underemployed and underpaid[12]. In rural areas, youths have limited access to
land and capital, and productive assets that would enable them to become self-employed. Non-farm employment opportunities
along the value chains are still scarce. The challenges faced by the youth pushed 15 percent of them to migrate to urban areas
between 2007 and 2013[13]. Young women are particularly vulnerable; limited access to education, capital, finance and land
make it difficult for them to thrive. This is made worse by a high prevalence of child marriage, teenage pregnancy and other
forms of Gender Based Violence (GBV).
Nutrition – Poor dietary diversity is the main driving factor of malnutrition. Less than 6 percent of children under five have a
minimum acceptable diet[14] and 77 percent of households' energy intake derives from starchy staples only, with little inclusion of
animal source foods, vegetables and fruits[15]. When available, nutrient-rich foods are given, first, to the household heads and
the children[16]. At society level, the nutrition gap in Ethiopia represents 16% of GDP in terms of productivity loss and the
overburden on health facilities and social protection mechanisms​[17]. Four issues need to be addressed to improve diets within
the scope of the Programme: a) availability of safe, diverse and nutritious foods with reduced postharvest losses; b) affordability;
c) profitability and market access for nutrient-rich crops; d) demand creation and consumption patterns due to limited awareness
of an optimal diet, cultural beliefs and misconceptions; (e) gender equity to ensure equitable food distribution within the
households.
Marginalised Groups including Pastoralists – Ethiopia ratified the Convention on the rights of Persons with Disabilities
(PWDs) in 2010. Furthermore, a National Plan of Action (NPA) of PWDs was adopted for the period 2012-2021, under the
leadership of the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs in consultation with civil society and UN organizations. Despite this
favourable institutional context, the provision of inclusive services and opportunities remain a challenge. Recent data suggest that
only one percent of Ethiopian buildings and roads are fully accessible to PWDs.[18] Yet accessibility is not only physical, but also
social, cultural, and political. Official estimates suggest that 95 percent of Ethiopia’s disabled live under the poverty line and are
unemployed[19].
Pastoralists and agro-pastoralists are highly vulnerable to poverty and food insecurity. They reside in the lowlands, which receive
less rainfall per annum and are mostly exposed to effects of climate variabilities, such as recurrent droughts in the last few years.
This has resulted in death of a huge number of their livestock due to severe shortage of water and pasture/feed and depletion of
their herd size. Consequently, this has left them vulnerable to future similar risks and shocks. In spite of the challenges,
pastoralists have solutions to a myriad CC related challenges embedded in traditional knowledge and climate-resilient
livelihoods.
21.
Mainstreaming theme eligibility criteria
☑ Gender transformational ☑ Nutrition sensitive
☑ Youth sensitive
☑ Climate finance
☑ National gender policies,
strategies and actors
Situation
analysis
☑ Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
☑ Key livelihood problems
and opportunities, by gender
☑  National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
☑  Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
☑  Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
☑ National youth policies,
strategies and actors
☑ Main youth groups
☑ Challenges and
opportunities by youth group
☑ Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
7/29
☑  Nutrition pathways
Theory of
change
☑ Gender transformative
pathways
☑  Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
☑ Policy engagement on
GEWE
☑ Pathways to youth
socioeconomic
empowerment
☑ Youth employment
included in project
objectives/activities
☑ Outreach disaggregated
by sex
☑ Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth, indigenous
peoples (if appropriate)
·          Output level Cis
Logframe
indicators
☑ Women are >40percent of
outreach beneficiaries
o          CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
☑ Outreach disaggregated
by sex and youth
·          IFAD empowerment
index (IE2.1)
·          Outcome level Cis (at
least one of below)
o          CI 1.2.8
o          CI 1.2.9
Human and
financial
resources
☑ Staff with gender TORs
☑ Funds for gender activities
☑ Funds for IFAD
empowerment index in M&E
budget
☑ Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
☑ Funds for nutrition
activities
☑ Staff with youth TORs
☑ Funds for youth activities
To qualify as climate-
focused, a value
amount for adaptation
and/or mitigation
finance must be
inserted in Section
G.a. on Project Costs.
Refer to the Climate
Finance Tracking
Annex of the IFAD
Project Design
Guidelines for
detailed guidance.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
22.
23.
24.
As Ethiopia’s economic performance continues its expected recovery in 2022, coupled with a high population growth rate, the
implication is an increase in demand for agricultural products. COVID-19 and the Ukraine crisis have shown the negative impacts
of reliance on imported inputs and food supply, due to supply logistics disruption and increased food prices. The need to increase
local production of food, especially cereals and oilseeds, and improve rural households’ resilience to shocks has never been
greater. However, the agricultural sector in general, including pastoralism is still constrained variously and this is preventing the
sector from maximising its massive potential. Improvement in smallholder agriculture presents an opportunity for the country to
meet its food requirements for local consumption and to export the surplus. With its special focus on smallholder farmers,
pastoralists and the rural poor, in Ethiopia and around the world, IFAD is well placed to make a significant contribution.
IFAD has supported the country’s efforts to boost productivity of selected agricultural commodities through investments in: a)
smallholder irrigation development ; b)Natural resource management c) marketing of agriculture production (Participatory Small-
Scale Irrigation Development Programme (PASIDP); d) access to rural finance (RUFIP); and d) development in the pastoral
areas (Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project (LLRP)). The two PASIDP phases have positively contributed towards reducing
Ethiopia’s productivity gap. However, Ethiopia remains dependent on rain-fed agriculture. Considering the high variability of
rainfall and the CC-induced increases in temperatures, closing the productivity gap and producing a surplus for the market
remains a challenge.
The IFAD investment will upscale successful interventions from PASIDP (such as landscape management activities,
dissemination of climate-smart practices and technologies, strengthening of IWUAs and cooperatives, linkages between research
and extension, market alliances and linkages of farmers to finance), to improve resilience and productivity and strengthen
cooperatives while also bringing in innovative approaches. Beyond production and productivity, the Programme will also build on
PASIDP II and other development partners’ successful experiences to transform the food systems in order to ensure access and
uptake of healthy diets for all. The Programme will adapt the community development planning approach, building on lessons
from
25.
26.
IFAD’s investments in access to finance for smallholder farmers have resulted in increased resilience of rural farmers and
reduced conflict[20]. The Programme will link with RUFIP, to improve access to financial services for the beneficiaries. The GCF
financed Inclusive Green Finance (IGREENFIN II) will enhance access to finance by small-scale farmers and pastoralists for
green investments.
8/29
The transformation agenda: The programme is ushering in a new transformative agenda for smallholder agriculture and
pastoralism in IFAD programming in Ethiopia. Innovative approaches that go beyond climate sensitivity, integrate climate
adaptation and mitigation, with compensation for the services that smallholder farmer and pastoralist provide will be initiated, with
a strong focus on regenerative agriculture. Regenerative agriculture focuses on producing adequate high above-ground biomass
for food and feed, as well as maintaining soil health. Soil health leads to high soil carbon. This is a great opportunity for IFAD to
help smallholder farmers to benefit from carbon finance, as an added advantage. In addition, a stronger focus on provision of
digital services to smallholder farmers and farmer organisations will go a long way in transforming smallholder agriculture through
new channels for information exchange, business opportunities and extension.
B. Lessons learned
27.
The Programme design is informed by number of experiences drawn from IFAD-supported interventions in Ethiopia and other
countries, similar/related projects financed by the Government or its other development The following lessons have therefore,
influenced the design as follows:
Commercialization of smallholder farmers by strengthening local producer organisations: Offering production support,
enhancing market facilities and establishing contracts with traders and producer organisations, project participants saw a 50
percent increase in income per year and 5 percent increase in market access in monsoon season in Nepal. The Programme
will therefore follow this approach in an effort to commercialize the targeted beneficiaries.
Integrate climate resilience in all the stages of the Theory of Change for impacts across the project interventions:
Under PASIDP I, climate resilience was well integrated in all the stages of the theory of change. IFAD’s Impacts
Assessment[21] found that farmers with modern irrigation were better able to harvest throughout the year and less likely to
resort to negative risk management strategies, such as selling off assets. Revenue from crop sales increased by 23 percent in
dry season and 77 percent in the rainy season. The assessment also showed: a) the importance of long-term data gathering
and georeferenced monitoring to assess vegetation cover and degradation and to address climate resilience; and b) the need
to include complementary market interventions to maximise impacts.
Nutrition-sensitive irrigation is an essential pathway to increase households' food security and dietary diversity:
PASIDP II demonstrated the potential to increase year-round food production and tested improved varieties of nutrient-rich
crops (e.g. tomatoes, cabbages and biofortified sweet potatoes) in collaboration with regional research centres. A study
conducted in Ethiopia[22] showed that expansion of fruits and vegetable value chains need to be prioritised, leveraging win-
win strategies for generating economic growth, alleviating poverty, creating jobs and diversifying diets. The Programme will
build on the results to scale up production of vegetables and fruits, and invest more deliberately in social behaviour change
communication for increased demand and improved nutrition practices.
Financial management arrangements for projects in Ethiopia are complex, since they operate through the country’s
decentralized systems: Funds flow to multiple cost centers under federal, regional and district staff systems, which requires
projects to be completed with strong monitoring, control and coordination arrangements. The Government’s Integrated
Financial Management System (IFMIS) is in the process of being improved. However, based on the World Bank’s (WB)
assessment, its roll-out is expected to take several years. IFAD is strengthening its collaboration with the supreme audit
institution, the Audit Services Corporation, to broaden audit coverage and strengthen the fiduciary oversight on IFAD financed
projects.
Flexibility in managing projects can help provide emergency responses as and when they occur:  Ethiopia has been
suffering from drought since mid-2021 and war in Tigray has also caused displacement of people in Tigray, Amhara and Afar
regions. IFAD LLRP responded to these emergencies through the procurement of livestock feed and water supply, veterinary
clinics and input supply, by streamlining some procurement procedures and revising the Annual Work Plan and Budget
(AWPB). Similar processes will be applied by the Programme as and when the conditions call for it. The project will also draw
lessons from emergency response support through the Rural Poor Stimulus Facility and the upcoming Crisis Response
Initiative projects.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
28.
29.
Programme Goal and Objective – The Programme’s goal is ‘to contribute to poverty reduction and improved resilience in
selected landscapes/woredas.’[23] The Programme Development Objective (PDO) is to ‘enable 150,000 vulnerable rural
households (men, women, youth and PWDs) in selected kebeles to sustainably improve incomes, food and nutrition security and
build resilience to climate shocks. The Programme will be implemented over a seven-year period.
Geographic Area of Intervention –The Programme will, be implemented in six regional states of Amhara; Oromia; Southern
Nations, Nationalities Peoples Region (SNNPR); Sidama; South Western and Somali. The regions have been selected based on:
(i) high rural population, (ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food and nutrition insecurity, (iv) presence of economic
opportunities/markets relevant to the project; (v) impacts of climate change and natural resources degradation; and (vi) relative
security (in consultation with the government of Ethiopia). Additional regions (Afar and Tigray) will only be included subject to
availability of additional funds and an improved security situation, as applicable.
30.
In the selected regions, a total of 90 food insecure woredas have been prioritized based on: (i) high poverty prevalence, based on
inclusion in the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) (ii) high climate vulnerability (iii) high vulnerability to other factors (food
security, poverty, gender inequality, water, education, agriculture); (iv) the level of degradation of the productive natural resource
base (particularly soil, water and trees); (v) minimised overlap with kebeles under PASDIP II; (vi) no overlap with LLRP
supported;[24] (vii) proximity to private sector providers of goods and services; and (viii) Synergies with WB financed Agricultural
Growth Programme (AGP), WFP Fresh Food Voucher Programme in Amhara. The number of woredas are distributed in
proportion to the population. The target woredas allow for linkages with RUFIP III and complementarities with PASIDP II areas.
9/29
31.
The selected woredas are not currently affected by conflict, but the programme will be making a continuous assessment as the
programme roles out.
Geographic Area of Intervention
Region
Amhara
Oromia
Sidama
SNNPR
Somali
South West
Total
Woredas
Target HH
Total
23
35
4
14
9
5
90
38,334
58,333
6,667
23,333
15,000
8,333
191,667
291,667
33,333
116,667
75,000
41,666
150,000
750,000
32.
33.
34.
35.
Target Groups – The Programme will benefit approximately 150,000 households, with the targeted participation of women,
youth, and PWD. The Programme’s primary target groups will include 50% (75,000) women, 40% (60,000) female and male
youth between 18‑34 years (40 percent) and 5% (7,500) PWD who are economically active. The primary target group will
include: a) poor households (with land holding less than 2ha of cultivable land with limited livestock,); b) pastoralists c) agro-
pastoralists engaged in less diversified traditional livelihood systems; d) PWD in rural areas; and e) rural underemployed and
unemployed youths owning no or small land; and f) female headed households
Targeting Strategy – In line with IFAD’s targeting guidelines and GoE’s ambitions, the targeting strategy will comprise: i)
geographic targeting, based on the identification of priority districts; ii) self-targeting, of poor households; iii) direct targeting of the
specific groups listed above. The targeting strategy will pay attention to drivers of conflict at the local level in order to do-no harm.
The primary safeguards against elite capture will be the self-targeting plus the participatory identification of the poor and priority
households.
The targeting strategy will also include: selection of enterprises that have a) potential for inclusion of poor households, women
and youth, b) potential positive impacts on nutrition and climate change adaptation; c) availability of natural resources for
production and d) availability of markets.
Gender Focus – The Programme will tackle the gender-based constraints using household methodologies, as an entry point, to
achieve gender transformation. Funding from the Gender Transformative Mechanism (GTM) presents an opportunity for GoE to
prioritize the financing of climate adaptation interventions for women of all ages. Three principles will be followed to promote
gender transformative change in the context of climate adaptation and market inclusion: (i) using participatory approaches to
facilitate dialogue, trust, ownership, visioning and behaviour change at various levels; (ii) promoting critical reflection on deep-
rooted social and gender norms and attitudes in order to challenge power dynamics and bring about a paradigm shift at all levels;
and (iii) explicitly engaging with men and boys to address the concepts of masculinity and gender
36.
Youth Focus – Youth empowerment will be achieved via the following pathways: a) creating employment opportunities along the
selected value-chains and watersheds rehabilitation activities; b) tailored support to young men and women agri-preneurs with
access to business packages, including agri-preneurship and enterprise related production training, seed capital and mentorship.
37.
38.
Persons with Disabilities (PWD) Focus– The Programme will adopt a twin-track approach to disability inclusion: mainstreaming
disability inclusion in all the Programme components, subcomponents and activities and targeting PWDs themselves to enable
access. This will be done through a) providing costs for care takers of PWDs to enable participation in Programme activities; b)
review of the training content by the disability inclusion expert; and ensuring disability inclusion needs in the trainings), c) capacity
building of public institutions to create a disability inclusive environment at the institutional and policy levels; ensuring that
infrastructure is disability inclusive.
10/29
Food and Nutrition Focus – In line with the Ethiopia Food System Transformation Roadmap and the National Food and
Nutrition policy, nutrition mainstreaming in the Programme will support: a) market-oriented production of diversified and nutritious
foods (1.3.1); b) direct support for integrated home gardening for the most vulnerable households with access to water (1.3.3); c)
improved post-harvest handling, including safe food storage and processing at household (1.1.3) and cooperative levels (2.1.3);
d) multiple-channel Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) on healthy diets (1.3.3); and f) household methodologies
to improve joint decision making on food production, purchase, preparation and distribution (1.3.2), as well as energy-saving
technologies to improve women’s time use (1.1.4). Policy engagement interventions will also be key to support PACT nutrition
agenda (3.1), ensuring PACT activities are included in the EFS roadmap and best practices captured in the revised Nutrition-
sensitive agriculture strategy of the MoA. PACT nutrition-sensitive interventions will be implemented as part of the project
components and coordinated by PACT PMU nutrition officer, in collaboration with the Gender, Environment and SECAP officers
(more details can be found in the PIM and in Annex 14).
39.
Environment and Climate Change Focus – The Programme will support interventions that will reduce land degradation and
enhance climate resilience of communities and ecosystems such as: a) soil and water conservation; b) improved cookstoves; c)
climate smart agriculture; d) promoting biogas use and participation in carbon markets; e) improved access to efficient water
technologies; and f) improved access to produce markets.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
40.
Outcomes – Interventions under the Programme will focus on addressing the identified factors limiting the effective functioning
and inclusivity of value chains and the following are the expected outcomes:
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
Adaptive capacity of rural households, production  and productivity of targeted value chains (including nutrient dense )  improved,
driven by community led climate-resilient land restoration, soil health improvement and water infrastructure development and
improved access to climate smart production technologies;
Increased access to remunerative markets of targeted food commodities and diversified incomes achieved by linking
beneficiaries to marketing channels via strong and inclusive pastoralists groups and cooperatives and through improved
employability   for young women and men, including persons with disabilities
Improved service delivery and policy environment  for effective Programme implementation achieved through, community
empowerment, institutional strengthening of public institutions for effective service delivery, and support for the operationalization
of key policies.
Landscape management approach: The programme will take a landscape approach in the implementation of activities. The
landscape approach will identify different pathways to improve the livelihoods of inhabitants, improve ecosystem services and
facilitate linkages with other landscapes, as will be documented in a landscape development and investment plan (LDIP). The
identified pathways will include business development activities for commercial agriculture, off-farm income generation and
resilience to shocks to be implemented through the programme components.
The Inclusive Green Finance programme (IGREENFINII), financed by Green Climate Fund (GCF), will co-finance scalable
smallholder adaptation and mitigation technology investments for low emission and climate-resilient agriculture by providing
small concessional loans. The Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) is the fund manager for IGREENFIN II and resources will be
channelled through the Micro-Finance Institutions. PACT programme activities will assist farmers to prepare bankable climate
adaptation and mitigation investments for financing with IGREENFIN II green loans. Examples of eligible investments will include:
construction and operationalization of climate smart infrastructure, renewable energies like solar and biogas, establishment of
new nurseries and climate smart agriculture activities.
46.
PACT will be upscaling most of the interventions promoted through PASIDPII with only additional innovations on ICT4D and
carbon markets. ICT4D is already being implemented by ATI while carbon markets will be supported through partners
47.
48.
Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes – The Component will support: a) community-led
equitable access and adaptive sustainable use and management of natural resources; b) market-led and climate adapted
pastoral and smallholder production and productivity enhancement of target crop commodities; c) development of inclusive and
equitable water and market infrastructure; and d) improved nutrition. The outcome of this component will be sustainable equitable
access and utilisation of natural resources, increased agricultural and pastoral production system. The component will be
implemented under three subcomponents.
Subcomponent1: Community-led Climate Resilient Development and Natural Resource Management (NRM) –
Interventions under this subcomponent will seek to empower communities to identify pastoral and agricultural-sector-related
opportunities, improve productivity and enhance climate resilience. The activities of the subcomponent include: a) Community
sensitization, b) Assessment and prioritization of landscapes based on their degradation status and climate vulnerability c)
Community led preparation of landscape development and investment plans (LDIPs) d) implementation of NRM including soil
health improvement measures.; e) Soil testing facility establishment; f) Construction of biogas facilities at household level; g)
installation of cookstoves to reduce deforestation and access carbon markets. The LDIPs will identify climate resilient
investments to achieve the vision and aspirations of the community. PACT will support investments in NRM, agriculture and
markets in components 1 and 2. NRM activities provide supportive activities to improving productivity and opportunities for job
creation supported in subcomponents 1.3 and 2.2. while also offering benefits for beneficiaries of infrastructure 1.1.1
Assessments and prioritizations of landscapes – This will involve identifying 150 landscapes, within the 90 administrative
Woredas to be targeted by the programme[25], and working with communities to prepare for the development of LDIPS.
Landscapes will be identified using Geographic Information System (GIS) based tools, the Adaptation Framework[26], Climate
Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD) Assessment tools[27], Geofolio and Regioclim, the Resilience Design and Monitoring
Tool (RDMT) and the Capacity Development for Agriculture Risk Management (CD4ARM) tools to identify the key agricultural
risks.
11/29
These tools will be used to prioritize Agro-ecology/Kebele specific adaptation measures and assess agriculture risk during the
delineation, prioritisation and selection of landscapes. The assessments will be gender and climate sensitive assessments, based
on priority commodities, opportunities and constraints. The federal, regional and Woreda level PMUs as well as bureaus of
agriculture will take role in the application of the tools during landscape prioritization. To this effect, training on the application of
the tools as well as preparation and implementation of LDIPs will be given prior to the assessments and preparation of the plans.
1.2 Community Sensitisation: For the selected landscapes, the project will conduct awareness raising and mobilisation of the
local communities, and identification and training of Community Facilitators (CFs) to facilitate the landscape planning process.
The CFs will be gender-balanced and will be trained in facilitation skills, to moderate the entire process of problem identification
and agreement on the development plans.
Led by the CFs, equitable participation in the landscape planning process of all community members will be enhanced by
addressing embedded social-cultural norms that may perpetuate gender inequalities and social exclusion. Before the LDIPs are
compiled, a participatory social norms diagnostic study will help the community identify and discuss social norms perceptions and
expectations that shape and constrain inclusive participation of especially women, youth and PWD. Social empowerment tools
including community conversation, household methodologies including Gender Model Family (GMF) will be used to engage
communities and households. 150 landscape communities are strengthened to undertake self-governance in landscape
management.
Landscape Coordination Committee (LCC): in the selected landscape, communities will form Landscape Coordination
Committees (with an emphasis on gender and youth inclusion). LCC is a group of farmers from the landscape who, in
collaboration with DAs and Kebele administration, will oversee/lead the overall preparation and implementation of the LDIPs. The
LCC will be elected from the landscape using a participatory approach. Under the umbrella of the LCC, there will be associations
(sub-associations) that will manage the day-to-day performance of specific activities. These includes: Water Users Association
(WUA), watershed committee, cooperative association/committee.
1.3 Community-led development and investments plans preparation: Through a guided and technical facilitation targeted
process, targeted communities are moderated and supported by CFs independent consultants, and woreda experts to identify
the constraints to sustainably improve resilience, agriculture and livestock production and the market linkages. The LCC will
ensure that LDIPs meet the following criteria: a) are socially inclusive; b) gender transformative, c) climate responsive; d) aligned
to market demands and e) meets nutrition and food security needs.
The LDIPs will include investments in i) integrated natural resources management, ii) water infrastructure for households, crops
and livestock, iii) crop and livestock production enhancement and iv) market access improvement, to be financed as described
under components 1 and 2.
The programme will assist in the preparation of 150 LDIPs for the 150 selected landscapes. The LDIPs will include both public
and community investments related to agriculture development and will be cleared by the regional PMU and approved by the
Federal PMUs. The LDIPs will remain with the leaders of the LCC and Local Authorities as a living document to guide
development and investment planning during and after the Programme implementation. Depending on the priorities of each
landscape from the LDIPs, the following NRM activities will be supported:
Training for LDIP implementation: The training will be focused on NRM (climate-smart agro-ecological practices and technologies
including Nature-based Solutions (NBS), Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EBA) measures, regenerative agriculture practices), soil
health, and carbon farming, through a gender equity, and social inclusion approach. Tailored training of trainers (ToT) will be
given to federal and regional experts by universities or research institutions which will eventually be cascaded to Woreda,
kebeles and LCCs. The training will be delivered prior to the physical implementation of the LDIPs. This capacity building is a
continuous process and will be delivered until project completion.  
1.4 Implementation of NRM and soil health improvement measures: – The Programme will support the restoration and improved
management of 100,000ha of rangelands and farmlands as identified in the LIDPs. The subcomponent will ensure that women
and youth including those with disabilities adequately benefit from enhanced landscape restoration and management. NRM
activities will include:
Soil and water conservation measures: The programme will finance preparation of terraces, gabions, contours, vegetative
windbreaks among other activities and rainwater harvesting for the most vulnerable. The Programme will cover the costs for
equipment and material supplies such as hoes, shovels, stone bunds, and gabion, and soil amendments and communities will
provide labour. The community contribution will be through the GoE mass mobilisation programme for landscape management
activities. The community contribution is estimated to be between 46-54%. Quality of the work will be ensured through training,
sensitization and monitoring, which will be undertaken prior and during implementation of the soil and water conservation
activities.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
Pasture land management: In addition, improved pasture land management activities will be undertaken in the pastoral and
agropastoral zones/areas mainly in the Somali, Oromia and SNNPR regions. These activities may include i) area closures; ii)
12/29
invasive species control, iii) controlled grazing; iv) fodder conservation; among others. Agroforestry and reforestation: The
programme will support the establishment and strengthening of agroforestry nurseries and tree planting: The project will establish
150 new medium sized nurseries and strengthen a further 100 existing nurseries in the selected landscapes. The capacity of the
new nurseries will be up to 150,000 plants. The nurseries will mainly produce seedlings such as fruit and fertiliser trees for the
purpose of agroforestry. The new nurseries maybe owned by rural youth and women groups or woreda administration. The
criteria to select the youth and women will include poverty level, under- and unemployment, owning no land. Skill development
training will be given to the selected youth and women groups on seedling development and business skills. The programme will
cover 70% of the cost for nurseries and regional/Woreda administration and nursery owners will finance the remaining 30%.
Targeted youth and women groups will be assisted to develop a business plan to access a green loan from IGREENFIN II to
cover their 30% contribution. Nursery owners will cover operational expenses and repay the loan by selling the seedlings to the
communities. The Woreda and kebele level land administrations, DAs and Watershed Association will allocate land to the youth.
Establishment of National Soil Testing Facility: As part of the soil health enhancement programme, the programme will facilitate
the establishment of a soil testing laboratory facility at the Federal level with 50% co-financing by the GoE. The facility will be
provided with testing kits, materials and equipment for soil analysis services to farmers and cooperatives. Soil samples will be
collected at regional and woreda levels for referral processing at the federal facility. The programme will also make provisions to
enable the laboratory personnel to provide technical assistance services and recommendations and guidelines for area specific
soil fertility management practices. The facility will run on a fee service basis and be linked with the rural extension services of the
MoA for the technical backstopping to farmers.
Compensation of smallholder farmers for Carbon farming: Smallholder farmers in the landscape will be supported to transition to
agroforestry in landscapes where Agroforestry provides solutions to challenges and opportunities identified by LDIPs.
Agroforestry has multiple benefits in improving soil health and soil carbon sequestration, increased carbon stocks and climate
resilience, increased diverse nutritious foods, diversified income streams and land restoration. PACT will partner with Rabobank
to offer carbon markets for agroforestry. Using the criteria set by Rabo Bank, the programme will ​identify a local partner who will
facilitate the carbon market processes between smallholders and Rabo Bank. Smallholder farmers sequestering carbon will be
monitored by satellites and remote sensing, to quantify CRU eligible for sale. From sales revenue, 10% will be retained by Rabo
Bank, 10% retained local partner and 80% paid out to farmers at least once a year. The Programme aims to have 32,000ha of
land under agroforestry with fruits and non-fruit tree species in both rain-fed and irrigated areas.
Promotion of improved cookstoves: The Programme will support the production and distribution of an indicative amount of 91,200
improved cookstoves (45,600 Mirt for Enjera baking and 45,600 Tikkl for cooking and boiling) in landscapes where improved
cookstoves will address the identified challenges in LDIPs to benefit approximately 45,600 HHs[28] This activity has multiple
benefits in reducing deforestation, women’s workload in fetching firewood, enhancing health benefits through reduction of smoke
pollution in the kitchen and avoided carbon emission. In addition, it will create jobs for 2,700 women (30 per woreda) involved in
the making of the cookstoves. The cookstoves will be financed through a 50% grant from the project,[29]​.
Biogas systems for cooking and lighting[30]: Biogas systems are environmentally friendly technologies that help to reduce/avoid
GHG emissions. Using these systems, animal dung and agricultural wastes are used to generate energy and the biodigester
residues are used to improve soil fertility for home gardening, agroforestry and crop production. The Programme will support the
construction and operationalization of 2,000 biogas systems in the landscapes where they offer opportunities to address
challenges identified in LDIPS. The programme will cover 60% of biogas production cost and the remaining 40% will be from an
IGREENFIN II loan. The program will select HHs based on criteria set by the government, for example, HHs who have four
livestock kept around the home, water access from the irrigation scheme, women-headed, households with a member with
disability.
Job Creation through landscape management activities:These NRM activities will create job opportunities for 4742 rural youth
and women and PWD through: a) nursery establishment, including production and planting of quality and resilient tree seedlings;
b) biogas system construction, operation and maintenance; and c) cookstove production and dissemination. To this effect, a job
creation strategy will be prepared by the Federal PCU.
Subcomponent 1.2: Climate Resilient Infrastructure Development: This sub-component will invest in climate-smart water
and market-related infrastructure as identified and prioritised in the LDIPs. All infrastructure will be prioritised and implemented
after feasibility assessments and will contribute to production and market related outcomes in the programme.
2.1 Water Development for Households, Crops and Livestock Use – The programme will support the development of climate
resilient 15,000ha irrigation, and development of 200 multiple purpose water systems for livestock and household use, thus
helping to sustainably raise and stabilize agricultural productivity and annual income, and enhance farmers and agro-pastoralists
resilience to the effects of climate change such as droughts in drought prone areas of the selected woredas.
The multi-purpose water infrastructure will increase access to and use of clean and safe water, as a key strategy to improve
nutrition outcomes and reduce women’s burden, including women with disabilities. Given the low household awareness on
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) practices[31], messaging on the importance of using safe water and handwashing at
critical moments will be disseminated through Nutrition-Sensitive Agriculture (NSA) training (under Subcomponent 1.3) to prevent
diseases and Do No Harm.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
To ensure ownership and sustainability, a participatory approach will be used when implementing activities, throughout the
infrastructure development cycle: identification, feasibility studies and detailed designs, and construction/rehabilitation. To
enhance capacity for maintenance and management of the infrastructure, the Water User Associations (WUAs) and youth will be
trained in infrastructure management, operation and maintenance either for irrigation purposes or for other water uses.
68.
Scheme identification and screening – Construction and/or rehabilitation of potential water schemes will be identified through the
LDIPs. The potential schemes will be subjected to rapid prefeasibility assessments by woreda and zonal experts to confirm
availability, adequacy and sustainability of water and land resources and social and environmental considerations and selection
of sites for feasibility study. The Bureaux of Agriculture (BoA) and water (BoW), will undertake feasibility studies, after which a
multi-criteria analysis will be used for the final selection of the schemes to be developed. Assessment of groundwater/surface
water resources, in particular shallow groundwater depth, yield and potentialities in all targeted Woredas and intervention sites
will be a prerequisite before development of water schemes to ensure that the designs and works meet the established quality
standards.
13/29
Establishment, Strengthening, and Engagement of Water User Associations (WUAs) –WUAs will serve as the beneficiaries’
representatives, starting from the early stage of water scheme identification. For new water schemes, WUAs will be established
as legal entities with a bylaw to be approved by the Woreda council. The programme will build WUA’s capacity, mainly in terms
of a) sustainable water resources management; b) infrastructure operation and maintenance and water scheme governance; c)
Administrative and Financial Management; d) Water Service Fee (WSF) policy either for irrigation purposes or for other water
uses, and e) mediation and conflict resolution. A module on GESI will accompany the capacity development and participation and
leadership of women, youth and persons with disabilities will be promoted.
Before the detailed design is undertaken, WUAs will sign an implementation agreement with the woreda administration. to
provide formal commitment to: a) contribute to the investment cost of the scheme of at least 10 percent (cash and/or in kind) by
contributing to the construction or rehabilitation works; b) ensure scheme maintenance; c) a women membership of 50% with
30% leadership positions; d) persons with disabilities membership of 5% with 1% leadership position, and e) youth membership
of at least 30 percent with 10 percent leadership positions. All designs will take the participatory approach to ensure local
acceptance. Before the commencement of construction/rehabilitation, an agreement will be made between WUAs and the
Woredas, indicating clearly the role and duties of all parties.
Water Infrastructure Detailed Engineering Design – Based on feasibility studies’ recommendations, detailed engineering designs
and, potentially, consultants will carry out construction supervision for the schemes that pass the prefeasibility stage. The design
criteria to be used will be a) groundwater sources, in particular shallow aquifers, will be preferred for multi-purpose water systems
to ensure the water is potable and in compliance with Ethiopian drinking water quality standards; b) use of efficient and climate
adapted water saving technologies for irrigation systems such as drip, sprinkler, mini sprinkler, etc.; c) solar pumping as required
and water storage whenever feasible for both irrigation and multiple use systems; d) provision of adequate drainage system as
required to prevent soil salinization and waterlogging risks. Climate risks will be considered during design preparation and
adequate measures will be integrated into the design to ensure resilience of the infrastructure to climate shocks and extreme
events such as flooding.
Water Infrastructure Construction – Construction of water infrastructure will follow the process already established under
PASIDPII. Contractors for construction will be identified through a competitive process as much as possible. Where, there is no
private sector capacity or willingness to participate in the procurement process, state enterprises can be used. PASIDP and
LLRP projects have a good experience in conducting similar works, and key lessons will be leveraged on how to improve
performance. The construction of water infrastructure is planned to be achieved by the sixth year of the Programme’s life, to allow
for the operation of the infrastructure for at least a year, before the Programme’s closure. Supervision of construction will be
undertaken by consulting engineers. IWUAs will sign off on the final acceptance certificate.
Handover of water schemes: After construction of water schemes, they will be handed over to the WUA for operation and
management. The WUA will be responsible for the collection of irrigation service fees, planning and implementing asset
management and for water allocations.
2.2 Local Market-Related Infrastructure: The programme will support interventions aimed at addressing market infrastructure-
related constraints faced by cooperatives, farmers, pastoralists and other relevant actors operating within the targeted value
chains; the focus will be either at storage, transportation, and marketing levels. Planned interventions will include supporting
climate-resilient and accessible rural infrastructure investments that: a) can add market and nutritional value; b) guarantee food
safety and extend shelf life; c) upgrade performance of enterprises; and d) support associated agricultural producers, including
women, youth and persons with disabilities, to become competitive, sustainable commercial businesses in an environmentally
friendly manner.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
Climate-resilient and accessible infrastructure investments will be identified by communities and business actors during the
LDIPs and the value chain assessments.
76.
Zero-energy cooling units (ZECUs): ZECUs will be piloted in selected irrigation schemes. ZECUs suitability will be assessed at
feasibility study stage of the irrigation scheme and included in the scheme detailed engineering studies. Prioritisation will consider
the following criteria: a) willingness to pilot the technology; b) make land available for the construction of units; c) not benefitting
from warehouse investments; d) willingness to co-finance; e) ensure equity by region.
77.
Roadside markets sheds: 200 low-cost roadside market sheds (25% co-financed by woredas), as identified in the LDIPs. The
markets will be owned and managed by the woreda administration.
78.
Warehouses: The Programme will support construction of 40 warehouses for farmers’ primary cooperatives (5,000 quintals
average capacity). The need for warehouses will be identified during the feasibility studies for irrigation schemes. Priority will be
given to cooperative that have successfully graduated under the ALP in component 2. Cooperatives will finance 10% of the costs
of establishing the warehouses as part of a graduation incentive and takes note of ability to contribute by the primary
cooperatives. To avoid elite capture, a rigorous selection criteria based on the targeting strategy for such warehouses will be
used. The cooperatives should have included warehouses in their business plans, and will be owned and managed by
cooperatives.
79.
Primary market sheds: The Programme will invest in the construction of 20 accessible primary market sheds for fruits and
vegetables (50% co-financed by woredas). The selection criteria will depend on production levels and cost effectiveness. The
markets will be owned and managed by woreda administration.
14/29
80.
The accessibility needs in the local market related infrastructure for persons with disability and sanitary needs for women would
be incorporated during design and construction.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
The programme will co-finance the spot rehabilitation of 100km of last mile roads leading to irrigation schemes by financing the
road designs and government finances the construction. The prioritisation criteria will mainly depend on: a) value for money (road
improvement activities will be in the most productive areas), b) population and number of social facilities served by the road, and
c) technical and environmental considerations.
Subcomponent 1.3: Market-Oriented, Nutrition-sensitive and Climate-Resilient Food Production and Productivity – This
sub-component will invest in activities for improving climate smart, and nutrition sensitive agriculture production and productivity
as identified and prioritised in the LDIPs and informed by market opportunities identified in component 2 and will benefit from
NRM and infrastructure activities while also supporting job creation activities through technical support to entrepreneurs. The
activities are also informed by the national horticulture development and marketing strategy[32], to address the sector constraints
of limited access to improved inputs due to inadequate extension capacity to introduce and disseminate horticulture technologies.
The expected outcomes from the subcomponent will be enhanced resilience of targeted beneficiaries through improved
productivity and access to nutritious foods. The outcomes will be achieved through; a) capacity development of 150 DAs/Farmer
Trainers (FT) on improved climate smart technologies and digital technologies, b) Equipping 50 Farmer Training Centres (FTC)
with climate smart irrigation infrastructure and ICT equipment for extension services, c) formation of 2000 FBS/Farmer Field
Schools (FFS) on improved technologies for irrigated and 3000 farmer groups in rain fed areas and d) support the production of
farmer- led climate smart certified seed production and access to inputs; e) establishing integrated home gardens and supplying
inputs for nutrition dense foods to vulnerable households.
3.1 Strengthen Capacity of Advisory Services for Targeted Value Chains– Enhancing the capacity of Development Agents (DAs)
and farmer/pastoralist trainers (FT) to effectively provide extension support to the landscape communities will be essential for
effective delivery of knowledge in an inclusive and gender sensitive manner for improved productivity. In collaboration with the
Horticulture Development Directorate, the Small-scale irrigation Directorate, Livestock directorate and research, DAs/FT will
receive training of trainer's course (ToT) on climate smart agriculture practices, seed production Good Agriculture practices
(GAPs), irrigation technologies and improved livestock management practices including housing, fodder production and climate-
resilient pastureland management. DAs/FT will also receive a ToT on gender transformative approaches. The training we be
informed by a capacity assessment of the DA/FT.
In partnership with JICA, DAs/FT will receive a ToT on farming as a business (FBS) using the Smallholder Horticulture
Empowerment and Promotion (SHEP) approach. In addition, capacities of extension staff will be developed, with the support of
the MoA Food and Nutrition Coordination Office, to demonstrate nutrient-preserving and processing techniques.
The programme will support to Pastoralist/Farmer Training Centres as key entry points to support production and strengthen
community capacity. The Programme will strengthen 50 FTC to provide effective extension services through a) provision of
simple water harvesting structures b), drip irrigation kits for small-scale irrigation c) soil moisture meters and d) inputs for
demonstrations for the targeted value chains for both irrigated and rainfed crops and livestock management. The 50 FTC, will be
model centers for extension and will be located close to the targeted landscapes.
Digital extension and dissemination of climate information: the Programme will equip DAs/FTCs with ICT hardware for data
collection and scaling up the current e-extension services information dissemination system (the 8028 Farmer Hotline) under the
Agricultural Transformation Institute (ATI) to reach more beneficiaries, adding more crop series as well as ensuring equal access
to information including those with disabilities (through support from an expert) and support with the training of the DAs on usage
of system and effective dissemination of information on weather, markets, climate smart production and ARM to FTCs.
3.2 Farmer/Pastoralists Field/Business Schools establishment – Following lessons from the IFAD FFS stocktake[33] which found
P/FFS to have an impact on beneficiary capacities, self-confidence, leadership and uptake of improved technologies, DAs/FT will
organize farmers into gender, youth-sensitive, disability inclusive commodity based 2,000 P/FBS[34] and pastoralists/farmer field
schools (P/FFS) including seed multiplication groups and other agri-prenuers supporting the value chain to receive farming as a
business training (using the SHEP approach) and technical production support on climate smart agriculture technologies.
 P/FFS/FBS will participate in a programme funded demonstration for the selected enterprise for one season to gain practical
knowledge on the production and marketing practices of the selected enterprise.  Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) will
be integrated in the P/FBS/FFS curriculum to focus on livelihood planning, institutional awareness raising and changing power
relations and to promote inclusive collective action for gender equality and social inclusion.
89.
Seed multiplication and access to Climate-Smart Production Inputs – The farmers will access inputs through the cooperatives,
seed multipliers and identified input suppliers, in the landscape or through credit arrangements with off-takers for their production.
Seed multiplication groups within the FBS will receive training, monitoring and certification through the seed services unit to
produce certified seed.
90.
In cases of emergencies declared by the government, the programme will integrate activities such as direct input provision and
provision of storage facilities to farmers affected by emergencies following the LLRP emergency response model.
91.
The Programme will explore partnership with Lersha, a private company, which provides farmers with a one-stop digital service
to access farm inputs (crops and livestock), rental mechanization services[35] and dynamic agro-climate advisory services using
technology in Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR, Sidama and Somali.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
3.3 Nutrition Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) –The Programme will adopt an evidence-based SBCC action
plan to influence change in key behaviours affecting diets, for both household members and value chain actors. Extension will be
one of the entry points to channel messages in different formats (e.g., in-person dialogue, digital content on DA tablets), in
addition to mass media, GALS, religious leaders or landscape committees.
15/29
Integrated Homestead Gardening (IHG): The Programme will also promote IHG among the most vulnerable households[36] who
have access to water (via multi-purpose water infrastructure or water harvesting systems). The Programme will scale up the
dissemination and multiplications of Orange-Flesh Sweet Potatoes (OFSP) in targeted landscapes.
Component 2: Agribusiness Development – The LDIPs will identify agriculture commercialisation opportunities in the area,
key commodities with potential for food and nutrition security and offtake to lucrative markets and the main actors. The outcome
of this component will be strengthened capacities of farmer and pastoral organizations to improve access to finance and
remunerative markets for small-scale women, men and young farmers and pastoralists, including PWDs in the Programme areas.
Subcomponent 2.1: Market Access Linkage Support – This sub-component will invest in addressing market linkage
blockages as identified and prioritised in the LDIPs with a focus on crop and forage markets. This subcomponent will seek to
develop value chain business linkages in the Programme areas where women and men farmers and pastoralists will largely
respond to market opportunities through the following interventions:
1.1 Inclusive value chain assessment and partner business companies' identification: The Programme will map existing pathways
across the value chain and different actors in which farmers and buyers engage to ensure the market platform includes the
current value and supply chain realities and including commodities supported under PACT. This map will: a) include cooperatives
and producer clusters, local traders, agribusinesses, off takers and external processing markets, such as IAIPs; and b) focus on
expanding data collection and improving data quality at the Kebele level and inclusion of PACT Programme priority commodities
to ensure accurate pricing information. This data collection will also be supported by youth in the community working through the
farmer promoter model. The digital market platform will also provide data on market trends to inform discussions under of the
Market Alliance Platforms (MAPs) to ensure cooperatives are increasing their market share and access adequate information on
pricing and market demands.
The Programme will adapt the digital-based inclusive market information services, leveraging and scaling the current National
Market Information System (NMIS) under ATI. The PACT programme will partner with ATI to provide market related information
to small holders via the Cooperatives and Development Agents through Department of Extension services. ATI will on-board
Cooperatives working under PACT as well as mapped agribusinesses (including local traders) and off takers who will be able to
access information on the available volumes and market pricing.
1.2 Capacity building of experts: Business facilitators from ATI, Regional Bureaux, and cooperation promotion officers, will be
trained to facilitate the cooperative training sessions. A total of 120 facilitators, one from each Woreda and 30 from region and
federal level will be trained.
1.3 Develop the capacity of cooperatives and unions/farmer organizations with increased women's voice: Cooperatives face the
following key challenges: lack of leadership and business management skills; lack of access to credit; lack of inputs and weak
customer relationships. Professionalization of cooperatives/unions/producer organizations is a critical if the Programme is to
strengthen individual smallholder for sustainable business linkages.
100.
The capacity building of cooperatives will follow the IFC’s Agribusiness Leadership Program (ALP) for smallholder farmers and
will involve the following steps: a) Identification and establishment and strengthening of 150 primary cooperatives and 12 Unions
that serve the producers/pastoralists in Programme areas (The cooperatives will be selected based on the programme and
IFAD’s pro poor value chains targeting guidelines to ensure inclusivity of poor, women and youth[37]) ; b) Recruitment of 10
certified assessors for baseline assessment and reassessment c) conducting baseline assessment using approved tools through
an independent service provider; d) Developing a clear graduation path for each cooperative; e) design training sessions based
on identified gaps; f) provide coaching support to cooperative/union leaders. Synergies will be sought with the Farmer's
Organisations for Africa, Caribbean and Pacific grant programme in IFAD.
101.
1.4 Facilitation of market alliance platforms (MAPs): The Programme will facilitate frequent communication and in advance
discussion for the required enabling environment for the business relationship with the stakeholders in the region. Support will be
provided to enhance joint action of the stakeholders in the MAPs. The MAPs will meet biannually for the first three years (five
market alliance platform meetings twice per year for three years with about 50 participants). Contract farming guideline
finalization, and implementation support will be provided by federal and regional authorities in collaboration with other
stakeholders using the stakeholders’ platform and training sessions.
102.
1.5 Investments in graduating cooperatives/unions: As an incentive for participation in the graduation process, a matching grant
facility will be initiated[38]. The facility will provide 50% matching grants of up to $25,000, to cooperatives/unions supported by
the programme that have graduated and have developed a business plan during the graduation support path. The business plans
will be informed by the needs as identified during the graduation support path. Participating cooperatives have to demonstrate
support to target group farmers. Specific requirements for grant administration that include: specific criteria for eligibility,
procedures for inclusivity, and grant award mechanisms, will be developed at start-up. The grant will be managed by the
agribusiness officer, assisted by independent technical teams. There will be two technical teams, at regional level and at federal
level who will review and assess the project proposals for each cooperative/union for feasibility and to ensure fairness. The
criteria for selection of grant recipients will also include the ability to raise the 50% co-payment (cash or in-kind). A grants
administration manual will be prepared during the first year of implementation.
103.
Small-scale technologies and postharvest infrastructure investments will be provided to the cooperatives, including threshers for
cereals, and processors, such as solar dryers for tomatoes or mill for cereals will be eligible for support through the grant and
IGEENFIN II as part of the business plan under the matching grant support.
104.
16/29
2.6 Initiating and Developing Business-to-Business Relationships: Following the value chain and business identification, the
programme will initiate and facilitate a sustainable business relationship between the producer representative organization and
potential processors. This will be through facilitation of Business to Business (B2B) sessions/deal making and the implementation
of jointly agreed actions with the private sector active engagement. The programme will finance the travel costs of the producer
organization representatives to go to the meetings or the buyers' premise or the buyers/processors to come to the community on
a declining basis for two years. These meetings will assist in enhancing the trust-building process. The Programme will facilitate
follow-up discussions between produce buyers, input suppliers/service providers with cooperatives and unions. The Programme
will cover events/travel allowance for 3 events in cost-sharing/travel allowance for 3 events in cost-sharing with the declining
principle. Young women and men agripreneurs will be supported to attend the deal making meetings. Special attention will be
made to facilitate business deal making meetings between small-scale producers and agribusinesses in the IAPs
105.
The programme will create market linkage for a total of 80,000 HHs (60,000 irrigated and 20,000 rain-fed). The business-to-
business linkages will be through partnerships or joint ventures, contract farming, or other business arrangements through the
facilitated business deal meetings and follow-up.
106.
Subcomponent 2.2: Tailored Business Support to Young men and women Agripreneurs The sub-component will support
young entrepreneurs to access business development support packages, including: a) tailored training for different types of agri-
businesses to enhance entrepreneurial attitude and business management skills; b) business plan development support; c) seed
capital; d) skill-based training depending on demand; e) mentorship; and f) engagement in policy dialogue. A total of 3,000 young
agripreneurs will be trained and 305 agribusinesses (of which five are led by youth with disabilities) will be trained and financially
supported via matching grants in three selected pilot regions, namely Oromia, SNNPR and Sidama[39]. This sub-component will
depend on availability of financing from the Dutch Embassy.
107.
The Programme will promote widely, Agri-preneurship 101 training, developed by FAO, in the Programme area. The course
combines entrepreneurial best practices with personal initiative training linked with the value chain approach. Gender parity will
be a critical factor in the selection of trainers, with the consideration for at least one trainer with disability. After successful
completion, participants will receive a certificate from FAO.
108.
Master trainers will be selected and tasked to provide ToT for selected trainers (ten per region), including extension officers,
TVET officers, business trainers, staff at FTC centres, OPD (Organisations of Persons with Disabilities) staff. The master trainers
will provide continued support and mentoring throughout the Programme.
109.
Over the course of four months, trainers will build rural youth’ entrepreneurial, business, and leadership skills to develop market-
oriented business plans to be funded under this subcomponent. Each year, the Programme will train 600 young agri-preneurs.
The training will enable youth agripreneurs to come up with business plans that are profitable and compliant with aspects, such
as climate resilience, nutrition sensitivity, social benefits, climate-smart technologies, etc. This will provide a foundation for
agribusinesses to drive innovation with a social and climate lens. Agri-preneurship opportunities will be identified from LDIPs and
the value chain assessments.
110.
The selection criteria for young entrepreneurs will include: a) owning no or small land, b) residing in and around targeted
landscapes, and c) who have actively engaged in the development of LDIPs under component 1. Close consultation with Kebele
authorities, DAs, Bureaus of Job Creation and Enterprise Development and one-stop job centres will support in identifying
underemployed and unemployed youth in targeted areas. Identification of skilled youth with disabilities will be facilitated through
the Federation of Ethiopian Association of Persons with Disabilities. Rigorous application of direct and self-targeting will serve the
purpose to avoid elite-capturing. Selection of trainers and young agripreneurs will be coordinated the RPCMU and the
Agribusiness specialist.
111.
FAO will provide Technical Assistance to the PCMU to implement the sub-component.
112.
Innovation Matching Grant Window: To support new innovative youth and women entrepreneurs, PACT will provide matching
grants of max. 5000 USD, wherein young agri-preneurs contribute 10 percent with a gradual increase at beneficiary contribution
over time. The first ‘small’ beneficiary contribution aims to attracting youth with no means to contribute more. To avoid elite
capture, as much as possible, the Kebele administration officials and and landscape development committees and Watershed
Associations, will lead the selection process, using the guidance from the targeting strategy developed by the project. Each year,
60 business proposals submitted by groups will be selected for financing, using the following criteria with a) linked with value-
chains supported under the Programme; b) should be climate-responsive; c) contribute to improving food and nutrition security,
and d) increase gender equity. Supported agribusinesses can qualify for a top-up of maximum US$ 15,000 matching grant
(young agri-preneurs contribute 50 percent) after successfully demonstrating a proof of concept along with a sound up-scaling
strategy. An independent technical committee, recruited by the Programme, will be responsible for evaluating the proposals and
recommending award. The RPSC, will be responsible for grant awards. A grant manual developed for cooperatives will also
detail the application procedures, eligibility criteria, eligible investments aligned to young agri-preneurs, as well as monitoring and
evaluation procedures.
113.
Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services – This will be a cross-cutting
component servicing the technical components and facilitating pathways for the effective and inclusive functioning of the target
value chains, from production to consumption. It comprises two subcomponents.PACT will capitalise on the current SSTC
initiative, on water management technologies, as an opportunity to learn on how to best implement institutional and policy
strengthening related interventions.
114.
Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support – Interventions under this subcomponent will seek to
avail a conducive environment for effective Programme activity implementation and to strengthen institutions for improved
service delivery.
115.
Institutional Strengthening –, To augment the capacity of the institutions (public and private sector/farmer-owned) responsible for
providing services to smallholder farmers, the Programme will support:
17/29
Coordination for the Ethiopia Food System Transformation Road map implementation – by i) supporting sensitisation and
planning workshops in programme Regions and Woredas; and ii) revise the nutrition sensitive agriculture strategy and iii)
monitoring the implementation of the roadmap.
Capacity building of government institutions implementing the programme in agriculture risk management; gender
transformative mechanisms; nutrition mainstreaming and use of nutrition sensitive data in decision making; landscape
management and climate risk analysis and implementation of climate adaptation and mitigation interventions, and disability
inclusion to inform decision making.
116.
Policy Support: The focus of this intervention will be to facilitate the development, review and update of policies and strategies in
areas identified as game changing solutions for the Ethiopia’s Food System Transformation (EFST) roadmap, including for
gender equality and youth to thrive in agriculture.
117.
The PACT programme will create alliances with key stakeholders to advocate for the development and revision of strategies. The
development of these strategies will be led by MoA. The activities foreseen under this intervention include: a) Support to
agriculture water strategies – by conducting an analysis on the current agriculture water infrastructure financing, utilisation,
operation, management and ownership models and providing policy and strategy recommendations; b) support to the revision of
national nutrition sensitive agriculture strategy; c) support to revise current strategies on gender to reflect gender transformative
approaches and support implementation through PACT; d) support the GoE roadmap for digital services towards the roll out of
specific pillars under  the Digital Agriculture Extension Advisory Services (DAEAS) road map specifically and integrate some
pillars in PACT; e) human capital development to support extension services, data and data analytics and business development
as part of supporting market linkages for small producers and cooperatives; and f) support to the implementation of the National
Adaptation Plan (NAP) by identifying lessons and challenges during implementation. This will be done in collaboration with the
Ministry of Planning and Development and Environmental Protection Authority. Any policy related documents generated from
policy support work of PACT programme will be disseminated through relevant channels identified in the KM plan. The PACT
programme will be using the available platforms to advocate for the implementation of the Policies and Strategies developed to
create conducive environment in the sector including the Rural Economic Development and Food Security  Sector (REDFS)
Working Group platform where  Government & Development Partners come together to have a dialogue, alignment,
coordination, harmonization and resource mobilization to the agriculture sector  and support government’s effort in speeding up
the agricultural transformation agendas.
118.
Subcomponent 3.2: Programme Coordination and Implementation Support Services – This subcomponent’s objective will
be to manage the Programme in an efficient and effective manner by providing overall coordination, including planning and
implementation, financial management and control, procurement support, Monitoring and Evaluation, knowledge management,
and progress reporting. It will also ensure liaison and linkage with all other relevant projects/Programmes being implemented in
the country that seek to address similar or related constraints; this would be aimed at taking advantage of existent synergies and
avoiding duplications. For this purpose, Programme Coordination Units (PCUs) will be established at the National and Regional
levels to coordinate the different Programme activities. Details are contained in Section K (a): Programme Management and
Coordination.
E. Theory of Change
18/29
119.
Smallholder farmers and pastoralists face the following challenges that limit their production, dietary diversity and market access:
a) land degradation; b) limited access to water and inefficient water management; c) inadequate extension services on priority
value chains; d) vulnerability to climate change and limited access to improved climate smart technologies (inputs,
mechanisation, climate and weather information); e) inadequate access to finance; f) limited social inclusion and malnutrition; g)
limited access to remunerative markets and  market infrastructure; h) Limited business capacities and inclusivity of Farmers’
Organisations; and i) Weak policy and institutional framework
120.
The Programme’s Theory of Change (ToC) is based on the assumptions that commercialization of pastoralists and small holder
farmers, in drought prone areas with a depleted natural resource base, begins with inclusive community empowerment. The
Programme will develop and facilitate the household and community capacities in the targeted landscape to develop inclusive,
nutrition focused, community-led, and climate-smart landscape development and investments plans. These plans are the
foundations to building sustainable and resilient communities.
121.
Through the plans, the Programme will support communities to address production, climate, environment, gender and nutrition
related challenges by supporting communities to invest in rehabilitating their landscapes. Equitably restoring degraded lands and
transitioning to agroforestry farming, and whole community use of improved cookstoves, increases chances of participation in the
voluntary carbon market. Providing communities with improved access to water for household use, livestock and irrigation,
coupled with improved access to climate smart production technologies including through digital means, inputs, and training will
improve production of market required commodities. Integrating nutrition and gender and social inclusion in the interventions, will
lead to increased production and access to nutrient dense crop for household consumption for all. 
122.
To improve market participation, the project building on the capacities of pastoral and farmer organizations and youth led
businesses that have benefitted from the production support. This will involve supporting them to effectively run their businesses
and promote B2B deal making between producers and off-takers, physical and digital market platforms, supporting access to
finance for cooperatives and business that support the value- chain including youth led businesses and investing in accessible
market infrastructure, such as storage facilities, market sheds and last mile roads. This support will help to de-risk pastoralists
and smallholder farmers and attract private sector stakeholders for increased incomes.
123.
To achieve gender-transformative and socially inclusive results, Programme interventions will address underlying root causes of
gender inequalities and social exclusion, and build women’s empowerment and social inclusion in the markets.  
124.
Capacity building of government and rural institutions in various areas including ICT4D and creating and supporting the
implementation of enabling policy environment for private sector engagement through policy dialogue, gender transformation,
disability inclusion and for youth inclusion will contribute to the success of the project interventions.
125.
The investments are expected to contribute to: a) Improved adaptive capacity and decreased greenhouse gas emission; b)
Increased and equitable access to water; c) Increased production and productivity of nutrient dense crops d) green jobs created
and entrepreneurship for rural youths and women enhanced, including for those living with a disability; e) economic
empowerment, increased voice and participation in decision-making bodies and more equitable workload for women f) increased
access to improved dietary choices and nutritious foods; g) increased access to finance, markets and household incomes.
126.
These outcomes would ultimately lead to climate resilient, inclusive and equitable agriculture income growth for rural households,
food and nutrition security and equitable social and economic empowerment. Income growth is expected to consequently be re-
invested back into production and marketing activities as part of a virtuous cycle. In order to assess project progress and
achievements towards resilience-strengthening, the TOC integrates the collection and analysis of data provided through the
implementation of Resilience Design and Monitoring Tool (RDMT) at Programme inception, MTR and at Programme completion.
The schematic presentation of the ToC is presented in Annex 2.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
127.
Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) – Successful implementation of the Programme will contribute to the
achievement of the following SDGs - a) SDG 1 (End poverty in all its forms everywhere); b) SDG 2 (End hunger, achieve food
security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture); c) SDG 5 (Achieve gender equality and empower all women
and girls) through the Gender Action Learning Systems and other gender-specific mainstreaming activities; d) SDG 6 (Ensure
availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all) through the construction of multi-purpose water supply
systems; e) SDG 8 (Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent
work for all); f) SDG 10 (Reduce inequality within and among countries); g) SADG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate
change and its impacts) by promoting climate smart agriculture and climate-proofing of all constructed/renovated infrastructure;
and h) SDG 17 (Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development) by
seeking partnerships with the international community, civil society, the private sector and other actors. PACT is aligned with the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) principles and outcomes on targeting those left
behind especially PWDs, building resilience for rural smallscale farmers to foresee, prepare and recover from shocks and
sustainability, through capacity development of country capacity. Specifically PACT contributes to Outcomes 2 and 3 of the
UNDSF[40].
128.
Alignment with National Priorities – The country’s priorities with regard to smallholder agriculture, rural poverty reduction and
enhanced food and nutrition security are presented in the National Rural Development Policy and Strategies, NAIP, Agriculture
Sector Ten-Year Plan, CRGE, CSA, NAP-ETH and Eth-Food System Transformation roadmap. During the 2021 Food Systems
Summit, the Ethiopia Government presented key national pathways to transform its food system, calling for a paradigm shift
thinking away from “feeding people” to “nourishing people. The GoE identified 22 game changing solutions, including support to
diversified nutrient-dense foods production by promoting garden level production, technologies and mechanisation, agricultural
commercialisation for nutrient-dense commodities and water access for all.
19/29
129.
Alignment with IFAD Policies and Corporate Priorities – The design and implementation of the Programme is aligned with a
number of IFAD’s policies. These include: a) IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-25 whose goal is to ‘enable rural households and
communities to gain increasingly remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods that help them permanently move out of
poverty and food insecurity’; b) the Environment and Natural Resource Management (ENRM) Policy, Climate Change Strategy,
and the Land Policy; c) Targeting Policy – Reaching the Poor (2010); d) Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment (2012) and
IFAD’s Youth Action Plan (2019-2021); and e) Nutrition Action Plan (2019-2025) – the Programme’s nutrition focus aligns with
IFAD’s corporate commitment to nutrition-sensitive interventions. PACT is also aligned with ongoing portfolio initiatives by scaling
and strengthening nutrition, gender model farming, irrigation user associations and cooperatives supported under PASDIP,
incorporating community led development plans from LLRP and financing modalities from RUFIPIII.
130.
THE Programme is fully aligned with the current Country Strategic Opportunities Programme (COSOP) 2017-2023. The
Programme contributes to Strategic Objectives of the COSOP: SO1: Enhanced resilience and productivity of ecosystems and
livelihoods through improved management of natural resources, particularly water; and  SO2: Enhanced linkages with the
private sector to ensure increased and sustained access to markets, finance and agricultural technology.
131.
Country Ownership – Conceptualisation of the Programme Concept Note and design followed a truly participatory approach with
consultations at the national and regional levels, led by government Programme delivery teams (PDTs). The government PDTs
ensured that the Programme was consistent with/representative of the respective strategies, priorities and policies of the
Government (both at the national and regional levels) and the actual needs of the target beneficiaries. The PDTs consulted
widely ensuring that the key stakeholders, particularly the target beneficiaries, beneficiary institutions, and the different
government institutions contributed to the Programme objectives.
132.
Harmonization and Partnerships – The Programme design process will seek to coordinate and harmonize with the
projects/Programmes financed by IFAD, the Government and various development partners that support thematic areas related
to its development objective. This will take advantage of synergies and avoid duplications. The Programme’s potential
collaboration partners are presented in Annex 1. 
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
133.
134.
Project Costs Total project costs are set at US$ 179.6 million over the seven-year project implementation period. A summary
breakdown of the project costs by component is shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Project costs by component and sub-component
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
135.
Project Financing. The project will be financed through the contributions from the following financiers: (i) IFAD, with a grant of
US$78.2 million and an additional grant of US$ 10.5 million through the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP+) ; (ii) the Gender Transformative Mechanism in the context of Climate Adaptation (GTM), with a grant of US$ 5 million;
(iii) the European Commission (EC), with a loan of US$ 16.9 million; (iv) a contribution of US$ 2 million from an additional
financier (to be confirmed); and (v) the Inclusive Green Financing Initiative (IGREENFIN), subject to the approval from the Green
Climate Fund (GCF), with a loan of US$35 million through a line of credit.
136.
Domestic co-financing will include: (i) the Government (GOE), which will contribute with about US$ 23.9 million (including waived
duties and taxes and a direct contribution); (ii) private sector (enterprises, associations, unions, cooperatives), with an expected
contribution of US$ 3.7 million (mainly through matching grants); and (iii) beneficiaries, who are expected to provide about US$
4.5 million (through in-kind and cash contributions). In case other donors aim at contributing with their own resources they will so
do on a parallel-financing basis.
20/29
137.
The proposed financing plan for is summarized in Table 2.
138.
Table 2: Project costs by component and financier
139.
(Table 2 continues)
140.
(Table 2 continues)
c. Disbursement
141.
The project disbursements categories comprise of: - i) Consultancies; ii) Works; iii) Vehicles; iv) Equipment & material; v)
Training; vii) Workshops; viii) Goods, services & inputs; viii) Salaries & allowances; ix) Operating costs; and x) Grants &
subsidies, which are allocated across various co-financiers. The overall programme recurrent costs is 4.2% for the total
programme while under IFAD financing it results to 8.46% which is within acceptable limits. Trainings and workshops are
considered high risks expenditure categories which will be monitored keenly to ensure it is adequately supported and incurred as
per procedures. 
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
142.
The economic and financial analysis (see details in Annex 5) shows that a wide adoption of climate-smart and improved farming
management would have important financial and economic benefits in the form of better on-farm economic returns, households’
livelihood, and reduced poverty. Results suggest significant potential for creating positive net cash flows for targeted households
in their productive activities through PACT interventions (especially for the irrigated crops), confirming attractiveness for the
farmers. Cash flows show that the households will have the capacity to cover the necessary operating costs.
143.
Financial analysis –The financial analysis demonstrates that, due to the implementation of project activities, household
beneficiaries would increase their financial annual net incomes. Indeed, the aggregate Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) is
33.9%, well above the opportunity cost of capital, showing the financial effectiveness of the planned activities and providing a
strong justification for the financing request. Such rate is expected to increase e.g., in case of benefits increments by 20%
(plausible given the conservative analytical assumptions) confirming the convenience of the proposed investments even with
higher opportunity cost of capital.
21/29
144.
Economic analysis – The economic analysis has confirmed the convenience of the investment, from the society’s standpoint.
Overall EIRR is 17.7%, well above the opportunity cost of capital in Ethiopia (7.9%), even in the case that at the end of the project
only 75% the total target beneficiaries would adopt the proposed climate-smart agricultural management practices. The
economic NPV is estimated at about 85 M$ over the 20-year period of the analysis. The discount rate adopted in the economic
analysis is 10%.
145.
The positive results are strong as shown in the sensitivity and risk analyses for adverse situations as cost over-runs, reduction of
prices for their agricultural products, and even reduction in the rate of adoption; as well as for all the risk categories, included the
climatic risk. These indicators - while monitoring performance during the implementation of the project - can provide valuable
information for adjusting the strategy and interventions to improve the project impact.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
146.
Elaboration of the exit and sustainability strategy has been done at the following levels: a) sustainability in the farming systems;
b) profitability of the market led approach; c) gender and nutrition focus; and d) capacity building at all intervention levels.
147.
Sustainability in the Farming Systems – Community-led environmental protection will be a key feature of the Programme that
ensures ownership and sustenance of sustainable land management practices. The landscape approach including NBS and
water shed management activities as well as climate resilient infrastructure development will ensure environmental sustainability
of project interventions. The rules and procedures that will be developed for management of natural resources will contribute to
sustainability.
148.
Profitability of the Market-led Approach – Market-led production and B2B linkages to be implemented by the Programme and the
benefits that accrue for the relationships created between farmers and off-takers will be a basis for sustainability and exit of the
Programme. Supporting and mentoring agripreneurs both technically and financially will also be a key sustainability measure of
the Programme.
149.
Community Empowerment and Strengthening of Institutions – The Programme will empower communities and strengthen
institutions for sustainable management of investments under the Programme. This will include innovative processes and
systems for management of infrastructure, farmer level institutions, such as cooperatives/unions and IWUAs. Building capacities
on governance, business skill and financial management at all levels will contribute to sustainability of investments.
150.
Investments in Human Social Capital – Interventions, such as gender transformative approaches, nutrition social behaviour
changes and youth empowerment mechanisms will be key to redress social imbalances and to build individuals, households and
communities on their livelihoods and quality of life. In addition, the policy reforms supported in Component 3 will drive the gender
equality agenda beyond the Programme’s life. The institutional capacity building that will be undertaken will ensure that skills
exist to continue supporting THE Programme-initiated activities after completion. The capacity building will cover government
institutions at the federal, regional and woreda levels and the target group’s producer institutions.  
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
151.
This section provides selected risks that could have a negative impact on the Programme’s implementation; the associated
mitigation measures are also presented. The magnitude and probability of the risks are measured and presented and mitigation
measures provided, in Annex 9. The overall inherent risk is rated as substantial and residual risk as moderate.
152.
Political instability: The African Union is forging ahead with mediation talks in Ethiopia to resolve the issues. There is also an
initiative from the GoE side to have a national dialogue which is expected to work towards peace, justice, democracy, national
unity, consensus and reconciliation among the Ethiopian people. The Programme will adopt a gradual implementation approach
and all conflict affected areas are not be included in the programme. When the situation improved, expansion to other areas will
only happen when there is additional financing
153.
Economic instability: Progress with political stability is expected to contribute to economic stability, and economic growth is
forecasted to recover during 2022. Monetary policy is expected to remain flexible in response to the government’s financing
requirements. The government is expected to do further reforms in public finance and investment management to improve the
efficiency of public expenditures and managing inflation. The Programme will take a gradual and phased approach that will adjust
according to the changing macro-economic situation to invest in increasing target groups’ resilience to economic instability.
154.
Vulnerability to climate change: Climate resilient infrastructure development, crop and livestock productivity enhancement
through the application of climate smart agriculture such as conservation agriculture, agroforestry techniques landscape
management activities, awareness and capacity development will enhance resilience of the community and ecosystem.
155.
22/29
The programme has various FM risks as follows:- i) It has multiple financiers financing different activities hence risks of mix-up in
budgeting and expenditure allocations to these multiple financiers during implementation, ii) risk of commingling of funds at the
entity which will be provided with advances for implementation of programme activities, iii) possibility of the FPCU and RPCU
staff hired lacking familiarity with IFAD, EU, GCF and other financiers key financial management procedures; iv) inadequate
accounting system which can have challenges in segregating financial reports to the various financiers, categories, components
and consolidating entire programme expenditure; v) possible delays in commitment/ contracting by other co-financiers for
instance GCF which is providing loans that will be negotiated separately, vi) possibility of delays and inaccuracies in financial
reporting due to multiple administrative levels of project implementation that have fiduciary responsibilities ie FPCU, RPCU and
Woredas (districts) at lower levels, vii) risks of inadequate audit coverage of the programme audit considering there are multiple
regions and many Woredas which will be implementing the programme.
156.
To mitigate these risks, implementing entities will have ring-fenced bank accounts for segregating funds received and tracking
advances. The AWPB will be prepared with details showing financiers and proportion of financing for each activity, to guide
finance teams in expenditure mapping. An appropriate accounting system will be acquired capable of networking and inputting at
regional levels with multiple recording codes for analysing reports on components, categories, financiers for reporting quarter,
cumulative for the year and cumulative since start of the programme including recording of in kind contributions. Programme
finance teams shall be competitively selected and will be made up of qualified personnel with appropriate expertise.  Capacity
building training will be organised at start-up to familiarise project staff with FM requirements. MoUs will be established between
Federal Government and participating Regional Governments, between the Regional Governments and their participating
Woredas, MoA and DBE stipulating FM requirements and responsibilities. A comprehensive audit coverage guiding plan has
been prepared which will ensure adequate audit coverage throughout implementation. 
157.
Due to above highlighted risks, financial inherent risk is assessed as Substantial. While adequate mitigation measures have
been proposed, residual risk is maintained as substantial but will be updated during implementation.
I. Environment and Social category
158.
Based on the preliminary assessment, the environmental and social risks will be environmental degradation and pollution,
occupational health hazard, conflict, temporary and/or permanent displacement and limited access to use of resources,
complaints/grievances. Uncontrolled use of pesticides and other agrichemicals may also affect biodiversity. Furthermore, some
environmental and health related impacts may persist for a long time and some impacts can be irreversible. Regarding nutrition,
the main risk lies in the capacity building interventions on food processing and preparation, but significant negative impact is not
anticipated as long as the food safety standards are applied as per the GoE regulations and planned sensitisation interventions
on healthy diets are implemented as per the PACT Nutrition strategy. The preliminary environmental and social category of the
project is Substantial. Accordingly, an Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) has been
developed and annexed. In addition, plans for Free Prior Informed Consent (FPIC), Pest Management Plan and Labour
assessment and Management are prepared. Detailed Social Development Plan, including FPIC, will be prepared during the early
implementation phase once the target communities in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas are known.
J. Climate Risk classification
159.
Following the assessment and consultations undertaken during project design and based on the reviewed climate-screening tool,
SECAP 2021, the climate risk is confirmed to be Substantial. The main risks revolve around the high exposure of rural
communities in target Regions to climate change hazards and the low adaptive capacity of their livelihoods, in particular food
production systems. The frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, like droughts, floods, pest outbreaks are projected to
increase, compared with the baseline with higher losses and damages caused by a changing climate. The ESCMF includes
mitigation measures to address climatic risks and Programme impacts. Also, the IFAD's Climate Toolbox has been used for the
identification of additional measures that have embedded in Programme design to support the Climate Transformation paradigm
shift.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
160.
Programme Management –The Ministry of Agriculture will be the lead executing agency (but will seek to include key agencies
and private sector partners in innovative areas of the Programme). The MoA Minister of State Natural Resources, will be
responsible for overseeing the overall Programme coordination with support from the Directorate of Small-Scale Irrigation. The
Programme will be coordinated following a decentralised government structure. Thus, the Programme’s institutional
arrangements for coordination will be specified at three levels − Federal, Regional, and Woreda. MoA will delegate the role of the
lead executing agency to a Federal Programme Coordination Office (FPCO) that will be established at that level. Composition of
the FPCO and the Terms of Reference (ToRs)/Job Descriptions (JoDs) of all the FPCO staff are presented in the Programme
Implementation Manual (PIM).
161.
At the Federal level, the oversight function will be provided by the National Programme Steering Committee (NPSC). The
composition of the NPSC will reflect the Programme Programme goal, development objective, implementation arrangements,
innovations and partnerships. NPSC will provide oversight with regard to policy and strategic guidance on the Programme focus,
priority setting and institutional strengthening to ensure that the Programme achieves its objective and contributes to the higher-
level sector policy and strategic goals.
23/29
162.
At the Regional level, the Programme will be managed by Heads of the Bureaux of Agriculture, in close collaboration of
participating bureaux. Regional Programme Coordination Offices (RPCOs) will be established in all participating regions and will
be responsible for the day-to-day coordination of the Programme. Composition of the RPCOs and the ToRs/JoDs of all the RPCO
staff are presented in the PIM.
163.
A Regional Project Steering Committees (RPSCs), chaired by the respective Heads of Bureaux of Agriculture, will be charged
with the responsibility of providing the oversight function at that level. The composition of the RPSCs will ensure appropriate
representation of all the relevant Bureaux and other representatives from the other stakeholders considered of relevancy to the
effective implementation of the Programme.
164.
At the Woreda and Programme site level, experience from PASIDP II suggests that there is a need to have dedicated Programme
staff at the Woreda level for effective and efficient implementation. A clustering approach will be used at this level with six
Woredas forming a cluster. Accordingly, the PACT Programme will have two staff at the Woreda Cluster level: a) Cluster
Coordinator; and b) Cluster Assistant Accountant. The duo will work with a team of three Development Agents (government
extension staff) per Woreda to oversee activity implementation. The skill mix of the Development Agents will depend on priority
interventions in a given Woreda. The Woreda Coordinator, having close linkages on the ground, will be handling day-to-day
issues in Programme implementation in close collaboration with the regional RPCU
165.
The IGREENFIN II financing will be implemented by the Development Bank of Ethiopia, following the RUFIP III Programme
management arrangements. The Programme activities will create a demand for financial services from IGREENFIN through
Micro-Finance Institutions (MFIs) and RUSSACOs.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
166.
The FPCU will be responsible for overall financial management of the Programme.  It will be responsible to release funds against
agreed plans, drawn out of the approved AWPBs, disburse funds to implementing agencies and coordinate monitoring and
financial reporting for the Programme as a whole. The RPCUs will be responsible for supporting, coordinating and overseeing
financial functions of woreda offices as well as Regional Bureaux, in their respective regions. DBE will be responsible for
implementation of iGreenFin (GFC) financial services activities which will be disbursed through MFIs and RUSSACOs.
Programme finance teams are proposed at each implementing agencies with FM responsibilities namely FPCU, RPCUs,
Woredas and DBE as detailed in the PIM. MoUs between Federal Government and participating Regions will include FM
responsibilities at each level. Likewise, participating Woredas will also sign MoUs with Regional Government to ensure
responsibilities at each level are clear and formalised. MoU signature will be a condition for disbursements of funds to the
Regions and Woredas, respectively. MoUs will also be signed between DBE and MoA for the iGreen Finance to be implemented
by DBE.
167.
Three disbursement mechanisms will be available: a) Advance Withdrawal; b) Direct Payments; and c) Reimbursements.
Disbursements from IFAD will be made by way of an advance to Designated Accounts, with subsequent replenishments
quarterly based on interim financial reports (IFRs) cash forecasts, aligned to approved AWPB.
168.
Designated accounts for the different sources of financing will be required to avoid commingling of funds. At Federal level, each
designated account will have a corresponding operational bank account in local currency. Programme implementation will be
reported in IFMIS and align with GoE’s administrative systems; funds will be disbursed to participating Regions which will
subsequently further disburse funds to participating Woredas. Participating Regions and Woredas will maintain single dedicated
programme accounts for receiving PACT funds from Federal and Regional levels, respectively.  Federal and Regional levels will
also maintain separate bank accounts in local currency for receiving funds from Government and processing counterpart costs.
 A detailed fund-flow diagram is provided in the PIM .
169.
Programme budgeting will be done in accordance with existing GoE procedures. The AWPB shall be approved by the
Programme Steering Committee and provided with no-objection by IFAD. The AWPB will be prepared with adequate details
showing financiers and proportion of financing for each activity to guide finance teams in expenditure mapping
170.
Programme financial reporting will be through quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) in line with IFAD guidelines. To ease
financial reporting, all required information would be mapped in the accounting system at acquisition such that financial reporting
would only entail extracting data from the accounting system with minimal refinements. Quarterly IFRs will be submitted to IFAD
within 45 days after period end. Dedicated programme finance staff will be put in place at Federal, Regional and Woredas levels
to ensure adequate financial reporting. Harmonised financial reporting templates for all financiers will be prepared at start-up.   
171.
Internal Audit services will be provided by the IA Department of MoA , facilitated by the project as with other IFAD projects in
Ethiopia. FPCU finance staff will also regularly carry out financial monitoring reviews at implementing agencies to ensure
expenditure are made and supported as expected, further providing capacity building on any areas of weakness .
172.
The project will be audited by the Audit Service Corporation (ASC), the Supreme Audit Institution of Ethiopia. The auditor’s
annual work plan will ensure adequate coverage of various institutions receiving programme funds, and will cover all major risk
areas. Draft audit TORs are annexed to the PIM, TORs will be subject to annual IFAD no-objection.
Financial Management
173.
24/29
The FPCU will be responsible for overall financial management of the Programme. It will be responsible to release funds against
agreed plans, drawn out of the approved AWPBs, disburse funds to implementing agencies and coordinate monitoring and
financial reporting for the Programme as a whole. The RPCUs will be responsible for supporting, coordinating and overseeing
financial functions of woreda offices as well as Regional Bureaux, in their respective regions. DBE will be responsible for
implementation of iGreenFin (GFC) financial services activities which will be disbursed through MFIs and RUSSACOs.
Programme finance teams are proposed at each implementing agencies with FM responsibilities namely FPCU, RPCUs,
Woredas and DBE as detailed in the PIM. MoUs between Federal Government and participating Regions will include FM
responsibilities at each level. Likewise, participating Woredas will also sign MoUs with Regional Government to ensure
responsibilities at each level are clear and formalised. MoU signature will be a condition for disbursements of funds to the
Regions and Woredas, respectively. MoUs will also be signed between DBE and MoA for the iGreen Finance to be implemented
by DBE.
174.
Three disbursement mechanisms will be available: a) Advance Withdrawal; b) Direct Payments; and c) Reimbursements.
Disbursements from IFAD will be made by way of an advance to Designated Accounts, with subsequent replenishments
quarterly based on interim financial reports (IFRs) cash forecasts, aligned to approved AWPB.
175.
Designated accounts for the different sources of financing will be required to avoid commingling of funds. At Federal level, each
designated account will have a corresponding operational bank account in local currency. Programme implementation will be
reported in IFMIS and align with GoE’s administrative systems; funds will be disbursed to participating Regions which will
subsequently further disburse funds to participating Woredas. Participating Regions and Woredas will maintain single dedicated
programme accounts for receiving PACT funds from Federal and Regional levels, respectively. Federal and Regional levels will
also maintain separate bank accounts in local currency for receiving funds from Government and processing counterpart costs. 
A detailed fund-flow diagram is provided in the PIM.
176.
Programme budgeting will be done in accordance with existing GoE procedures. The AWPB shall be approved by the
Programme Steering Committee and provided with no-objection by IFAD. The AWPB will be prepared with adequate details
showing financiers and proportion of financing for each activity to guide finance teams in expenditure mapping
177.
Programme financial reporting will be through quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) in line with IFAD guidelines. To ease
financial reporting, all required information would be mapped in the accounting system at acquisition such that financial reporting
would only entail extracting data from the accounting system with minimal refinements. Quarterly IFRs will be submitted to IFAD
within 45 days after period end. Dedicated programme finance staff will be put in place at Federal, Regional and Woredas levels
to ensure adequate financial reporting. Harmonised financial reporting templates for all financiers will be prepared at start-up.
178.
Internal Audit services will be provided by the IA Department of MoA , facilitated by the project as with other IFAD projects in
Ethiopia. FPCU finance staff will also regularly carry out financial monitoring reviews at implementing agencies to ensure
expenditure are made and supported as expected, further providing capacity building on any areas of weakness.
179.
The project will be audited by the Audit Service Corporation (ASC), the Supreme Audit Institution of Ethiopia. The auditor’s
annual work plan will ensure adequate coverage of various institutions receiving programme funds, and will cover all major risk
areas. Draft audit TORs are annexed to the PIM, TORs will be subject to annual IFAD no-objection.
Procurement Management
180.
IFAD’s General Conditions place emphasis on using the Borrower/Recipient’s procurement regulations, provided they are found
to be consistent with IFAD’s guidelines. This is in line with the commitments of the international donor community to work
towards increasing the use of national systems where they can be shown to be compatible with the requirement of donors. The
IFAD procurement guidelines and the procurement handbook require an assessment of the national procurement systems as
part of Programme design. The assessment was done in two stages: a) overarching country assessment; and b) Programme
specific assessment.
181.
The findings suggest that the country's legislative and regulatory framework is adequate to address the relevant procurement
issues that will arise under the Programme and consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and international
procurement practices. The applicable law and regulations are contained in: a) The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Procurement and Property number 649/2009; b) The Public Procurement Directive of June 2010; and c) Public Procurement
Manual. All these provide an adequate operational environment for procurement, including procurement for goods, works,
services. Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) are available, developed by the Public Procurement and Property Administration
Agency (FPPA), and shall be used for procurement of goods, works, consultancy and non-consultancy services required for the
Programme.
182.
However, the Programme specific assessment, based on planned Programme operations, indicates a need for improvement in
the following areas: a) recruit Programme-specific Procurement Officer personnel at the Federal level and Regional levels; b)
management of records of procurement processes; c) strengthening contract management; d) integrate procurement planning in
the budget formulation process; and e) monitoring and reporting of procurement. Overall, the institutional procurement capacity is
rated as 'medium' risk.
183.
Details of the findings of the assessments and guidance on all information related to procurement processes, procedures,
planning, bidding documents and thresholds are presented in the procurement module of the Programme PIM.
Procurement Governance
184.
THE Programme program procurement will be managed by the Directorate of Procurement and Property Administration, drawing
from the pool of specialists. Under the Programme, provision should be made for a Procurement Officer and an Assistant
Procurement officer who will handle THE Programme program procurement at FPCU and support RPCUs in executing their
procurement plans.
25/29
185.
A Procurement Officer and an Assistant Procurement Officer will be recruited competitively and engaged on performance-based
contracts as a contribution of the Programme to the pool of specialists during the Programme implementation period. The
Procurement Officer will technically be responsible to the Director of Procurement and Property Management with a dual
reporting line to the Programme Coordinator. He/She will be the focal point to handle all procurement aspects of the Programme
assisted by an Assistant Procurement Officer and regional Procurement Officers.
186.
All procurement documentation issued to bidders will comply with the requirements laid out in: a) IFAD’s Revised Policy on
Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations; b) Policy on preventing and responding to sexual harassment,
sexual exploitation and abuse; c) IFAD’s Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Policy; and d) IFAD’s
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP).
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
187.
Planning – The planning cycle will follow the Federal Government of Ethiopia planning and budgeting cycle. The cycle will
commence with the AWPB preparation as a key instrument for implementation and operational control. The Programme will
follow a bottom-up participatory planning process for the AWPB. The first stage of planning and preparation of the AWPB will be
carried out at the Kebele level, following the decentralised administration framework. The Kebele level plans will then be
consolidated at the Woreda level, then at the regional level and, eventually, at the Federal level, into the Programme AWPB.  The
approved AWPB will be the only mechanism through which Programme resources would be spent and the basis for progress
monitoring. Preparation of the AWPB will be led by the FPCU in liaison with the RPCMUs.
188.
Monitoring and Evaluation – The logical framework will be the foundation of the Programme's M&E system and will contain a
set of defined Programme specific indicators and core indicators selected from the IFAD Core Indicators, to guide continuous
performance assessment of the Programme. Intentional indicator selection will allow tracking social and economic performance
of target groups, especially women, youth and vulnerable groups. To this end, all person-based indicators will be disaggregated
by sex, age and by disability, if feasible. The M&E system will be developed in accordance with the requirements of IFAD and the
Federal Government of Ethiopia. It will be coordinated by MoA as the executing agency and coordinated by the FPCU and
supported by the RPCUs. The M&E System will conform to IFAD’s new Operational Results Management System (ORMS),
updated SECAP guidelines and Core Outcome Indicator Guidelines, as well as MoA’s existing M&E arrangements.
189.
The Resilience Design and Monitoring Tool (RDMT) has been embedded in the PDR, underpinning the design of the Programme
interventions aimed at enhancing resilience. The RDMT questions have been included in the Monitoring Reporting and
Verification (MRV) system to collect resilience data at the household level.
190.
The Programme will have a detailed M&E Plan developed at the start of implementation. The objectives of this M&E Plan will be
to inform Programme management decision-making during implementation to ensure achievement of the set goal and
development objective. It would also enable accurate and timely reporting to all stakeholders. The M&E strategy will be to
establish an iterative process for identifying issues and problems to ensure that the Programme focus is maintained and
expected results are achieved. This will rely on data from periodic monitoring but, more importantly, on specific outcome/impacts
measurement exercise/surveys which will be carried out by the Programme.
191.
The strategy will use digital tools (such as Kobo Toolkit and a web-based Management Information System (MIS), GIS, and
Microsoft PowerBI to collect and analyse information about Programme outreach, effectiveness of targeting strategy and specific
benefits for women, youth and marginalized groups. All data will be disaggregated by gender and age, where applicable. The
Programme will use data generated from the M&E system to continuously evaluate the Programme’s theory of change. 
192.
The Programme will undertake a baseline survey at the start of implementation and subsequent rigorous evaluations that seek to
establish Programme impacts and provide lessons learned for enhanced Programme impacts. The Programme’s evaluation
strategy will use quantitative and qualitative methods to determine how it contributed to improved livelihoods and nutrition among
beneficiaries, at baseline, mid-term, annual surveys and end line with a control group as per the IFAD COI guidelines. .  A final
evaluation will consolidate data and provide recommendations for future efforts.
193.
SECAP Monitoring – Monitoring of environment and climate aspects of the Programme and implementation of appropriate
mitigation measures identified in the ESCMF will be done in two ways: a) monitoring physical progress against targets of
proposed climate adaptation/mitigation measures, environmental sustainability, and sustainable natural resource management
interventions. The M&E, Landscape and Safeguard Specialists, will have the primary responsibility of coordinating monitoring
SECAP issues, with support from the other technical; and b) monitoring and ensuring the implementation of mitigation measures
against identified environment, social and climate risks associated with Programme interventions such as irrigation. This will be
done through implementation and regular monitoring of the Environment, Social and Climate Management Plans (ESCMP) and
their accompanying Monitoring Plans.
194.
Data collection and day-to-day monitoring within the Programme will be supported by a web-based management information
system (MIS) based on an open-source DHIS2 interface. Data on outputs will be collected through the reports of implementing
partners, validated by the FPCU and triangulated through field visits by the FPCU M&E unit The MIS will depend on the use of
Electronic Tablets for field level data collection and online transmission to cloud based servers administered at Regional and
Federal levels, for storage and processing. While the system will be set up with external consultancy support, its smooth
operationalization will require capacity building through training to all staff charged with M & E responsibilities in the following
specific areas:
26/29
195.
Setting up Management Information System: Capacity will be provided in setting up of the monitoring system and infrastructure
as well as ongoing support to ensure smooth running of the system.
196.
Use of electronic tablets in data collection: Capacity building (M & E and ICT related) will be provided for all field staff at Woreda
level (Woreda level Project coordinator) on the use of Tablets for electronic data collection and transmission to the servers that
will be based at Regional and Federal Levels.
197.
Preparation of the project M&E Plan at the start of implementation: a) Orientation and Training to the use of the recently adopted
IFAD Core Indicator Survey Guidelines and ORMS reporting; b) Staff will also be trained to the use of the Resilience Design
Monitoring Tool (RDMT) in monitoring the resilience of the project beneficiaries; c) M&E staff and Watershed Management
Specialists will also be trained on the use of the FAO Exact tool for measurement of the GHG emission reduction in the project
area
198.
Beneficiary Engagement in Planning and Monitoring Implementation of Programme Intervention. The Programme will
support participatory planning processes at community level in which development priorities will be identified and consolidated in
LDIPs. These plans will form the basis for implementation of project interventions and will also be a key component of the project
monitoring and evaluation system. Upon preparation of the LDIPs, beneficiaries will coordinate with the Woreda Project
Implementation Unit, Woreda Technical Committees and Community Facilitators as well as Development Agents at Kebele
Level, on the channels to be used to collect information and transmit it to higher levels.  Tools will be developed in line with the
LDIPs to facilitate the monitoring of the delivery of identified priorities. Community level organizations such as Water Shed
Management Associations and Water Infrastructure Users’ Associations will also be involved in monitoring and ensuring
accountability in delivery of respective investments.
199.
Knowledge Management and Learning (KM&L) – Knowledge Management in the Programme will be guided by a Knowledge
Management and Communication Strategy (KMCS) to be developed at the beginning of Programme implementation. The
Programme M&E system will form the foundation of KM&L system and will, thus, be a primary instrument of information capture
and storage. KM activities will ensure that the Programme implementation is a continuous learning process during which
quantitative and qualitative data will be compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons learned, thematic studies and stories
from the field. The lessons and experiences will be recompiled and systematized and shared on the Rural Solutions Portal and
broadly through the SSTC as well as utilise them as part of the policy engagement activities to be undertaken by the programme
through the Rural Economic Development and Food Security Sector (REDFS) Working Group platform. Some KM themes that
can be focussed on may include: a) private sector management of irrigation schemes; b) Promoting young agripreneurs in a
drought prone area; c) digitalisation of agriculture, carbon trading, d) Gender transformative programming and climate resilience
etc.
200.
Communication A KM and Communication Action Plan that outlines specific activities on how information is to be obtained,
analysed, and disseminated, has been developed and will be aligned to the Knowledge Management Strategy to be developed at
the start of implementation of PACT.  Plans to support the implementation of the KM and Communication Action Plan will be
integrated in the Project’s Annual Work Plan and Budget. The KM & Communication Action Plan  includes an outline on how
knowledge will be extracted, packaged and disseminated using, but not limited to, the communication channels. Effective
communication at all levels will be critical to promotion and awareness raising, learning and adoption innovative techniques and
practices under the respective value chains as well as issues related to mainstreaming of gender and nutrition in the selected
value chains and encourage youth participation in rural agricultural development. In order to facilitate the online dissemination of
generated knowledge products to government and other stake holders, the Project will develop a website and a KM Portal with
links to the Ministry of Agriculture Website. Other online knowledge sharing and communication mechanisms such as the use of
social media and short messaging services will be implemented.
b. Innovation and scaling up
201.
Innovation and Scaling-up – The Programme will promote innovative approaches through leveraging digital technologies to
scaleup: a) market-oriented production; b) business to business linkages through deals rooms; c) usage of data to support market
analytics. The programme will leverage on participating in the development of a data sharing protocol as part of setting up of a
market information system and in the implementation of the DAEAS roadmap towards agriculture digital transformation, with the
public and private sector in Ethiopia.
202.
In partnership with VITA, the programme is scaling up the community-led cookstove for carbon finance programme. The
Programme will collaborate with selected institutions to encourage target beneficiaries to conserve the environment in which they
live and benefit through deliberate carbon farming and linkages to carbon finance carbon trading.
203.
To achieve scale, the Programme will document the lessons learnt and best practices in the first phase Regions to ensure
effective adoption of digital solutions and carbon finance in the preceding phase. The implementation arrangements will promote
scaling up of the existing market platform under ATI to increase beneficiary coverage as well as enhancing capacity of local
institutions to ensure effective adoption and adaptation.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans
27/29
204.
PACT has applied participatory approach where all stakeholder including government and non-government organizations, private
sectors as well as communities are consulted during concept note and design preparation. During concept, Ministry of
Agriculture led stakeholder consultations were held at federal and region levels to (i) identify agriculture, environment, climate
and rural finance related challenges and (ii) prioritize solutions including value chains. This has been a good opportunity to
identify community challenges and their equivalent solutions. During design, besides the consultation with federal, regional
stakeholder and communities, quite large number of consultations have been made with international organizations, including UN
agencies, and partnerships were established with some organizations. PACT has been designed in such a way to ensure
adequate engagement of stakeholder and most of the investments will be identified during the community planning which will be
undertaken at early stage of implementation.
205.
Stakeholder engagement plan has been prepared for PACT (appendix 5 of SECAP Review Note). The plan has identified
potential governmental, non-governmental, private sector and community level stakeholders and defines their role. Based on the
plan, the programme will carry out stakeholder consultations during:
206.
Start Up: Federal, regional and woreda level programme teams and community facilitators will be trained to lead landscape level
community sensitization and awareness programmes. In addition, training and awareness will be delivered to Kebele
administrations, DAs, Community associations such as water user’s association, watershed committee and the target
communities at large. In doing so, communities will be empowered/capacitated to identify landscape specific agricultural,
environment, climatic and market related risks and prioritize adaptation interventions which will be eventually integrated in the
Landscape Development and Investment Plans (LDIPs)
207.
Implementation: The stakeholder engagement will be continued in the implementation phase to ensure programme activities
are implemented as per the plan and in the required quality. Furthermore, intensive consultation will be done during preparations
of ESMF/ESMP/ESIA for sub project.
208.
As per the stakeholder engagement plan, the programme will continuously engage all stakeholders, specially the communities
and their organization, through periodic meeting and establishment of feedback mechanisms.
b. Grievance redress.
209.
Programme planning, design and implementation may cause grievances. The main sources of complaints include geographic
and beneficiary targeting, job creation, land acquisition/compensation, irrigation water distribution. As per IFAD’s GRM,
complaints can be resolved in two ways: (i) provision of quality service and (ii) resolution of complaints by the GRM
system/committees. To this effect, the former will be achieved through engagement of the various stakeholder and target groups
and the later through the establishment of Grievance Redress committees at all levels such as Federal, Regions, Woreda, Kebele
and community.
210.
The programme should establish a GRM system at all level based on the guidance indicated in the ESCMF and stakeholder
engagement plan. Wherever GRM is available, PACT can use the existing one and new system might not be needed and the
programme will strengthen the system. The main task of the GRM (Committee) is to resolve PACT related complaints in fairly in a
desired quality and timely. To this effect, training to the GRM committee on how to resolve complaints and awareness creation to
communities on how to direct any complaints they may have will be delivered during programme implementation. The GRM
committees will be provided with log books to record all complaints reaching out to them. Details of the GRM
establishment/strengthening, complaints handling procedure are explained in the PIM.
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans
211.
As a means of addressing potential start-up delays, the Programme design process has prepared a draft Annual Work Plan and
Budget (AWPB), the associated Procurement Plan and a draft Programme Implementation Manual. Job descriptions for the
different Programme Coordination Office positions at different levels have been provided. The IFAD In-Country Office will engage
the Government and provide any facilitation that may be needed to ensure that all conditions required for effectiveness are timely
satisfied. The institutional and implementation arrangements for the Programme will build on the existing structures and
mechanisms of PASIDP II, facilitating a quick and smooth start-up.
Supervision, Mid-Term Review and Completion Plans
212.
Supervision– The Programme will be jointly supervised by IFAD and GoE to assess achievements and lessons learned and,
when required, provide implementation support with the objective of ensuring effective Programme implementation and increase
the likelihood of achieving the target objective. Missions would be fielded at least once every twelve months. However, and
depending on the extent and quality of implementation progress, implementation support Missions would be fielded as frequently
as warranted by conditions on the ground so as to address any emergent issues that may have the potential to negatively
impacts Programme implementation.
213.
Mid-Term Review (MTR) – An MTR will be undertaken halfway through Programme implementation; it will be led by the
Government but with the participation of IFAD. It will evaluate whether the Programme is on course to achieve the objectives.
During the MTR, particular emphasis will be put on assessing sustainability and the extent of implementing the exit strategy. This
would be critically important, especially for those investments that have a public good nature and would require continuous
involvement of the Government after the formal Programme completion date. Overall, the MTR process will seek to identify any
prevailing constraints and recommend such re-orientation as may be required to help the Programme get back on course to
achieve its objectives.
28/29
214.
Programme Completion Plans – Undertaking of the Programme Completion Review (PCR) exercise at the end of the
Programme implementation will be led by GoE, but in close coordination with IFAD. The main purposes of the completion review
process will be to promote accountability, reflect on performance and elicit lessons learned to inform future Programme/project
design and to define an appropriate post-project strategy. The learning dimension of the completion process will be used by both
IFAD and GoE as the foundation for improvements in future Programme/project design and implementation. The completion
review process will also be critical for identifying opportunities for scaling-up best practices. The PCR would need to be
undertaken after Programme completion but before the Programme closure period. As part of the completion activities, a
Beneficiary Programme Assessment (BIA) will be undertaken and findings used to inform the Programme Completion Report.
Footnotes
[1] UNDP, Quarterly Economic Profile, Ethiopia, July 2022.
[2]EPHI Ministry of Health (2019). Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey (Issue July).
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/PR120/PR120.pdf
[3] 10-Year Development Plan (2021-2030)
[4] World Bank, 2021
[5] Diriba (2020)
[6]Final report Eastern Africa locust upsurge: Multi Country: Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Uganda. International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
[7] Management Entity. 2021. Ethiopia’s Livestock System: Overview and Areas of Inquiry. Gainsville, FI, USA: Feed the Future
Innovation Lab for Livestock Systems.
[8] CSA. 2020a. Agricultural Sample Survey 2019/20 [2012 E.C.]. Volume II report on livestock and livestock characteristics (private
peasant holdings). Central Statistical Agency (CSA): Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
[9] The six pathways are a) Nutrient-dense food production, food safety, fortification and rural electrification and appropriate climate
smart technologies; b) Supply and value chain development, national food based dietary guidelines, and nutrition literacy and
awareness creation; c) Integrated policy-making, land reform, and improved government finance provision for agricultural and rural
transformation; d) Agricultural technologies, innovation and agricultural input supplies; e) Access to markets, market information,
infrastructure and specialisation; and f) Managing risk and protection the poor.
[10]https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/
[11]Ministry of Environment and Forest (2015)
[12]In 2018, the urban youth unemployment rate was as high as 25.3 percent. UNCT Ethiopia (2020). Socio-economic impact of
COVID-19 in Ethiopia.
[13]Bezu S., Holden S., Are Rural Youth in Ethiopia Abandoning Agriculture?, World Development, Vol. 64, 2014, pp 259-272, ISSN
0305-750X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.06.013.
[14] Ethiopian Public Health Institute, Ministry of Health (2016). Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey – Minimum acceptable diet
among children 6-23 months in rural areas = 5.7%. A diet of adequate diversity and frequency that meets their needs for physical and
mental growth.
[15] Ethiopian Public Health Institute and World Food Programme (2021). Fill the Nutrient Gap, Ethiopia. Addis Ababa: Ethiopia
[16]WFP Fresh Food Voucher SBCC external evaluation – World Food Programme. Centre for Evaluation and Development C4ED
(2021) External Evaluation Report: Support for strengthening resilience of vulnerable groups in Ethiopia: the Fresh Food Voucher
Programme expansion in Amhara region. January 2018 to December 2020
[17] Ethiopian Public Health Institute, Ministry of Finance. The Cost of Hunger in Africa Implications for Growth and Transformation of
Ethiopia. 2013.
[18] Iyassu S and McKinnon F (2021) “Disability Rights are Human Rights: Pushing Ethiopia towards a rights-based movement.”
Published in the Journal of Human Rights.
[19] UNCT Ethiopia (2020). Representation of Persons with Disabilities in Ethiopian Labour Force: A Review of National Surveys on
Disability Statistics.
29/29
[20] https://www.ifad.org/en/web/latest/-/do-ifad-supported-projects-reduce-the-risk-of-conflict-what-the-evidence-says
[21] PASDIP I : Impact Brief[1]PASDIP I : Impact Brief
[22]Benfica, Rui S and Thurlow, James, Identifying Priority Value-chains in Ethiopia (2017). Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305040 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3305040
[23] Resilience refers to resilience of the target rural HHS to climate impacts
[24] LLRP woredas are in Somali (17), SNNPR (2) and Oromia (18)
[25] The actual spread per woreda will be determined upon selection of Kebeles(basic administrative unit). The 90 woredas have been
defined in a preliminary way at design and will be confirmed at start up to take into account real-time conflict dynamics and other
aspects of the agreed criteria.
[26]Adaptation Framework Tool (ifad.org)
[27]https://www.ifad.org/en/web/knowledge/-/publication/climate-adaptation-in-rural-development-card-assessment-tool
[28]Each household will receive 2 cookstoves; one for cooking and another one for injera baking.
[29] See Annex on VITA Financial Model.
[30]This will be implemented in collaboration with the National Biogas Programme (under the Ministry of Water and Energy) and
regional bureaus of energy.
[31]Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI), National Information Platform for Nutrition (NIPN) and International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI) (2021). The Productive Safety Net Programme and the Agri-Food System in Ethiopia: Key outcomes and challenges.
9 June 2021.
[32] National Horticulture Development and Marketing Strategy, April 2019
[33]https://www.ifad.org/en/web/knowledge/-/stocktaking-of-farmer-field-schools
[34] This will include agri-prenuers in component 2 that will be supported in their business skills
[35]Lersha onboarded 178 mechanization providers to date and has shown great interest in making the app more disability-friendly to
ensure farmers with disabilities can easily access farm inputs, agro-climate advisory services and mechanization services.
[36] rural poor households with pregnant and lactating women, children under two years old, adolescents or persons with disabilities
[37]https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/42266596/propoor_vc_guidelines.pdf/10bcbf35-36bc-a0a0-2d0b-f4a9bd3c5e5f?
t=1616421969633
[38] The match grants for primary cooperatives is aimed to be an incentive for participation in the graduation process. The eligible
cooperatives are those that would have been graduated or at an advanced stage, according to an independent assessment with help
of Scope Insight, under the IFC Agribusiness Leadership training model. It is assumed that the cooperatives will at that time not be
able to raise adequate financing.
[39] Oromia, SNNPR and Sidama were pre-selected due to the proximity to agro-industrial parks, presence of private sector entities,
especially Dutch companies, and to build on FAO’s value-chain support around the agro-industrial parks. Upon a successful pilot and
availability of additional funding, the training and support for agripreneurs will be expanded to the remaining PACT regions.
[40] Outcome 2: All people in Ethiopia live in a cohesive, just, inclusive and democratic society and Outcome 3: All people in Ethiopia
benefit from an inclusive, resilient and sustainable economy. (https://ethiopia.un.org/en/90108-united-nations-sustainable-
development-cooperation-framework-2020-2025)
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
1/7
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
Males
Females
Young
Total number of persons
receiving services
0
0
0
0
37 500
75 000
37 500
75 000
30 000
60 000
75 000
150 000
Persons with disabilities
3 750
7 500
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Household members
0 375 000
750 000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed
households
Non-women-headed
households
Households
0
0
0
15 000
30 000
60 000
120 000
75 000
150 000
Project Goal 
Contribute to poverty reduction and
improved resilience in selected
landscapes/woredas
Number of persons/households whose food security and nutrition has increased
Total number of persons
281 250
562 500
Males
Females
Young Total
Young Male
Young Female
140 625
281 250
140 625
281 250
112 500
225 000
56 250
112 500
56 250
112 500
Persons with disabilities
14 063
28 125
1) 50% of persons receiving
project support are women (based
on National stat), 2) 40 % of
persons receiving project support
are the youth (50% of them are
women, National Stat). The youth
is defined as persons aged
between 18 and 35 (inclusive).  3)
Pastoralists are assumed to be
15% of the target group 4) HHs
that receive project support are
20% female headed (based on
National Stat. 5) 5 members on
average in one HH  
Progress
reports/MIS
Annually
PACT-PCUs
Progress
reports/MIS
Progress
reports/MIS
Annually
PACT-PCMUs
Annually
PACT-PCUs
Outcome
and Impact
surveys
PCU
Baseline,
Midline
and
Completion
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
Mid-
Term
2/7
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Number of persons/households whose combined resilience has increased (CRI)
Total persons
60 000
112 500
Total households
30 000
112 500
Resilience
Scorecard
Tool
(RDMT)
surveys
Baseline,
Midline
and
endline
survey 
PCUs and
PARM
Total persons
Females
Females
Male
Males
40
75
30 000
56 250
50
50
30 000
56 250
50
50
Development Objective 
Enable 150,000 rural households
(men, women ,youth and PWDs) in
selected kebeles to sustainably
improve incomes, food and
nutrition security and build
resilience to shocks.
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW)
Women (%)
8
10
25
Women (number)
Households (%)
3 750
18 750
10
25
Households (number)
7 500
37 500
Household members
37 500
187 500
Women-headed
households
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in empowerment
Total persons
Total persons
Females
Females
Males
Males
13
25
19 500
37 500
13
25
9 750
18 750
13
25
9 750
18 750
Farmers reserve some of their
farm produce for home
consumption​ (A), Households are
willing to change their nutrition
behaviours (A) Extreme weather
events causes losses and
damages to agriculture sector and
have major impacts to food and
nutrition security in target regions
(R)
COI
Surveys
PCUs
Baseline,
Midline
and
endline
survey
COI
Surveys
PCUs
Baseline,
Midline
and
endline
survey
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
Mid-
Term
3/7
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Value of household income from project supported selected VCs 
EFA
Outcome 
Outcome 1: Enhanced sustainable
and equitable access to natural
resources and increased
agricultural productivity
Average crop income
(USD'000)
Average household
income (USD'000)
1 124
1 702
2 280
738
1 207
1 676
3.2.1 Tons of Greenhouse gas emissions (tCO2e) avoided and/or sequestered
Hectares of land
tCO2e/20 years
tCO2e/ha
tCO2e/ha/year
50 000
100 000
11 900 000
-119.9
-6
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Total number of
household members
Households
Households
281 250
562 500
38
75
56 250
112 500
PCUs
Baseline,
Midline
and
endline
FAO Exact
tool
Baseline
and
Endline
PCU and
validated by
ECG
Infrastructure is operational and
well maintained (A) Community
leaders and institutions embrace
gender transformative approaches
(A) All project beneficiaries will
participate in SBCC interventions
COI
Surveys
PCU
Baseline,
Midline
and
endline
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient
technologies and practices
COI
Surveys
Total number of
household members
Households
Households
281 250
562 500
38
75
56 250
112 500
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making of local authorities and project-
supported service providers
COI
Surveys
Household members
281 250
562 500
Households (%)
38
75
Households (number)
56 250
112 500
FPCMU and
RPCMU
Baseline,
Midline
and
endline
PCU
Baseline,
Midline
and
endline
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
Mid-
Term
4/7
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
1.2.9 Households with improved nutrition Knowledge Attitudes and Practices (KAP)
Households (number)
56 250
112 500
Households (%)
38
75
Household members
281 250
562 500
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Hectares of land
50 000
100 000
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources and climate-related risks
Output 
Output 1.1 Community led climate-
resilient and natural resources
management
Total size of groups
75 000
150 000
Groups supported
75
150
Males
Females
Young
37 500
75 000
37 500
75 000
30 000
60 000
COI
Surveys
PCU
Baseline,
Midline
and
endline
Progress
Reports/MIS
Progress
Reports/MIS
Annually
PCU 
Annually
PCU 
Based on 15000ha under
irrigation and 45000 from rainfed
area and a ratio of 1 to 3. 150
communities from 90 targeted
Woredas. 1 Woreda is expected
to have at least 2 Kebeles
benefiting
ASAP+ 1. Poor smallholder household members supported in coping with the effects of climate
change
Progress
Reports/MIS
Annually
PCU
Output 
Output 1.2 Climate resilient
infrastructure developed
Total household
members
Males
Females
Young
75 000
150 000
37 500
75 000
37 500
75 000
30 000
60 000
1.1.2 Farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated
Hectares of land
5 000
15 000
Number of multipurpose water infrastructure developed
Water points
100
200
2.1.6 Market, processing or storage facilities constructed or rehabilitated
Total number of facilities
130
260
Irrigation development acceptable
in pastoral areas (A), Adequate
water sources in dry areas(A)
Progress
Reports/MIS
Progress
Reports/MIS
Progress
Reports/MIS
Annually
PCU
Annually
PCU 
Annually
PCU 
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Market facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Storage facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Indicators
Mid-
Term
5/7
End
Target
110
220
20
40
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 1.3: Market-Oriented and
Nutrition-sensitive Climate-resilient
Food Production and Productivity
improved
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or technologies
Men trained in crop
37 500
75 000
Women trained in crop
37 500
75 000
Progress
Reports/MIS
Annually
PCU 
All project beneficiaries will
access training on production
practices and or technologies All
project beneficiaries will
participate in SBCC interventions
Young people trained in
crop
Total persons trained in
crop
Persons with disabilities
trained in crop
30 000
60 000
75 000
150 000
3 750
7 500
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition
Total persons
participating
Males
Females
Households
Household members
benefitted
Young
Number of persons with
disabilities
75 000
150 000
37 500
75 000
37 500
75 000
75 000
150 000
375 000
750 000
30 000
60 000
3 750
7 500
Progress
Reports/MIS
Annually
PCU 
Results Hierarchy
Outcome 
Outcome 2: Increased access to
remunerative markets of targeted
value chains
Name
Baseline
Indicators
Mid-
Term
6/7
End
Target
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities
Males
Females
Young
Total number of persons
with new
jobs/employment
opportunities
3 750
3 750
3 000
7 500
7 500
7 500
6 000
15 000
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
COI
Surveys
PCU
Baseline,
Midline
and
Endline
Banks are willing to finance
smallholder farmers (A),
Young agripreneurs are reliable
economic agents(A) No. of
members in a cooperative Groups
with partnership/agreements (A)
300 Youth supported enteprises
can access funding (A)
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal partnerships/agreements or contracts with
public or private entities
COI
Surveys
Quarterly
FPCMU and 
RPCMU 
Number of POs
Women in leadership
position
75
150
9 000
18 000
2.2.2 Supported rural enterprises reporting an increase in profit
Number of enterprises
100
Percentage of
enterprises
180
60
Output 
Output 2.1: Market Access and
Business to Business linkages
established
2.1.3 Rural producers’ organizations supported
Total size of POs
32 400
64 800
Rural POs supported
81
162
Males
Females
Young
Rural POs supported
that are headed by
women
16 200
32 400
16 200
32 400
16 200
32 400
20
40
COI
Surveys
PCU
Baseline,
Midline
and
Endline
Progress
report/MIS
Annually
PCU
Based on 150 primary
Cooperatives and 12 Unions.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
Mid-
Term
7/7
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 2.2: Access to Financial
Services for Producers and Agri-
businesses improved
2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business development services
Size of enterprises
30 600
61 200
Rural enterprises
225
450
Women in leadership
position
15 300
30 600
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business management
Males
Females
Young
Persons trained in IGAs
or BM (total)
750
750
1 500
1 500
1 500
1 500
3 000
3 000
Persons with disabilities
75
150
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
Household members
318 750
637 500
Households (%)
43
85
Households (number)
63 750
127 500
Outcome 
Outcome 3: Institutions and policy
capacity strengthened
Progress
reports/MIS
Annually
PCU
Progress
reports/MIS
Annually
PCM
Includes 300 Youth Led
enterprises and 150 Cooperatives
and unions Members of 150
cooperative and 300 youth
enterprises4 people estimated for
each of the 300 Youth enterprises
and about 400coperative
members for each cooperative
Funding available for the
enteprenuer training
COI
Surveys
PCU
Baseline,
midline
and
endline
New agriculture and rural
development policies are
approved (A)
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for
approval, ratification or amendment
MoA
Records
Completion MoA and PCU
Output 
Output 3.1: Policy support &
engagement in PACT-related
focused areas strengthened
Output 
Output 3.2: Institutions
strengthened
Number
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
2
2
4
Supported Rural and Government Institutions
Institutions
150
300
Progress
reports/MIS
Annually
Progress
Reports/MIS
Annually
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
t
c
a
p
m
I
s
e
m
o
c
t
u
O
s
t
u
p
t
u
O
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
s
e
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
C
Climate resilient, inclusive and equitable agriculture income 
growth ​for rural HHds
Sustainable Food and Nutrition Security for Rural HHds
Equitable  social and economic empowerment
PACT Theory of Change
Farmers reserve some of their farm produce for home 
consumption​
Households are willing to change their nutrition 
behaviours
Reasonable accommodation to ensure full participation 
of persons with disabilities​
Adaptive capacity of rural households, production and productivity of targeted 
(including nutrient dense) value chains improved 
•
•
Access to equitable markets and diversified incomes improved
Increased employability for women and youth
Improved Service delivery and policy 
environment
Extreme weather stressors
and shocks
Internal conflicts in some 
regions 
Macro-economic imbalance 
Community leaders and institutions embrace 
gender transformative approaches
Land brought 
under climate-
resilient mana
gement
Climate 
Resilient 
Water 
Infrastructure
developed
Energy Saving 
and Renewable 
energy 
Technologies 
promoted
Climate-smart and 
nutrition 
sensitive  technolo
gies and 
services promoted 
with use of ICT
Inclusive Business to 
Business Linkages 
Developed and FOs 
strengthened with ICT
Tailored 
Business Packages 
Accessed and linkages 
for to Finance 
Facilitated
Irrigation development acceptable 
in pastoral areas
Women and girls are allowed to 
go for training​
Banks are willing to 
finance smallholder 
farmers​
Nutrition sensitive 
post-harvest 
technologies accessed
Young agripreneurs are 
reliable economic agents​
New agriculture and 
rural development 
policies are approved
Market infrastructure 
built (road, outlets)
Implementation 
of supported policies
Strengthened 
Government and Rural 
institutions incl in 
ICT$D
Efficient and 
Effective Project 
Management
Private sector is willing to partner 
with smallholder farmers​
Youth access to land and interest 
in agriculture business
Inclusive Climate-smart and nutrition sensitive productive landscape 
management including e-services
Inclusive Nutrition sensitive Agribusiness Development and e-
market access
Institutional and organisational capacity and policy 
strengthening
•
Capacity building on Nutrition , Youth Sensitive, disability inclusive and Gender Transformation Programming, ARM, SBCC
Community-led Agriculture development planning
•
Internal conflicts
Restrictive measures on Ethiopia Government restricts co-funding
Poor  landscape management and low production
Poor NRM, 
landscape 
management, Land 
degradation and CC
Limited Access to CS 
inputs and 
technologies 
especially for women
Poor production 
practices focused 
on staples
Limited Access to 
water and 
Inefficient water 
management
Limited Access to markets
Limited social 
inclusion and 
malnutrition
Limited business 
capacities and 
Inclusivity of FOs
Limited 
Access to 
Finance
Limited Access to 
markets and 
market infrastructure
Poor institutional and policy framework 
Limited capacities of 
government and 
rural institutions
Limited 
operationalisation 
of policy and 
frameworks
Main Challenges
Activities
Results
Assumption
Risk
Direct causal pathway
Contribution
Addresses 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Annex 3:  
  Project Costs and Financing 
1.  Main  Assumptions  –  This  Annex  presents  the  analysis  of  costs  and  financing  for  the 
Participatory  Agriculture  and  Climate  Transformation  (PACT)  Programme  in Ethiopia.  It 
describes  the  assumptions  made  in  estimating  the  project  costs  including  the  detailed 
cost  tables  and financing plan.  The  analysis used  the  COSTAB  software  to display  the 
financial  data  and  the  detailed  cost  tables  for  each  component.  The  cost  tables  have 
been consolidated into summary tables that present the costs by component, category of 
expenditure and financiers. The full set of detailed and summary tables is presented  at 
the end of this Annex.  
2.  The  project  is  proposed  to  be  financed  over  a  seven-year  period  (2023-2029).  The 
information collected during the design mission (June 2022) provided the key parameters 
for  the  costs.  Project  costs  have  been  computed  based  on  the  available  information 
about the project structure and its planned activities. 
3.  National economy status and growth. According to the World Bank1, over the past 15 
years,  Ethiopia’s  economy  has  been  among  the  fastest  growing  in  the  world  (at  an 
average of 9.5 percent per year). Even if the real gross domestic product (GDP) yearly 
growth  slowed  down  in  the  2019-21  period  due  to  COVID-19,  from  8.4  to  5.6%,  the 
average  over  the  5-year  period  (2017-2021)  is  7.3%  and  Ethiopia’s  economy  is  still 
strong:  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  fall  to  4.8%  in  2022  but  pickup  to  5.7%  in  2023, 
driven  by  industry  and  by  private  consumption  and  investment.  The  GDP  per  capita  is 
estimated at US$944 in 20212. 
4.  Agriculture,  where  over  70%  of  the  population  are  employed,  was  not  significantly 
affected  by  the  pandemic  and  its  contribution  to  growth  slightly  improved  in  2020/21 
compared  to  the  previous  year.  Value  added  from  agriculture  (including  forestry  and 
fishing) contributed to 37.6% of GDP in 20213 and it has been constantly increasing over 
the past four years.  
5.  Inflation rate. The inflation rate in Ethiopia has increased to 26.8% in 2021 from 20.4% 
in 2020, much above the central bank’s 8% target, mainly because of the domestic credit 
expansion  needed  to  revive  the  economy  and  COVID-19-induced  supply  chain 
disruptions.  Higher  global  food  and  oil  prices  due  to  the  Russia–Ukraine  conflict  are 
expected to further increase inflation to 32.6% in 2022 before it eases to 24.9% in 20234. 
Inflation rate is further projected to decrease. Therefore, a local inflation rate of 25% was 
set as a base for the analysis for the year 2023. Subsequently, the rate is set at 20% for 
2024, 15% for 2025, and 10% for the remaining period 2026-2029. Foreign inflation rate 
has been preliminary set at 1% for the same period. Both local and foreign inflation rates 
are compounded at mid-year. Inflation figures used in the calculation of the Programme 
costs are shown in Table 1. 
1 See https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/ethiopia/overview, updated Apr 21, 2022 
2 See The World Bank dataset, https://data.worldbank.org/  
3 See The World Bank dataset, https://data.worldbank.org/  
4 Source: ADB, African Economic Outlook 2022, Supporting Climate Resilience and a Just Energy Transition in 
Africa, 25 May 2022, https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/african-economic-outlook-2022 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Table 1: Inflation Rates (%) 
6.  Exchange  Rate.  The Ethiopian  Birr  (ETB) has been  steadily devaluated  in  the  last  ten 
years  from  18  to  52  ETB/US$  over  the  period  July  2012-2022.  The  project  costs  are 
presented in both ETB and US$. The exchange rate has been set at XOF 52 to US$ 1 as 
the  exchange  rate  prevailing at  design.  Conversions from  current  US$  values  into  ETB 
use the constant purchasing power parity (CPPP) exchange rates reported in Table 2.  
Table 2: Constant Purchasing Power Parity (CPPP) Exchange Rates  
7.  Taxes and duties. Excise taxes and value added tax (VAT) are imposed to costs of all 
transactions  where  appropriate.  A  VAT  of  15%  is  levied  on  all  imported  and  locally 
procured goods and services. No goods and services with VAT positive rates other than 
standard  exist.  In  addition  to  VAT,  excise  taxes  and  custom  duties  are  imposed  on 
imports.  They  have  been  estimated  using  the  latest  information  from  the  Ethiopian 
Revenue  and  Customs  Authority.  Some  products  and  services  are  exempt  from  VAT. 
These include financial services, educational services, and healthcare and transportation 
services.  International  technical  assistance  does  not  carry  any  taxes.  Salaries  include 
the social insurance charges of  11% paid by the employer5 while allowances attract no 
taxes. Taxes and duties applied in Project costing – displayed by expenditure categories 
– are summarized in Table 3. 
Table 3: Taxes, duties, and foreign exchange by expenditure category 
5 Employees must contribute to the social security system together with the employer. The employees only pay 
7% of basic salary while the employer pays 11% of the payroll. 
Inflation Rates (%)2023202420252026202720282029AnnualLocal25.020.015.010.010.010.010.0Foreign1.01.01.01.01.01.01.0CompoundLocal12.537.561.381.199.2119.2141.1Foreign0.51.52.53.54.65.66.7Exchange RateUp to negotiationUp to Project start-up2023202420252026202720282029ETB to US$52.052.058.270.481.891.099.1107.9117.5% VAT% Taxes and duties% foreign exchangeI. Investment CostsA. Consultancies005B. Equipment & materials15560C. Works15520D. Vehicles1513575E. Training & Workshops005F. Goods, services & inputs151750G. Grants & subsidies000H. Credit line000II. Recurrent CostsA. Operating costs1500B. Salaries & allowances0110Expenditure category 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 3: Project Costs and Financing 
8.  Project Costs. 1. Total  project  costs  are  set  at  US$  179.6  million  over  the  seven-year 
project implementation period. A summary breakdown of the project costs by component 
is shown in Table 4.  
Table 4: Project costs by component and sub-component 
9.  Project  Financing.  Project  Financing.  The  project  will  be  financed  through  the 
contributions from the following financiers: (i) IFAD, with a grant of US$78.2 million and 
an additional grant of US$ 10.5 million through the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture 
Programme  (ASAP+)  ;  (ii)  the  Gender  Transformative  Mechanism  in  the  context  of 
Climate Adaptation (GTM), with a grant of US$ 5 million; (iii) the European Commission 
(EC),  with  a  loan  of  US$  16.9  million;  (iv)  a  contribution  of  US$  2  million  from  an 
additional  financier  (to  be  confirmed);  and  (v)  the  Inclusive  Green  Financing  Initiative 
(IGREENFIN), subject to the approval from the Green Climate Fund (GCF), with a loan 
of US$35 million through a line of credit. 
10. Domestic co-financing will include: (i) the Government (GOE), which will contribute with 
about US$ 23.9 million (including waived duties and taxes and a direct contribution); (ii) 
private  sector  (enterprises,  associations,  unions,  cooperatives),  with  an  expected 
contribution of  US$ 3.7  million  (mainly  through  matching grants); and  (iii)  beneficiaries, 
who  are  expected  to  provide  about  US$  4.5  million  (through  in-kind  and  cash 
contributions). In case other donors aim at contributing with their own resources they will 
so do on a parallel-financing basis. 
11. The proposed financing plan for is summarized in Table 5.  
(ETB '000)(US$ '000)TotalTotalA. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 1,633,29831,4102. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  5,651,006108,6733. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 756,27914,544Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 8,040,584154,627B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support 445,7388,5722. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs 159,8383,074Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 605,57611,646C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support 16,9003252. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services 464,7348,937Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 481,6349,262Total BASELINE COSTS 9,127,794175,534Physical Contingencies --Price Contingencies 4,812,1994,058Total PROJECT COSTS 13,939,993179,593 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Table 5: Project costs by component and financier  
(Table 5 continues) 
(Table 5 continues) 
12. Project  sustainability.  Most  project  costs  will  be  represented  by  investment  costs. 
Therefore,  post-project  sustainability  is  not  considered  at  risk.  Also,  the  project  is 
expected to increase climate resilience of smallholder producers, therefore it is expected 
that they will be able to manage future climate risk. Furthermore, the project will invest in 
facilitating  productive  private  investments  along  the  value  chains  and  to  continue  and 
expand  the  effectiveness  of  current  IFAD  investments  through  expanded  agriculture 
productivity, production, and increased value added to production. 
The GovernmentIFADASAP+_1 grantASAP+_2 grantAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 2.78.64.514.1--3.511.12. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  19.617.652.847.3----3. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 0.42.85.033.87.046.7--Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 22.714.462.339.47.04.43.52.2B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support 0.11.16.978.6----2. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs -0.0-0.618.0----Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 0.10.87.462.7----C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support --0.3100.0----2. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services 1.111.58.288.5----Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1.111.18.588.9----Total PROJECT COSTS 23.913.378.243.57.03.93.52.0GTMECIGREENFINTBCBeneficiariesAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 3.711.7--13.542.5--2. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  --16.915.121.018.8--3. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 1.38.7--0.53.6--Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 5.03.216.910.735.022.1--B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support --------2. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs ------2.064.6Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access ------2.017.0C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support --------2. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services --------Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services --------Total PROJECT COSTS 5.02.816.99.435.019.52.01.1BeneficiariesPrivate sectorTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%A. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 3.812.0--31.717.72. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  0.0-1.41.2111.662.13. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 0.64.3--14.98.3Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 4.52.81.40.9158.288.1B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support --1.820.38.74.92. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs --0.517.43.11.7Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access --2.319.511.86.6C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support ----0.30.22. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services ----9.25.1Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services ----9.65.3Total PROJECT COSTS 4.52.53.72.0179.6100.0 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Summary Cost Tables 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
A6 
A7 
A8 
Components Programme Cost Summary, by Year  
Cost Summary by Expenditure Category  
Expenditure Accounts by Components  
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers  
Procurement Accounts by Financiers  
Local/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers  
Programme Components by Year – Investment/Recurrent costs  
Expenditure Accounts by Year 
5 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Table A1 
6 
 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies2023202420252026202720282029TotalA. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 5,5547,7825,0254,7795,7412,71212631,7192. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  1,11618,73032,70730,14618,7309,461697111,5873. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 1,0895,5294,0792,53684959621314,890Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 7,75832,04141,81237,46225,31912,7681,036158,197B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support 1,0011,5041,6961,9331,808722588,7222. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs 876915055105075143003,115Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1,0882,1952,2012,4432,3151,23635811,837C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support -27951----3302. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services 2,1051,0731,0121,1771,6911,0431,1289,229Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 2,1051,3521,0631,1771,6911,0431,1289,559Total PROJECT COSTS 10,95235,58845,07641,08229,32515,0472,522179,593 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Table A2 
7 
 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeExpenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary(ETB '000)(US$ '000)%% Total%% TotalForeignBaseForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts I. Investment Costs A. Goods 1. Equipment & materials 5,3568,03413,39060-10315525860-2. Vehicles 24,70074,10098,8007514751,4251,9007513. Goods, services & inputs 39,83639,83679,6735017667661,532501Subtotal Goods 69,892121,970191,8636421,3442,3463,690642B. Works 3,305,869826,4674,132,336204563,57415,89479,4682045C. Training and Workshops 1,548,94781,5241,630,47151829,7871,56831,355518D. Consultancies 517,08027,215544,295569,94452310,46756E. Grants & subsidies 235,040-235,040-34,520-4,520-3F. Credit Line 1,908,192-1,908,192-2136,696-36,696-21Total Investment Costs 7,585,0201,057,1768,642,1961295145,86620,330166,1961295II. Recurrent Costs A. Operating costs 130,130-130,130-12,503-2,503-1B. Salaries & allowances 355,468-355,468-46,836-6,836-4Total Recurrent Costs 485,598-485,598-59,338-9,338-5Total BASELINE COSTS 8,070,6181,057,1769,127,79412100155,20420,330175,53412100Physical Contingencies ----------Price Contingencies 4,073,877738,3224,812,19915533,4356234,058152Total PROJECT COSTS 12,144,4951,795,49713,939,99313153158,63920,954179,59312102 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Table A3 
8 
 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Component 3: InstitutionalComponent 1: Community-led climate-smartand policy strengthening andproductive landscapesimplementation supportSub-componentservices1.1.Sub-ComponentSubcomponentCommunity-led1.3.Component 2: Inclusive and3.2: climateMarket-orientedequitable market accessSubcomponentProgrammeresilientSub-Componentproduction andSub-ComponentSub-component3.1:coordinationdevelopment1.2. Climateproductivity2.1. Market2.2. SupportInstitutionalandand naturalresilientimprovement ofaccessto women andstrengtheningimplementationresourceinfrastructureselected foodlinkagemenand policysupportmanagementdevelopment commoditiessupportagripreneurssupportservicesTotal I. Investment Costs A. Goods 1. Equipment & materials --20---2392592. Vehicles -603----1,3331,9363. Goods, services & inputs 155-1,191120--891,556Subtotal Goods 1556031,212120--1,6613,751B. Works -82,137-----82,137C. Training and Workshops 13,12260412,2394,0571,52825429332,097D. Consultancies 2,4236,1301121,198177676410,720E. Grants & subsidies ---2,9501,570--4,520F. Credit Line 15,16121,000535----36,696Total Investment Costs 30,861110,47414,0988,3253,1153302,718169,921II. Recurrent Costs A. Operating costs 272652-272--1,3962,592B. Salaries & allowances 586461792125--5,1157,080Total Recurrent Costs 8581,114792397--6,5119,671Total PROJECT COSTS 31,719111,58714,8908,7223,1153309,229179,593  Taxes 15516,68447293--1,08818,493Foreign Exchange 85517,2161,22532377171,24020,954 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Table A4 
Table A5 
9 
 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeExpenditure Accounts by Financiers(US$ Million)The GovernmentIFADASAP+_1 grantASAP+_2 grantGTMECIGREENFINTBCBeneficiariesPrivate sectorTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Goods 1. Equipment & materials 0.05.30.293.2--------0.01.6------0.30.12. Vehicles 0.14.01.996.0----------------1.91.13. Goods, services & inputs 0.530.40.955.1--0.15.70.18.4------0.00.4--1.60.9Subtotal Goods 0.615.03.078.9--0.12.40.13.5--0.00.1--0.00.1--3.82.1B. Works 19.523.845.955.8------15.418.7----0.0-1.41.782.145.7C. Training and Workshops 1.95.810.833.86.921.53.19.64.514.0----1.44.33.310.20.30.932.117.9D. Consultancies 0.11.48.276.50.10.50.33.00.33.11.513.8--0.00.10.21.60.0-10.76.0E. Grants & subsidies -0.0-1.941.6----------0.614.0--2.044.44.52.5F. Credit Line 0.71.9----------35.095.4--1.02.7--36.720.4Total Investment Costs 22.813.469.841.17.04.13.52.05.02.916.99.935.020.62.01.24.42.63.72.2169.994.6II. Recurrent Costs A. Operating costs 0.14.02.596.0----------------2.61.4B. Salaries & allowances 1.014.06.084.2--0.00.60.00.6------0.00.30.00.27.13.9Total Recurrent Costs 1.111.38.487.4--0.00.50.00.5------0.00.20.00.29.75.4Total PROJECT COSTS 23.913.378.243.57.03.93.52.05.02.816.99.435.019.52.01.14.52.53.72.0179.6100.0 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeProcurement Accounts by Financiers(US$ Million)The GovernmentIFADASAP+_1 grantASAP+_2 grantGTMECIGREENFINTBCBeneficiariesPrivate sectorTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Consultancies 0.11.48.276.70.00.20.33.00.33.11.513.9--0.00.10.21.60.0-10.76.02. Works 19.523.845.955.8------15.418.7----0.0-1.41.782.145.73. Vehicles 0.14.02.196.0----------------2.21.24. Equipment_material 0.04.21.095.8----------------1.00.65. Training 1.86.39.331.96.923.82.910.14.615.6------3.311.30.31.029.116.26. Workshops 0.00.50.730.4--0.28.1------1.460.7--0.00.32.31.37. Goods, services & inputs 0.530.40.955.1--0.15.70.18.4------0.00.4--1.60.98. Salaries & allowances 1.014.15.985.9----------------6.83.89. Operating costs 0.14.02.596.0----------------2.61.410. Grants & subsidies -0.0-1.941.6----------0.614.0--2.044.44.52.511. Credit Line 0.71.9----------35.095.4--1.02.7--36.720.412. Unallocated ----------------------Total PROJECT COSTS 23.913.378.243.57.03.93.52.05.02.816.99.435.019.52.01.14.52.53.72.0179.6100.0 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Table A6 
10 
 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeLocal/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers(US$ Million)The GovernmentIFADASAP+_1 grantASAP+_2 grantGTMECIGREENFINTBCBeneficiariesPrivate sectorTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I.   Foreign 0.52.514.770.30.52.20.21.10.41.83.918.70.0-0.10.30.20.90.52.221.011.7II.  Local (Excl. Taxes) 5.94.262.444.66.54.63.32.34.63.312.99.235.025.01.91.44.33.03.22.3140.178.0III. Taxes 17.494.31.05.7----------------18.510.3Total Project 23.913.378.243.57.03.93.52.05.02.816.99.435.019.52.01.14.52.53.72.0179.6100.0 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Table A7 
11 
 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeProject Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies2023202420252026202720282029TotalA. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management Investment Costs 5,4357,6624,9044,6575,6172,587-30,861Recurrent Costs 119120121123124125126858Subtotal Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 5,5547,7825,0254,7795,7412,71212631,7192. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  Investment Costs 96218,57432,55029,98718,5699,298533110,474Recurrent Costs 1541561571591611621641,114Subtotal Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  1,11618,73032,70730,14618,7309,461697111,5873. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities Investment Costs 9795,4183,9672,4237354819614,098Recurrent Costs 110111112113114115116792Subtotal Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 1,0895,5294,0792,53684959621314,890Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 7,75832,04141,81237,46225,31912,7681,036158,197B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support Investment Costs 9461,4491,6401,8761,750664-8,325Recurrent Costs 55565657575858397Subtotal Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support 1,0011,5041,6961,9331,808722588,7222. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs Investment Costs 876915055105075143003,115Recurrent Costs --------Subtotal Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs 876915055105075143003,115Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1,0882,1952,2012,4432,3151,23635811,837C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support Investment Costs -27951----330Recurrent Costs --------Subtotal Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support -27951----3302. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services Investment Costs 1,20216191247752941702,718Recurrent Costs 9039129219309399499586,511Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 2,1051,3521,0631,1771,6911,0431,1289,559Total PROJECT COSTS 10,95235,58845,07641,08229,32515,0472,522179,593Total Investment Costs 9,61134,23443,70839,70127,93013,6381,099169,921Total Recurrent Costs 1,3411,3541,3681,3811,3951,4091,4239,671 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Table A8 
12 
 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeExpenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Goods 1. Equipment & materials 239183----2592. Vehicles 1,256---680--1,9363. Goods, services & inputs 3251,02010750252541,556Subtotal Goods 1,8201,038110507042543,751B. Works 11111,40924,65922,14814,6478,63053382,137C. Training and Workshops 4,37511,1666,7775,2113,69275312332,097D. Consultancies 3,3051,4561,9252,0321,01884613910,720E. Grants & subsidies -3148641,1641,0648143004,520F. Credit Line -8,8529,3739,0956,8052,571-36,696Total Investment Costs 9,61134,23443,70839,70127,93013,6381,099169,921II. Recurrent Costs A. Operating costs 3593633673703743783812,592B. Salaries & allowances 9819911,0011,0111,0211,0321,0427,080Total Recurrent Costs 1,3411,3541,3681,3811,3951,4091,4239,671Total PROJECT COSTS 10,95235,58845,07641,08229,32515,0472,522179,593 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
Detailed Cost Tables 
DT1  
DT2  
DT3  
DT4  
DT5 
DT6 
DT7 
Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes   / Sub-Component 1.1. 
Community-led and climate resilient natural resources management 
Component 1: Community-led and climate resilient natural resources management  / Sub-
Component 1.2. Climate Resilient Infrastructure Development  
Component 1: Community-led and climate resilient natural resources management  / Sub-
Component 1.3. Market-Oriented Production and Productivity Improvement of Selected Food 
Commodities 
Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access  /  Sub-Component 2.1. Market Access 
Linkage Support 
Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access  / Sub-component 2.2. Support to 
Women and Men Agripreneurs 
Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services / 
Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support 
Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services / 
Subcomponent 3.2: Programme Coordination and Implementation Support Services 
13 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
DT1. Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes    / Sub-Component 1.1. Community-led Participatory 
Agricultural Development Planning (US$) 
14 
QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total2023 I. Investment Costs A. Assessments and prioritizations of landscapes 1. Regional assessments of landscape areas and associated communities  through zones Number5------520,000100------1001012. Woreda level prioritization and selection of watersheds Awareness raising and mobilisation of authorities and communities (including mainstreaming themes) Landscape150------1505,000750------750754Selection and training of  community facilitators at woreda level workshop5------525,000125------125126Creation of Watershed Management Committees /a Number150------1505,000750------750754Sensitization in various thematic areas (Gender equality, Equity, Climate , Nutrition) using community conversations Landscape150------1505,000750------750754Costs for the carers of trainers and participants with disabilities Person1,000------1,0004040------4040Agriculture Risk Management (ARM) support with Risk Disaggregation for watersheds /b Number150------1501,000150------150151Operationalise Household Methodologies at household level (complement GMF curricular) /c lumpsum1-1----2125,000125-125----250126Subtotal Woreda level prioritization and selection of watersheds 2,690-125----2,8152,703Subtotal Assessments and prioritizations of landscapes 2,790-125----2,9152,804B. Community sensitisation 1. ToT to experts (Federal, Region) Session111111-614,903151515151515-89152. Disability inclusion expert to review the community development process & provide expert guidance Day20------2050010------10103. Training at Woreda level on the implementation of watersheds Session1-1-1--362,50063-63-63--18863Subtotal Community sensitisation 871577157715-28788C. Community-led development and investments plans preparation 1. Preparation of the watershed management plans /d Number-7575----150750-5656----113-D. Implementation of natural resource management and soil health improvement measures 1. Awareness creation and training to WUA and watershed committees and kebele admin Number1-1-1--330,28830-30-30--91302. Implementation of soil and water conservation activities /e Ha3,0005,5005,5005,5005,500--25,0002507501,3751,3751,3751,375--6,2507543. Implementation of soil and water conservation activities_credit line /f Ha-10,00010,00010,00012,0006,000-48,000250-2,5002,5002,5003,0001,500-12,000-4. Soil health and testing laboratory lumpsum-1-----13,500,000-3,500-----3,500-5. Establishing and strengthening of tree nurseries /g Number-7575----1501,100-8383----165-6. Construction and operation of biogas /h Number--500500500500-2,000700--350350350350-1,400-7. Production and dissemination of cookstoves /i Number--5,0007,00013,00020,600-45,60035--175245455721-1,596-8. Experience sharing visit to kebele leaders, WUS and watershed committees /j Visit--11---288,321--8888---177-9. Participatory monitoring and evaluation Training to Federal and Regional Watershed experts abroad /k Session-1-----128,000-28-----28-Subtotal Implementation of natural resource management and soil health improvement measures 7807,4864,6014,5585,2102,571-25,207784E. Double Cabin Vehicles Number5---5--1050,000250---250--500251F. SECAP implementation /l lumpsum0.8------0.81,700,0001,360------1,3601,367G. Digital knowledge Development of Digital Knowledge Repository for Extension, ARM , Agric Practices and linkage to ADAC /m lumpsum1------1110,000110------110111GIS Mapping and Monitoring including implementation of the Resilience Design and Monitoring Tool /n lumpsum11-1---330,0003030-30---9030Subtotal Digital knowledge 14030-30---200141Total Investment Costs 5,4087,5874,8604,6035,5382,586-30,5815,435II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 1. Federal level Climate change and watershed management specialist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067102. Regional level Climate change and watershed management specialist Month727272727272725047505454545454545437854Driver Month1081081081081081081087561601717171717171712117Subtotal Regional level 7171717171717149972Subtotal Salaries and allowances 8181818181818156681B. Operating Expenses Vehicle O&M Number5555555357,5003838383838383826338Total Recurrent Costs 118118118118118118118829119Total 5,5267,7054,9784,7225,6562,70411831,4105,554 _________________________________\a 50% will be women\b Trainings and support to ARM measures for 100 watershed committees\c This will be integrated with gender model families approach and staggered implementation to cater for the scale up in phase 2\d The plans will be prepared based on the national watershed managemnt plan preparation guideline. They'll include: biophysical and socio-economic survey; Identification and prioritization of interventions that bring change; Prepare development map,     inputs a\e Land rehabilitation and CSA activities will be done in the upper streams, water user associations and downstream areas. It will include terracing, stone bunds, tree planting, and nursery development, among many others.\f Land rehabilitation and CSA activities will be done in the upper streams, water user associations and downstream areas. It will include terracing, stone bunds, tree planting, and nursery development, among many others.\g Establish a nursery and support for one year\h Target HHs will have two livestock heads and access to water\i Unit cost covers two cookstoves. The activity targets a number of households equal to 1/3 of total beneficiaries\j One for watershed committees and one for water users associations\k Training on climate risk analysis at the University of Johannesburg\l It includes compliance monitoring\m It includes support for knowledge updates and adding new knowledge products\n This is for the establishment of geospatial information system for baseline and monitoring of progress and achievements including assessing resilience at HH and community levels 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
DT2. Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes   / Sub-Component 1.2.  Integrated Natural Resources 
Management (US$) 
15 
QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Water development for households, crops and livestock use 1. Development of improved farmer led small-scale irrigation systems Identification of Potential Schemes and Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment Ha3,6004,0004,0003,6002,400--17,6003512614014012684--616Establishment of IWUAs /a Unit-3070703010-2101,000-3070703010-210Capacity Building of IWUAs Session-3070703010-2102,000-601401406020-420Feasibility Studies Ha-2,3004,0004,0002,0002,000-14,300200-460800800400400-2,860Schemes Detailed Design and Construction Works Supervision Ha-2,3004,0003,5002,0001,000-12,800300-6901,2001,050600300-3,840Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies Ha-2,3004,0004,0002,0002,000-14,300100-230400400200200-1,430Construction of irrigation schemes /b Ha-1,3003,0002,5001,5001,000-9,3006,000-7,80018,00015,0009,0006,000-55,800Construction of irrigation schemes_Credit line /c Ha-1,0001,0001,000500--3,5006,000-6,0006,0006,0003,000--21,000Subtotal Development of improved farmer led small-scale irrigation systems 12615,41026,75023,58613,3746,930-86,1762. Development of Multiple-Use Water Systems (MUS) Identification of Potential MUS Sites and Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment Unit50707050---24020010141410---48Establishment of MUS WUAs Unit-20505030--1501,000-20505030--150Capacity Building of MUS WUAs Session-20505030--1501,000-20505030--150Feasibility Studies Unit45656545---2201,20054787854---264MUS Detailed Design and Works Supervision Unit40606040---2002,0008012012080---400Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies Unit45656545---22060027393927---132Construction of  MUS /d Ha-20505030--15025,000-5001,2501,250750--3,750Subtotal Development of Multiple-Use Water Systems (MUS) 1717911,6011,521810--4,8943. Rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure Site identification and Feasibility Studies Ha200300400300300--1,5001002030403030--150Schemes Detailed Design and Rehabilitation Works Supervision Ha200300400300300--1,5001503045604545--225Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies Ha200300400300300--1,500501015201515--75Strengthening & Capacity Building of IWUAs Unit-23433-151,000-23433-15Rehabilitation of irrigation schemes Ha-300405410400400-1,9153,000-9001,2151,2301,2001,200-5,745Disability inclusion expert to review the training materials  & provide expert guidance during ToT Day-20-----20500-10-----10Subtotal Rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure 601,0021,3381,3241,2931,203-6,220Subtotal Water development for households, crops and livestock use 35717,20329,68926,43115,4778,133-97,290B. Local market-related infrastructure 1. On-farm storage facilities Design & Works Supervision of Pilot Zero energy storage technology (on farm) Unit--20----20900--18----18Construction of pilot Zero energy storage technology Unit--20----209,000--180----180Subtotal On-farm storage facilities --198----1982. Warehouses for cooperatives and cooperative unions Identification, design and works supervision of warehouses for farmers primary cooperatives /e Unit--10101010-405,000--50505050-200Construction of warehouses for farmers primary cooperatives /f Unit---101010104050,000---5005005005002,000Subtotal Warehouses for cooperatives and cooperative unions --505505505505002,2003. Markets Construction of road side market sheds Unit-4040404040-2003,000-120120120120120-600Design and construction works supervision of town market sheds Unit-5555--2018,000-90909090--360Construction of town/primary market sheds Unit-5555--20180,000-900900900900--3,600Subtotal Markets -1,1101,1101,1101,110120-4,5604. Feeder roads spot rehabilitation Survey, design and works supervision Km-304030---1002,500-7510075---250Rehabilitation works Km--304030--10025,000--7501,000750--2,500Subtotal Feeder roads spot rehabilitation -758501,075750--2,750Subtotal Local market-related infrastructure -1,1852,2082,7352,4106705009,708C. Vehicles and motorcycles Motorcycles Number150------1504,000600------600Total Investment Costs 95718,38831,89729,16617,8878,803500107,598II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 1. Federal level Irrigation Engineers Month121212121212128480010101010101010672. Regional level Irrigation Engineers Month7272727272727250475054545454545454378Subtotal Salaries and allowances 64646464646464445B. Operating Expenses Motorcycle O&M Number1501501501501501501501,05060090909090909090630Total Recurrent Costs 1541541541541541541541,075Total 1,11118,54232,05129,32018,0418,957654108,673 _________________________________\a 1 IWUA/Irrigation Scheme. Average Command Area/Scheme = 100 Ha.\b The unit cost is an average cost to develop 1 Ha of irrigation, with construction elements depending on the site.\c The unit cost is an average cost to develop 1 Ha of irrigation, with construction elements depending on the site.\d A Multiple-Use System will supply water to Domestic and/or Livestock Uses, and may include a community garden where feasible. The unit cost is including: Digging a shallow well/borehole up to 50 m depth (up to 10,000 USD) + Solar Pump with adequate     specifi\e Estimated size for 5,000 quintals\f Estimated size for 5,000 quintals. Linked to graduation, aims at top tier cooperatives. 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
DT3. Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes   / Sub-Component 1.3. Climate Resilient Water Development for 
Households, Crops and Livestock Use (US$) 
16 
QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Support to climate resilient production 1. Support to FTCs Equipping FTC with water harvesting structures and pumps Number-2525----504,000-100100----200Drip irrigation kits /a Number-2525----501,700-4343----85Inputs for demos for crops /b Number-7070----1401,700-119119----238Soil moisture content meter Number-100100----20025-33----5Livestock inputs for demonstration /c Number-2010----30400-84----12Subtotal Support to FTCs -272268----5402. Support to digital agriculture extension Development of digital platform to support extension and NMIS for market linkages /d lumpsum-1-----1900,000-900-----900ICT equipment ( Mobile Tablets and Training TVs for FTC/FBS) Set-50-----50300-15-----15Production of video materials on ARM and other extension messaging for farmer training under FTCs lumpsum1------1175,000175------175Disability inclusion expert to review the digital modules content and training materials  & provide expert guidance during trainings Person30------3050015------15Promotion and Awareness for the Digital Platform through Cooperatives/FTCs and Agribusiness lumpsum1111---425,00025252525---100Subtotal Support to digital agriculture extension 2159402525---1,2053. Capacity building of extension staff Training on the SHEP approach through JICA to woreda/ kebele level staff Person300------300500150------150Capacity building of DAs and Community agents on resilient practices by research/technical departments /e Person500500500----1,500250125125125----375Capacity building of DAs/Community agents on resilient practices by livestock forage department Person100100100----300250252525----75Capacity buiilding of DAS and Farmer Promoters (Community based agents/ Model Farmers) on digital extension and market platfrom/ NSA /f Person200200200----600625125125125----375Building advisory content for Weather, Climate, Markets, ARM and promotion and dissemination through DAs and Model Farmers Number-3,000-----3,000200-600-----600Disability inclusion expert to review the climate resilient practices training materials  & provide expert guidance during trainings Person day202020----60500101010----30Subtotal Capacity building of extension staff 435885285----1,6054. Support to farmers Organize farmers into commodity groups for training as FFS/FBS and operationalize GALs /g Group-1,0001,000----2,000650-650650----1,300Support the FBS/FFS with inputs for demonstration of enterprises on the farm /h Group12,00020,00020,00020,00030,00018,000-120,00020240400400400600360-2,400Organize field days Day-151515151515901,000-15151515151590Demonstration support for rain fed agriculture at FTC /i Number9045-----13510095-----14Training of farmers on CSA, Agronomy- rainfed + NSA GALS Person-90,00090,00090,000---270,00020-1,8001,8001,800---5,400Promotion of integrated home gardening among the most vulnerable households incl. HHs with a member with disability. /j Household-10,00012,837----22,83725-250321----571Subtotal Support to farmers 2493,1203,1862,215615375159,7745. Seed certification Monitoring and certification visits by research lumpsum-10.750.50.250.1-2.625,000-25191363-65Training on seed multiplication lumpsum-10.750.50.250.1-2.625,000-25191363-65Subtotal Seed certification -503825135-1306. Nutrition SBCC design TA and roll-out implementation support (mass media, community influencer training, M&E) /k lumpsum1111111775,00075757575757575525Total Investment Costs 9745,3423,8762,3407034559013,779II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 1. Federal level Agronomist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Agribusiness Specialist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Subtotal Federal level 191919191919191342. Regional level Agronomist Month7272727272727250475054545454545454378Agribusiness Specialist /l Month4848484848484833675036363636363636252Subtotal Regional level 90909090909090630Total Recurrent Costs 109109109109109109109764Total 1,0835,4513,9862,44981256419914,544 _________________________________\a For land units of 0.25 ha\b Sliding support to 70 FTC\c 20 FTC for livestock\d One-off contribution- ATI to include financing from others e,g WB & BGMF - (adding PACT Regions and Commodities , Weather advisory, Climate and ARM) for access through 8028 Farmers hotline\e Each trainer is trained twice a year, on soil fertility and crop production and NSA/GALS\f Two training per year for four years\g This is for the four initial regions and depends on the number of irrigation sites/area in the four priority areas\h Organized in groups of 25-30, 2 rounds of training per year\i Reduced support for demos over time- 1 FTC per woreda\j Package: indigenous veg seeds and fruit tree seedlings, small livestock and tools provided to HHs with PLW and Childre U2\k Barrier analysis in 4 regions ,SBCC strategy design, content development by a firm, mass media airtime and other influencers' training\l 4 regional agribusiness experts (Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR, Somali; Sidama not considered, the thinking with a slim team was proposed as an option for Sidam that may be supported by the other agribusiness team). 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
DT4. Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access  /  Sub-Component 2.1. Market Access Linkage Support (US$) 
17 
QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Inclusive digital value chain assessment and partner business companies identification Digital data collection of base market information to feed into market platform /a Per year111111-619,444191919191919-117Digital Mapping /b Study888888-4816,978136136136136136136-815Disability inclusion expert to review content & expert guidance during promotion and awareness raising Person20------2080016------16Subtotal Inclusive digital value chain assessment and partner business companies identification 171155155155155155-948B. Capacity building of experts Business facilitation skill training to ATI, BoA, Cooperative Promotion Office Staffs /c Person120------12050060------60Exposure visit and training to regional experts /d Person-404040---120250-101010---30Training and exposure visit to Woreda experts and DAs on business /e Person-450450450---1,350168-767676---227Subtotal Capacity building of experts 60868686---317C. Capacity building of farmers Training to farmers and pastoralists representatives/leads /f Person-2,0252,0252,0252,025--8,100160-324324324324--1,296Nutrition sensitization workshop to processors and unions /g Person--6060---120160--1010---19Exposure visit /h Visit-10101010--405,000-50505050--200Subtotal Capacity building of farmers -374384384374--1,515D. Develop Capacity of Cooperatives and Unions to Graduate to Professional Business Organizations /i Train Assessors/Trainers to become certified /j Person-10101010--40500-5555--20Payment to Access Dashboard and Tools for Assessment Planning Per year-1111--410,000-10101010--40Assessment Using Certifed Assessment Tools and Trainers (Baseline and Benchmarking) and Reassessments /k Number-137137137137--548250-34343434--137Cooperative Graduation Training Package Trainers ToT Session /l Session6------620,000120------120Roll-out ALP Face to Face Training to Cooperatives and Union Leaders /m Number-685685----1,370150-103103----206Agribusiness Leadership Graduation Support Coaching Roll-Out (6 rounds) - travel expense /n Day-274274274---822100-272727---82Cooperative Leaders exposure visit /o Person--375375375--1,125200--757575--225Unions capacity enhancement exposure visit and training /p Person-60606060--240350-21212121--84Subtotal Develop Capacity of Cooperatives and Unions to Graduate to Professional Business Organizations 120200275173145--914E. Facilitation of market alliance platforms (MAPs) /q Person-800800800---2,400120-969696---288F. Investments in cooperatives and unions Matching grants for primary cooperative investments /r Number-1020353525-12520,000-200400700700500-2,500Matching grants for Union investments /s Number-4662--1825,000-10015015050--450Subtotal Investments in cooperatives and unions -300550850750500-2,950G. Facilitation of business deal making Facilitation of B2B deal meetings with processors in IAPs and other buyers /t Person-400160400160--1,120200-80328032--224Business deal meetings facilitation, input suppliers/service providers with cooperatives/unions /u Person-1,404351176---1,931100-1403518---193Subtotal Facilitation of business deal making -220679832--417H. Double Cabin Vehicles Number5---5--1050,000250---250--500I. SECAP implementation /v lumpsum0.2------0.21,700,000340------340Total Investment Costs 9411,4321,6131,8411,707655-8,188II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 1. Regional level Driver Month10810810810810810810875616017171717171717121B. Operating Expenses Vehicle O&M Number5555555357,50038383838383838263Total Recurrent Costs 55555555555555383Total 9961,4861,6681,8951,761710558,572 _________________________________\a Engagement of youth to support data collection is foreseen\b 8 selected Value Chain in  4 Regions\c 90 from Woreda and 30 from region and federal\d 5 days exposure and training @ 50USD/day\e 5 people from each Woreda, 3 times. It focuses on buyers quality requirement and business arrangement\f On buyers requirements, quality, business management and financial literacy - in partnership with buyers/processors and unions 1 day 3 sessions, 30 farmers per Woreda per value chain (3 value chains per Woreda) 90 lead farmers\g 6 locations 2 sessions with 10 represntatives\h On business to business linkage in the country or abroad, challenges to main stakeholders from value chain actors and support organizations - 4 teams/visits with 10 members each\i Cooperatives and Unions Business Leadership (Graduation)  Program\j 10 Assessors to be renwed for 4 years until the final reassessment\k 125 Cooperatives and 12 Unions a total of 137 prodcuer organizations - baseline assessment, two years support follow-up/results assessment and fourth years final assessment\l Each session 20-25 participants with 6 ToT Sessions\m It includes: 2 rounds of training (3 days and 2 days) with travel days; daily cost of DSA and refreshment\n 137 Cooperatives/unions (125 cooperatives +12 unions) 1 day coaching for 6 rounds\o 125 cooperatives and 12 Unions 3 individuals from each organization in the different areas ateast 1 women leader - 3 exposure visits\p 12 Unions with 5 members each year in selected areas for relevant team\q 8 MSPs 2 per year for 3 years with 50 participants per MSPs\r Cooperatives matching grant for required investment as graduated cooperative\s Union matching grant for required investment as graduated Union\t Costs include travel, meeting arrangements, facilitation fees\u 3 events one from agribusiness participants and 2 from cooperative and unions, 1200 input suppliers + 120cooperatvies + 12 Unions\v It includes compliance monitoring 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
18 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
DT5. Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access  / Sub-component 2.2. Support to Women and Men Agripreneurs (US$) 
19 
QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Online agripreneurship training Master trainer /a Person day66------6630020------20Technical support /b lumpsum111111-620,000202020202020-120Disability inclusion expert to review content lumpsum1------15,0005------5Subtotal Online agripreneurship training 452020202020-145B. ToT training /c 1. Conduct ToT for 10 trainers per region /d Person75------7530023------232. Participation of trainers /e Person day300------300206------63. Mentoring of trainers /f Person day-90-----90300-27-----274. Localization of agripreneurship toolkit /g Person day15-5----203005-2----65. Costs for the carers of trainers with disabilities lumpsum11-----29,00099-----186. Final workshop in Addis Ababa Participants /h Person-60-----60596-36-----36Venue lumpsum-1-----17,000-7-----7Subtotal Final workshop in Addis Ababa -43-----43Subtotal ToT training 42792----122C. Agripreneurship training to young men and women Trainer honorarium /i Person day-960960960960960-4,800150-144144144144144-720Participation of young agripreneurs /j Person-19,200-----19,20020-384-----384Backstopping mission by technical agri experts by demand lumpsum-21111-65,000-105555-30Inspirational Talk with successful (female) agripreneurs lumpsum-1-1-1-35,000-5-5-5-15Costs for the carers of trainers with disabilities lumpsum-1-----19,000-9-----9Subtotal Agripreneurship training to young men and women -552149154149154-1,158D. Business-Plan financing Business proposals selection /k Person-1515151515-75150-22222-11Seed capital for young agripreneurs Number-6060606060-300150-99999-45Seed capital for skilled young agripreneurs with disabilities Group-11111-55,000-55555-25Mentorship programme for young agrepreneurs /l Day-9090909090-450150-1414141414-68Top-up finance for selected agripreneurs Number--202020202010015,000--3003003003003001,500Subtotal Business-Plan financing -303303303303303001,649Total 876815005044995043003,074 _________________________________\a 3 trainers , 22 days\b provided by FAO\c 10 per region - 5 groups of 2 trainers\d 3 Trainers, 25 days for training preparation and training facilitation\e 30 trainees, 10 training days\f 3 Mentors, 2 days for 15 groups\g 3 trainers,  15 days for localization\h 30 participants; 2 day-workshop; costs include all expenses, such as transportation and perdiem\i 2 trainers per session, 32 sessions in three regions  and 5 groups per region -\j 600 youth trained per year\k Committee with 5 members\l 3 months mentoring/30days per month. 10 mentors per region 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
DT6. Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services / Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional 
Strengthening and Policy Support (US$) 
20 
QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs Support the newly established inter-ministerial body - Food System Transformation /a lumpsum-1-----1150,000-150-----150Development of agricultural water utilization and infrastructure management strategies lumpsum-2-----230,000-60-----60Support to the revision of national nutrition sensitive agriculture strategy lumpsum-1-----115,000-15-----15Capacity building of Federal, Regional, Woreda and Kebel staff of MoA on Agriculture risk management Person-200200----400250-5050----100Total -27550----325 _________________________________\a to ensure coordination of the Ethiopian Food System Transformation roadmap implementation 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Project Costs and Financing 
DT7. Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services / Subcomponent 3.2: Programme 
Coordination and Implementation Support Services (US$) 
21 
QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit2023202420252026202720282029Total(US$)2023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles and motorcycles Double Cabin Vehicles Number13---13--2650,000650---650--1,300B. Office Equipment for PCO Desktop Number140------1401,000140------140Printer/Photocopier Number9------91,50014------14Accounting software Set1------120,00020------20Office furniture Set140------14020028------28Subtotal Office Equipment for PCO 202------202C. Audit and key studies External audit Number1111111720,00020202020202020140Internal audit Number2222222145,0001010101010101070Baseline study /a Number1------1110,000110------110Mid Term Review Number---1---150,000---50---50Project Completion and Impact evaluation Number------1170,000------7070Core Outcome Surveys /b Number---1---1110,000---110---110Specific Thematic Surveys /c Number31311231410,00030103010102030140Design and setup of the MIS including training of  staff on its use lumpsum-1-----150,000-50-----50Procurement of electronic tablets to be used for data collection /d Number90------9040036------36Annual web-hosting for the MIS cloud servers /e lumpsum111111171,00011111117Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan /f lumpsum1------130,00030------30Development of a Knowledge Management, Learning and Communication Strategy /g lumpsum1------130,00030------30Roll out and implementation of the Knoweldge Management Action Plan /h lumpsum111111173,000333333321Training on M & E Related areas /i lumpsum111111175,000555555535Subtotal Audit and key studies 27599692094959139899D. Workshops Startup workshop Number1------150,00050------50Annual planning & review workshop Number1111111720,00020202020202020140PCO participation to workshops Number-1-1-1-310,000-10-10-10-30Subtotal Workshops 70302030203020220E. PCO capacity building Capacity building on disability inclusion to inform project decision-making /j lumpsum-1-----110,000-10-----10Capacity building on nutrition-sensitive agriculture use nutrition-related data to inform project decision-making /k lumpsum-1-----120,000-20-----20Subtotal PCO capacity building -30-----30Total Investment Costs 1,19715989239719891592,651II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 1. Program coordination -Federal level Programme Coordinator Month12121212121212841,0001212121212121284Monitoring and Evaluation  Specialist Month2424242424242416880019191919191919134Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067MIS/GIS specialist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Social safeguard specialist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Environmental safeguard specialist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Nutrition Officer Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Capacity Building and Gender Specialist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Senior procurement specialist Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Finance manager Month12121212121212848001010101010101067Senior finance specialist Month1212121212121284780999999966Accountant Month1212121212121284780999999966Driver Month12012012012012012012084020024242424242424168Secretary Month1212121212121284210333333318Office assistant Month1212121212121284130222222211Subtotal Program coordination -Federal level 1551551551551551551551,0842. Program coordination - Regional level Programme Coordinator Month7272727272727250490065656565656565454Monitoring and Evaluation  Specialist /l Month6060606060606042075045454545454545315Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist /m Month6060606060606042075045454545454545315MIS/GIS specialist Month7272727272727250475054545454545454378Social and enviromental safeguard specialist Month7272727272727250475054545454545454378Capacity building and gender specialist Month7272727272727250475054545454545454378Assistant Procurement Month7272727272727250480058585858585858403Financial management specialist Month7272727272727250475054545454545454378Secretary cashier Month7272727272727250420014141414141414101Office assistant Month72727272727272504125999999963Subtotal Program coordination - Regional level 4524524524524524524523,1633. Program coordination - Woreda level Cluster Coordinator Month1801801801801801801801,26030054545454545454378Cluster Accountant Month1801801801801801801801,26025045454545454545315Subtotal Program coordination - Woreda level 99999999999999693Subtotal Salaries and allowances 7067067067067067067064,939B. Operating Expenses General operating expenses for PCO lumpsum9999999635,00045454545454545315Vehicle O&M Number13131313131313917,50098989898989898683Field per diem for PCO staff lumpsum7070707070707049050035353535353535245Field supervision and monitoring of project interventions lumpsum1111111715,00015151515151515105Subtotal Operating Expenses 1931931931931931931931,348Total Recurrent Costs 8988988988988988988986,287Total 2,0951,0579871,1371,6179871,0578,937 _________________________________\a The baseline survey will be carried out using the COI survey methodology and will also serve as the COI survey baseline\b The project will not carry out annual outcome surveys. Instead it will carry out Core Outcome Surveys at baseline, midline and endline and will be required to use the COI survey methodology for the baseline to collect baseline information for the CIs\c Specific thematic surveys will be carried out in the place of annual outcome surveys\d Each of the Woredas PIUs will have a tablet for data collection and linked to the MIS\e The MIS will use cloud based servers for secure data storage and management . These will require annual subsrciption support for the entire duration of the project implementation period\f A Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will be developed at the beginning of implementation of PACT to provide further guidance for M & E within the project\g A KML&C Stratgey will be developed in the first year of implementation to guide Knoweledge Management within PACT\h The implementation of the KMC strategy will be through the KMC action plan which will be implementated and updated on annual basis\i Staff including M & E unit staff will be trained on M & E related areas\j costs for disability inclusion expert\k Nutrition dashboard\l One M & E Specialist will be stationed at each Regional PCMU\m One KMC Specialist will needed for each of the 5 regions to be covered by the project 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
Annex 4:  
  Economic and Financial Analysis 
I. 
Introduction 
1.  Overview.  This  Annex  reports  the  results  of  the  financial  and  economic  analysis 
related  to  the  Participatory  Agriculture  and  Climate  Transformation  (PACT)  Programme  in 
Ethiopia.  PACT  will  enhance  resilience  and  productivity  of  ecosystems  and  livelihoods 
through promotion of climate-smart irrigation development and landscape management and 
will  expand  linkages  with  the  private  sector  to  ensure  increased  sustained  access  to 
markets, finance, and agricultural technology. 
2.  Structure  of  the  analysis.  The  analysis  aims  at  proving  the  financial  and  economic 
viability  of  the proposed  investments.  The financial  analysis,  including  crop  and household 
(HH)  financial  models,  is  reported  in  section  II.  The  economic  analysis,  which  includes  a 
description  of  the  expected  Project  benefits,  is  described  in  section  III.  The  net  benefits 
derived from the activity level models in the form of incremental benefits with respect to the 
baseline are aggregated in the economic analysis considering the scale of the project and its 
targets (total number of hectares and households) to assess overall benefits generated from 
proposed project interventions. Such benefits are compared with the project costs (estimated 
from the project budget) to assess overall project performance indicators. Crop financial and 
economic  models,  as  well  as  a  summary  of  the  economic  analysis  can  be  found  in  the 
attached Excel worksheets. 
II. 
Financial Analysis 
3.  Objectives.  The  objectives  of  the  financial  analysis  are:  (i)  to  assess  the  financial 
viability  of  the  development  interventions  promoted  under  the  proposed  Project;  (ii)  to 
examine  the  impact  of  Project  interventions  on  the  incomes  of  the  households  (HHs) 
targeted,  therefore  determining  the  incentive  for  the  target  group  for  engaging  in  the 
proposed  activities;  and  (iii)  to  establish  the  framework  for  the  economic  analysis  of  the 
Project,  which  will  complement  the  financial  analysis  to  assess  the  justification  from  the 
overall economy’ perspective (see section III). 
4.  Data.  Quantities  and  costs  of  the  inputs  used  in  agriculture  management  (fertilizers, 
seeds, chemicals), including labour utilized in the different operations, as well the technical 
coefficients  for  the  different  technologies,  and  the  output  farm-gate  prices  have  been 
collected during the design mission, in June 2022. Collected data refer to both conventional 
and  improved  (climate-resilient)  farm  management  practices  that  are  considered  in  the 
‘without  project’  (WOP)  and  ‘with  project’  (WP)  scenarios,  respectively.  Data  on  prices  for 
pesticides,  fertilizers  and  seeds  are  obtained  through  the  Agricultural  Inputs  Supply 
Enterprise (AISCO). Labour costs and wages are derived through field interviews and from 
the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  (MoA).  Technical  coefficients  used  to  describe  WP  crop 
production  technologies  are  those  recommended  by  the  Ethiopian  Institute  of  Agricultural 
Research (EIAR). Crop productivity (yields) are obtained from the Central Statistics Agency 
(CSA)  and  MoA  and  refer  to  the  growing  season  2020/21.  Secondary  data  sources  have 
been  used  to  integrate  information  available  and  to  cross  check  our  findings  including 
previous investment programs in the agriculture sector of Ethiopia and data available in the 
literature as  well as  in official statistical datasets.  Activity  budgets  are  calculated  based on 
financial  (farm  gate)  prices  for  the  financial  analysis.  For  the  economic  analysis,  they  are 
converted into economic prices using ad hoc conversion factors. The effects and impacts of 
climate change are accounted for in the risk and sensitivity analysis. 
5.  Methodology,  model  assumptions  and  specifications.  The  method  is  based  on 
activity  and  household  (HH)  models  which  simulate  the  implementation  of  climate-resilient 
farming practices for a variety of rainfed and irrigated crops grown in the project area and for 
1 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
livestock  rearing  activities.  The  activity  models  simulate  financial  budget  and  estimate 
financial performance  indicators  (namely, gross margins,  net  margins and  returns to family 
labour) that are instrumental for assessing the impact of Project interventions on economic 
activities of targeted smallholders. Gross margins (cash flow) are computed as a difference 
between total revenue and total operating (variable) costs.  
6. 
Total  revenue  is  computed  considering  all  farm  production  which  is  valued  using  the 
farm-gate  market  price.  No  self-consumption  is  considered,  since  the  analysis  is  aimed  at 
estimating  HHs’  incomes  in  the  WOP  and  WP  scenarios  and  not  at  indicating  how  the 
income  is  spent.  In  any  case,  including  food  consumption  in  the  computations  would  not 
change  the  analytical  results,  as  there  would  be  no  difference  between  the  value  of  food 
purchase on the market and the foregone revenue corresponding to the self-consumption. 
The operating  costs  include  the  costs for  running  the  activities  conducted every  year 
7. 
during  the  intervention  period,  and  thereafter  during  the  operational  phase  of  the  Project. 
They include hired external labour but exclude family labour costs. Net margin is derived by 
subtracting from the gross margins the costs of family labour1. Returns to family labour are 
computed as the ratio between the gross margin and the quantity of family labour involved in 
the  production activity.  The  economic  rationale for  the  Project  hinges on  the  increased net 
margins  of  agriculture  production,  primarily  resulting  from  better  yields  and  productivity 
gained thanks to the adoption of improved climate-resilient farming practices.  
8.  Models should be seen only as a representative set of possible  annual and perennial 
crop  production  activities  among  many  others  that  are  eventually  combined  in  complex 
production  systems  and  investment  options.  They  refer  to  average  socio-economic 
conditions in the area. Even if productivity increases in the WP scenario (with respect to the 
WOP ones) may seem high, it is well known that crop and livestock productivity of Ethiopian 
smallholders’  conventional  farming  is  well  below  the  potential.  Thus,  modelled  productivity 
increases consequent to the implementation of the improved technologies promoted by the 
Project are not unrealistic. Also, an overall conservative approach is adopted in the models 
not to overestimate potential benefits.  
9.  Crop  activity  models  refer  to  one  hectare  of  cropland.  This  will  make  possible  the 
comparison  between  different  activity  models.  The  models  are  calibrated  for  the  agro-
climatic  variables  which  characterize  each different  agroecology  and  reproduce  both WOP 
and  WP  technologies.  The  models  simulate  annual  budgets  reporting  all  the  quantities  of 
inputs  and  outputs,  their  unit  costs  and  prices.  Comparisons  of  result  indicators  are  made 
among  the  different  crop  production  activities  at  maturity  of  the  investment.  The  models 
provide  performance  indicators  both  for  the  WOP  scenario  –  which  is  the  baseline  of  the 
analysis – and the WP one. To make the analysis more realistic, models are representative 
of  the  different  agroecological  zones  (AEZ)  which  characterize  agriculture  in  the  Project 
area, namely lowland, mid-altitude, and highland. 
10.  All  labour  is  valued  in  the  models  using  as  a  proxy  the  market  rural  wage  of  300 
Birr/person-day.  Even  if  differences  exist  in  the  local  labour  markets,  it  is  not  possible  to 
consider  them  due  to  absence  of  reliable  data.  Given  that  there  is  no  minimum  wage  in 
Ethiopia, it is not possible to assess if the returns computed through the models presented 
here reflect the real conditions of the job market in rural areas. Since the goal of the analysis 
is to consider all the input costs, labour is valued in the same way, no  matter if the labourer 
is a family member or an external labourer. In other words, the analysis looks at labour costs 
within overall production costs. Most smallholders, however, do not rely on hired labour and 
use  only  manual  family  labour  (indeed  labour  is  often  a  constraint  to  the  expansion  of 
cropped land), without considering the real labour costs. Therefore, in each crop model, both 
the  gross and net  margins  are  computed  (where  the net  margin  is obtained  by  subtracting 
the labour costs from the gross margin), to fully consider production costs. Last, the labour-
1  All  costs  borne  at  HH  level  have  been  included  in  the  models.  Thus,  HHs’  financial  capacity  to  cover  the 
incremental production costs is already considered in the net margins and corresponding HHs’ incomes. 
2 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
related indicator returns to family labour (ratio between gross margin and total family labour 
used in farming activities) is built. The returns to family labour indicate how much is earned 
for  each  day  of  work  attributed  to  the  crop  enterprise,  irrespective  of  who  provided  the 
labour. It provides an indicative assessment of the convenience in undertaking the farming 
activity. It must be noted that there is no difference between the value of food purchase on 
the market and the foregone revenue corresponding to the self-consumption.  
11.  The WOP scenario refers to conventional management activities where farmers do not 
adopt  suitable  technologies,  considering  climate  change  and  natural  resource  base 
degradation, and yields are below the potential. The WOP models are representative of the 
current situation which is assumed to remain unchanged during project implementation. The 
WP  scenario  simulates  the  impact  on  the  project  beneficiaries  of  the  activities  funded 
through  the  project.  In  such  scenario,  beneficiaries  will  adopt  improved  climate-resilient 
agronomic practices, e.g., use of organic fertilization (compost, vermicompost), adoption of 
optimal fertilization levels. They will access to irrigation, being able to grow crops also during 
the dry season, therefore increasing the cropping intensity; and will enhance the productivity 
of  high-value  crops,  such  as  vegetables  and  fruits.  They  will  also  have  better  access  to 
value-chain markets, therefore obtaining better farm-gate prices, enhancing overall incomes 
at  farm  level.  The  farm  gate  price  is  arbitrarily  set  20%  higher  than  the  regular  farm-gate 
price to account for this. Labour and overall productivity and farm incomes are expected to 
increase as effect of the implementation of project activities. 
12. 
 The  models  are  differentiated  by  AEZ.  Three  AEZs  are  considered:  highland,  mid-
highland and lowland. They include annual and perennial crops. In the highland, annual crop 
production  is  conducted  over  two  seasons:  the  1st  season  goes  from  July  to  mid-October, 
and the 2nd season from March to mid-June (supplementary irrigation is needed during the 
2nd  season).  In  the  mid-highland  and  lowland  zones,  crop  production  is  conducted  during 
three growing seasons: the 1st one goes from July to mid-October, the 2nd from mid-October 
to end-February, and the 3rd from March to mid-June. They are fully irrigated, except the 1st 
season  which  is  only  supplementary  irrigated.  Irrigation2  is  considered  an  option  available 
only  under  the  WP  scenario,  thanks  to  water  development  interventions  foreseen  under 
PACT. Thus, project interventions are assumed to expand the possibility to grow crops also 
in the 2nd and 3rd seasons which are generally dry. Perennial crop production is conducted all 
over  the  year.  Irrigation  investments  made  under  the WP  scenario  will  improve  water  use 
efficiency and increase crop productivity. 
13.  Crop  models  and  financial  results.  Crop  models  are  built  for  both  annual  and 
perennial crops. They include cereals (teff, wheat, barley, maize), pulses (beans, chickpea), 
fodder  (Napier  grass),  and  high  value  crops  like  vegetables  and  fruits  (tomato,  onion, 
cabbage, sesame, avocado, and banana). The crops selected are chosen as representative 
cases. Crop-budget models considered in the analysis include on-farm costs related to the 
implementation  of  climate-smart  technologies,  including  labour  for  irrigation  management. 
The  investment  costs  related  to  irrigation  infrastructures,  training  and  dissemination  of  the 
climate-smart  practices  are  not  considered  directly  into  the  crop  models  since  they  are 
already  computed  within  the  overall  project  costs,  so  to  avoid  double  counting.  The 
difference  between  net  margins  in  the  WOP  versus  WP  scenarios  represents  the  net 
incremental  financial  benefits  (per  hectare)  of  switching  from  WOP  to  WP  management 
through  the  implementation  of  project  activities.  The  list  of  crops  targeted  in  the  analysis, 
together with an indication of the AEZ considered for each crop and the corresponding crop 
yields and financial  results  -  including performance  indicators  such  as  annual net  margins, 
returns  to  labour,  returns  on  investments  (ROI),  Net  Present  Value  (NPV)  and  Financial 
Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) as appropriate - are reported in Table 1.  
2 Drip irrigation technology is assumed to be implemented in the WP scenario. Investment costs are 
included in the crop models as these are considered on-farm investments paid by the farmers. 
3 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
14.  All  the  models  show  an  increase  in  the  financial  returns  (per  ha)  resulting  from  the 
implementation  of  the  proposed  climate-resilient technologies3.  Increased yields  will  be  the 
main driver for increasing cash flows. In the WP scenario, it is assumed that  thanks to the 
project  interventions,  yields  will  increase  compared  to  the  baseline  scenario.  The  financial 
analysis  demonstrates  that  all  project  scenario  models  are  profitable  from  a  farmer 
perspective illustrating the financial effectiveness of project investments aimed at supporting 
innovation  adoption.  Detailed  information  and  results  are  shown  in  the  financial  models 
available in the attached Excel file. 
Table 1.  
a)  Crop models: yields  
3 The annual net margins reported for the perennial crops refer here to the investment’s maturity,  i.e., at the 4th 
year  for  Avocado  and  at  3rd year for  Banana,  since  here  we  are  interested  at  showing the  outcome  of project 
investments. However, in the computation of the benefits, the net margins (used as proxy of the net benefits) are 
aggregated considering also previous years (i.e., from year 1) to account for the proper benefits progression.  
4 
WOPWPAnnual cropsTeffHighland                        1,800                         2,110 17%WheatHighland                        2,700                         3,010 11%Malt BarleyHighland                        2,300                         2,571 12%MaizeHighland                        3,547                         4,300 21%Faba beanHighland                        2,220                         3,500 58%ChickpeaHighland                        1,700                         2,700 59%PotatoHighland                      13,597                       15,000 10%TeffMid-highland                        1,800                         2,110 17%WheatMid-highland                        2,700                         3,010 11%MaizeMid-highland                        3,800                         4,300 13%Faba beanMid-highland                        1,838                         2,200 20%Haricot beanMid-highland                        1,579                         2,800 77%ChickpeaMid-highland                        1,426                         2,700 89%SoybeanMid-highland                        1,393                         2,500 79%TomatoMid-highland                      15,900                       18,200 14%OnionMid-highland                        8,748                       12,500 43%CabbageMid-highland                        9,500                       16,000 68%TeffLowland                        1,800                         2,110 17%WheatLowland                        2,700                         3,010 11%MaizeLowland                        3,990                         7,000 75%HaricotLowland                        1,579                         2,800 77%ChickpeaLowland                        1,700                         2,700 59%SesameLowland                           700                         1,250 79%SoybeanLowland                        1,393                         2,500 79%TomatoLowland                      15,900                       18,200 14%OnionLowland8,748                        12,500                      43%CabbageLowland9,500                        16,000                      68%ForageLowland-                            20,000                      -Perennial AvocadoMid-highland/Lowland                        8,300                       16,000 93%BananaMid-highland/Lowland                        6,432                       10,000 55%Yield percentage variationCropAEZKg/haYield    
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
b)  Crop models: annual financial results 
Source: Author’s elaboration 
15.  Representative  farm  households  and  incomes.  The  crop  models presented  above 
are used to assess average yearly income of representative farm households. Since farmers 
targeted by the project are represented by smallholder farmers, the present analysis focuses 
only on this farmer typology. Indeed, they represent most Ethiopian farmers. Representative 
farm  HHs  are  built  starting  from  the  average  land  size  at  national  level  (0.96  ha/HH)  as 
reported  in  the  available  national  statistics,  and  then  adjusting  it  to  account  for  the  real 
situation  in  the  areas targeted by  PACT.  The farm  size  considered  in the  analysis, also  in 
line with the project logframe, is 0.67 ha/HH, of which 0.57  Ha/HH 
rainfed,  and  0.10 
ha/HH is irrigated. 
is 
 Farmers  grow  a  variety  of  crops.  It  is  not  possible  to  represent  all  possible  HH 
16. 
cropping  patterns  and  various farm  sizes  which can  also  vary by AEZ.  Therefore,  the  land 
size by household and the land allocation by crop which has been hypothesized here (total 
land is uniformly allocated to the representative crops grown) should be considered only as 
average and representative of the possible combinations of target crops. To be conservative 
and  not  overestimate  incomes’  increases,  cropland  allocation  is  considered  unchanged 
under  both WOP  and WP  scenarios.  Indeed,  since  farmers  will  have  expanded  access  to 
5 
WOPWPWOPWPWPWPWPReturns on investment (ROI)NPVFIRR%$%Annual cropsTeffHighland          970          1,575 21.728.3---WheatHighland          140             292 8.29.9---Malt BarleyHighland-         111             384 4.212.96%--MaizeHighland-         211 -            17 3.65.60%--Faba beanHighland       1,849          4,004 46.977.359%--ChickpeaHighland          723          1,880 21.840.028%--PotatoHighland       1,303          2,136 30.442.031%--TeffMid-highland          993          1,548 23.227.9---WheatMid-highland          140             264 8.29.3---MaizeMid-highland-         208 -            18 3.65.6-1%--Faba beanMid-highland       1,371          2,286 36.245.9168%--Haricot beanMid-highland          496          1,604 15.133.924%--ChickpeaMid-highland          544          1,903 17.939.128%--SoybeanMid-highland          664          2,100 16.342.631%--TomatoMid-highland       3,657          5,305 60.477.578%--OnionMid-highland       1,973          3,773 35.259.755%--CabbageMid-highland       1,317          2,813 26.047.141%--TeffLowland       1,336          1,996 23.428.5---WheatLowland464.90662.138.28.1---MaizeLowland          437          1,075 4.511.416%--HaricotLowland          815          1,957 15.428.829%--ChickpeaLowland       1,013          2,254 22.533.133%--SesameLowland          696          1,129 10.112.317%--SoybeanLowland       1,039          2,449 16.537.136%--TomatoLowland       4,328          6,110 64.675.490%--OnionLowland2,516      4,437        37.556.265%--CabbageLowland1,771      3,338        27.242.349%--ForageLowland-          2,719        90.726%132,277     18%Perennial AvocadoMid-highland/Lowland       1,556          4,117 56.076.880%14,407       40%BananaMid-highland/Lowland       2,151          4,338 73.074.652%4,370         66%* For the perennial crops, the net margin is indicated at investment's maturityCrop$/haAEZAnnual net margin $/person dayReturns to family labour 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
irrigation  under  the  WP  scenario,  they  would  also  be  able  to  expand  the  size  of  irrigated 
areas  and  change  the  land  allocation  among  crops  therefore  further  increasing  their 
incomes. Nevertheless, such option is not considered here.  
17. 
It is assumed that 0.10 ha can be irrigated in the WP scenario, therefore the cropping 
intensity  (i.e.,  the  number  of  cropping  seasons)  increases only for  0.10 ha, for  most  crops 
except  for  cereals  like  teff  and  wheat  are  only  grown  during  the  wet  season  and  are  not 
irrigated. The cropping patterns and intensity of the representative HH, by AEZ, is reported 
in Table 2. Land allocation and cropping intensity by crop and AEZ  
Table 2. Land allocation and cropping intensity by crop and AEZ  
Source: Author’s elaboration  
18.  Per hectare crop activity models described above have been used to estimate incomes 
of the beneficiary HHs, by considering net margins and HH land structure. HHs’ incomes are 
computed  as  sum  of  the  net  margins  obtained  from  the  crops  grown  in  the  HHs.  By 
considering  how  much  land  is  allocated  by  each  HH  to  each  crop,  the  HH farm  income  is 
computed as weighted average of the net margins of selected crop ‘activities’ (land allocated 
to each crop being used as weight). HH incomes both under the WOP and WP scenarios are 
shown  in  Table  3.  For  perennial  crops,  the  net  margins  considered  for  the  income’s 
estimations are those earned at investments’ maturity. It is therefore acknowledged that for 
6 
WOPWPWOPWPTeffHighland0.100.10100%100%WheatHighland0.100.10100%100%Malt BarleyHighland0.100.10100%115%MaizeHighland0.100.10100%115%Faba beanHighland0.100.10100%115%ChickpeaHighland0.100.10100%115%PotatoHighland0.100.10100%115%TotalHighland0.670.67TeffMid-highland0.060.06100%100%WheatMid-highland0.060.06100%100%MaizeMid-highland0.060.06100%130%Faba beanMid-highland0.060.06100%130%Haricot beanMid-highland0.060.06100%130%ChickpeaMid-highland0.060.06100%130%SoybeanMid-highland0.060.06100%130%TomatoMid-highland0.060.06100%130%OnionMid-highland0.060.06100%130%CabbageMid-highland0.060.06100%130%AvocadoMid-highland/Lowland0.060.06100%100%BananaMid-highland/Lowland0.060.06100%100%TotalMid-highland0.670.67TeffLowland0.050.05100%100%WheatLowland0.050.05100%100%MaizeLowland0.050.05100%100%HaricotLowland0.050.05100%100%ChickpeaLowland0.050.05100%100%SesameLowland0.050.05100%100%SoybeanLowland0.050.05100%100%TomatoLowland0.050.05100%100%OnionLowland0.050.05100%100%CabbageLowland0.050.05100%100%ForageLowland0.050.05100%100%AvocadoMid-highland/Lowland0.050.05100%100%BananaMid-highland/Lowland0.050.05100%100%TotalLowland0.670.67AEZCropping intensity (%)Average cropland area (ha)Crop 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
perennial crops a transition period is expected before fully gaining the investment’s benefits. 
Results show that HHs’ net incomes would increase because of project activities, confirming 
that the proposed production packages are financially attractive for the participants and that 
the potential gains for beneficiary farmers’ from joining project activities will be attractive, and 
adoption  of  the  proposed  activities  feasible.  Cash  flows  show  that  the  HHs  will  have  the 
capacity to cover the necessary operating costs. Farmers may obviously  decide to change 
crop  land  allocation  by  growing  more  of  a  crop  which  is  found  to  be  more  profitable  than 
others.  This  would  result  in  further  incomes’  increases.  However,  since  our  analysis  is 
conducted in a conservative way, such option is not considered here.  
19.  Also, the Project is also promoting activities, (e.g., distribution of cookstoves) which are 
expected  to  generate  climate  change  mitigation  benefits  that  can  potentially  be  sold  as 
Carbon credits on the Carbon market(s) and generate an additional revenue stream for the 
beneficiaries.  This  has  not  been  included  in  the  analysis  due  to  absence  of  reliable 
information at this stage. 
Table  3.  Households’  incomes  from  crop  production  under  the  WOP  and  WP 
scenarios 
Source: Author’s elaboration 
7 
WOPWPTeffHighland92.80           28.72              WheatHighland13.37           7.91-                Malt BarleyHighland10.59-           42.29              MaizeHighland20.24-           1.89-                Faba beanHighland177.02         440.42            ChickpeaHighland69.24           206.84            PotatoHighland124.73         276.22            TotalHighland446.33         984.68            TeffMid-highland55.42           65.50              WheatMid-highland7.80             6.22-                MaizeMid-highland11.63-           28.48-              Faba beanMid-highland76.56           165.72            Haricot beanMid-highland27.70           116.29            ChickpeaMid-highland30.40           137.94            SoybeanMid-highland37.10           152.24            TomatoMid-highland204.18         411.83            OnionMid-highland110.14         300.74            CabbageMid-highland73.55           231.14            AvocadoMid-highland/Lowland86.90           229.89            BananaMid-highland/Lowland120.12         242.21            TotalMid-highland818.24         2,018.81          TeffLowland68.87           83.56              WheatLowland23.96           14.80              MaizeLowland22.53           42.50              HaricotLowland42.01           100.84            ChickpeaLowland52.23           116.16            SesameLowland35.85           77.53              SoybeanLowland53.57           126.24            TomatoLowland223.05         334.25            OnionLowland129.66         247.98            CabbageLowland91.27           191.35            ForageLowland-               140.11            AvocadoMid-highland/Lowland86.90           229.89            BananaMid-highland/Lowland120.12         242.21            TotalLowland950.02         1,947.43          Average 738.20      1,650.30       AEZAnnual net income ($)Crop 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
 Annual  incomes are used  to  compute  the  average  income per  person for both WOP 
20. 
and  WP  scenarios,  by  AEZ  and  for  various  typologies  of  farm  households,  to  assess  the 
impact of project’s activities and investments on HHs’ livelihoods. An average size of about 
five people per household is used in the computations. Results are summarised in  
21.  Table 4. They show that project’s interventions are successful in increasing per capita 
daily incomes helping to fight rural poverty. 
Table 4. Per capita daily incomes in rural HHs under the WOP and WP scenarios 
Source: Author’s elaboration 
22.  Opportunity  cost  of  capital.  The  financial  interest  rate  provides  the  alternative 
financial returns/opportunity costs to the investor. It is used here to assess the viability and 
robustness of the investments as compared with market alternatives. The financial discount 
rate is estimated at 7.9%, computed as simple average between official deposit and lending 
interest  rates  (see  Table  5).  Such  rate  is used  to estimate  the financial  Net Present Value 
(NPV)  of  the  production  models.  Also,  since  the  FIRR  of  the  proposed  investment  is 
estimated  at  16%,  which  is  well  above  the  opportunity  cost  of  capital,  the  financial 
profitability of the planned activities is confirmed.  
Table 5. Average interest rates (opportunity cost of capital) 
Source:  Author’s  elaboration  based  on  data  from  the  National  Bank  of  Ethiopia  and  from 
International Financial Statistics of the International Monetary Fund 
III.  Economic Analysis  
23.  Objectives.  The  economic  analysis  objectives  are  to:  (i)  determine  the  economic 
viability and  overall  cost effectiveness of  the project,  estimated from  the perspective of  the 
society rather than the individuals, through the comparison of aggregated economic benefits 
with  project  economic  costs  and  the  assessment  of  the  economic  internal  rate  of  return 
(EIRR);  and  (ii)  perform  sensitivity  analysis  to  measure  the  robustness  of  the  proposed 
investments  and  to  measure  variations  in  the  overall  EIRR  due  to  risk  and  unforeseen 
factors,  including  climatic  events.  Details  of  the  economic  analysis  can  be  found  in  the 
attached Excel worksheets. 
24.  Methodology and assumptions. The economic analysis is based on the estimation of 
the  benefits  gained  from  the  increased  economic  performance  of  the  HHs  targeted  by  the 
project. The main quantifiable economic benefits from the project are represented by the net 
incremental benefits as  computed  in  the financial  analysis,  i.e.,  the  difference  between  the 
annual net benefits in the WOP and WP scenarios. Such benefits are aggregated over the 
total  number  of  beneficiaries.  The  economic  analysis  is  conducted  over  a  20-year  period, 
included  the  7-year  implementation  period  of  the  proposed  project.  Specifically,  the  HH 
8 
WOPWPWOPWPWOPWPCrop production0.310.670.561.380.651.33HighlandMid-highlandLowland$/day/personPer capita daily income Indicator  Deposit interest rate (average 2020-21)  Lending interest rate (2008) AverageRate (%)7.8%8.0%7.9% 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
models  discussed  in  the  financial  analysis  above  are  used  to  link  the  crop  activity  models 
with the number of HH beneficiaries (set as target), estimate the overall flow of benefits, and 
compute the EIRR.  
25.  Economic benefits are estimated using economic prices (instead of the financial ones). 
Financial  prices  of  tradable  goods  are  converted  into  economic  ones  using  a  Standard 
Conversion factor (SCF) computed as shown in Table 6.  
Table  6.  Computation  of  the  Standard  Conversion  factor  (SCF)  for  the  economic 
analysis 
Source: Author’s elaboration 
26.  However,  for  some  key  traded  goods,  import/export  parity  prices  at  farm  gate  have 
been computed with reference to international border prices, applying conversion factors for 
each category of costs, and eliminating taxes and transfers. Specifically, import parity prices 
are computed for fertilizers (urea, phosphate, and potassium chloride) which are among key 
imported  items,  starting  from  the  international  Free  on  Board  (FOB)  prices  at  nearest  port 
and  considering  tariffs  and  taxes,  marketing  charges  and  transportation  costs.  Details  are 
shown  in Table 7. Export parity price  is  computed for  avocado  (chosen as  a  reference for 
the export of agricultural goods) and used to estimate the economic price of exportable crop 
outputs (avocado and banana). Details are shown in Table 8. 
Table 7. Import parity price for key importable inputs 
Source:  Author’s  elaboration  based  on  World  Bank  Commodities  Price  Data  (The  Pink 
Sheet), retrieved in February 2022 
9 
Variable RateM $1) total imports (M) 25,820.00  2) total exports (X) 5,003.00    3) import taxes (Tm) 20.8%5,370.56    4) export taxes (Tx)0%-             SER61.06      OER52.00      SCF1.17        VAT15%1/ Import tariff, average SCF=SER/OER  VAT applied to all tradable goods     Source of data and notes  National statistics  National statistics   1/ Ethiopian Revenue and Customs Authority  Ethiopian Revenue and Customs Authority  SER=(M+X)/[(M+Tm)+(X-Tx)]*OER CommodityRateUnitFinancialEconomicFinancialEconomicFinancialEconomicPrice F.O.B,  Annual average, 2021$/mt483.2                     483.2                                         123.2              123.2           210.2                     210.2       Plus:- Transport, insurance and freight21.1%$/mt102.1                     102.1                                         26.0                26.0             44.4                       44.4         - Marketing Charges2.5%$/mt12.1                       12.1                                           3.1                  3.1               5.3                         5.3           Border C.I.F. price$/mt597.3                     597.3                                         152.3              152.3           259.8                     259.8       Birr equivalent Birr/mt31,061.3                31,061.3                                    7,919.6           7,919.6        13,512.2                13,512.2  - VAT 15.0%Birr/mt4,659.2                  -                                             1,187.9           -               2,026.8                  -           - Marketing Charges 5.0%Birr/mt6,460.7                  6,460.7                                      1,647.3           1,647.3        2,810.5                  2,810.5    -Import tariff 20.8%Birr/mt-                         -1,647.3           2,810.5                  Wholesale border priceBirr/mt42,181.2                37,522.0                                    12,402.1         9,566.9        21,160.0                16,322.7  - Transport to regional market 2/Birr/mt293.4                     293.4                                         293.4              293.4           293.4                     293.4       - Transport to farmgate 3/Birr/mt293.4                     293.4                                         293.4              293.4           293.4                     293.4       - Marketing charges 2.5%Birr/mt1,054.5                  938.0                                         310.1              239.2           529.0                     408.1       Farm Gate Import PriceBirr/mt43,822.5                39,046.8                                    13,298.9         10,392.8      22,275.8                17,317.6  Farm Gate Import PriceBirr/kg43.8                       39.0                                           13.3                10.4             22.3                       17.3         % of nutrient in product%0.5                         0.5                                             0.5                  0.5               0.6                         0.6           Input subsidy 0.0%Birr/Kg-                         --                  -               -                         -           Farm gate market priceBirr/Kg95.3                       84.9                                           29.6                23.1             37.1                       28.9         Conversion Factor 0.9                         0.8                  0.8                         1/ Urea: E.Europe; Phosphate: rock.2/ 900 km @ $ 0.046 $ per-ton/Km = 2.35 Birr per-ton/Km3/ 900 km @ 2.35 Birr per-ton/KmUrea 1/Phosphate 1/Potassium Chloride 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
Table 8. Export parity price for exported output 
Source: Author’s elaboration based on Eurostat / Market Access Database, 2020 
20. 
The economic analysis links social discount rates to the long-term growth prospects 
of the country where the project takes place. Indeed, the economic role of the social discount 
rate  (SDR)  is  to  guide  the  allocation  of  public  resources  into  the  most  desirable  social 
investments. The SDR parameter is estimated as per the IFAD EFA guidelines by taking into 
account:  i)  public  nature  of  the  investment;  ii)  scarcity  of  resources;  and  iii)  good  use  of 
public  funds.  Based  on  the  available  data,  the  interest  rate  on  treasury  bonds  (Source: 
National Bank of Ethiopia) is used for estimating the SDR. 
27.  Direct  project  beneficiaries  and  benefits  flow.  Project  activities  will  directly  target 
150,000  households.  In  line  with  the  conservative  approach  followed  in  this  analysis,  and 
with the project logframe, it is assumed here that not all the target beneficiaries will adopt the 
proposed  improved  technologies  and  implement  the  proposed  investments.  The  adoption 
rates  increase  over  the  years  because  of  cumulative  interventions  of  the  project  and  peer 
learning  whereby  more  and  more  farmers  start  adopting,  also  in  line  with  previous  IFAD 
experience. The adoption rate is expected to reach 75% of the target beneficiaries at the end 
of  the  project,  which  corresponds  to  about  112,500  households  adopting  the  proposed 
innovations.  The incremental targets and adoption rates are shown in  Table 9. The flow of 
benefits is computed as follows: for annual crops, the incremental net margins (WP-WP) are 
aggregated  by  crop,  AEZ,  farmland  area  allocated  to  that  crop  and  the  number  of 
beneficiaries  (adopters).  For  perennial  crops,  a  similar  procedure  is  implemented,  but  it  is 
accounted for the net margin progression along the years as indicated in the crop models. 
28.  The  project  is  also  targeting  the  private  sector  (small  and  medium  enterprises, 
associations,  unions)  through  matching  grants.  However,  the  potential  benefits  occurring 
from this investment stream has not been considered here. This confirms the conservative 
approach adopted in the current analysis. 
Table 9. Number of HHs adopters of cropland management practices 
 Source: Author’s elaboration  
10 
FinancialEconomic FOB price at port of arrival (futures)  $/t 2,641                     2,641                                         Maritime Fret (average) $/t 90                          90                                              International Insurance (% of FOB price)2.0% $/t 53                          53                                               Exchange rate   Birr/$ 52.0                       61.1                                            CIF price at port of departure   Birr/t 134,585                 158,035                                      Export duties (% of CIF price) 0.0% Birr -                         -                                              Handling (% of CIF price) 2.5% Birr 3,365                     3,951                                          Storage fee (% of CIF and duties) 1.0% Birr 1,346                     1,580                                          Port fee (% of the storage fee and handling fee) 50.0% Birr 2,355                     2,766                                          Transportation cost from farm to port 1/   Birr/t 293                        293                                             Price at the farm gate  Birr/t 127,226                 149,445                                      Conversion Factor  1/ 900 km @ 0.326  Gh¢ per-ton/Km1.17CommodityRateUnitAvocadoPhasing of the targetsY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Total targetsNumber of Households              10,000              25,000    40,000           75,000        100,000           125,000             150,000 Adoption rate%15%25%40%50%60%70%75%Total adoptersNumber of Households                1,500                6,250    16,000           37,500          60,000             87,500             112,500 Incremental adoptersNumber of Households1,500               4,750               9,750     21,500          22,500        27,500            25,000               
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
Indirect  project  beneficiaries  and  benefits.  There  will  also  be  large  numbers  of 
29. 
smallholders  who  will  benefit  indirectly  from  the  Project  through  diffuse  knowledge  of 
improved  crop  and  fodder  production  and  reduced  climate  risk  for  the  overall  agriculture 
production  sector.  Consumers  would  also  benefit  from  more,  better  quality  agriculture 
products  and  better  prices,  with  positive  effects  in  terms  of  improved  nutrition  and  overall 
food  security.  In  addition  to  this,  all  those  living  in  the  rural  areas  where  supported 
households  will  be  located  will  benefit  from  strengthened  local  economies  resulting  from 
inflows  of  income  and  strengthened  local  demand.  There  will  also  be  increased  job 
opportunities for unemployed and underemployed women and men living in rural areas. The 
expansion  of  crop  and  livestock  production  will  also  promote  development  of  other 
complementary economic activities (e.g., input dealers). Thus, project activities will indirectly 
stimulate  the  whole  rural  economy  benefiting  rural  population  (including  the  rural  poor) 
through increased demand for goods and services, additional employment opportunities and 
possibly reduced rural-urban migration. However, these indirect benefits are not considered 
in  this  analysis.  In  this  sense,  benefits  computed  here  should  be  considered  an 
underestimation of total potential benefits of the proposed investments. 
30.  Economic  Project  Costs.  Total  project  costs of  185.6  M$  invested  over  7  years  are 
derived from the draft budget. They are transformed into economic costs using the COSTAB 
software:  a  total  economic  cost  of  187.2  M$  is  used  in  the  analysis.  No  investment  costs 
after  year  7  were  considered  necessary.  Operating  costs  (assumed  equal  to  10%  of  total 
costs)  were  included  from  year  8  to  20,  as  it  is  assumed  that  these  costs  will  have  to  be 
incurred  if  the  benefits of  the project  are  to be  sustained.  To  avoid double  counting of  the 
costs,  only the  incremental  economic  costs  of  the project are  considered  (i.e.,  the  costs of 
activities funded by  PACT). Costs already included in the estimation of the net incremental 
benefits  of  the  individual  project  activities  models  (e.g.,  costs  directly  borne  by  farmers 
engaging in the proposed activities or the project and accounted for in the financial/economic 
models)  have  been  excluded  as  they  are  incorporated  in  the  aggregation  of  the  HH  or 
activity models4.  
31.  Economic  performance  indicators  (EIRR  and  NPV).  The  following  economic 
performance  indicators  of  the  proposed  investments  are  computed:  Net  Present  Value 
(NPV)  and  Economic  Internal  rate  of  Return  (EIRR).  The  expected  EIRR  is  computed  to 
illustrate the need for funding and overall cost effectiveness of the project. The overall EIRR 
of the project is estimated at 17.7% (base case) which is well above the opportunity cost of 
capital  in  Ethiopia  (7.9%,  see Table 5)  confirming  the economic  justification of  the project. 
Given that  the adoption rate at the end of the project is assumed to be only 75% of target 
farmers, in case of higher adoption rates, the EIRR will increase further. In addition to this, 
the  analysis  only  considered  the  economic  benefits  at  farm-gate.  The  indirect  benefits  to 
upstream  and  downstream  actors  in the  value  chain from  increased  trade  volumes,  quality 
and  value adding opportunities  beyond  those  mentioned above, have  not  been  considered 
due to estimation difficulties. The economic NPV is estimated at about 85 M$ over the 20-
year  period  of  the  analysis,  with  the  benefit  stream  based  on  the  quantified  benefits  as 
specified above. The discount rate adopted in the economic analysis is  10%, as discussed 
above. 
32.  Sensitivity Analysis. To test the robustness of the above results, a sensitivity analysis 
has been carried out to incorporate the forecasted impact of climate change on agriculture 
productivity under the WOP scenario and  to  measure  variations  due to unforeseen factors 
and relevant risks. The climate change impacts modelled into the analysis is aligned with the 
4  No  on-farm  costs  or  investments  (e.g.,  for  irrigation)  are  included  in  the  Costab  and  no  project  costs  are 
included in the models. As far as the matching grants are concerned, it is observed that they target private sector 
entities (e.g., Cooperatives, Unions) which are not directly included in this analysis. Indeed, the benefits for the 
farmers who liaise to the markets through a Cooperative or Association, is already indirectly captured in the EFA 
through the increased farm-gate price in the WP scenario. 
11 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
overall Climate Change rationale for the proposal and the available documents, even if the 
uncertainty  of  projecting  climate  variables  and  impacts  on  agriculture  productivity  and 
production in Ethiopia is acknowledged here. Further distinctions exist between highland and 
lowland  agro-ecological  zones.  The  sensitivity  analysis  takes  all  this  into  account  by 
simulating  the  following  scenarios:  10,  20  and  50%  cost  over-run,  benefits  increment, 
benefits decrease, and 1 and 2 years of benefits delays.  
33.  Results are presented in Table 10 and Figure 1. It is found that the proposed project is 
solid  from  the  economic  standpoint  since  the  project  is  profitable  under  all  simulated 
changes.  The  table  also  shows  that  the  minimum  number  of  adopters  required  to  have  a 
positive  NPV  (break-even  point)  amounts  to  about  37,300  HHs,  corresponding  to  an 
adoption rate of almost 25%. 
Table 10. Summary of the economic and sensitivity analysis  
Source: Author’s elaboration 
Figure 1. Results of the economic and sensitivity analysis  
Source: Author’s elaboration 
34.  Risk analysis. The bulk of risk to be considered in the sensitivity analysis relates to: a) 
delays from some of the Institutions charged with the responsibilities of implementing and/or 
overseeing the implementation of some of the project activities; b) farmers reluctant to fully 
engage  in  the  project  and  adopt  the  farming  practices  disseminated;  c)  worsening  of  the 
macroeconomic  scenario;  d)  increased  climatic  risk  affecting  temperatures  and  water 
availability  consequent  to  climatic  changes;  and  d)  discontinuation  of  practices  once  the 
12 
+10%+20%50%+10%+20%-10%-20%1 year2 yearEIRR %17.7%16.1%14.7%11.3%19.3%20.9%15.9%14.1%15.0%17.3%NPV (000 $)84,98471,79258,59919,022106,675128,36663,29341,60258,80780,742Base case Project performance indicators Cost incrementsBenefits incrementsBenefits decreaseBenefits delayMinimum number of beneficiaries to have a positive NPV (HH)56,500Corresponding end-of-the-project adoption rate37.7% 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
project  ends.  Table  11  reports  the  impact  of  each  of  the  key  risk  components  on  Project 
economic  performance  indicators.  The  probability  of  occurrence  is  supposed  to  affect  the 
entity  of  cost/benefit  increases/decreases  reported  above,  i.e.,  a  low  probability  translates 
into a 10% decrease in benefits (or 10% cost increase, or a 1-year delay in benefits), while a 
medium probability is supposed to determine 20% benefits decrease (or 20% cost increase, 
or a 2-years benefits delay), and a high probability relates to 50% benefits decrease (or 50% 
costs  increase).  It  is  important  to  notice  that  these  impacts  should  be  considered  as 
indicative and have been arbitrarily determined based on secondary information. 
Table 11: Risk analysis 
Source: Author’s elaboration 
IV.  Conclusions.  
35.  Overall,  our  analysis  has  shown  that  a  wide  adoption  of  climate-smart  and  improved 
farming  management  would  have  important  financial  and  economic  benefits  in  the  form  of 
better  on-farm  economic  returns,  HHs’  livelihood,  and  reduced  poverty.  The  financial 
analysis  demonstrates  that,  due  to  the  implementation  of  project  activities,  household 
beneficiaries  would  increase  their  financial  annual  net  incomes.  Indeed,  the  aggregate 
Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) is 33.9%, well above the opportunity cost of capital, 
showing  the  financial  effectiveness  of  the  planned  activities  and  providing  a  strong 
justification for the grant request. Such rate is expected to increase e.g., in case of benefits 
increments by 20% (plausible given the conservative analytical assumptions) confirming the 
convenience of the proposed investments even with higher opportunity cost of capital5.  
36.  The  economic  analysis  has  confirmed  the  convenience  of  the  investment,  from  the 
society’s  standpoint: overall  EIRR of  17.7% even  in  the  case that  at  the  end of  the  project 
only 75% the total target beneficiaries would adopt the proposed climate-resilient agricultural 
management practices.  The positive  results  are strong as  shown  in the  sensitivity  and  risk 
analyses  for  adverse  situations  as  cost  over-runs,  reduction  of  prices  for  their  agricultural 
products,  and even  reduction  in the  rate  of  adoption; as  well as for all  the  risk  categories, 
included  the  climatic  risk.  These  indicators  -  while  monitoring  performance  during  the 
implementation  of  the  project  -  can  provide  valuable  information  for  adjusting  the  strategy 
and interventions to improve the project impact.  
5 See the attached Excel file for further details. 
13 
 Risk description (link with the risk matrix)   Occurrence probability   Proxy to compare with sensitivity   EIRR (%)    NPV (000 $)    INSTITUTIONAL: Limited Institutional capacity    Low    Benefits delay 1 year due to 15.0%     58,807   ECONOMIC: Worsening of the macroeconomic scenario   High  Increase in costs due to inflation higher than planned, 11.3%     58,599   SOCIAL: Farmers reluctant to fully adopt the farming   Low    Decrease in benefits due to the 15.9%     19,022   CLIMATIC: increased risk affecting temperatures and   Medium   Increase in benefits due to the worsening 20.9%   128,366   POLITICAL: Discontinuation of practices once the project ends    Low    Decrease in benefits due to the suspension of 15.9%     63,293  
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme in Ethiopia 
ANNEX 4: Economic and financial analysis 
37.  The analysis has been conducted based on the available information and data and to 
the  best  of  Author’s  knowledge.  The  validity  of  the  analytical  assumptions  may  limit  the 
findings  presented  here.  All  assumptions  and  calculations  are  transparently  shown  in  the 
attached Excel file which is made accessible to the reader. 
14 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
The SECAP Review note should build on the preliminary note mentioned above, draw on the results of the screening exercise and be
informed by the issues raised during the design mission, the stakeholders interviews, publicly available tools and dataset, and
environmental, social or climate-related studies that inform on the characteristics of the project location. The SECAP review note
includes the revised ESMP and should be attached to the Project Design Report, integrated in Draft Project Implementation Manual
(PIM) and COSTAB and shall be submitted to Design Review Meeting (DRM) or IRC (for NSOs).
1/22
1. Introduction
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
The purpose of this document is to provide elements of context and guidance for the Ethiopia PACT concept note to better
integrate social, environmental and climate dimensions. Thus, the SECAP Review Note describes the main socio-economic,
climate and environmental trends in Ethiopia and analyses the potential contribution or risks related to the PACT. In terms of
methodology, data was collected through an extensive literature review, various tools of IFAD and WB, and consultations with
stakeholders. 
PACT is a flagship programme of the Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture. Building on the first phases of the Participatory Small-
Scale Irrigation Development Programme, PACT will directly contribute to the objectives of Ethiopia 10-Year plan, Climate
Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) strategy (CRGE 2011), Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC 2021) by enhancing
agricultural productivity, climate resiliency and market linkages issues and leveraging climate change mitigation mechanisms to
build a more resilient and inclusive food system.
Climate Finance from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) for the Inclusive Green Financing Initiative (IGREENFIN) will be used to co-
finance PACT. IGREENFIN will avail loans and grants to MFIs, Cooperatives etc for them to engage in climate adaptation and
resilience interventions.  Thus, PACT/IGREENFIN alignment will assist to bring about a transformational impact on the target
communities and ecosystems.  
PACT will target the most vulnerable households and socio-economic groups in seven regional states of the country. Based on
key indicators of vulnerability such as food insecurity, poverty rate, unemployment, approximately 120 districts (or woreda) will be
mapped out against opportunities for irrigation, integration of value chains and administrative absorption capacities.
This SECAP Review Note is prepared based on IFAD’s SECAP 2020 and will be aligned with similar requirements of the GCF,
IGREENFIN for a better and smooth implementation.
6.
The programme focuses on three interlinked components as follows:
Component 1 - Community-Led Climate Smart Productive Landscapes
Component 2 - Inclusive and Equitable Market Access
Component 3 - Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts
7.
8.
An analysis of socio-economic status such as poverty, gender, youth, pastoral communities, nutrition as we as environment and
climate status including land degradation, deforestation, water scarcity, loss of biodiversity have been carried out based on
available policies, strategies, plans and data/reports.
The anticipated environmental and social impact of the programme impacts on the environmental and social will be environmental
degradation and pollution, occupational health hazard, conflict between upper and dawn stream communities (resource use
conflict), temporary and/or permanent displacement and limited access to resources, complaints/grievances. Environmental,
Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) is prepare to ensure environmentally friendly programme implementation
and also to reduce/avoid adverse impacts. Furthermore, Grievance Redress Mechanisms will be established and strengthened to
ensure time resolutions of complaints.
2.1 Socio-economic assessment
a. Overall poverty situation
9.
Ethiopia has the second largest rural population in Africa with 115 million inhabitants[1], 49.9% female and 34% youth between
15 and 29 years old[2].  Ethiopia ranks 173th out of 189 in terms of HDI (Human Development Index)[3] in 2019 and an estimated
24% of the population live in poverty[4]. The trend has been decreasing from 30% of the population in 2011; however, the
poorest 10% did not experience any growth in income since 2005. Poverty reduction was stronger in urban areas, compared to
rural areas that are dependent on subsistence farm livelihoods and less connected to markets and basic social services like
education. Additionally, rural poverty is intrinsically linked to vulnerability to negative consequences of climate change like erratic
weathers, droughts, floods and soil degradation.
10.
Ethiopia is divided into 13 regions, including three city-states and two regions recently created (split from SNNPR). Regional
disparities in poverty are low but the five regions targeted by PACT, Oromia, Amhara, Sidama, Somali and SNNPR, have the
largest shares of poverty in the country. Additionally, differences in poverty rates are high across agro-ecological zones, with the
lowland parts of Oromia and SNNPR having the highest poverty rates (32%). 
2/22
11.
The very poor are characterised by larger households, higher dependency rates per adult and less education than poor
households. They are more likely to be rural and more isolated from markets; in SNNPR and Somali regions.
Table 1. Poverty rates, poverty shares and population shares by region and agro ecological zone in 2016
12.
Key drivers of poverty reduction include access to improved seeds, improved infrastructure and connectivity like markets, and the
expansion of the Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP) targeting Pregnant and Lactating Women (PLW) and their infants.
13.
Assessing and addressing the challenges of the poorest is at the core of IFAD strategy. Effective and participatory targeting
mechanisms should be designed for PACT to unlock the poorest of the poor’s access to key opportunities.
b. Gender
14.
Gender Inequality Index (GII), which reflects gender-based inequalities in health, empowerment and economic dimensions,
ranks Ethiopia 125th out of 162 countries[5].
15.
In the agricultural sector, although women make up more than 40% of the labour force and head approximately 25% of all
farming households, their productivity is 36% lower than men. This is mostly because, compared to their male counterparts,
women have less access to land (20% of women own land with a title), farm inputs and financial services (especially formal
credit). Additionally, women benefit less from extension programmes (23% vs. 38% for male)[6], crop and seed multiplication
opportunities along unequal access to climate-smart technologies and technical inputs such as fertilisers[7]. Subsequently, 76%
of rural women have control over crop, land and livestock compared to over 90% of men[8], but even then, ownership and
decision-making remains in control of men. Asset ownership such as land has significant implications. They serve not only as
crucial inputs but also as potential collateral for credit. By consequence, women in Ethiopia face significant barriers in accessing
markets, financial services, including saving/deposit, insurance, credit and other risk management services, limiting  women’s
economic empowerment and agency over their assets, and the ability to innovate, access digital technologies, and invest in
productive and climate-resilient measures. In fact, Ethiopia is highly vulnerable to the impact of climate change, which is not
gender neutral. Limited asset ownership, adaptive capacities, access to finance and climate-resilient approaches shrink women’s
ability to adequately cope and recover from climate stressors. Lack of information and limited participation in decision-making on
climate change adaptation actions also put female farmers and female-headed households at higher risks. Addressing these
challenges is key to effectively build climate resilience and fulfil the ambitious targets from the Ethiopia 10-Year Plan 2021-2030
(e.g., provide land ownership rights to 60% of women who are deprived of land; increase the number of women who are engaged
in income generating activities using microfinance loan from 33 to 55%).
16.
17.
18.
In terms of workload, women contribute 18 to 20 hours a day for agricultural labour and unpaid domestic work. They are
suffering from a triple burden, spending significant time for child rearing, food production and preparation, as well as wood and
water collection.[9] Consequently,  women spend 26% less time on business activities than men. Albeit playing a significant role
in agricultural development, women’s decision-making power in agricultural and rural organisations is limited by deep-rooted
socio-cultural norms and practices. In cooperatives, women represent only 27% of the members[10] and men are five times more
likely than women to hold a leadership position. Efforts at the highest political levels to improve gender parity are also noted
through the appointment of the first female President and President of the Federal Supreme Court, as well as increased women
representation in the Parliament (37% of seats)[11]. These promising endeavours need to be accelerated to guarantee increased
voice and participation of women in decision-making processes at all levels.
3/22
The gender gap in education and literacy is a root cause of women’s lack of economic opportunities. In Ethiopia, 7% of women
have attended secondary education[12] and 48% are literate compared to 10% and 64% of men respectively[13]. In rural areas,
the female literacy rate drops to 39%, with the lowest rates in Afar, Somali, Benishangul-Gumuz and Gambella regions. When
adult training is available such as Technical and vocational education and training (TVET), women enrol but struggle to attend all
sessions due to high workloads, lack of transportation, and lack of gender-sensitive spaces (e.g., bathroom, nursery). Informal
learning channels also play an important role in disseminating technical, entrepreneurial, and noncognitive skills, but 74% of
women (versus 62% of men) lack access to print, television, or radio.
At household level, violence against women impacts women’s ability to engage in activities. 27% of women have experienced
physical, sexual or emotional violence from their partner. 16% of women reported that their partners don’t permit them to meet
with female friends or family members[14]; which significantly limits their independence and ownership. The COVID-19 pandemic
has significantly affected women across Ethiopia, having a disproportionate impact on their livelihoods, limited access to
healthcare and increased occurrences of domestic violence[15]. The conflict ongoing since November 2020 has further affected
households, directly in Tigray, Amhara and Oromia regions (displacements, shortages, disruption of services and utility) but also
indirectly in other regions (high inflation rate, government instability). In this context, peer-support (e.g., VSLAs, Saccos) and
livelihood safety nets are crucial mechanisms for households to cope with shocks. 
c. Youth
19.
20.
21.
70% of the population is less than 35 years old. In particular, 30% is between 15 to 29 years old, which falls under the Ethiopian
classification of Youth. While the demographic dividend can serve as a strong force for innovation, progress and development,
young people in Ethiopia are faced with a multitude of challenges, leaving them largely unemployed, underemployed and
underpaid. In 2018, the urban youth unemployment rate was as high as 25.3 %[16]. In rural areas, where 60% of households
cultivate less than 1ha of land, a growing youth population poses a challenge in terms of ensuring access to land and to a
livelihood. Youths have limited access to land and capital, and productive assets that would enable them to become self-
employed. Both a symptom and a cause of this phenomenon, youths are less interested in engaging in agriculture like their
parents. .
However, non-farm employment opportunities along the value chains (e.g., nurseries, post-harvest management, processing,
packaging and retailing) are still scarce. Additionally, the inadequate training offer does not enable youths to build their
entrepreneurial skills, develop viable business plans and access finance. These challenges have pushed 15% of youths to
migrate to urban areas between 2007 and 2013[17].
Carrying a triple burden, young women are particularly vulnerable. Limited access to education, capital, finance and land
stricken young women’s ability to thrive in the economy. This is further hardened by a high prevalence of child marriage, teenage
pregnanacy and other forms of GBV[18]. The national FGC rate for girls aged between 0-14 is still 24 %, with the highest rate of
99 % in the Somali region (for women aged 15-49 years). According to the socio-economic assessment conducted by the UN in
Ethiopia, more than 1 out of 4 women aged 15-49 years have experienced physical and/or sexual violence since the age of 15
years[19]. The COVID-19 pandemic and the subsequent closure of schools aggravated gender inequalities and vulnerabilities,
and as such, women and girls were disproportionately hit by the crisis with limited access to education, (sexual and reproductive)
health care services, livelihood, food security, and protection, which puts young women at heightened risk of violence, abuse, and
exploitation. With a pervasive high prevalence of child labor, attention and investment in programs to tackle child labor are vital to
allow children and adolescence in Ethiopia to fully enjoy their rights to development and a life free from violence.
22.
The ongoing conflict in Tigray and neighbouring regions threaten to intensify vulnerabilities and increase poverty, which will
disproportionately affect the most marginalised, including young women and men, indigenoues groups, persons with disabilities,
internally displaced persons and refugees.
d. Indigenous peoples
23.
Ethiopia is a federal state composed of nine regional states. Multiple socio-cultural groups coexisting across those regions,
including sedentary farmers, pastoralists and hunter-gatherer communities. The Constitution from 1995 recognises the presence
and the rights of Nations, Nationalities and Peoples to self-determination, to equitable political representation, to some degree of
self government, to socio-economic equity and justice. The Constitution also recognises the rights of pastoral groups inhabiting
the lowland of Ethiopia (representing 12% of the country population and 60% of the land), including the “right to free land for
grazing and cultivation as well as a right not to be displaced from their own lands[20]. Additionally, Ethiopian farmers and
pastoralists’ “right to receive fair prices for their products” as a basis for decent and equitable livelihoods is protected by the
Constitution.
24.
4/22
This was a significant political shift, with the designation of four regions[21] as “Developing Regional States”, the establishment of
the Ministry of Peace (MoP) in charge of promoting equitable development for all Ethiopian groups as well as the creation of the
Ethiopian Pastoralist Day obersved every two years. The Prime Minister who came to power in 2018 pledged to guarantee the
rule of law and build trust amongst Ethiopia’s diverse communities. In 2019, the Government revised Ethiopia Pastoral
Development policy and strategy, with the aim of facilitating inclusive development of lowland communities and preserving
pastoral lifestyle, in the context of climate change. However, pastoral communities organisations[22], researchers,  and
INGOs[23], have raised some concerns about Ethiopian governments’ strategies that undermine invaluable indigenous
knowledge and pastoralist lifestyle, including mobility as a key driver of climate-smart livestock productivity[24]. Instances of top-
down sedentarisation-centred interventions (called “villagisation” or “commune programme”) as well as land attribution to large-
scale commercial agricultural investments, blocking livestock routes and access to water and forage, have raised concerns of
violation of Constitutional rights. In the past years, other instances of right deprivation including violence against pastoral groups
in Gambella, Amhara, SNNPR and Benishangul-Gumuz have been reported[25],[26].
25.
Today, pastoralists are still amongst the least served in terms of basic services (e.g., lowest basic vaccination coverage and
access to water in Afar and Somali) and highly vulnerable to consequences of climate change such as recurring droughts, floods
and encroachment of invasive species[27]. In fact, agro-pastoral and pastoral communities were heavily hit by heavy rainfalls in
2020, which destroyed cropland, killed livestock, and triggered displacement in Somali, Oromia, Afar, SNNP, and Gambella
regions. This was exacerbated by two desert locust invasions, which damaged an estimated 200,000 hectares of land[28].
Consequently, interventions to enhance climate resilience, improve access to services, and leverage indigenous climate-smart
knowledge, along with measures to address food and nutrition insecurity are now more relevant than ever. The program will give
special attention to mitigate risks of implementation by strengthening traditional rules and institutions to control use of pasture
and other rangeland resources.  
e. Marginalised groups
26.
Other individuals largely marginalised are persons living with disabilities. Women and men with disabilities struggle to actively
participate in decision making and community life[29]. However, the disability prevalence rates in Ethiopia are difficult to assess
due to a severe lack of data on disability statistics. The estimated overall prevalence of disability varies between 3.02% as
reported by the Central Statistics Agency[30], which is believed to be underreported, and 17.6% according to the World Health
Survey from 2003[31]. Many are uneducated and unemployed and 95 % of them are poor[32]. This calls for a coordinated national
mechanism to regularly collect data on persons with disabilities as well as advocacy and agency to mainstream the
considerations of persons living with disabilities.  A vast majority of them live in rural areas where access to basic services is
limited so they mostly depend on family, neighbour and friends’ support. According to the 2020 review conducted by CSA and
UN Women, persons with disabilities continue to face multidimensional marginalisation. For instance, the employment rate for
persons with disabilities compared to persons with no disabilities is at 53.5% and 80.7% respectively. Applying a gender-lens to
the figures exemplifies women’s disadvantage with an employment rate of 43.7 % compared to men with disabilities at 63 %.
Structural inequalities also persist in the education system. Only 0.7% of persons with disabilities have access to educational
services. It comes to no surprise that only one in four persons with disabilities is literate with a huge discrepancy between women
and men (15.12 % and 34.85 % respectively)[33]. Following the adoption of the National Action Plan for Persons with Disabilities
and the 10-Year-Development Plan, which considers disability as a cross-cutting issue in all development endeavours, efforts
are necessary to combat stigma, prejudice and intersectional forms of discrimination in order to create a conducive environment
for persons with disabilities to thrive and actively contribute to the sustainable development of the country[34].
27.
Based on interviews conducted, PACT is likely to impact on key pastorali livelihood enhancement assets in the study area such
as stock routes, pastures and salt resources. Accordingly FPIC is recommended during implementation stage in order to get
culturally-appropriate mitigation measures.
f. Nutrition
28.
In Ethiopia, malnutrition affects most rural households. Less than 6% of children under five have a minimum acceptable diet[35];
a diet of adequate diversity and frequency that meets their needs for physical and mental growth. Poor dietary diversity is the
main driving factor of malnutrition since 77% of households' energy intake derives from starchy staples only, with little inclusion of
animal source foods, vegetables and fruits[36]. The lack of access to clean water, sanitation and health services affects nutrient
absorption. As a consequence, 28% of child deaths in Ethiopia are attributable to malnutrition. Among children in rural areas,
40.6% are stunted and will not be able to reach their full potential[37]. At society level, this nutrition gap represents 16% of GDP in
terms of productivity loss, overburden on health facilities and social protection mechanisms[38].
29.
The burden of malnutrition varies across regions (see map on stunting[39]). Even zones with high agricultural productivity face
significant chronic malnutrition issues. 
5/22
30.
Malnutrition has two direct causes: inadequate dietary intake and disease. This assessment focuses on dietary intake gaps,
driven by four main issues:
(i) Availability - 72% of agricultural production in Ethiopia focuses on staples[40]. Current levels of domestic production are not able
to meet the nutrient requirements of the population, especially in Somali and Afar[41]. Agricultural food production can be improved by
scaling up climate-smart irrigation solutions, diversifying production and facilitating farmers’ access to high-quality and biofortified
inputs.
(ii) Affordability – The average cost of an ‘energy only’ diet for a household[42]is $0.9 compared to $3.9 for a nutritious diet. Only
26% of Ethiopian households can afford the latter and the trend is worsening (see map for regional disparities). Over the past decade,
prices of nutrient-rich foods have increased (90% increase for dark leafy vegetables between 2007 and 2016) while those of staple
grains have decreased.
6/22
(iii) Accessibility - Rural households mostly depend on markets to access fresh, nutrient-rich foods such as vegetables, fruits and
meat. There is potential for interventions to increase homestead production, invest in road networks, transport and market
functionality, as well as strengthening markets' ability to supply these foods at more affordable prices.
(iv) Consumption - Even when diverse foods are available and affordable, households would rather invest money and time in other
competing priorities (e.g. school fees, construction, farm tools) because of limited awareness of the benefits of optimal diet, cultural
beliefs (e.g. religious fasting[43]) and misconceptions. Social behaviour change communication is essential to improve consumption of
affordable sources of micronutrients such as green leafy vegetables (spinach, kale), eggs and dairy (milk and yoghurt), especially
among household members with high nutritional needs: pregnant and lactating women, young children and adolescent girls.
31.
Additionally, investing in nutrition sensitive agriculture has significant co-benefits for climate change mitigation. Data modelling
performed by EPHI and WFP showed that improving access to nutritious diets and improved consumption patterns can reduce
the greenhouse gas emissions below the 2030 target set by the Ethiopian government for the agriculture sector.
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications
32.
33.
According to the World Vulnerability Index and ND-GAIN Matrix, Ethiopia is the 19th most vulnerable and 34th least ready country
to the impact of climate change (CC) in the world. This is due to its high dependence on rain-fed agriculture, natural resources
and low adaptive capacity. The agriculture sector performance is subject to high inter-annual and intra-annual variabilities and
yearly variation. Increased water scarcity and drought conditions may result in increased risks of food insecurity and conflict
situations over scarce resources.
In Ethiopia, livelihoods are closely linked to natural resources.  The major environmental issues that increase the vulnerability of
Ethiopians, with the highest risk to political, economic and social landscape, are CC, pollution, land degradation, deforestation
and forest degradation, water scarcity and biodiversity loss. Unsustainable use of natural resources and failure to protect the
environment could result in floods and landslides, droughts, desertification, loss of land productivity, population displacement,
etc. 
34.
Details on the environmental and climate context, trends and implications are elaborated in the sections below.  
a. Environmental assessment
35.
In Ethiopia, the livelihood security of the people, particularly in rural areas, is closely linked to natural resources. However,
because of population pressure, unsustainable use, inappropriate management, expansion of planned development (commercial
farms and infrastructure development), weakness in enforcing environmental policies and regulations, etc., there is considerable
depletion of natural resources and environmental degradation. The major environmental issues that increase the vulnerability of
Ethiopians, with the highest risk to political, economic and social landscape, include: climate change, pollution, land degradation,
deforestation and forest degradation, water scarcity and biodiversity loss. Unwise use of natural resources and failure to protect
the environment could result in floods and landslides, droughts, desertification, loss of land productivity; population displacement
increased rural-urban migration[44].
7/22
Land degradation
36.
Land degradation, resulting from unsustainable land management practises including inappropriate cultivation, deforestation,
overgrazing and cultivation on steep lands due to population pressure, is a major threat to the environment in Ethiopia. Land
degradation in the form of soil erosion, nutrient depletion, soil compaction, and increased salinization and acidity pose a serious
threat to sustainable management and diversification of agricultural production systems. The Economics of Land Degradation
(ELD) initiative reported that the annual net erosion is 940 million tons a year, or 18 tons/ha/year[45]. Out of a total land mass of
1,221,900 square kilometres (122 million hectares), approximately 11 million ha are salt affected soils[46]. In the highlands of
Ethiopia, climate change is expected to increase both annual precipitation and seasonal variability in rainfall, increasing soil
erosion by 7-10% per year and, in the more extreme scenarios, possibly by as much as 40- 70% per year by 2050. Conservative
estimates suggest that partly as a result of this increased soil erosion, climate change will reduce agricultural crop productivity in
Ethiopia by 5 -10 % by 2030. Land degradation in Ethiopia has proceeded at an alarming rate and will be increasingly
aggravated by climate change. From 1981 to 2003, 296,812 km2 (29.7 million ha) of land has been degraded, affecting a
population of 20.65 million, approximately one in five people in Ethiopia[47].
37.
The resultant ecological impacts of land degradation in Ethiopia include loss in the chemical, physical and/or biological properties
of soil which directly affects the type of plant that are grown on the area, reduced availability of potable water, lessened volumes
of surface water, depletion of aquifers due to lack of recharge, and biodiversity loss[48]. Infrastructure development as well as
other project activities should be accompanied with parallel land restoration activities, as part of the project as well as ASAP+.
Deforestation
38.
The current rate of deforestation is estimated at 150,000 to 200,000 hectares per year and the FAO estimates that fertile topsoil
is lost at a rate of one billion cubic metres annually. The annual forest loss is approximately 92,000 ha/year and the gain is about
19,000 ha/year. Ethiopia’s forest cover was estimated to be 15.5% in 2015 and the government has planned to increase forest
cover from 15.5% in 2021 to 30% in 2030[49].
Water Scarcity
39.
40.
Access to water and water scarcity has been a source of conflict at different scales and different times. With growing demand
both for domestic and agriculture use, access to affordable technologies for water abstraction and financial capacities, water
related conflicts will likely be growing water related risks at different scales.
Climate change and lack of water management are among the major causes of water scarcity. Ethiopia has seen at least five
major droughts since 1980 accompanied by an abundance of local droughts as well. Global warming is a significant reason as to
why these droughts are becoming more frequent and prolonged[50]. Intensive watershed management activities, water use
efficiency, coupled with the use of up to date weather information will ensure sustainable availability of water in the project areas.
Loss of biodiversity
41.
Owing to the land, soils, and climatic configuration, Ethiopia is one of the richest countries in biodiversity. This wealth is the
source of economic and social wellbeing through direct provision of food, fibre and fuel as well as environmental services
including regulation of climate, water, and health. Ethiopia’s biodiversity resource is, however, threatened by several
socioeconomic and natural factors. Significant areas of forests, grassland, and shrubland have been lost through conversion to
farmland across the country.
42.
As far as agro ecological zonation are concerned, two classifications are known in Ethiopia:
43.
1. Traditional agro ecological zones: Ethiopia has 6 traditional agro-ecologies:
(i) Bereha refers to hot lowlands of less than 500 meters above sea level. In the arid east, crop production is very limited while in the
humid west root crops and maize are largely grown.
(ii) Kolla refers to lowlands between 500 and 1,500 meters. Predominant crops are sorghum, finger millet, sesame, cowpeas, and
groundnuts.
(iii) Woina Dega refers to midlands between 1,500 and 2,300 meters, in which predominant crops include wheat, teff, barley, maize,
sorghum, chickpeas and haricot beans.
(iv) Dega refers to highlands between 2,300 and 3,200 meters. Predominant crops include barley, wheat, highland oilseeds, and
highland pulses.
(v) Wurch refers to highlands between 3,200 and 3,700 meters. Barley is a common crop.
(vi) Kur refers to highland areas above 3,700 meters, which are primarily used for grazing pasture.
44.
2. Agro-ecological zones developed by MoA and Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research (EIAR). This
classification was done in 2005 and it classified the country into 32 major agro-ecological zones where about 51% of the total
land area categorized under arid, semi-arid and sub-moist zones and the remaining area in moist to humid zones
Figure 1: Agro-ecological zonation[51]
8/22
b. Climate trends and impacts
45.
46.
47.
According to World Vulnerability Index and ND-GAIN Matrix, Ethiopia is the 19th most vulnerable and 34th least ready country to
the impact of climate change in the world. Ethiopia is highly vulnerable to the impact of climate change because of its high
dependence on rain-fed agriculture, natural resources and low adaptive capacity[52]. The agriculture sector, which employs a
significant portion of the country’s labour force, heavily relies on rainfall, which is subjected to high inter-annual and intra-annual
variabilities and yearly variation around mean rainfall level is 25%, which can increase to 50% in some regions[53]. Water scarcity
and drought conditions are expected to increase risks of food insecurity and may exacerbate conflict situations over scarce
resources and population movements. Heavy rains, flooding, and soil erosion puts both urban and rural infrastructure at risk,
particularly for poor and vulnerable groups. Increased occurrences of drought conditions and reduced rainfall across much of the
country will further impact agriculture, livestock, food security, and human health. Environmental degradation, impacted water
resources, and loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services constitute serious obstacles to the country’s continued development
and poverty reduction efforts, increasing vulnerability to risks and hazards, increasing the importance for sustainable adaptation
and resilience measures[54].
Historic and present climate: Ethiopia currently experiences an annual average temperature of 23°C, with a minimum of 11.9°C
found in the Amhara region and a maximum of 30.8°C in the Northeast of the country. In the past, Ethiopia had an average
number of very hot days per year of ~57 days and 8 very hot nights on average. The annual mean total precipitation is 900 mm
per year, with the lowest amount (around 100 mm.) found in the North-eastern part of the country (Afar Triangle) and the
maximum amount in the western part (above 1,900 mm.)
Projected climate changes: Mean annual temperature is projected to increase by 1.6°C until 2030, by 1.8°C until 2050 and by 1.9
until 2090 under RCP2.6, and by 1.8°C until 2030, by 2.6°C until 2050 and by 4.6°C until 2090 under RCP8.5, compared to pre-
industrial levels. Projected precipitation changes are uncertain, but models agree on a precipitation increase during the second
half of the century under RCP8.5. The number of very hot days and tropical nights per year is projected to increase considerably,
especially under RCP8.5 and by the end of the century. Over Ethiopia, the average of very hot days would increase from 12 to 16
under RCP2.6 by 2050 and from 20 to 94 under RCP8.5 by 2090. The number of very hot nights would increase seven times per
20-year period on average under RCP2.6 and from 7 to 59 under RCP8.5 by 2090. Extreme precipitation events are projected to
increase slightly, with a maximum of four heavy precipitation events per period under RCP8.5 by 2090 and two additional very
heavy precipitation events for the same period and scenario[55].
Figure: Historic and Projected average temperature for Ethiopia 1986-2099[56]
9/22
Figure: Annual average precipitation in Ethiopia 1986-2099[57]
48.
Climate change is predicted to affect the GDP growth of the country by between 0.5 and 2.5 percent each year unless effective
steps are taken to build resilience. The frequency and intensity of droughts has increased in recent years, severely affecting the
livelihoods of millions of people. At the same time, increases in floods have placed additional stress on social institutions and
intensified the vulnerability of households. Climate related shocks affect productivity, together with high levels of poverty and low
levels of technology, leave people with limited choices or resources to adapt. These changes also hamper economic progress
and exacerbate existing social and economic problems[58].
49.
According to the World bank’s Think Hazard climate hazard rating, There are high level of river and urban flood, landslide,
volcano, extreme heat and wild fire and the hazard level for water scarcity and earthquake is medium.
c. Climate change mitigation
50.
Mitigation: PACT will not contribute as such to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, however, EX-ACT tool will be used to
estimate its overall mitigation potential during full design preparation. Overall, the project will obviously contribute to GHG
emission reduction and sequestrations through the use of renewable and energy saving technologies, lower emitting livestock
such as poultry, Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices including forestry and agroforestry and various watershed
management activities. The project will be designed and implemented inline to IFAD and GCF policies as well as the
government’s climate strategy and plans. 
51.
Adaptation: The project will implement proven climate smart/proof technologies such as conservation agriculture, composting,
agroforestry as well as biophysical soil and water conservation, to enhance adaptation. Furthermore, IFAD’s Climate Adaptation
in Rural Development (CARD) tool has been used to identify crops whose productivity will be increased in the coming 10 years
under climate change. It should be noted that the CARD tool don’t provide yield of all available crops in the country/regions and
the detailed information is available in the appendix.
2.3 Target group profiles
10/22
52.
The project has identified primary target groups to leave no one behind;
Smallholder farmers living in food insecure areas; men and women farmers in this category have large households and
cultivate a limited area of land that is less than 1 Ha, use different soil fertility improvement measures but cannot afford to
purchase inputs to make their production market oriented. For those who own livestock, the overall average herd size is
comprised of two cattle, four hens, one goat, and one sheep and have no access to proper extensions services and improved
inputs for market-oriented livestock production.  Poor bargaining power and poor market linkages reduce the income derived
from the sale of limited surplus (eggs, chicken). Farmers in this category do not have access to financial services from formal
institutions. They are isolated from markets and have limited education. They are mostly organized in informal credit and
saving groups at village level or Rural Credit and Saving Cooperatives (RuSACCOs) at kebele (sub-district) level.
Smallholder farmers able to participate in markets; men and women farmers in this group actively engage in livestock and
fishery production at a larger scale that their subsistence counterparts with a market purpose, although their sale are limited to
primary markets. Average land size is about 1 hectare; they own average herd size comprising five cattle, five hens, one goat,
two sheep. They use good husbandry practices but have limited bargaining power in the market and limited access to more
commercial markets. Formal financial institutions, mostly Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) offer limited financial products to
this group, which limits their ability to expand their production and productivity levels.
Specialized smallholder’s farmers; In this category, the beneficiaries have some assets and are organized into formally
established and legally registered operational and viable producers and/or processors cooperatives or union of cooperatives
with productive and entrepreneurial potential. Their average herd size of 11 cattle, five hens, three goats, two sheep an
average access to land of about five hectares per HH. They have a good access to inputs and services and relative good but
still limited access to finance.
Subsistence level production pastoralists with limited potential: These poorer households’ make their income and living
from very small-scale livestock coupled with agriculture and other incomes derived from off-farm activities (petty trade
performed mostly by women, fattening, poultry, dairy etc.) and also combined with irregular remittances from occasional
labour (men and younger). These include poor men and women from pastoralist and agro pastoralists communities farming
small areas of dry land, or irrigated areas, along irrigations schemes/rivers banks of up to 0.5 to 1 ha. They usually grow some
fruits / vegetables for domestic consumption and keep some livestock, having limited access to rangelands for animal feed. In
the Afar Regional State a subsistence pastoralist household has been described as a family with no camel, 2-5 cattle and 30
to 40 shoats, while a subsistence agro pastoralist: 0.5 to 1 hectares of land, no oxen, combined with 1 to 2 cattle and 5 to 10
shoats and 1 oxen. A very poor household owns only 5 to 10 shoats and provide labour for others, i.e. taking animals to
grazing areas (including far from the settlement) and/or to market places.
Commercially oriented pastoralists with high potential are men and women pastoralists and agro pastoralists who
typically own larger number of animals and practice intensive as well as extensive herd management. They have access to
natural resources, including rangelands areas and water resources (with different degrees) but lack connectivity to networks
and markets, including market information, technical capacity and scale. Their livestock production provides more than 50% of
their annual income (agro-pastoralists) and being close to full time for “pure” pastoralists. They have the potential to provide
consistent increased quantity and quality of their output to meet compliance standards and market requirements
(local/regional).  In this category men are mostly responsible for cattle and camels while women are mostly engaged in small
ruminant production (sheep and goats) and milking cows. This groups can be defined as the better off, compared to the other
categories.
Former pastoralists (drop outs): These are groups of former pastoralists who because of livestock losses (natural causes or
mismanagements of herds and/or lack of support from community for restocking/animal diseases) have abandoned
pastoralism and are now surviving on alternative livelihood options, moving from the traditional livelihood based system (and
settlements) to a more sedentary model in search of opportunity for work, cultivable lands, and going closer to basic social
services.
Female farmers (including female-headed households); Female holders are, on average, older than male holders by about
five years. Female holders also tend to have smaller household sizes than do male holders. Nationally, on average, female
holders have 1.6 fewer household members than their male counterparts. This has important implications for household labor
availability and access to labor through social arrangements, which is an important source of agricultural labor in rural
Ethiopia. Female holders are also less educated, on average, than male holders. Illiteracy rate is about 31 % higher than male
holders. The gap is higher in Oromia (37% point) and lowest in Amhara (25% point). Over 97 percent of both male and female
holders own land, suggesting that there are no major gender gaps in landownership among holders. The size of land
managed by female landholders is, on average, 43 percent smaller than the size of land managed by their male counterparts.
Only about 12 percent of female holders have a pair of oxen, required for plowing, as compared to more than 30 percent of
male holders. This lack of oxen ownership may hinder female holders from accessing land through renting. Oxen ownership
has significant implications for the livelihoods of farm households in rural Ethiopia. In contrast, more than half of male holders
own one ox or more. Both female and male holders participate in the crop production of cereals, pulses and oil crops
production. However, female holders tend to participate less in the production of each type of crop with some variation by
crops and regions. Pregnant and lactating women with children under two, and adolescent girls are the most at risk of having
inadequate diets, as they have higher nutritional needs but are usually less prioritised in intra household food distribution[59].
Rural underemployed and unemployed youths owning no or small land: In 2018, the urban youth unemployment rate
was high as 25.3 %. Estimates on rural youth unemployment are more difficult since agriculture is the dominant source of
livelihood. Yet, battered with land scarcity, shrinking farm sizes and growing landlessness, young people rely on land
redistribution, inheritance and small rental markets to access land. Land sales are prohibited and restrictions on long-term land
renting remain, making land inheritance the prime source of access to agricultural land and agricultural livelihood. The very
fact that in rural areas 60 % of households only cultivate less than 1ha of land, erodes much hope to benefit from their
constitutional right to agricultural land.  The 2012 national level land use survey indicates that youth (18 – 29 years of age)
11/22
accounts for 21 % of the rural landholders. According to CSA’s report on land utilisation in 2012, only 3 % of all landholders in
Ethiopia are young women. A study in northern Ethiopia finds that 42 % of the youth had access to rented land in 2016 and 47
% in 2019 with average area rented land of 0.66 ha in 2016 and 0.74 ha in 2019. Male youth who own oxen and ploughs are
much more likely to rent land, whereas young women are on a disadvantaged end.  However, available farm sizes are too
small to feed an entire household, pushing young people to look for unskilled, off-farm wage employment elsewhere. 15 % of
youth migrate from rural to urban areas during 2007 – 2012. A paper by IFPRI from 2016 found a strong relationship between
expected land inheritance and youths’ long-distance permanen migration, rural-to-urban permanent migration, and non-
agricultural-sector employment in rural Ethiopia. 
The rural elderly who have no supporters: if some rural elders are considered as leaders in communities, a large number of
the rural elderly are marginalised, especially women. Defined as persons above 60 years old, the rural elderly who have no
supporters are the most vulnerable to be hit by different shocks and they have no resources to withstand them. 6.3% of
Ethiopia’s elderly population have access to the Rural Productive Safety Net Programme that provides a minimum
pension[60]. PACT design can provide opportunities for rural elderly to engage in common interest groups for income
generating activities. Even if they would contribute less to labour intensive activities than their younger counterparts, the
elderly could play a critical leadership, advisory, and motivational role.
Persons with disabilities living in the rural area – As per the (draft) Disability Act of Ethiopia, “Persons with Disabilities”
are defined as persons who have one or more permanent physical, sensory, mental or intellectual impairments which in
interaction with various attitudinal and environmental barriers, may hinder or limit their full exercise of rights or full and
effective inclusion in society, on an equal basis with others. PACT design can provide opportunities for persons with
disabilities by supporting disability inclusion in agriculture through digital tools, offering farmers with disabilities paths to
financial inclusion, ensuring accessibility of capacity building trainings including accessible training materials, ensuring
inclusion of persons with disabilities during community led agriculture development planning, accessible market infrastructure,
capacity building of public and private sector institutions on disability inclusion. Additional actions would include targeting
households with members with disabilities that would benefit from the irrigation schemes, be part of the WUAs and
cooperatives targeted by PACT. PACT can further specifically target skilled youth with disabilities to become agripreneurs,
through participation in extensive agripreneurship training; access to start-up loans/grants; mentorship; and participation in
policy dialogues.
3. Institutional analysis
53.
54.
55.
56.
1) As part of an institutional reshuffle in 2021, the Government of Ethiopia has created a new Ministry, the Ministry of Irrigation
and Lowland, that will complement the activities of the Ministry of Agriculture. This significant shift highlights the political will to
foster irrigation development across the country, to achieve the objectives of the Government 10-year plan in terms of agricultural
modernisation, productivity increase and food import substitution. The former Environment, Forest and Climate Change (EFCCC)
has also been splitted into two stand alone organisations: (i) Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) which will be responsible
to oversee environment and climate related issues. The Ministry of Planning and National Development is the host agency for
EPA, (ii) Forest Commission will be responsible for the forestry related programs and will be hosted under the Ministry of
Agriculture. The Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) is the executing agency for IFAD’s RUFIP III and is also proposed to be an
apex for the IGREENFIN initiative will have a significant role in terms of providing loans to PACT and IGREENFIN target
communities. PACT, being nutrition - youth-sensitive and gender transformative, the Ministry of Health and  Ministry of Youth and
Women will also have a significant role.
In terms of capacities, the Ministry benefit from 10+ years experience implementing large-scale irrigation development
programmes and partnering with key national and international research institutions (e.g., Ethiopian Institution of Agricultural
Research, CGIAR, universities), development partners (e.g., Technoserve), and NGOs (e.g., Self Help Africa). The new
programme will receive support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to implement Gender transformative mechanisms,
leveraging the experience of CARE in the country.
Ethiopia hosts a myriad of long-standing and innovative development partners working in different fields (e.g., knowledge,
nutrition, women and youth empowerment)  from which PACT could benefit from. They can be identified through the alliances and
working groups they belong to, such as the “International Development Innovation Alliance’s Gender and INnovation Working
group”, the “Nutrition Development partners forum”, or the SUN business network.  Additionally, as PACT is putting a strong
emphasis on agribusiness capacities, access to finance and markets, the programme would benefit from partnerships with
private sector organisations such as companies working in mobile technologies, financial innovation, solar or entrepreneurship.
2) The Constitution of Ethiopia recognises the rights of women (Article 35), of Nations, Nationalities and Peoples (Article 39) and
pastoral groups (Article 40). Article 92 also states that the design and implementation of any program and development projects
shall not damage or destroy the environment, and people have the right to be fully consulted and express their views in planning
and implementation of environmental policies and projects. Articles 43 and 44 state that every citizen has the right to live in a
clean and healthy environment.
57.
National strategies, policies and regulatory frameworks relevant to the project from a safeguard and IFAD mainstreaming
perspectives are the following:
58.
Gender - ​
​The Ethiopian Government is a signatory to most international instruments, conventions and declarations such as; the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women CEDAW (1979), the Declaration on the Elimination
of Violence Against Women DEVAW (1993), the Beijing Platform for Action/BPA (1995) including the domestication of the
international instruments. The GoE adopted the Women’s Policy of Ethiopia (1993) and a National Action Plan on Gender and
Development (2006) led by the Ministry of Women’s Affairs. The Labour Proclamation and the Civil Servants Proclamation
59.
60.
61.
62.
prohibit discrimination; protect pregnant women and maternity rights. The Government also revised the Family Law in 2004 and
the Criminal Code in 2005 to address issues linked to women’s rights and guarantee women’s control of assets and right to
pursue a profession. The Ministry of Agriculture developed Agricultural Gender mainstreaming guidelines in 2011. Gender and
social inclusion is recognised as one of eight key strategic pillars of the Ethiopia Ten-Year Development plan (2021-2030), with
specific targets in terms for women and youth’s rights to land tenure, participation and economic development.
12/22
Youth - The Government of Ethiopia adopted a National Youth Policy in 2004 to drive youth participation in governance,
economic empowerment, access to education and training as well as healthcare. It is reinforced by the Rural Job Opportunity
Creation Strategy (RJOCS) in 2017 to address a key challenge faced by young people in rural areas. As laid out in the country’s
first digital strategy, the GoE aspires to create millions of jobs, especially digital jobs, to spur the digital economy. Youth will play
a pivotal role in modernizing Ethiopia’s agricultural sector. In doing so, the following key stakeholders will be engaged to drive job
creation and youth outcomes: Ministry of Agriculture, including the Directorate of Rural Job Creation Development and the
Bureau of Job Creation and Enterprise Development; Directorate of Agricultural Extension, Directorate of Women, Youth and
Children, and Agricultural Mechanization; Technical and Vocational Education Training Institutions; Ministry of Women and Social
Affairs.
​The Government of Ethiopia is extremely active on the nutrition scene. Over the last decade, it has developed rich
Nutrition - ​
policy tools that promote multisectoral food system approaches to ensure long-term prosperity of the country. The Ten-Year
Development plan (2021-2030), backbone of Ethiopia development agenda, emphasises the transformational role of the
agriculture sector to satisfy the food and nutrition needs of the nation and setting clear targets of food production across seasons.
Additionally, two years before joining the Scale-Up Nutrition (SUN) movement in 2010, Ethiopia launched a National Nutrition
Strategy (NNS) operationalised through the National Nutrition Programme (NNP) led by the Ministry of Health then the Ministry of
Agriculture (MoA) in collaboration with ten other ministries involved at different stages of the food value chains (e.g. Education,
Industry, Trade). In 2016, the MoA developed a Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture Strategic Plan to mainstream nutrition in its
programme with a dedicated Coordination Office under the Minister. The Sekota declaration in 2016 confirms Ethiopia’s
commitment to end child malnutrition by 2030 with sustainable food systems as one of its eight pillars[61]. The initiative aims to
foster multisectoral action in targeted woredas and scale a cost-effective package of interventions to the entire country. The
National Food and Nutrition Policy (2018) and Strategy (2020) intend to enhance the food aspect and the multisectoral
effectiveness of the sector. Consecutively, Food based Dietary Guidelines (2022) have been developed to inform the most
relevant (effective, sustainable) diets to promote per region.
People with disabilities - The Constitution of Ethiopia recognises the State’s responsibility to provide necessary rehabilitation
and support services for people with disabilities. In 2010, the GoE ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Additionally, the Government adopted multiple Proclamations to protect their right to
productive and decent work, as well as a National Plan of Action of Persons with Disabilities (2012-2021) to create building
blocks for persons with disabilities to fully participate in all spheres of society and development.
Environment -Based on environment related articles of the constitution, Ethiopia has issued policies, strategies and
proclamations and regulations. The Environmental Policy of Ethiopia was issued in 1997 and revised in 2017. The Environmental
Policy overall goal aims to improve and enhance the health and quality of life of all Ethiopians and to promote sustainable social
and economic development through the sound management and use of natural, human-made and cultural resources and the
environment to meet the needs of the present and future generations. The Biodiversity Conservation and Research Policy (1998)
provides policy guidance on the effective conservation, rational development and sustainable utilisation of biological diversity.
Ethiopian Water Resources Management Policy (1999) aims at enhancing and promoting all national efforts towards the efficient,
equitable and optimum utilisation of the available water resources on a sustainable basis. Ethiopia has also a number of
proclamations issued to safeguard the safety of citizens and the environment The most important proclamations include: (i)
Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation No. 299/2002, (ii) Environmental Pollution Control Proclamation No. 300/2002
and Industrial Pollution Control Regulation No. 159/2008, Solid Waste Management Proclamation, Proclamation No. 513/2007
and Environmental Protection Organs Establishment Proclamation (Proclamation No 295/2002). Furthermore, Ethiopia is part of
a number of Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) which were ratified by proclamations. The most important MEAs
include: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification (UNCCD), United Nations Convention on Biodiversity (UNCBD), Rotterdam Convention, and Stockholm
Convention. 
63.
Climate -Ethiopia has officially launched its Climate Resilient Green Economy strategy during COP-17 in Durban South Africa.
Since then, important milestones such as establishment/reshuffling of institutions, mainstreaming of CRGE into the country’s
development plan, preparation and implementation of various plans have been undertaken. These include: Establishment of
CRGE facility to mobilise national and international climate resources, preparation of climate resilient strategies of agriculture and
forestry, water and energy. Ethiopia has submitted its first Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) later NDC in 2016
and has updated its NDC and resubmitted it in 2021. Ethiopia has also prepared a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) which
included 18 prioritised adaptation options. Ethiopia has also prepared four Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA)
namely, Forestry, Waste, Climate Resilient Energy Access and Rail Academy NAMAs, although they didn’t grant resources from
the NAMA facility.
4. Environmental and social category
64.
The Environmental, social and climate risk screening of the PACT Programme was undertaken using the online ESC screening
tool, SECAP 2021. The most important activities that could attribute to environmental and social impacts include: (i) infrastructure
development such as irrigation schemes, storage facilities, constructions of rural road, warehouses etc, (ii) increased use of
13/22
agro-chemicals/ pesticides, (iii) targeting of beneficiaries (iv) increased water abstraction and use (v) farm mechanisation. The
environmental and social impacts will be environmental degradation and pollution, occupational health hazard, conflict, temporary
and/or permanent displacement and limited access to resources due to land acquisitions for the constructions of irrigation
schemes, storage facilities and access roads. However, given the scale of activities, huge displacement are not expected and
detailed assessments will be carried out during preparation of Resettlement Action Plan (PAP) during implementation.  Activities
that may affect biodiversity includes uncontrolled use of agrichemicals and fertilizers, including crop intensification; some tree
clearance to increase amount of arable land, huge abstraction of river water may affect river biodiversity and project activities in
wetland areas. Most of these impacts will be localised to the project areas with some impacts, particularly water use conflict, may
extend to the downstream stream areas.  Furthermore, some environmental and health related impacts may persist for a long
time and some impacts can be irreversible. The project will avoid investments/activities that will affect biodiversity through
screening and implementation of mitigation measures for sub projects. Specifically, biodiversity will be considered during
screening of projects, identification of projects areas and prioritizations of program activities. For land acquisitions, pursuant to
the national laws, the project will adequately be engaged land holders and payment will be effected prior to commencement of
any physical activities.  As far as the grievances are concerned, communities have compliant handling mechanism (informal
GRM) and GRM will be established/strengthen during project implementation. To this effect, draft stakeholder engagement plan
has been drafted and annexed to this report (Appendix 5). 
65.
Therefore, the environmental and social category of the project is Substantial.  Based on this categorization the following
assessment/studies has been triggered: (i) Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF), (ii) Plan for
Free Prior Informed Consent (FPIC), (iii) Detailed Social Development Plan, (iv) Pesticide Management Plan, and (v)
Resettlement Action Framework and Plan, (vi) Labor Management and procedure Assessment. ESCMF, FPIC plan and Labour
Management Plan are prepared during the design and annexed to this Review Note (Appendices 2,4 1). Resettlement Action
Framework will be prepared before December board where as other studies/assessments will be prepared during early
implementation phase. Terms of References for the preparation of Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) and Social
Development Plan are annexed.
66.
Social Development Plan will be prepared to ensure that the vulnerable and marginalized communities are adequately consulted
during programme preparation and also benefited during implementation. The plan will be prepared during early implementation
phase when the target areas and HHs are identified and an estimated $ USD 20,000 is needed which is included in the budget
for the ESCMF and ESCMP.
5. Climate risk category
67.
As part of the online ESC screening tool, various tools such as the World Bank’s climate change knowledge portal (CCKP) and
think hazard models, INFORM etc. have been used to see the anticipated climate risks such as hazard, sensitivity and exposure
and adaptive capacity of the project. The assessment was made at the country level and it was found that there are high
occurrences/ risks of river and urban flood, landslide, extreme heat and wildfire. The hazard for water scarcity is medium. There
will be changes in temperature and rainfall trends in the country. Crop production and livestock and forestry productivity are
frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature, wildfire or pests and diseases.
Furthermore, biodiversity in the project area is likely to be affected by changes in climate variables and the agricultural value
chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) will be exposed to climate related hazards. It is likely that rural
infrastructure will be affected by flooding, landslides, changes in temperatures, and extreme winds.
68.
Project contribution to Green House Gases emissions through use of fertilisers and deforestation/forest clearance are minor.
However, the programme will create huge GHG sequestration potential due to INRM, CSA and improved cook stoves.
69.
The climate risk is classified using the formula and the online classification tool[62]. As per the climate-screening tool, the climate
risk is calculated to be 4.95 and hence the project is classified as Substantial for climate risks. Based on the classification,
adaptation interventions have been identified prioritized and mainstreamed into the project components. In addition, indigenous
knowledge will be explored to identify adaptation interventions during community development planning. The FAO EX-ACT tool
has also been run to estimate the mitigation potential of the programme. 
6. Recommendations for project design and implementation
70.
The programme will put in place a resilient and profitable agricultural production system, paying special attention to (i) the unique
roles, needs and priorities of women, youth and other vulnerable groups with particular emphasis on persons with disabilities; (ii)
opportunities along the value chains to improve food system outcomes; and (iii) the programme contribution to climate adaptation
and mitigation. Based on the overall project Climate Risk Analysis findings, Climate Risk Analyses at sub-project or agro-ecology
level will be conducted to identify specific climate risks and recommend proven mitigation options.
71.
The following sub-components of the programme represent key entry points for mainstreaming:
72.
1) Value chain selection: In order to contribute to its development objective, the programme will apply a mainstreaming lens to
its value chain interventions. The selection criteria of the targeted value chains include the contribution to food and nutrition
security, the potential for empowerment of youth, women and vulnerable groups with emphasis on persons with
disabilities, as well as potential for  climate change adaptation and mitigation. IFAD’s various tools such as the Climate
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
Adaptation for Rural Development (CARD) tool should be used to inform on the selection of appropriate crops for target regions.
14/22
2) Access to inputs for enhanced production and productivity: Tailored interventions should address major gaps hindering
women, youth and other vulnerable groups including persons with disabilities to access climate-smart farm inputs
(including seeds, biofertilizers), credit and technologies. The project should also support youth and women groups to establish
nurseries for seed multiplication and seedling production. Based on Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research (EIAR) progress
made on biofortified crops and fertilisers, the programme should consider introducing those to the irrigated schemes to
increase the nutritional value of the crops. Similarly, EIAR expertise will be leveraged to identify and promote relevant biological
controls rather than increasing access to pesticides. Regarding the livestock value chains, the programme should provide poultry
and sheep start-up packages including equipment, training, mentoring and financing to women and youth groups in order to
develop their own business.
3) Extension and capacity building : In terms of content, the agronomic training curriculum designed for farmers should be
gender, disability and nutrition-sensitive, enhance environmental awareness and leverage indigenous knowledge  to
address the needs of the target groups. Additional packages should be developed to build farmers’ climate adaptive capacities,
entrepreneurship, leadership and non-cognitive skills, with a particular attention to women, youths and persons with disabilities.
In particular, ensuring adequate and timely access to whether information can reduce farmers’ vulnerability to erratic weather and
enable pastoralists to optimise forage resources.
In terms of delivery, capacity building activities will take into account factors such as time, accessibility and safety of venue
(Farmers Training Centres), costs, gender and inclusion dynamics in the facilitation, including the identification of adequate
reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities. Child care solutions and labour saving technologies such as energy
saving cookstoves and biogas that also contribute to reducing deforestation will be provided to enable women’s participation in
capacity building activities. The project should also consider relevant channels to increase outreach and inclusion, such as social
networks (e.g., women-to-women knowledge transfer and coaching) and ICT (e.g., mobile technologies, radio). The project will
benefit from the IFAD ICT4D initiative and multiple partners’ experiences in the country.
Improving awareness and behaviours will require a more intentional strategy. The programme should adopt gender
transformative interventions addressing unequal social norms and harmful practises (including gender-based violence) at
community and household levels, but also along the value chains. The household methodology, Gender Action Learning
System (GALS), can create gateways for joint-decision-making and contribute to an equitable workload between household
members. As they work together, household members question key drivers of inequalities such as labour allocation, decision
making or intrahousehold food distribution. Increasing women’s time to cook and feed, their control over resources, and joint
decision making on farm production and food purchases directly contribute to beneficiaries’ nutrition outcomes.
Women empowerment is essential to improve consumption of diverse, safe and nutritious foods. In addition to market-oriented
food production, the programme will promote integrated home gardens with neglected and underutilised species, especially for
female headed households and households with pregnant and lactating women, children under two years of age and
adolescents. Demand and awareness creation for nutrition should be strategically addressed by the programme, going beyond
top-down nutrition education curricula conveyed by extension workers on an ad-hoc basis. A social behaviour change
communication strategy will be built on IFAD Review of SBCC best practises in the ESA region and domestic partners
experiences (e.g., JICA, USAID, WFP, Save the Children).
The GTM will complement the PACT initiatives by drilling down to address the underlying social norms, attitudes and behaviours
that perpetuate gender inequalities. Three principles will be followed to promote gender transformative change in the context of
climate adaptation and market inclusion: (i) using participatory approaches to facilitate dialogue, trust, ownership, visioning and
behaviour change at various levels; (ii) promoting critical reflection on deep-rooted social and gender norms and attitudes in order
to challenge power dynamics and bring about a paradigm shift at all levels; and (iii) explicitly engaging with men and boys to
address the concepts of masculinity and gender.
4) Water infrastructure: Any infrastructure development such as irrigation schemes should be accompanied with budgeted
watershed management activities to ensure sustainable water availability, to reduce siltation, to enhance and diversify income of
the watershed communities, and avoid conflict between upper and downstream communities. Additionally, renewable energy
sources will be used wherever possible, such as solar irrigation and lighting of facilities.
Infrastructure development represents an opportunity for temporary and long termjob creation, especially for youths. The
programme will train and employ youths from the community to conduct infrastructure maintenance. In this regard, special
safeguard measures will be established to prevent any form of child labour in the programme activities.
The project should also explore ways to maximise the use of water in the communities, ensuring gender-specific challenges are
addressed. Developing multipurpose water infrastructure as labour saving solutions such as reducing time to fetch and
harvest water, for home consumption or for the livestock, will allow women to use spare time for economically productive work
and participation in capacity building activities. Additionally, promoting access to and use of clean water is a strategic pathway to
improve nutrition outcomes of the beneficiaries. Key messages on Water Hygiene and Sanitation will be included in the extension
and SBCC packages. Accessibility will be ensured in these initiatives, to consider the needs of different impairments of persons
living in the project areas.
82.
The prioritization of households with members with disabilities in beneficiary selection of irrigation schemes will ensure that poor
households with members with disabilities are not left behind, but rather a priority for the project in aims to reduce the additional
vulnerability faced by persons with disabilities and their households.
83.
5) Post harvest, inclusive market access and off-farm opportunities: The programme will seek to improve postharvest
practises, which will contribute to reduce food losses and enhance nutritional value of foods. For livestock value chain and
84.
85.
aflatoxin-susceptible crops in particular, interventions will address food safety issues, with implementation of quality control and
hygienic standards for processing and packaging. Down the value chain, clear labelling of nutrition information and use of social
marketing for packaging will contribute to increased demand for safe and nutritious foods by the end consumers.
15/22
6) Rapid gender-specific value-chain assessments will identify barriers women and youth, including women and youth with
disabilities face to access markets and opportunities down the value chains. Based on the findings, the project will facilitate
dialogue and foster partnerships between women/youth farmers, women/youth organisations with other relevant stakeholders
along the value chains. Cooperatives will be central to the market linkages. Therefore, the programme will design enabling
mechanisms for diverse women's participation, voice and leadership in farmers organisations, including cooperatives.
Based on capacity needs assessment, women’s positioning will be strengthened with confidence building and leadership training,
as well as gender awareness creation among all members. Moreover, the GALS approach can help to target specific
disadvantaged groups. It will tackle underlying social norms, attitudes, behaviours and systems that represent the root causes of
inequitable power distributions. These tools help to unite what are often disparate livelihood strategies pursued by women, men
and young people same household or group, into a joint vision and practical strategy. The inequitable distribution of power
prevalent throughout the production and trade of high-value crops, which are often dominated by male actors. GALS can mitigate
the risk of male capture of women’s high-value crops through the promotion of greater gender-balanced decision-making
7) Gender-youth-and disability-sensitive modalities will be identified to expand (financial) offers to improve access to market-
relevant information and other services, including inclusive and accessible digital solutions. Based on needs, the programme will
provide technical support and training on strategic skills like business development and management, financial literacy,
leadership or digital skills, for women, youth, especially young girls, and marginalised groups. Establishing a mentoring
system with role models identified in the community will strengthen the training interventions.  This way, relevant capacities will
be strengthened to boost more viable and profitable agribusinesses along the targeted value chains and enable better access to
information and markets for women and youth. Keeping in mind that the project will be partly implemented in post-conflict areas,
the interventions should address the needs of the beneficiaries with a recovery perspective. In this regard, providing job
opportunities to youths can instil a sense of stability. The project should create other building blocks for adolescents and youth to
become an active part in the society to foster peaceful, equitable and prosperous societies for all.
86.
Further, Infrastructure development (particularly market infrastructure) should consider universal design principles to ensure the
needs of all, including persons with disabilities are taken into account.
87.
88.
89.
8) Environment and Social inclusion-sensitive institutions: A strong dimension will be integrated into the delivery of capacity
building initiatives and PMU staff will be skilled to conduct specific analysis on mainstreaming themes and integrate insights into
programming. However, gender, youth, disability inclusion, nutrition, and environmental issues will not be treated as stand-alone
concepts. Instead, the project will strive to apply an integrated mainstreaming approach with special attention to the intersection
of gender, youth, disability, nutrition and climate. Awareness raising on the interrelations between the themes will be integrated in
GALS. That way, underlying biases and misconceptions can be better addressed, leading to a shift in mind-set at institutional
level and set processes in motion for gender-sensitive planning, programming and service delivery. Preventing a top-down
institutional approach, the programme should leverage indigenous governance systems through community-driven development
approaches and device mechanisms to ensure stakeholders’ feedback and buy-in (e.g., organisation of consultations with free
and prior informed consent, grievance redress mechanisms, documentations and reporting of consultations as part of the SECAP
Compliance monitoring process).
9) Enabling policy environment: The project should review existing policies and strategies with a social inclusion-lens, identify
entry points to enable persons with disabilities to participate in economic activities, and address gender-, and youth-sensitive
barriers to economic empowerment. To that end, policy dialogues will be organised with multi stakeholders and women-, youth-
and other marginalised groups’ representatives. Further, identified as a game changer for Ethiopia’s food system
transformation[63], nutrition-sensitive irrigation will be a key entry point to drive multi-sectoral policy engagement. In addition,
assessment/evaluation of practical implementation of climate policies/strategies/plans will be made.
10) Embedding gender equality and disability inclusion in Programme Coordination and Implementation : The
programme should put a strong emphasis on gender- and youth-sensitive PMUs. They will benefit from gender parity among staff
and inclusion of persons with disabilities. At beginning of project to create enabling environ for gt Gender-transformative capacity
development in the context of climate adaptation and market inclusion for critical self-reflection regarding social norms that
perpetuate gender inequalities and stimulate positive behaviour change. This  will go  beyond introductory workshops or gender
sensitization training to stimulate critical reflection and mindset shifts towards positive behaviour change. It is essential that all
those engaged in PACT delivery fully appreciate and internalise the GT ambitions of the Programme.
90.
Additionally, coordination mechanisms at each level can seek to be gender- and youth-sensitive to ensure effective
implementation of project activities, strategies, Monitoring and Evaluation, and knowledge management will consider social
inclusion dimensions. The M&E system will be gender- and youth-disaggregated to track progress and provide nuanced insights
into the project impacts on women, youth, and vulnerable groups.
7. Further studies needed
91.
Based on the social and environmental category and on the climate risk classification, the following studies are required:
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESMP)
Abbreviated Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
Abbreviated Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF)
Pest Management Plan
FPIC
FPIC implementation plan
Labour Assessment and Management Procedures
Targeted Adaptation Assessment
Social Development Plan[64]
16/22
92.
In addition to the required studies, the following studies are recommended:
Socio Economic analysis and diagnostic assessments at baseline or start-up phase, ~ USD 100,000
Socio-economic analysis and diagnostic assessment will inform the development of a social inclusion strategy (gender,
youth, persons with disabilities) and action plans, which will determine target groupings, identify vulnerabilities, capacity
gaps and needs, and entry points for social and economic empowerment along with enlisting potential risks, such as
GBV, child labor, and adequate mitigation measures;
Need assessments will include an analysis on the potential impacts of the 2020-2022 conflict, COVID-19 pandemic on
livelihood, safety and rights of vulnerable groups, access to basic services, opportunities, etc.;
Rapid-value chain assessment to identify gaps and barriers women and youth face accessing market systems,
Infrastructure assessment, including water-related-, and market-led infrastructure, to identify gaps and opportunities for
climate-resilient infrastructure development;
Nutrition KAP survey focused on barriers to quality diets in the targeted regions, including gender dynamics;
Following consultations with community members, including women, youth, pastoral community, persons with disabilities,
additional strategies and action plans will be developed to ensure project activities respond to the unique needs and priorities
of target beneficiaries.
Resettlement Action Framework (RAF) or Plan (RAP)
Biodiversity Action Plan
Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP)
Study documenting indigenous knowledge and crops to inform the programme strategies and materials
Cumulative Impact Assessment
Targeted Adaptation Assessment
Vulnerability Impact and Adaptation Assessment
Targeted vulnerability and opportunities assessments on persons with disabilities
Climate studies with a gender lens to identify opportunities for gender-transformative climate-related interventions
Market studies with a gender lens
Social norms diagnostics to jointly identify and address underlying norms that perpetuate gender inequalities in the the
community
8. Monitoring and evaluation
93.
94.
The project’s monitoring and evaluation system will be aligned to the project logframe and include specific responsibilities for
monitoring targeting performance, beneficiary tracking, especially women, youth and vulnerable groups- (persons with
disabilities). To that end, all people-centred indicators will be disaggregated by sex and age, including further disaggregation by
pastoral people Peoples and disability, where possible. Outcome Indicators, including the Empowerment Indicator (CI IE 2.1),
Employment Indicator (CI 2.2.1), and MDDW (CI 1.2.8), Environmental sustainability and Climate change (CI 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3,2,3) 
will be tracked at baseline, midterm, and endline as part of the COI surveys.
The Project Management Units at Federal, region and Woreda level will be responsible to conduct periodic compliance
monitoring and evaluation of the SECAP related reports (ESCIA, ESCMP, RAP etc). To this effect, a generic reporting template
and guideline will be prepared and reporting periodicity will be defined and ANWP, including indicators, will be prepared and
implemented by the PMUs. The Federal PMU is specifically responsible to consolidate reports and submit them to IFAD.
Furthermore, the PMUs should work hand in hand with the regulatory body, such as the Environmental Protection Authority
(EPA), to make sure that project implementation is not violating national laws.
95.
IFAD has two roles: (i) Oversight of the implementation of the SECAP related studies/documents including feedback and (ii)
Capacity development to PMU in general and to environment, social and climate specialists in particular. 
9. References
Social inclusion (Poverty, Gender, Youth, Nutrition, Marginalised groups)
Advocates for Youth (2014). Ethiopian Youth Council for Higher Opportunities
Baye et al (2019). Irrigation and Women’s Diet in Ethiopia. IFPRI
Bezu S., Holden S. (2014). Are Rural Youth in Ethiopia Abandoning Agriculture?, World Development, Vol. 64, pp 259-272,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.06.013
CARE & FAO (2019). Good Practices for Integrating Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in Climate-Smart
Agriculture Programs
17/22
CARE Ethiopia (2020). Rapid assessment on COVID-19 response of TESFA+ women living in Gunabegemidir Woreda,
Amhara Region. July 2020.
Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia (2017) Integrated Surveys on Agriculture Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey (ESS) Wave 3
2015-2016.
CIAT, BFS & USAID (2017). Climate Smart Agriculture in Ethiopia Brief. Washington DC. CGIAR
Committee on the Elimination of Descrimination against Women (2019). Concluding observations on the eight periodic report
of Ethiopia. CEDAW/C/ETH/CO/8
Craft, T. (2019). Enabling Resilience for Pastoral Communities in Ethiopia:PRIME Impact and Results Report. Portland, OR:
Mercy Corps
CSA and UN Women (2020)
Bekele and Z. Worku (2008). Women Entrepreneurship in Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises: The Case of Ethiopia.
Journal of International Women’s Studies 10(2): 3–19.
EPHI Ministry of Health (2016). Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey
EPHI Ministry of Health (2019). Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey (Issue July).
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/PR120/PR120.pdf
Ethiopia Ministry of Agriculture (2020). Productive Safety Net Programme (PNSP) Phase 5 Design Document.
Ethiopia Ministry of Agriculture Productive Safety Net Programme Phase 5 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
FRAMEWORK (ESMF)
Ethiopia Ministry of Peace (2021). Socio-economic profile of PAP areas in Ethiopia.
Ethiopian Constitution. Accessible here: https://www.ethiopia.gov.et/about-ethiopia/constitution
Ethiopian Public Health Institute and World Food Programme (2021). Fill the Nutrient Gap, Ethiopia. Addis Ababa: Ethiopia
Ethiopian Public Health Institute, Ministry of Finance (2013). The Cost of Hunger in Africa Implications for Growth and
Transformation of Ethiopia
FAO STAT (2017)
Federal Cooperative Agency Report (2015)
Global Nutrition Report, Ethiopia, (2019)
Government of Ethiopia (2021) Vision 2030: Transforming Ethiopian Food Systems. A synthesis report: game changing
solutions to transform Ethiopia’ food system
Government of Ethiopia (2014.) Ethiopian National Youth Policy (NYP)
HelpAge International, Irish Aid (2019) Coverage of older people in Ethiopia’s social protection system.
Hirvonen, K., & Wolle, A. (2019). Consumption, production, market access and affordability of nutritious foods series. Addis
Ababa: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and Alive & Thrive/FHI360.
Human Rights Council (2019). Compilation on Ethiopia. Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human
Human Rights Watch (2015). Ethiopia: Lethal Force Against Protesters.
IFAD ECG (2020). Ethiopia Country Brief
IFAD Ethiopia Country Office (2021). General Brief Nutrition
IFAD Instiglio (2021). The Gender Transformative Mechanism: Achieving gender transformative results in agriculture and rural
development. Ethiopia draft business case.
IFPRI EDRI (2018). Structural Change and Poverty Reduction in Ethiopia. Economy-wide analysis of the evolving role of
agriculture.
International Law and Policy Institute (2016). Beyond Joint Land Titling in Ethiopia: Rural Women’s Rights to Productive
resources.
Kaka, L., Abate, G., Warner, J., and Kieran, C. (2015). Patterns of Agricultural Production among Male and Female Holders.
International Food Policy Research institute, IFPRI
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (2016). Gender Equality Strategy for Ethiopia’s Agriculture Sector
MISEREOR (2019). Pastoral Development Orientation Framework Focus on Ethiopia
PASIDP II (2018). Gender mainstreaming guideline
TECHNOSERVE (2020). Gender assessment in households and cooperatives in PASIDP II programme
The International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs (2020). The Indigenous World. Ethiopia (pp.83-91) Accessible here:
https://iwgia.org/images/yearbook/2020/IWGIA_The_Indigenous_World_2020.pdf
The International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs (2021). The Indigenous World 2021.
UNCT Ethiopia (2020). Socio-economic impact of COVID-19 in Ethiopia.
UNDP (2019) Gender Inequality Index.
UNICEF (2017) Nutrition Country brief
UN Inter Agency Group meeting (2015/2016), Ethiopia’s Progress Towards Eradicating Poverty: An Interim Report on 2015/16
UN WOMEN United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (2018). Report to the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women Committee for Ethiopia
UN WOMEN United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (2018). The Cost of the Gender Gap
in Ethiopia, Policy Brief
UN Women and Central Statistics Agency Ethiopia (2020). Representation of Persons with Disabilities in Ethiopian Labour
Force: A Review of National Surveys on Disability Statistics.
USAID (2012) Empowering Women Through Agricultural Development in Ethiopia
World Bank (2015). Ethiopia Poverty Assessment 2014. Washington, DC. World Bank.
World Bank (2017). Stunting rates visualisation based on DHS 2014 Accessible here:
https://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/what-studies-in-spatial-development-show-in-ethiopia-part-i
World Bank (2019). Ethiopia Gender Diagnostic report, priorities for promoting equity.
World Bank (2020). Ethiopia Poverty Assessment: Harnessing Continued Growth for Accelerated Poverty Reduction
World Health Organisation (WHO) World Health Survey (2003) Ethiopia.
Youth Policy (2014) Factsheet for Ethiopia
Climate and Environment
18/22
Ministry of Environment and Forest (2015): Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC). Ethiopia.
Environment, Forest and Climate Change Commission (2017) State and Outlook of the Environment, Environment for
Sustainable Development. Ethiopia.
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Interactive Climate Indicator Dashboard-
Agriculture.Ethiopia.URL:https://climatedata.worldbank.org/CRMePortal/web/agriculture/crops-and-land-management?
country=ETH&period=2080-2099
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Climate Data-Projections. Ethiopia. URL:
https://climateknowledgeportal. worldbank.org/country/ethiopia/climate-sector-water
WBG, 2021: CLIMATE RISK COUNTRY PROFILE, Ethiopia
NDC (2021) Updated Nationally Determined Contributions, Ethiopia
Ethiopia National Adaptation Plan
WBG: Think Hazard tool
IFAD’s Climate Adaptation for Rural Development (CARD) tool
GIZ (2020): Climate Risk Analysis for Identifying and Weighing Adaptation Strategies in Ethiopia’s Agricultural Sector.
Gebresellassie, S. (2006). Land, Land Policy, and Smallholders Agriculture in Ethiopia: Policy Brief 001/February 2006.
Sussex: Future Agriculture Consortium
Ethiopia (2021): Ten Year Development plan of the government of Ethiopia
Hurni K, Zeleke G, Kassie M, Tegegne B, Kassawmar T, Teferi E, Moges A, Tadesse D, Ahmed M, Degu Y, Kebebew Z,
Hodel E, Amdihun A, Mekuriaw A, Debele B, Deichert G, Hurni H. (2015). Economics of Land Degradation (ELD) Ethiopia
Case Study. Soil Degradation and Sustainable Land Management in the Rainfed Agricultural Areas of Ethiopia: An
Assessment of the Economic Implications. Report for the Economics of Land Degradation Initiative. 94 pp.
Drought, Disease and Death Morgan Hendrix. Global Majority E-Journal, Vol. 3, No. 2 (December 2012), pp. 110-120 Water in
Ethiopia:
Berry L (2003). Land degradation in Ethiopia: its impact and extent in Berry L, Olson J. and Campbell D (ed): Assessing the
extent, cost and impact of land degradation at the national level: findings and lessons learned from seven pilot case studies.
Commissioned by global mechanism with support from the World Bank.
Terms of Reference (ToR) for Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP)
An ARAP has been triggered following the substantial categorization of PACT. Therefore, the ARAP will be prepared based on the
guidance of the Resettlement Action Framework (RAF) during early implementation phase. The expected contents of the ARAP
report include:
1.  Introduction
This section should explain the main purpose, scope and content of the plan, methodologies used to prepare the plan. The
plan may not be approved by any institution in the country, but relevant institutions such as the Ministry of Irrigation and Low
Lands (MILL) and ots structure at region and Woreda level, should be engaged.
1.  Project description
General description of the project and description of the project components and activities that will require land acquisition and cause
physical/economic displacement should be included in this section.
1.  Project impacts
Projects activities that will result in the permanent/temporary displacement of communities will be identified. Impact descriptions such
as nature and frequency of impact, duration etc will also be included. Furthermore, this section will explanation of all activities and
alternatives considered to avoid or minimize displacement.
1.  Legal Framework
An assessment of national and international policy and legal frameworks on displacement and resettlement. In addition, gap analysis
that might not be touched in the Resettlement Action Framework (RAF) will be done.
1.  Affected People and assets
The following information should be collected once the target communities are known and project activities that will
actually affect pastoral communities are identified; (i) People/households who will be physically displaced because of
project activities, including their land-ownership status, (ii) people/households/businesses that will be economically
displaced and their land-ownership status, (iii) standard characteristics of displaced people/households, (iv) social
networks and social support systems, and how they will be affected by the project and (v) description of affected
assets, including natural resources, public infrastructure and services
1.  Key compensation and assistance principles
Key government principles of compensation, resettlement and livelihood restoration that the client is committed to implementing
1.  Eligibility
A survey/census should be carried out following targeting of communities and detailed information on; description and results of the
census, cut-off date for eligibility and eligibility of categories of displaced persons for compensation and other resettlement assistance
should be documented.
1.  Entitlements matrix
19/22
Entitlements matrix addressing categories of losses and entitlements pertaining to the project components/phases in question
1.  Compensation and assistance
The following activities will be included under this section; (i) description of the methodology/models for valuing losses to determine
their replacement cost, (ii) description of compensation and assistance measures, (iii) description of process for executing
compensation and assistance, (iv) description of organized resettlement programme (selection of locations, design of housing,
planned infrastructure, improvements for host community). As part of the assistance, this section will also include livelihood
restoration mechanism and measures.
1.  Organizational arrangements
Procedures for the delivery of entitlements and the roles and responsibilities of all involved agencies/organizations (client,
authorities, various service providers), including coordination arrangements
1.  Time frame
Implementation time frame covering all activities from preparation of the plan through implementation, including monitoring and
evaluation
1.  Disclosure of information and consultations
Description of engagement activities undertaken as part of developing the plan, summary of the views expressed and how
these were considered in preparing the plan, description of planned stakeholder engagement during implementation. The
stakeholder engagement will be contextualized from the stakeholder engagement plan prepared for PACT.
1.  Grievance mechanism
The grievance redress mechanism of the PACT programme will be mentioned here.
1.  Monitoring and reporting
Besides the programme and SECAP/ESCMP monitoring and reporting, ARAP specific monitoring and reporting systems will be
described. Specifically, description of the internal and external monitoring and evaluation arrangements as well as monitoring
indicators to measure inputs, outputs and outcomes for resettlement/ livelihood-restoration activities and reporting on implementation
of the plan will be included.
1.  Implementation costs
Tables presenting expected costs for all resettlement activities and sources of funds.
Terms of Reference for Social Development Plan
This plan will be prepared to ensure that vulnerable peoples such as the pastoral and agro-pastoral communities are benefited from
the programme. The plan will focus target communities in the low land areas such as Oromia, SNNPR and Somali regions. The main
contents are:
1.  Executive summary of the Social Development Plan
Concisely describes the critical facts, significant findings and recommended actions
1.  Description of the project
General description of the project, the project area and components/activities that may lead to impacts on vulnerable people
1.  Description of vulnerable peoples (pastoral and agropastoral communities)
A description of affected vulnerable people and their locations, including: (i) description of the community or communities constituting
the affected peoples (e.g. names, dialects, estimated numbers, etc.); (ii) description of the resources, lands and territories to be
affected and the affected peoples’ connections/relationship with those resources, lands and territories; and (iii) an identification of
more vulnerable groups within the affected peoples (e.g. uncontacted and voluntarily isolated peoples, women and girls, the disabled
and elderly, others).
1.  Summary of substantive rights and legal framework
A description of the substantive rights of vulnerable peoples and the applicable legal framework, including:  (i) an analysis of
applicable national and international laws affirming and protecting the rights of vulnerable/pastoral and agropastoral peoples (include
general assessment of government implementation of the same); and (ii) analysis as to whether the project involves activities that are
contingent on establishing legally recognized rights to lands, resources or territories that vulnerable people have traditionally owned,
occupied or otherwise used or acquired.
1.  Summary of social and environmental assessment and mitigation measures
A summary of the findings and recommendations of the required prior social and environmental impact studies and mitigation
measures specifically those related to vulnerable peoples, their rights, lands, territories, resources, traditional livelihoods and cultural
heritage. Reference can be made to ESCMF and ESCMP.
20/22
1.  Participation, consultation and FPIC processes
 A summary of results of the culturally appropriate consultation and FPIC processes undertaken with the affected peoples which led to
the social development support for the project. This section will also include a description of the mechanisms to conduct iterative
consultation and consent processes throughout implementation of the project. Identify particular project activities and circumstances
that require consultation and FPIC.
1.  Appropriate benefits
An identification of the measures to be taken to ensure that vulnerable people receive equitable social and economic benefits that are
culturally appropriate, including a description of the consultation and consent processes that led to the determined benefit-sharing
arrangements.
1.  Capacity support
Description of measures to support social, legal and technical capabilities of vulnerable people organizations in the project area to
enable them to better represent the affected peoples more effectively.
1.  Grievance redress
A description of the Grievance Redress Mechanism for the programme with some specific issues applicable to the vulnerable people.
1.  Monitoring, reporting and evaluation
Besides the programme and SECAP/ESCMP monitoring and reporting, specific monitoring and reporting issues relevant to social
development plan will be described.
1.  Institutional arrangements
Describes institutional arrangement responsibilities and mechanisms for carrying out the measures contained in the social
development plan, including mechanisms for participation of affected vulnerable peoples. Describes role of independent, impartial
entities to audit and conduct social and environmental assessments, as required, and/or to conduct oversight of the project.
1.  Budget and financing
An appropriately costed plan, with itemized budget sufficient to satisfactorily undertake the activities.
ESCMP Matrix
96.
Please refer to appendix 2.
Footnotes
​https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?end=2020&locations=ET&start=1960&view=chart
[1] ​
[2] Ethiopia Ministry of Health (2016). National Adolescent and Youth Health Strategy 2016-2020
[3] UNDP (2020) Briefing note for countries on the 2020 Human Development Report: Ethiopia.
[4]Under US$1.9 per person per day, in 2016. World Bank (2020). Ethiopia Poverty Assessment: Harnessing Continued Growth for
Accelerated Poverty Reduction
[5] UNDP (2019) Gender Inequality Index.
[6] World Bank (2019). Ethiopia Gender Diagnostic Report, priorities for promoting equity.
[7] Kaka, L., Abate, G., Warner, J., and Kieran, C. (2015). Patterns of Agricultural Production among Male and Female Holders.
International Food Policy Research institute, IFPRI
[8] ​
[9] Idem - World Bank (2019)
[10] Federal Cooperative Agency Report, 2015
[11] Committee on the Elimination of Descrimination against Women (2019). Concluding observations on the eight periodic report of
Ethiopia. CEDAW/C/ETH/CO/8
[12] EPHI Ministry of Health (2019). Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey. Exact indicator: Percentage of the de facto female
​66% of male-headed households own an oxen compared to 29% for FHHs.
21/22
household population age 6 and over who attended secondary education. Accessible on The DHS program Stat compiler:
www.statcompiler.com
[13] Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia (2017) Integrated Surveys on Agriculture Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey (ESS) Wave 3
2015-2016.
[14] EPHI Ministry of Health (2016). Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey
[15] CARE Ethiopia. Rapid assessment on COVID-19 response of TESFA+ women living in Gunabegemidir Woreda, Amhara Region.
July 2020.
[16] UNCT Ethiopia (2020). Socio-economic impact of COVID-19 in Ethiopia.
[17] Bezu S., Holden S., Are Rural Youth in Ethiopia Abandoning Agriculture?, World Development, Vol. 64, 2014, pp 259-272, ISSN
0305-750X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.06.013.
[18] Human Rights Council (2019). Compilation on Ethiopia. Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights.
[19] UNCT Ethiopia (2020).
[20] Article 40 of the Ethiopian Constitution. Accessible here: https://www.ethiopia.gov.et/about-ethiopia/constitution
[21] Afar, Somali, Benishangul-Gumuz and Gambella
[22] Labata Fantalle, IWGIA
[23] The International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs (2020) The Indigenous World. Ethiopia (pp.83-91) Accessible here:
https://iwgia.org/images/yearbook/2020/IWGIA_The_Indigenous_World_2020.pdf
[24] MISEREOR (2019) Pastoral Development Orientation Framework Focus on Ethiopia.
[25] Human Rights Watch (2015) Ethiopia: Lethal Force Against Protesters.
[26] Idem - The International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs.
[27] Ethiopia Ministry of Peace (2021) Socio-economic profile of PAP areas in Ethiopia.
[28] The International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs (2021). The Indigenous World 2021.
[29]Ethiopia Ministry of Agriculture (2020) Productive Safety Net Programme (PNSP) Phase 5 Design Document.
[30] Central Agency Statistics (2020), Representation of Persons with Disabilities in Ethiopian Labour Force: A review of National
Surveys on Disability Statistics. Only 30 per cent of the 37 national surveys used by the CSA  had indicators for disability while the
remaining 70 per cent did not.
[31] World Health Organisation (WHO) World Health Survey. Implemented between 2002 and 2004, the WHS is the largest
multinational health and disability survey using a single set of questions and consistent methods to collect comparable health data
across countries (weighted and age standardised). Domains of affect, cognition, interpersonal relationships, mobility, pain, sleep and
energy, self-care, and vision were included in the disability score. Report accessible here:
https://www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/whseth-ethiopia.pdf
[32] UNCT Ethiopia (2020). Representation of Persons with Disabilities in Ethiopian Labour Force: A Review of National Surveys on
Disability Statistics.
[33] CSA and UN Women (2020)
[34] CSA and UN Women (2020).
[35] EPHI Ministry of Health (2016). Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey – Minimum acceptable diet among children 6-23
months in rural areas = 5.7%
[36] Ethiopian Public Health Institute and World Food Programme (2021). Fill the Nutrient Gap, Ethiopia. Addis Ababa: Ethiopia
[37] EPHI Ministry of Health (2019). Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey (Issue
July).https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/PR120/PR120.pdf
[38]Ethiopian Public Health Institute, Ministry of Finance. The Cost of Hunger in Africa Implications for Growth and Transformation of
Ethiopia. 2013.
[39]World Bank (2017). Stunting rates visualisation based on DHS 2014  data. Accessible here:
https://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/what-studies-in-spatial-development-show-in-ethiopia-part-i
[40]FAO STAT (2017)
[41]Hirvonen, K., & Wolle, A. (2019). Consumption, production, market access and affordability of nutritious foods series. Addis
Ababa: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and Alive & Thrive/FHI360.
[42]Ethiopian Public Health Institute and World Food Programme (2021). Fill the Nutrient Gap, Ethiopia. Addis Ababa: Ethiopia.
[43]~180 days/year in the Orthodox Christian communities (44% of the population)
[44] Ethiopia State and Outlook of the Environment 2017
[45] Hurni et al. 2015
[46] Ethiopia State and Outlook of the Environment 2017
[47] Gebreselassie etal (2015). Economics of Land Degradation and Improvement in Ethiopia.
[48] Berry L (2003). Land degradation in Ethiopia: its impact and extent in Berry L, Olson J. and Campbell D (ed): Assessing the
extent, cost and impact of land degradation at the national level: findings and lessons learned from seven pilot case studies.
Commissioned by global mechanism with support from the World Bank
[49] Ethiopia’s Ten Year Development plan (2021)
[50] Drought, Disease and Death Morgan Hendrix. Global Majority E-Journal, Vol. 3, No. 2 (December 2012), pp. 110-120 Water in
22/22
Ethiopia
[51] IFAD’s Climate Adaptation for Rural Development (CARD) tool
[52] Updated National Determined Contributions (NDCs), 2021
[53] Ethiopia’s updated Nationally Determined Contributions (2021)
[54]  Ethiopia’s Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
[55] Climate Risk Analysis for Identifying and Weighing Adaptation Strategies in Ethiopia’s Agricultural Sector, GIZ (2020)
[56] WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Interactive Climate Indicator Dashboard -Agriculture.  Ethiopia. URL:
https://climatedata.worldbank.org/CRMePortal/web/agriculture/crops-and-land-management?country=ETH&period=2080-2099)
[57] (Reference : WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Climate Data-Projections.
Ethiopia.URL:https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ethiopia/climate-sector-water)
[58] State and Outlook of the Environment, 2017
[59] Ethiopian Public Health Institute and World Food Programme (2021). Fill the Nutrient Gap, Ethiopia. Addis Ababa: Ethiopia
[60] HelpAge International, Irish Aid (2019) Coverage of older people in Ethiopia’s social protection system.
[61]The eight pillars are zero stunting in children under two years; universal access to adequate food year-round; social protection;
sustainable food systems; transformation of smallholder productivity and income; zero loss of food; education; and water, sanitation,
and hygiene (IFPRI 2018, GoE 2016)
[62] Climate risk is a factor pf Hazards (H), Exposure (E) and Sensitivity (S) and Adaptive Capacity (AC). The formula used to
estimate climate risk classification is: (H+E+S-AV)/3.
[63] Government of Ethiopia (2021) Vision 2030: Transforming Ethiopian Food Systems. A synthesis report: game changing solutions
to transform Ethiopia’ food system.
[64] The plan will be prepared to ensure vulnerable and marginalized people are equally enegaged and benefited from the
programme 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Classification: Substantial
1/7
Environmental and Social Safeguards
Biodiversity conservation
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
1.1 Could the project potentially involve or lead to conversion or
degradation of biodiversity, habitats (including modified habitat,
natural habitat and critical natural habitat) and/or ecosystems and
ecosystem services?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Minor impact on habitats.
Impacts are temporary
and confined to a small
area of low ecological
sensitivity or value.
Risk
Rating
Moderate
1.2 Could the project involve or potentially lead to activities
involving habitats that are legally protected, officially proposed for
protection, or recognized as protected by traditional local
communities and/or authoritative sources (e.g. National Park,
Nature Conservancy, Indigenous Community Conserved Area,
ICCA, etc.)?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
Project is close to a
protected area, and
associated facilities may
have an indirect impact
unless the project is
modified
1.3 Could the project potentially involve or lead to an increase in
the chance of human-wildlife encounters/conflict?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
Humans and wildlife co-
exist, but no chance of
human-wildlife conflict
1.4 Could the project potentially involve or lead to risks to
endangered species (e.g. reduction, encroachment on habitat)?
1.5 Could the project potentially involve or lead to impacts/risks to
migratory wildlife?
1.6 Could the project potentially involve or lead to introduction or
utilization of any invasive alien species of flora and fauna, whether
accidental or intentional?
No
No
No
1.7 Could the project involve or lead to the handling or utilization of
genetically modified organisms?
No
Low
Low
Low
Low
1.8 Could the project involve or lead to procurement through
primary suppliers of natural resource materials?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Poject requires
procurement of natural
resources through primary
suppliers, and resource
extraction is tightly
regulated
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
2.1 Could the project involve or lead to the release of pollutants to
the environment due to routine or non-routine circumstances with
the potential for adverse local, regional, and/or transboundary
impacts?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Pollutants may possibly
be released, either
routinely or by accident,
but treatment systems are
proven and verified.
Receiving environment
has absorptive capacity.
Risk
Rating
Moderate
Environmental and Social Safeguards
2.2 Could the project involve or lead to primary not environmentally
sustainable production of living natural resources? (Note: this
includes the cultivation or rearing of plants or animals, including
annual and perennial crop farming, animal husbandry (including
livestock), aquaculture, plantation forestry, etc )
2/7
Yes
Unlikely
Moderate
Moderate
Project is fully dependent
on production of living
natural resources. Project
is sited in an existing
agricultural area, with low
environmental and/or
social sensitivity.
2.3 Could the project involve or lead to engagement in areas of
forestry, including the harvesting of natural forests, plantation
development, and/or reforestation?
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
Only a small component
of the project is focused
on forestry, and this
aspect is well regulated.
2.4 Could the project involve or lead to significant consumption of
raw materials, energy, and/or water?
Yes
Likely
Moderate
Substantial
2.5 Could the project involve or lead to significant extraction,
diversion or containment of surface or ground water (e.g.
construction of dams, reservoirs, river basin developments,
groundwater extraction)?
The project will require
consumption of raw
materias, energy, and/or
water. This will be a
significant component of
the project, but impacts
can be appropriately
managed.
Yes
Almost
certain
Moderate
Substantial
The project needs a
considerable amount of
groundwater or surface
water. Ths will require a
minor extension of
existing sources. It
includes construction of
large-scale irrigation
schemes
rehabilitation/development
– below 300 ha per
scheme
2.6 Could the project involve inputs of fertilizers and other modifying
agents?
Yes
Almost
certain
Moderate
Substantial
2.7 Could the project involve or lead to procurement, supply and/or
result in the use of pesticides on crops, livestock, aquaculture or
forestry?
2.8 Could the project be located in an area which is being, or has
been, polluted by an external source (e.g. a mine, smelter,
industry)?
No
The project requires use
of fertilizers, but options
are available to replace
polluting fertilizers with
alternatives.
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
The project only requires
minimal amounts of
pesticide.
Low
2.9 Could the project involve livestock – extensive and intensive
systems and animal products (dairy, skins, meat, etc.)?
3/7
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
Environmental and Social Safeguards
The project involves
livestock or fisheries, but
not in extensive or
intensive systems.
Cultural Heritage
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
3.1 Could the project be located in areas that are considered to
have archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical,
cultural, artistic, and religious values or contains features
considered as critical cultural heritage?
No
Risk
Rating
Low
3.2 Could the project directly or indirectly affect indigenous peoples’
rights, lands, natural resources, territories, livelihoods, knowledge,
social fabric, traditions, governance systems, and culture or
heritage (tangible and intangible)?
3.3 Could the project involve or lead to significant excavations,
demolitions, movement of earth, flooding or other environmental
changes?
3.4 Could the project involve or lead to adverse impacts to sites,
structures, or objects with historical, cultural, artistic, traditional or
religious values or intangible forms of culture (e.g. knowledge,
innovations, practices)? (Note: projects intended to protect and
conserve Cultural Heritage may also have inadvertent adverse
impacts)
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
Minor impact to
indigenous population. No
damage to/or loss of
access to indigenous
land, assets, resources,
and/or cultural heritage.
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate impact on land.
Some short-term earth
moving and environmental
changes required.
Rehabilitation is
straightfoward.
Yes
Unlikely
Moderate
Moderate
The project is thought to
be close to an area that is
considered to have
archaeological
(prehistoric),
paleontological, historical,
cultural, artistic, and
religious values or
contains features
considered as critical
cultural heritage. The site
has not been surveyed,
and so the presence of
cultural heritage is not
well known.
3.5 Could the project involve or lead to alterations to landscapes
and natural features with cultural significance?
3.6 Could the project involve or lead to utilization of tangible and/or
intangible forms (e.g. practices, traditional knowledge) of Cultural
Heritage for commercial or other purposes?
No
No
indigenous peoples
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
4.1 Could the project be sited in areas where indigenous peoples
are present (including the project area of influence)?
4.2 Could the project result in activities located on lands and
territories claimed by indigenous peoples?
4.3 Could the project result in impacts on the rights of indigenous
peoples or to the lands, territories and resources claimed by them?
No
No
No
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
4.4 Could the project result in the utilization and/or commercial
development of natural resources on lands and territories claimed
by indigenous peoples?
4/7
4.5 Could the project lead to impacts on the Cultural Heritage of
indigenous peoples, including through the commercialization or use
of their traditional knowledge and practices?
No
No
Labour and Working Conditions
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
5.1 Could the project operate in sectors or value chains that are
characterized by working conditions that do not meet national
labour laws or international commitments? (Note: this may include
discriminatory practices, high gender inequality and the lack of
equal opportunities, denial of freedom of association and collective
bargaining, labour migrants)
Yes
Likely
Moderate
Substantial
The project operates in
sectors or value chains
that have, in the past, not
met national labour laws,
or international
commitments, but is now
adequately nationally
regulated. However,
international value chains
are not regularly audited
for environmental or
social performance.
5.2 Could the project use or operate in a value chain where there
have been reports of forced labour? (Note: Risks of forced labour
may be increased for projects located in remote places or where
the status of migrant workers is uncertain)
5.3 Could the project involve children (a) below the nationally-
defined minimum employment age (usually 15 years old) or (b)
above the nationally-defined minimum employment age but below
the age of 18 in supported activities or in value chains?
5.4 Could the project: (a) operate in a sector, area or value chain
where producers and other agricultural workers are typically
exposed to significant occupational and safety risks, and/or (b)
promote or use technologies or practices that pose occupational
safety and health (OSH) risks for farmers, other rural workers or
rural populations in general? (Note: OSH risks in agriculture might
include: dangerous machinery and tools; hazardous chemicals;
toxic or allergenic agents; carcinogenic substances or agents;
parasitic diseases; transmissible animal diseases; confined spaces;
ergonomic hazards; extreme temperatures; and contact with
dangerous and poisonous animals, reptiles and insects.
Psychosocial hazards might include violence and harassment.)
Yes
Unlikely
Moderate
Moderate
The project does not
operate in sectors or
value chains where forced
labour was evident in the
past. The status of forced
labour regulation is
currently unclear.
Yes
Likely
Moderate
Substantial
The project does not
operate in sectors or
value chains where child
labour was evident in the
past. The status of forced
labour regulation is
currently unclear.
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project operates in a
sector, area, or value
chain where workers are
occasionally exposed to
significant OSH risks, and
where regulation is known
to be weak or non-
existent.
Community Health, Safety and Security
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Risk
Rating
Environmental and Social Safeguards
6.1 Could the project be at risk from water-borne or other vector-
borne diseases (e.g. temporary breeding habitats), and/or
communicable and non-communicable diseases?
5/7
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project is situated in
an area where there is
past evidence of negative
impacts from water-borne
or other vector-borne
diseases, or
communicable/non-
communicable diseases,
but where regulation or
containment of these
impacts has been shown
to be effective.
6.2 Could the project lead to unintended negative impacts on
nutrition?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
6.3 Is there a possibility of harm or losses due to failure of structural
elements of the project (e.g. collapse of buildings or infrastructure)?
6.4 Could the project involve or lead to the construction or
rehabilitation of dams?
6.5 Could the project involve or lead to transport, storage, and use
and/or disposal of hazardous or dangerous materials (e.g.
explosives, fuel and other chemicals during construction and
operation)?
6.6 Could the project lead to adverse impacts on ecosystems and
ecosystem services relevant to communities’ health (e.g. food,
surface water purification, natural buffers from flooding)?
Moderate impact on
customary or traditional
diet, resulting in
occasional individual
health problems.
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project has significant
reliance on buildings or
infrastructure. Risk of
failure is unlikely to lead
to loss of life or significant
environmental damage.
The structural integrity of
the required infrastructure
has been independently
verified.
No
No
Low
Low
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate adverse
impacts to ecosystems
and their services that
could negatively affect the
health of communities in
the direct vicinity of the
project are possible, but
similar projects have
shown that Impacts can
be mitigated or offset
through schemes such as
Payment for Ecosystem
Services.
Environmental and Social Safeguards
6.7 Could the project lead to the potential for gender-based
violence, including sexual harassment, exploitation and abuse, as a
result of labour influx, land redistribution, or other actions that alter
community dynamics?
6/7
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate changes to
community dynamics may
result in increased
potential for gender-
based violence or sexual
exploitation. Gender-
based violence
interventions are
integrated into project
design.
6.8 Could the project lead to increases in traffic or alteration in
traffic flow?
6.9 Could the project lead to an influx of project workers?
6.10 Could the project involve or lead to the engagement of security
personnel to protect facilities and property or to support project
activities?
No
No
No
Physical and economic resettlement
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
7.1 Could the project result in temporary or permanent and full or
partial physical displacement (including people without legally
recognizable claims to land)?
Yes
Possible
Minor
>5 households/
businesses displaced.
Low
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Moderate
7.2 Could the project result in economic displacement (e.g. loss of
assets or access to resources due to land acquisition or access
restrictions – even in the absence of physical relocation)?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
Minor possible negative
impact on either
community assets or
individual farmer assets.
7.3 Could the project present a risk of forced evictions?
No
Low
7.4 Could the project result in impacts on or changes to land tenure
arrangements and/or community-based property rights/customary
rights to land, territories and/or resources?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project will result in
moderate changes to land
tenure arrangements
and/or community-based
property rights/customary
rights. Legal recourse and
other forms of
arbitration/conflct
resolution are available.
Financial intermediaries and direct investments
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
8.1 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not
have an environmental and social policies and an associated
environmental and social management system (ESMS) in place
(transparent, publicly available)?
8.2 Could the investment be granted to an institution with
insufficient capacities (i.e. unqualified personnel e.g. ES Officer) to
implement the ESMS?
8.3 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not
have an Exclusion List?
8.4 According to the institution's portfolio classification: Could the
institution have potential high-risk projects in their portfolio?
No
No
No
No
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
8.5 Is there evidence that the institution does not comply with the
local legal framework?
7/7
8.6 Does the institution provide a stable communication channel
with stakeholders and local communities (e.g. a Grievance Redress
Mechanism)?
8.7 Does the organization provide auxiliary or capacity building
support services.
No
No
No
Low
Low
Low
Climate Risk Classification: Substantial
Step 1: Hazard identification
1/2
What are the expected hazards in the project intervention area?
No, Yes, TBD
River flood
Costal Flood
Urban Flood
Landslide
Cyclone
Water Scarcity (agricultural droughts and/or dry spells)
Extreme Heat
Wildfires
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Future climate scenarios foreseen (period 2040-2059) - Change in frequency and intensity
No, Yes, TBD
Change in temperature (increase or decrease)
Change in rainfall (increase or decrease)
Climate variability (larger or smaller)
Intensity and frequency of extreme events (larger or smaller)
Is the project expected to have an impact on climate?
Is the project expected to be a significant emitter of greenhouse gases?
Step 2: Exposure Assessment
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No, Yes, TBD
No
Is the project located in exposed areas to weather-related natural hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Low-lying areas (valleys, coastal zones, and small islands)
Very warm areas (subtropical)
Tropical areas (rainforests)
Arid and semi-arid areas (deserts)
Mountains zones and permafrost areas (tundra)
River banks
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Does the project target agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods exposed to weather-related
hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Is crop production frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or pests
and diseases?
Is livestock productivity frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or
diseases?
Are fisheries frequently affected by ocean acidification, water salinity and changes in sea surface temperature due
to ocean-atmospheric oscillations or climate change?
Is forest productivity frequently affected by wildfires, diseases, rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, or changes in
temperature?
Is the biodiversity in the project area likely to be affected by changes in climate variables?
Is any stage of the agricultural value chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) exposed to climate
related hazards?
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Is any rural infrastructure likely to be affected by flooding, landslides, changes in temperatures, and extreme winds. Yes
Step 3: Sensitivity Assessment
What are key sensitivities for the populations in the project’s areas of intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is conflict exacerbating the population's sensitivity to weather related hazards?
Is population displacement being exacerbated by climate change impacts?
No
Yes
Are diseases (e.g. COVID-19, malaria, cholera) increasing the population´s vulnerability and affecting their capacity
to address potential weather-related hazards?
2/2
Is the income of the target population predominately coming from agriculture?
Are social inequalities (e.g. based on gender, youth, indigenous persons and other marginalized groups) being
exacerbated by climate change?
Is the Human Development Index (HDI) equal to or below 0.6?
Is the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) equal to or above 0.1?
Step 4: Adaptive capacity and climate resilience
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
What are key adaptive capacities in the areas of project intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is the country well ranked in the Disaster risk reduction progress score?
Are climate and weather information services (real-time weather data, seasonal forecasts etc.) effectively being
delivered (through radio, TV, SMS, extension services etc.) to farmers, rural dwellers, and end users?
Does the project country have an early action plan (preparedness and emergency response) to mitigate the
impacts of weather-related hazards once the shock occurs?
Does the government or other institutions support the target population/communities with the necessary social and
economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events?
Is the target community carrying out (using their own means) agricultural adaptation?
Does the target population have the economic means or support to adjust or adapt their activities in response to
weather related shocks?
Do policies/mechanisms exist that make financial credit, loans, and agricultural insurance available?
Are rural infrastructures effectively delivering services to farmers and rural dwellers?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
The Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) 
Programme 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
i 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PAGES 
CURRENCY EQUIVQLENTS ........................................................................................... 3 
Weights and Measures ................................................................................................ 3 
Map of the PACT Programme Area ................................................................................ 7 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................ 8 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ 15 
I. 
1.1.  COUNTRY BACKGROUND AND THE PROJECT AREA ..................................................................... 15 
AGRICULTURE, BASIC PROBLEMS AND OPPORTUNITIES ............................................................ 15 
1.2. 
1.3.  KEY STAKEHOLDERS AND INVOLVEMENT OF SMALLHOLDERS ..................................................... 16 
FOCUS OF THE PROJECT .......................................................................................................... 16 
1.4. 
II.  summary of Project dEscription ........................................................................... 17 
III.  Summary of Implementation To-date ................................................................... 21 
IV.  The Work plan 2023........................................................................................... 21 
V.  Budget ESTMATES AND FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS ............................................ 27 
VI.  Implementation ARRANGEMENT .......................................................................... 35 
VII.  EXPECTED BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES ........................................................... 37 
VIII. CONSTRAINTS, RISKS AND MITIGANTS ............................................................... 37 
2 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
CURRENCY EQUIVQLENTS 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
Ethiopian Birr (ETB) 
ETB 51.65 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
1 acre 
Currency Unit 
USD 1.0 
Weights and Measures 
1 kilogram 
1 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre 
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
1 Feddan 
FISCAL YEAR 
1 January-31 December 
3 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Abbreviations and ACRONYMS 
ACC 
AfDB 
ADLI 
AGRA 
ASAP+ 
AEZ 
ATI 
AWPB 
B2B 
BMGF 
BOA 
BOQ 
BRAM 
CC 
WDIP 
CLA 
COSOP 
COVID-19 
CRGE 
ESS 
CSA 
DA 
DP 
EIAR 
EFA 
EFS 
EIB 
EPA 
ENRM 
ESIA 
ESMF 
ESMP 
FAO 
FBS 
FCA 
FEAPD 
FFS 
FFV 
FNCO 
FPCMU 
FTC 
FRG 
GALS 
GAPs 
GBV 
GCF 
GDP 
GHG 
GII 
GIS 
GMF 
GoE 
GTM 
GTP 
Agricultural Commercialization Clusters 
African Development Bank 
Agricultural Development-Led Industrialisation 
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa 
Adaptation for the Smallholder Agriculture Program Plus 
Agro-Ecological Zone 
Agricultural Transformation Institute 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Business to Business 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
Bureau of Agriculture 
Bill of Quantity 
Borrowed Resources Access Mechanism 
Climate Change 
Community Development Plan 
Collaborative Learning and Adaptation 
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
Corona Virus Disease-2019 
Climate Resilient Green Economy 
Ethiopia Statistics Services 
Climate-Smart Agriculture 
Development Agent 
Development Partner 
Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Ethiopia Food System 
European Investment Bank 
Environment Protection Authority 
Environment and Natural Resources Mapping 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 
Farmer Business School 
Federal Cooperative Agency 
Federation of Ethiopian Associations of Persons with Disabilities 
Farmer Field School 
Fresh Food Voucher 
Food and Nutrition Coordination Office 
Federal Programme Coordination and Management Unit 
Farmer Training Centre 
Farmer Research Group 
Gender Action Learning Systems 
Good Agricultural Practices 
Gender Based Violence 
Green Climate Fund 
Gross Domestic Product 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Gender Inequality Index 
Geographic Information System 
Gender Model Family 
Government of Ethiopia 
Gender Transformative Mechanism 
Growth and Transformation Plan 
4 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Hectares 
Household 
Household Methodologies 
Integrated Agro-Industrial Park 
International Competitive Bidding 
Inclusive Green Finance 
International Financing Corporation 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
IFAD Country Office 
International Centre for Research in Agroforestry 
Information Communication and Technology 
Integrated Agro Industrial Parks 
Integrated Natural Resources Management 
Integrated Pest Management 
Interactive Voice Response 
Irrigation Water Users’ Association 
Knowledge Management 
Land Degradation Surveillance Framework 
Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
Mid-Term Review 
National Agricultural Investment Plan 
Ethiopia’s National Adaptation Plan 
Nature-based Solutions 
National Competitive Bidding 
Non-Government Organisation 
National Management Information System 
No-Objection Tracking Utility System 
National Programme Steering Committee 
Orange-Flesh Sweet Potatoes 
Ha 
HH 
HHM 
IAIP 
ICB 
IGREENFIN 
IFC 
IFAD 
ICO 
ICRAF 
ICT 
IGIP 
INRM 
IPM 
IVR 
IWUA 
KM 
LDSF 
LLRP 
MoA 
M&E 
MoFED 
MRE 
MTR 
NAIP 
NAP-ETH 
NbS 
NCB 
NGO 
NMIS 
NOTUS 
NPSC 
OFSP 
THE 
Programme  Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme 
PASIDP 
PASDEP 
PDO 
PDR 
PDT 
PHL 
PIM 
RPCMU 
RPSC 
RPSF 
RUFIP 
SBCC 
SBD 
SECAP 
SDGs 
SNNPR 
SO 
SoE 
SUN 
TVET 
UNFSS 
USD 
USSD 
WASH 
Participatory Small-Scale Irrigation Development Programme 
Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty 
Programme Development Objective 
Programme Design Report 
Project Delivery Team 
Post-Harvest Loss 
Programme Implementation Manual 
Regional Programme Coordination and Management Unit 
Regional Project Steering Committee 
Rural Poor Stimulus Fund 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme 
Social Behaviour Change Communication 
Standard Bidding Document 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region 
Strategic Objective 
Statement of Expenditure 
Scale-Up Nutrition 
Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
United Nations Forum for Sustainability Standards 
United States Dollar 
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data 
Water Sanitation and Hygiene 
5 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
WB 
WFP 
WUA 
World Bank 
World Food Programme 
Water Users’ Association 
6 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Map of the PACT Programme Area 
7 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Plan Objective – The objective of this inaugural Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) is, 
essentially, to set the stage for the effective implementation of the Participatory Agriculture 
and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme. This plan primarily focuses on establishing 
processes and procedures that will guide the effective and successful implementation of the 
Programme following established guidelines. 
Strategic Approach  and  Focus  –  As  far  as  a  strategic  approach is  concerned, the  PACT 
Programme will build on PASIDP II experience. PACT implementation will also make use  of 
lessons of experience generated by several projects funded by other donors such as PASIDP 
II; RUFIP III, Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project (LLRP), etc. 
This  being the first year  of PACT implementation, the approach to be employed during the 
course of 2023 will largely focus on establishing firm, but simple, processes and procedures 
to serve as a solid basis for Programme implementation in the subsequent  years. Essentially, 
the approach will include the following: 
a)  Ensuring the PCU core staff are mobilised and adequately facilitated (in terms of skills and 
equipment) to work for the effective implementation of the Programme 
b)  Liaising  with  ongoing  Projects  (funded  by  either  IFAD,  GoE  or  other  GoE  development 
partners) to exploit any existent synergies as a way of avoiding duplication and, therefore, 
ensuring effective resource use; 
c)  Establishing  effective  collaboration  between  and  among  the  different  implementing 
institutions  to  ensure  that  the  different  activities  are  appropriately  sequenced.  This 
collaboration will also serve as a learning mechanism whereby some institutions  will learn 
from  others so  as  to  pass  on  relevant  experience  and  ensuring that  past  mistakes  are 
avoided; 
d)  Developing and effectively communicate to all stakeholders reasonable schedule to ensure 
that  they  all  know  what  to  do,  when  to  do  it,  and  respecting  all  the  implicit  approval 
processes. 
Summary  Description  of  the  2023  Plan  –  The  plan  contained  herein  is  summarised 
hereunder by components and subcomponents. 
Component  1:  Community-Led  Climate-Smart  Productive  Landscapes  –  The 
Component will support: a) community-led equitable access and sustainable use of natural 
resources;  b)  market-led  and  climate  adapted  smallholder  production  and  productivity 
enhancement of target crop commodities; c)  development of inclusive and equitable water 
infrastructure;  and  d)  improved  dietary  diversity.  The  outcome  of  this  component  will  be 
sustainable access and utilisation of natural resources and increased agricultural productivity. 
The component will be implemented under four subcomponents. 
Subcomponent  1.1:  Community-led  Climate  Resilient  Development  and  Natural 
Resource  Management  –  Interventions  under  this  subcomponent  will  seek  to  empower 
communities  to  identify  pastoral  and  agricultural-sector-related  opportunities,  improve 
productivity and enhance climate resilience. The activities of the subcomponent include: a) 
Community  sensitization,  b)  Assessment  and  prioritization  of  landscapes  based  on  their 
degradation  status  and  climate  vulnerability  c)  Community  led  preparation  of  landscape 
development and investment plans (LDIPs)  d) implementation of NRM including soil health 
improvement  measures.;  e)  Soil  testing  facility  establishment;  f)  Construction  of  biogas 
facilities at household level; g) installation of cookstoves to reduce deforestation and access 
8 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
carbon markets. The LDIPs will identify climate resilient investments to achieve the vision and 
aspirations  of  the  community.  The  following  activities  are  planned  for  PACT’s  first  year to 
gradually contribute to the subcomponent’s objective: 
•  Assessments and prioritizations of landscapes 
o  Regional assessments of landscape areas and associated communities through 
zones – 5 assessments; 
o  Woreda level prioritization and selection of watersheds 
▪  Awareness raising and mobilisation of authorities and communities 
(including mainstreaming themes) – 150 watersheds; 
▪  Selection and training of community facilitators at woreda level – 5 
workshops; 
▪  Creation of Watershed Management Committees – 150 committees; 
▪  Sensitization in various thematic areas (Gender equality, youth Equity, 
Climate Change, Nutrition) using community conversations – 150 
watersheds; 
▪  Agriculture Risk Management (ARM) support with Risk Disaggregation for 
watersheds – 150 watersheds; 
▪  Costs for the carers of trainers and participants with disabilities – 1,000 
carers; 
▪  Operationalise Household Methodologies at household level1; 
•  Community sensitisation 
o  Training of Trainers (ToTs) (experts at the Federal and Regions) – 1 session; 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review the community development process & 
provide expert guidance – 20 person days; 
o  Training at Woreda level on the implementation of watersheds – 1 session; 
• 
Implementation of natural resource management and soil health improvement measures 
o  Awareness creation and training of WUA and watershed committees and kebele 
admin – 1 session per watershed for 150 watersheds; 
Implementation of soil and water management activities2  - 10,000 ha. 
o 
Subcomponent  1.2:  Climate  Resilient  Infrastructure  Development  –  This  sub- 
component will invest in climate-smart water and market-related infrastructure as identified 
and  prioritised  in  the  LDIPs.  All  infrastructure  will  be  prioritised  and  implemented  after 
feasibility assessments. Activities planned for the first year include: 
•  Development of improved farmer led small-scale irrigation systems 
o 
Identification of Potential Schemes and Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment – 3,600 
Ha 
•  Development of Multiple-Use Water Systems (MUS) 
o 
Identification of Potential MUS Sites and Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment – 50 
sites; 
o  Feasibility Studies – 45 sites; 
o  MUS Detailed Design and Works Supervision – 40 sites; 
o  Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies – 45 studies; 
•  Rehabilitation of existing water Infrastructure 
o  Site identification and Feasibility Studies – 200 ha; 
1This will be integrated with gender model families’ approach and staggered implementation to cater for the scale 
up in phase 2. 
2Land rehabilitation and Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) activities will be done in the upper streams, water user 
associations and downstream areas. 
9 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
o  Schemes Detailed Design and Rehabilitation Works Supervision – 200 ha; 
o  Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies – 200 ha. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Market-Oriented, Nutrition-sensitive and Climate-Resilient Food 
Production  and  Productivity  –  This  subcomponent  will  invest  in  activities  for  improving 
climate smart, and nutrition sensitive agriculture production and productivity as identified and 
prioritised in the LDIPs and informed by market opportunities identified in component 2. The 
activities are informed by the national horticulture development and marketing strategy30, 
to  address  the  sector  constraints  of  limited  access  to  improved  inputs due  to  inadequate 
extension capacity to introduce and disseminate  horticulture technologies. Activities planned 
for the first year include: 
•  Support to digital agriculture extension; 
o  Production of Video materials on ARM and other extension messaging for farmer 
training under FTCs – 1 set of video materials; 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review the digital modules content and training 
materials & provide expert guidance during trainings – 30 persons days; 
o  Promotion and Awareness for the Digital Platform through Cooperatives/FTCs and 
Agribusiness; 
•  Capacity building of extension staff 
o  Training on the SHEP approach through JICA to woreda/ kebele level staff – 300 
persons; 
o  Capacity building of DAs and Community agents on resilient practices by 
research/technical departments3  - 500 persons; 
o  Capacity building of DAs/Community agents on resilient practices by livestock forage 
department – 100 persons; 
o  Capacity building of DAs and Farmer Promoters (Community based agents/ Model 
Farmers) on digital extension and market platform/NSA4 – 200 persons; 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review the climate resilient practices training materials 
& provide expert guidance during trainings – 20 person days 
•  Support to farmers 
o  Support the FBS/FFS with inputs for demonstration of enterprises on the farm5 – 
12,000 groups; 
o  Demonstration support for rain fed agriculture at FTC6  - 90 FTCs 
•  Nutrition SBCC design TA and roll-out implementation support (mass media, community 
influencer training, M&E)7. 
1.  Component  2:  Agribusiness  Development  –  The  LDIPs  will  identify  agriculture 
commercialisation  opportunities  in  the  area,  key  commodities  with  potential  for  food  and 
nutrition security and offtake to lucrative markets and the main actors. The outcome of this 
component will be strengthened capacities of farmer and pastoral organizations to improve 
access to finance and remunerative markets for small-scale women, men and  young farmers 
and  pastoralists,  including  PWDs  in  the  Programme  areas.  The  component  comprises  the 
following subcomponents. 
2.  Subcomponent 2.1: Market Access Linkage Support – This subcomponent will seek 
to  develop  value  chain  business  linkages  in  the  Programme  areas  where  women  and  men 
3Each trainer is trained twice a year, on soil fertility and crop production and NSA/GALS 
4Two training per year for four years 
5Organized in groups of 25-30, 2 rounds of training per year 
6Reduced support for demos over time- 1 FTC per woreda 
7Barrier analysis in 4 regions, SBCC strategy design, content development by a firm, mass media airtime and other 
influencers' training 
10 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
farmers  and  pastoralists  will  largely  respond  to  market  opportunities  through  the  following 
interventions: 
• 
Inclusive digital value chain assessment and partner business companies’ identification; 
o  Digital data collection of base market information to feed into market platform8 - 1 
survey/study; 
o  Digital Mapping9  - 8 studies (one study per value chain); 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review content & expert guidance during promotion and 
awareness raising – 20 person days; 
•  Capacity building of experts 
o  Business facilitation skill training to ATI, BoA, Cooperative Promotion Office Staff10 - 
120 staff; 
•  Develop Capacity of Cooperatives and Unions to Graduate to Professional Business 
Organizations11
o  Cooperative Graduation Training Package Trainers ToT Session12  - 6 sessions. 
3.  Subcomponent  2.2:  Tailored  Business  and  Finance  Linkage  to  Young  men  and 
women  Agripreneurs  –  The  subcomponent  will  support  young  entrepreneurs  to  access 
business development support packages, including: a) tailored training for different types of 
agri-businesses  to  enhance  entrepreneurial  attitude  and  business  management  skills;  b) 
business  plan  development  support;  c)  seed  capital;  d)  skill-based  training  depending  on 
demand; e) mentorship; and f) engagement in policy dialogue. The following activities  are 
planned for the first AWPB: 
•  Online agripreneurship training 
o  Master trainer13  – 66 person days; 
o  Technical support14  - 1 package of support; 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review content 
•  ToT training15
o  Conduct ToT for 10 trainers per region16  – 75 persons; 
o  Participation of trainers17  - 300 person days; 
o  Localization of agripreneurship toolkit18  - 15 person days; 
o  Costs for the carers of trainers with disabilities. 
4.  Component  3:  Institutional  and  Policy  Strengthening  and  Implementation 
Support  Services  –  This  will  be  a  cross-cutting  component  servicing  the  technical 
components and facilitating  pathways for the effective and inclusive functioning of the target 
value chains, from production to consumption. It comprises two subcomponents. 
5.  Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support – Interventions 
under this subcomponent will seek to avail a conducive environment for effective Programme 
activity implementation and to strengthen institutions for improved service delivery. 
8Engagement of youth to support data collection is foreseen 
98 selected Value Chain in the participating Regions 
1090 from Woreda and 30 from region and federal 
11Cooperatives and Unions Business Leadership (Graduation) Program 
12Each session 20-25 participants with 6 ToT Sessions 
133 trainers, 22 days 
14provided by FAO 
1510 per region - 5 groups of 2 trainers 
163 Trainers, 25 days for training preparation and training facilitation 
1730 trainees, 10 training days 
183 trainers, 15 days for localization 
11 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
6.  There are no specific activities planned for the first AWPB. 
7.  Subcomponent  3.2:  Programme  Coordination  and  Implementation  Support 
Services – This subcomponent’s objective will be to manage the Programme in an efficient 
and  effective  manner  by  providing  overall  coordination, 
including  planning  and 
implementation,  financial  management  and  control,  procurement  support,  monitoring  and 
evaluation, knowledge management, and progress  reporting. It will also ensure liaison and 
linkage with all other relevant projects/Programmes being implemented in the country that 
seek to address  similar or  related constraints; this  would be aimed at taking advantage of 
existent synergies and avoiding duplications. The following activities are planned: 
•  Vehicles 
o  Double Cabin Vehicles19  - 23 vehicles; 
o  Motorcycles – 150 cycles; 
•  Office Equipment for PCU 
o  Desktop Computers – 140 computers’ 
o  Printer/Photocopier – 9 printers/photocopiers; 
o  Accounting software – 1 set; 
o  Office furniture20  - 140 sets; 
•  Audit and key studies 
o  External audit – 1 audit; 
o 
Internal audit – 2 audits 
o  Baseline study21  – 1 study; 
o  Specific Thematic Surveys – 3 surveys; 
o  Procurement of electronic tablets to be used for data collection22  - 90 tablets; 
o  Annual web-hosting for the MIS cloud servers23  – 1 event; 
o  Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan24  – 1 plan; 
o  Development of a Knowledge Management, Learning and Communication Strategy – 
1 strategy; 
o  Roll out and implementation of the Knowledge Management Action Plan25  - 1 plan; 
o  Training on M & E Related areas26
o  Development of Digital Knowledge Repository for Extension, ARM, Agric Practices and 
linkage to ADAC27; 
o  Mapping and Monitoring including implementation of the Resilience Design and 
Monitoring Tool28
o  SECAP (ESCMF) implementation29
•  Workshops 
o  Startup workshop – 1 workshop; 
o  Annual planning & review workshop – 1 workshop; 
1915 at woreda level (cluster), 3 at federal level, 5 at regional level 
201 set for each Officer. Set consists of a desk, chair, lamp and a file cabinet. Assumes a total of 140 staff members 
at the Federal and Regional levels 
21The baseline survey will be carried out using the COI survey methodology and will also serve as the COI survey 
baseline 
22Each of the Woredas PIUs will have a tablet for data collection and linked to the MIS 
23The MIS will use cloud-based servers for secure data storage and management. These will require annual 
subscription support for the entire duration of the project implementation period 
24A Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will be developed at the beginning of implementation of PACT to provide further 
guidance for M & E within the project 
25The implementation of the KMC strategy will be through the KMC action plan which will be implemented and 
updated on annual basis; 
26Staff including M & E unit staff will be trained on M & E related areas; 
27It includes support for knowledge updates and adding new knowledge products 
28This is for the establishment of geospatial information system for baseline and monitoring of progress and 
achievements including assessing resilience at HH and community levels 
29It includes compliance monitoring 
12 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
•  Salaries and allowances 
o  Program coordination -Federal level 
o  Programme Coordinator – 12 months; 
o  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist – 24 months; 
o  Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist – 12 months 
o  Agronomist – 12 months; 
o  Agribusiness Specialist – 12 months; 
o  MIS/GIS specialist – 12 months; 
o  Irrigation Engineers – 24 months; 
o  Social safeguard specialist – 12 months; 
o  Climate change and watershed management specialist - – 12 months; 
o  Environmental safeguard specialist – 12 months; 
o  Capacity building and Gender specialist – 12 months; 
o  Nutrition Officer – 12 months; 
o  Senior procurement specialist – 12 months; 
o  Finance manager – 12 months; 
o  Senior finance specialist – 12 months; 
o  Accountant – 12 months; 
o  Driver 48 months; 
o  Secretary – 48 months; 
o  Office assistant – 12 months; 
o  Programme coordination - Regional level 
o  Programme Coordinator – 72 months; 
o  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist30  - 60 months; 
o  Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist31  - 60 months; 
o  Agronomist – 72 months; 
o  Agribusiness Specialist32  - 48 months; 
o  MIS/GIS specialist – 72 months; 
o  Irrigation Engineers – 72 months; 
o  Social and Environmental safeguard specialist – 72 months; 
o  Climate change and watershed management specialist – 72 months; 
o  Capacity building and gender specialist – 72 months; 
o  Assistant Procurement – 72 months; 
o  Financial management specialist – 72 months; 
o  Driver – 288 months 
o  Secretary cashier – 72 months; 
o  Office assistant – 72 months; 
o  Program coordination - Woreda level33
o  Cluster Coordinator – 180 months; 
o  Cluster Accountant – 180 months. 
•  Operating Expenses 
o  General operating expenses for PCU – 9 PCUs; 
o  Vehicle O&M – 23 vehicles; 
o  Motorcycles O&M – 150 motorcycles; 
o  Field per diem for PCU staff34  - 70 staff members; 
o  Field supervision and monitoring of Programme interventions. 
30One M & E Specialist will be stationed at each Regional PCMU 
31One KMC Specialist will needed for each of the 5 regions to be covered by the project 
324  regional  agribusiness  experts  (Oromia,  Amhara,  SNNPR,  Somali;  Sidama  not  considered,  the  thinking  with  a 
slim team was proposed as an option for Sidam that may be supported by the other agribusiness team). 
33Assumes a Cluster approach, a total of 15 Clusters with an average of about 6 Woredas per Cluster. 
34Assumes an average of US$500 per staff (technical staff and drivers) per year 
13 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Summary Budget and Financing – Presented in this section are summary tables giving an 
overall  picture  of  financial  resources  required  for  the  PACT  Programme  2023  AWPB.  The 
budget information is presented by component, financier and categories of expenditure. The 
total budget for PACT’s 2023 AWPB is about USD 12.6 million. A total of about USD 6.7 million 
(or  53.4%  of  the  budget)  is  allocated  to  Component  1:  Community-Led  Climate-  Smart 
Productive  Landscapes;  about  USD  300,000  (or  2.8%  of  the  budget)  is  allocated  to 
Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access; and about USD 5.5 million (or 43.8% 
of  the  budget)  is  allocated  to  Component  3:  Institutional  and  Policy  Strengthening  and 
Implementation Support Services. About 49.4% of the budget will be financed by the IFAD 
grant; 6.9% will be from the Government; 15.3% from the ASAP+; 12.2% from the GTM; 
15.5% from the beneficiaries, the remainder will be financed by the private sector and other 
financiers to be identified (0.2%). The following tables present the PACT Programme AWPB 
by component, category and financier. 
First  Year  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  by  Financier  and  by  Component  (US$ 
million) 
Ethiopia 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Components by Financiers 
(US$ Million) 
First Year Annual  Work Plan and Budget by Financier  and by Category (US$ 
million) 
Ethiopia 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Expenditure  Accounts  by  Financiers 
(US$ Million) 
14 
LocalThe GovernmentIFADASAP+_1 grantASAP+_2 grantGTMECIGREENFINTBCBeneficiariesPrivate sectorTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 2.78.64.514.1--3.511.13.711.7--13.542.5--3.812.0--31.717.70.930.70.22. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  19.617.652.847.3------16.915.121.018.8--0.0-1.41.2111.662.117.277.716.73. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 0.42.85.033.87.046.7--1.38.7--0.53.6--0.64.3--14.98.31.213.20.5Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 22.714.462.339.47.04.43.52.25.03.216.910.735.022.1--4.52.81.40.9158.288.119.3121.617.3B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support 0.11.16.978.6--------------1.820.38.74.90.38.30.12. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs -0.0-0.618.0----------2.064.6--0.517.43.11.70.13.0-Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 0.10.87.462.7----------2.017.0--2.319.511.86.60.411.30.1C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support --0.3100.0----------------0.30.20.00.3-2. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services 1.111.58.288.5----------------9.25.11.26.91.1Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1.111.18.588.9----------------9.65.31.37.21.1Total PROJECT COSTS 23.913.378.243.57.03.93.52.05.02.816.99.435.019.52.01.14.52.53.72.0179.6100.021.0140.118.5LocalThe GovernmentIFADASAP+_1 grantASAP+_2 grantGTMECIGREENFINTBCBeneficiariesPrivate sectorTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment Costs A. Goods 1. Equipment & materials 0.05.30.293.2--------0.01.6------0.30.10.20.10.12. Vehicles 0.14.01.996.0----------------1.91.11.50.10.33. Goods, services & inputs 0.530.40.955.1--0.15.70.18.4------0.00.4--1.60.90.80.30.5Subtotal Goods 0.615.03.078.9--0.12.40.13.5--0.00.1--0.00.1--3.82.12.40.50.9B. Works 19.523.845.955.8------15.418.7----0.0-1.41.782.145.716.449.316.4C. Training and Workshops 1.95.810.833.86.921.53.19.64.514.0----1.44.33.310.20.30.932.117.91.630.5-D. Consultancies 0.11.48.276.50.10.50.33.00.33.11.513.8--0.00.10.21.60.0-10.76.00.510.2-E. Grants & subsidies -0.0-1.941.6----------0.614.0--2.044.44.52.5-4.5-F. Credit Line 0.71.9----------35.095.4--1.02.7--36.720.4-36.7-Total Investment Costs 22.813.469.841.17.04.13.52.05.02.916.99.935.020.62.01.24.42.63.72.2169.994.621.0131.617.3II. Recurrent Costs A. Operating costs 0.14.02.596.0----------------2.61.4-2.20.4B. Salaries & allowances 1.014.06.084.2--0.00.60.00.6------0.00.30.00.27.13.9-6.30.8Total Recurrent Costs 1.111.38.487.4--0.00.50.00.5------0.00.20.00.29.75.4-8.51.2Total PROJECT COSTS 23.913.378.243.57.03.93.52.05.02.816.99.435.019.52.01.14.52.53.72.0179.6100.021.0140.118.5 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
1.1. 
Country Background and the Project Area 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
8.  The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia’s (henceforth “Ethiopia”) economy has faced 
multiple  challenges  in  the  past  three  years,  which  include  the  global  impacts  of  Ukraine 
conflict,  drought,  global  supply  shocks  of  key  commodities  and  domestic  conflict  in  the 
northern  parts  of  the  country. The  official  estimate  for  real Gross  Domestic  Product (GDP) 
growth in 2022 is 6.6%, while the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  project  3.0%  and  3.8%,  respectively3  with  a  rebound 
growth  of  4.8%  estimate  by  UNDP,  led  by  the  services  sector  but  with  slower  growth  in 
agriculture  and  manufacturing.  Inflation  has  increased  up  to  37.2%  by  May  2022  (double 
from  same  period  last  year),  driven  by  food  inflation  (43.9%),  while  June  inflation  data 
indicates a slight reduction to 34%. The high levels of inflation are having  increasing poverty 
trends and reducing the purchasing power of incomes in the country. 
9.  In  the  context  of  the  Ukraine-Russia  crisis,  food  price  inflation  is  due  to  the  import 
dependency  for  wheat,  maize  and  sunflower  oil,  as  well  as  fertilisers  for  agricultural 
production. There have been sharp increases in the price of fertiliser on the  global market as 
Russia  is  a  major  source  of  Urea  (16%)  and  DAP  (12%).  The  government  has  started  to 
reduce the fuel subsidy progressively through 2022. The key downside risks to the economic 
outlook  include  low  investor  confidence,  in  part  due  to  the  continuing  domestic  conflicts, 
weakness in global growth, and climate change (CC). 
10. The exchange rate has been depreciating at about 20-25% annually since 2018. With a 
foreign  reserves’  cover  of  less  than  two  months,  Ethiopia  has  a  severe  foreign  currency 
shortage that puts pressure on the foreign exchange rate of the Birr to the US dollar. 
11. Ethiopia’s stock of public debt stood at $US 56.45 billion (50.7% of GDP) at March 2022. 
About 63% ($US 35.5 billion) of the debt stock is owed by the central government. 
12. Project Target Area – The Programme will be implemented in 5 regional states of Amhara, 
Oromia, Southern Nations, Nationalities Peoples Region (SNNPR), Sidama, and Somali. The 
regions have been selected, in consultation with the Government of Ethiopia, based on the 
following criteria: a) high rural  population; b) high poverty prevalence; c) high rate of food 
and  nutrition insecurity;  d)  presence  of  economic  opportunities  relevant to  the  project;  e) 
impacts of climate change; and f) natural resources degradation.  Three additional Regions 
(Afar, Tigray, and South West Ethiopia) will be included subject to: a) availability of additional 
funds; and b) improved security situation in some of the target Regions as applicable. 
1.2. 
Agriculture, Basic Problems and Opportunities 
13. Agriculture  is  the  country's  second  largest  economic  sector,  contributing  about  32.8 
percent of the country's GDP5 and employing more than 67 percent of the working population6. 
More  than  95  percent  of Ethiopia’s  agricultural output is  generated  by  subsistence farmers 
who, on average, own less than 1 hectare (ha) of cultivated land, with poor soil fertility as a 
result  of  continuous  cropping  and  little  input  of  nutrients  and  little  use  of  mechanisation. 
Subsistence  mixed  farming,  with  crop  cultivation  and  livestock  husbandry, is  dominant  on 
most farms. Heavy reliance on oxen ploughs for tilling the land7The major challenges of the 
agricultural  sector  include  limited  access  to  improved  technologies,  finance,  inadequate 
infrastructure and investment, weak institutional capacity and poor participation of the private 
sector. 
14. Ethiopia is believed to have the largest livestock numbers in Africa (Management Entity, 
2021)8,  although  the  contribution  of  the  sub-sector  to  the  country’s  economic  growth 
15 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
continues to be less significant. Challenges encountered include limited access to improved 
feeds  and  improved  breeds  and  breeding  techniques  and  inadequate  provision  of  good 
livestock extension services. 
15. The natural resources  base is coming under increasing pressure reflecting demographic 
growth, inappropriate farming and management practices. Small-scale farmers, who depend 
on  these  resources,  face  serious  threats  from  intensive  cultivation,  overgrazing  and 
deforestation. There is a widespread problem of soil erosion and soil fertility decline, fuel wood 
crisis, water scarcity, shortage of pasture resulting in the poverty, food insecurity and natural 
resources degradation trap. 
1.3. 
Key Stakeholders and Involvement of Smallholders 
16. Government institutions at different levels (National, Regional, Zonal, Woreda and Kebele) 
have  an  inherent  interest  in  the  successful  implementation  of  the  PACT  Programme. The 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will be responsible for overseeing the overall implementation of 
the Programme. The MoA Minister of State will be responsible for overseeing the overall PACT 
Programme  coordination  with  support  from  the  Directorate  of  Small-Scale  Irrigation.  The 
PACT Programme will be coordinated following a decentralised government structure. Thus, 
the Programme’s institutional arrangements for coordination will be specified at three levels 
− Federal, Regional, and Woreda. 
17. At  the  Regional  level,  the  Programme  will  be  managed  by  the  respective  Bureaux  of 
Agriculture; the Heads of the Bureaux of Agriculture will provide overall leadership. Similar to 
the Federal level, management of the PACT Programme will follow the PASIDP II management 
arrangements  at  the  Regional  level.  Where  needed,  changes  will  be  made  to  reflect  the 
peculiarities of the PACT Programme. In addition, the structures will be strengthened, under 
subcomponent  3.1,  to  ensure  that  the  Regions  have  adequate  capacity  to  implement  the 
Programme  in  accordance  with  the  overall  strategic  priorities  and  contribute  to  the 
achievement of Programme’s development objective. Regional Programme Coordination Units 
(RPCUs) will be established in all participating regions and will be responsible for the day-to-
day coordination of the Programme. 
18. At the Woreda and Programme site level, experience from PASIDP II suggests that there 
is a need to have dedicated Programme staff at the Woreda level for effective and efficient 
implementation. Accordingly, the PACT Programme will have two staff at the Woreda level: 
a) Woreda Coordinator; and b) Assistant Accountant. The duo will work with a team of three 
Development Agents (government extension staff) to oversee activity implementation. 
19. The smallholders and their organisations are the central focus of the PACT Programme; 
they  will  be  involved  variously  during  the  course  of  project  implementation.  Their 
involvement, not only as beneficiaries but also as active participants, will ensure ownership 
of the Programme and sustainability of the different interventions. Participatory community 
development  planning  will  be  the  first  step  to  PACT  Programme  implementation.  That,  de 
facto,  makes  Community-Based  Organisations  (CBOs)  key  players  in  identifying  the 
smallholders’  problems,  prioritizing  them,  development  of  Community  Development  Plans 
(CDPs) and oversee the process of implementing subprojects that will emanate from the CDPs. 
The  design  process  established  that  many  of  these  institutions  have  various  capacity 
limitations.  Accordingly,  the  respective  institutions’  capacities  will  be  augmented  through 
capacity strengthening interventions. 
1.4. 
Focus of the Project 
20. IFAD,  together  with Ethiopia’s  other  development  partners, have  positively contributed 
towards  reducing  the country’s  productivity  gap.  However, Ethiopia remains  dependent  on 
rain-fed agriculture. Considering the high variability of rainfall and the CC-induced increases 
16 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
in  temperatures,  closing  the  productivity  gap  and  producing  a  surplus  for  the  market 
remains a challenge. 
21. The PACT Programme will focus on upscaling successful interventions from the two PASIDP 
phases  in  irrigation  development  and  VITA,  in  carbon  trading  from  cookstoves  to  improve 
resilience  and  productivity  and  strengthen  farmer  organizations  while  also  bringing  in 
innovative  approaches.  Beyond  production  and  productivity,  the  Programme  will  also build 
on PASIDP II and other development partners’ successful experiences to transform the food 
systems in order to ensure access and uptake of healthy diets for all. 
22. The programme is ushering a new transformative agenda for smallholder agriculture, in 
IFAD  programming, in Ethiopia.  Innovative  approaches  that  go  beyond climate  sensitivity, 
integrate  climate  adaptation  and  mitigation,  with  compensation  for  the  services  that 
smallholder farmer provide will be initiated, with a strong focus on regenerative agriculture. 
II.  SUMMARY OF PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
2.1  Goal, Objective and Strategic Approach 
23. The Programme’s goal is ‘to contribute to inclusive and equitable poverty reduction and 
improved resilience of the target rural households.’ The Programme Development Objective 
(PDO)  is to  ‘enable  150,000  rural households  (men,  women,  youth  and  PWDs)  in  selected 
kebeles  to sustainably improve incomes, food and nutrition security and build resilience to 
shocks. The Programme will be implemented over a seven-year period. 
24. Approach – The PACT Programme will use a facilitated community development planning 
approach linked to the elaboration and implementation of inclusive CDPs  that identify priority 
production and infrastructure investments needed to address climate change adaptation, and 
provide  viable  and  sustainable  livelihoods  for  the  target  rural  communities.  This  is  an 
integrated rural development approach in which smallholders’ sources of livelihood, such as 
agriculture, are supported by other related services, such as water for production, etc. The 
engagement/participation  of  the  beneficiaries  in  the  process  enables  the  growth  of  social 
capital  between  communities;  it  also  strengthens  vertical  engagements  with  Local 
Governments.  Sustainability  will  also  be  ensured  through  the  PACT  Programme’s 
implementation approach since the process will be managed by the beneficiary communities 
themselves. 
2.2.  Target Group 
25. The  Programme  will  benefit  approximately  750,000  beneficiaries,  with  the  targeted 
participation of women, youth, and PWD. THE Programme’s primary target groups will include 
50% (375,000) women, 40% youth (300,000) unemployed female and male youth between 
18-34  years  (40  percent)  and  5%  (37,500)  persons  with  disability  who  are economically 
active. The primary target group will include: a)  the poor households (with land holding less 
than 2ha of cultivable land with limited livestock); b) pastoralists and agropastoral engaged 
in less diversified traditional livelihood system and; c) persons living with  a  disability  in  the 
rural  area;  d)  rural underemployed  and unemployed youths  owning no or small land; and e) 
female headed households. 
2.2 
Component Summary Description 
26. The  Programme’s  Development  Objective  will  be  achieved  through  the  effective 
implementation  of  two  technical  components  and  a  third  component  that  will  focus  on 
augmenting the capacity of communities, institutions, and contributing to a conducive policy 
environment towards Programme implementation. Job creation for young women and men, 
17 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
including persons with disabilities, will be a main focus of all investments in the Programme. 
Following  is  a  summary  of  the  expected  focus  of  the  different  components  and 
subcomponents. 
27. Component  1:  Community-Led  Climate-Smart  Productive  Landscapes  –  The 
Component will support: a) community-led equitable access and adaptive sustainable use and 
management  of  natural  resources;  b)  market-led  and  climate  adapted  pastoral  and 
smallholder  production  and  productivity  enhancement  of  target  crop  commodities;  c) 
development  of  inclusive  and  equitable  water  and  market  infrastructure;  and  d)  improved 
nutrition. The outcome of this component will be sustainable equitable access and utilisation 
of natural resources, increased agricultural and pastoral production system. The component 
will be implemented under three subcomponents. 
28. Component 2: Agribusiness Development – The Component will support: a) Market 
Access Linkage; b) Support to Young Women and Men Agripreneurs; c) Local Market related 
infrastructure  development  and  management.  The  outcome  of  this  component  will  be 
strengthened  capacities  of  farmer  organizations  to  improve  access  to  finance  and 
remunerative  markets  for  small-scale  women,  men  and  young  farmers  and  pastoralists, 
including those living with a disability in the Programme areas. 
29. Component  3:  Institutional  and  Policy  Strengthening  and  Implementation 
Support  Services  –  This  will  be  a  cross-cutting  component  servicing  the  technical 
components  and  facilitating  pathways  for  the  effective  and  inclusive  functioning  of  the 
target  value  chains,  from  production  to  consumption.  The  Component  will  support:  a) 
Institutional Strengthening; b) Policy support; and c) implementation support services. 
2.4 
Programme Cost and Financing by Component 
30. Total Programme costs are set at US$ 185.6 million over the seven-year implementation 
period. A summary breakdown of the PACT Programme costs by component and by categories 
of expenditure are shown in the below tables. 
Table 1: PACT Programme Costs by Component 
18 
(ETB '000)(US$ '000)TotalTotalA. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 1,633,29831,4102. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  5,651,006108,6733. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 756,27914,544Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 8,040,584154,627B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support 445,7388,5722. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs 159,8383,074Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 605,57611,646C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support 16,9003252. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services 464,7348,937Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 481,6349,262Total BASELINE COSTS 9,127,794175,534Physical Contingencies --Price Contingencies 4,812,1994,058Total PROJECT COSTS 13,939,993179,593 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Table 2: PACT Programme Costs by Category of Expenditure 
Ethiopia 
Participatory Agriculture  and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Expenditure  Accounts  Project Cost Summary 
31. The PACT Programme will be financed through the contributions from the following 
financiers: a) IFAD, with a grant of US$78.2 million and an additional  grant of US$ 10.5 
million through the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP+); b) the 
Gender Transformative Mechanism in the context of Climate Adaptation (GTM), with a 
grant of US$ 5 million; c) the European Commission (EC), with a loan of US$ 16.9 million; 
d) a contribution of US$ 2 million from an additional financier (to be confirmed); e) the 
Inclusive Green Financing Initiative (IGREENFIN), subject to the approval from the Green 
Climate  Fund  (GCF),  with  a  loan  of  US$35  million  through  a  line  of  credit;  f)  the 
Government of Ethiopia (GoE), contribution of about US$ 23.9 million (including waived 
duties and taxes and a direct contribution); g) private sector (enterprises, associations, 
unions, cooperatives), with an expected contribution of US$ 3.7 million (mainly through 
matching  grants);  and  h)  beneficiaries,  who  are  expected  to  provide  about  US$  4.5 
million (through in-kind 
cash
and 
contributions). 
2.5  Programme Organization and Implementation Arrangements 
31. Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) is the Lead Implementing Agency but will delegate the 
19 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
day- to-day coordination and management of the PACT Programme to the FPCU; it will 
work with the RPCUs in the respective participating regions. The FPCU  will be responsible 
for the overall and effective implementation  of the Programme as a whole, including, 
but not  limited to the following: a) coordinating the consolidation, and overseeing the 
execution,  of  the  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPBs),  implementation  progress 
and  financial  reports for  submission  to  the  National  Programme  Steering  Committee 
(NPSC) for review, comment and  endorsement  before  forwarding  to  IFAD  for  review 
and  provision  of  No  Objection;  b) 
20 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
have  adequate  M&E,  fiduciary  and  procurement  systems  and  capacities  and  undertake  all 
Programme-related  fiduciary  functions in  compliance  with  IFAD  Guidelines;  c)  work  closely 
with the  RPCUs  and Woredas  (and the  respective  Regional  Administrations)  during  activity 
planning  and  implementation  to  ensure  consistency  with  existent  Regional  and  Woreda 
development agendas. The Programme will work through the Government  frontline extension 
agents  (Development Agents  (DAs)  with  the  dual  objective  of  strengthening their  capacity 
and also serve as part of the exit strategy at Programme completion. 
32. In  order  to  respond  to  emerging  policy  issues  critical  for  timely  programme 
implementation,  MoA  will  establish  a  PSC.  Steering  Committees  at  federal,  regional  and 
woreda levels play key roles for oversight and major  decision-making.  Steering Committees’ 
key  roles  and  functions  across  the  different  Programme  levels  (all  from  federal  to  woreda 
level) will include: a) providing overall oversight and strategic guidance to PACT Programme 
implementation;  b)  ensure  that  the  Programme  contributes  to  the  higher- l e v e l sector 
policy and strategic goals; c) en s u r e that the Programme is moving in the right direction 
towards  achievement  of  its  development  objective;  d)  review  and  approve  the  AWPB 
submitted  by  the  respective  PCUs  at  the  different  levels;  e)  review  and  approve 
implementation  performance  progress  reports  prepared  by  the  PCUs  and  oversee  the 
implementation of the  corrective actions; f) updating respective senior management within 
their ministries/bureaux on strategic and policy related issues of Programme developments; 
g)  facilitating  strategic  partnerships  with  high  level  senior  stakeholders  within  the 
Government;  and  h)  ensure  inter-ministerial  coordination,  harmonization   and alignment 
with  other programmes and initiatives in the sector. 
33. Technical Committees  (TCs)  will be established at the levels and will be responsible for 
providing  technical  advice  to  the  respective  PSCs  to  ensure  that  decisions  made  by  the 
PSCs are evidence-based. TCs  will  a l s o  p r o v i d e  technical  support  t o  the  PCUs  on the 
quality  of  special  studies,  guidelines,  documentation  of  best  practices,  and  M&E  reports. 
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  role  of  the  TCs  at  all  levels:  a)  provide t e c h n i 
c  a  l  advice  to  steering  committees  on  PACT  Programme  activities;  b)  support  the  PACT 
Programme PCUs at all  levels  through  technical backstopping and supervision; c)  review 
AWPBs and implementation progress reports and provide comments and recommendations on 
improving  the  documents;  d)  review  implementation  progress  on  an  ongoing  basis  and 
provide advice on any institutional and other capacity building as may be found appropriate; 
and e) review all documents prepared as part of the PACT Programme implementation and 
advise on the technical appropriateness or lack thereof. 
2.6 
Beneficiaries, Expected Benefits and Sources 
34. The PACT Programme will target a total of 150,000 households (750,000 beneficiaries). 
The  Programme’s  primary  target  groups  will  include  50%  (375,000)  women,  40%  youth 
(300,000)  unemployed  female  and male  youth  between  18-34 years  (40  percent)  and  5% 
(37,500) persons with disability who are economically active. The primary target group will 
include: a) the poor households (with land holding less than 2ha of cultivable land with limited 
livestock); b) pastoralists and agropastoral engaged in less diversified traditional livelihood 
system and; c) persons living with a disability in the rural area; d) rural underemployed and 
unemployed youths owning no or small land; and e) female headed households. 
35. The  PACT  Programme  will  use  a  variety  of  targeting  mechanisms  to  ensure  equitable 
participation in, and benefits from, programme activities and opportunities for women, men, 
youth and vulnerable groups. The targeting strategy will comprise: a) geographic targeting, 
based  on  the  identification  of  priority  districts;  b)  self-targeting,  of  poor  households;  c) 
direct  targeting  of  very  poor  and/or  marginalised  households,  including  youth  and  female 
21 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
headed households. The targeting strategy will  pay attention to drivers of conflict at the local 
level in order to do-no harm. The primary safeguards against elite capture will be the self-
targeting plus the participatory identification of the poor and priority households. 
36. The economic and financial analysis undertaken shows that a wide adoption of climate- 
smart  and  improved  farming  management  would  have  important  financial  and  economic 
benefits in the form of better on-farm economic returns, households’ livelihood, and reduced 
poverty. Results suggest significant potential for creating positive net cash flows  for targeted 
households  in  their  productive  activities  through  PACT  interventions  (especially  for  the 
irrigated  crops),  confirming  attractiveness  for  the  farmers.  Cash  flows  show  that  the 
households will have the capacity to cover the necessary operating costs. 
III.  SUMMARY OF IMPLEMENTATION TO-DATE 
37. This chapter is supposed to present the summary of achievements to date both in physical 
terms  (physical  achievements  in  relation  to  targets)  and  financial  terms  (disbursement 
status). It is also supposed to highlight the constraints encountered during implementation 
(thus  far);  the  constraints  highlighted  are  supposed  to  be  addressed  for  improved 
implementation. Lastly, the chapter is supposed to state the number of target beneficiaries 
reached, disaggregated by gender. However, this is the first Programme year of  the  7-year 
Programme  and,  as  such,  there  is  no  implementation  progress  to  report herein. But, as 
part  of  the  design  process,  some  steps,  such  as  preparation  of  the  Programme 
Implementation Manual, were undertaken. These will greatly help kick-start actual, on-the-
ground, Programme implementation once the PACT Programme gets launched. 
IV.  THE WORK PLAN 2023 
4.1 
The Planning Process 
38. Ideally, the planning process for an Annual Work Plan and Budget should be participatory, 
involving all the relevant stakeholders through consultative meetings/workshops  at various 
levels. Under such a situation, there are three major sources of information and these include: 
a)  Programme  Design  Report  –  it  provides  the  general  framework  for  Programme 
implementation; 
b)  the  findings  of  the  needs  assessment  and  participatory  planning  exercises  in  the 
Programme areas; and 
c)  the findings of annual strategic reviews and performance evaluation. 
39. However,  this  being  PACT’s  first  AWPB,  its  preparation  was  largely  based  on  the 
Programme Design Report and was prepared as part of the design process.  It is expected that 
starting with the 2024 AWPB onwards, the decentralised and participatory planning process will 
take over where the process will, necessarily, utilise all three sources of information as listed 
above. 
4.2 
Plan Focus 
40. This  being  the  first  Programme  Year,  the  focus  of  the  plan  is  to  put  processes  and 
procedures  in  place  to  facilitate  a  smoother  implementation  of  the  Programme  during  the 
proceeding  Programme  Years.  This  will  include:  a)  establishing  of  the  PACT  Prorgramme 
22 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
coordination structures at the Federal, Regional and Woreda levels; b) establish the Federal 
Programme Steering Committee and introduce the PACT Programme to it. Agree on how to 
proceed with the provision of the oversight function (frequency and modality of meetings); 
c)  initiate the undertaking of the PACT Programme baseline survey; d) conduct awareness 
creation on Programme objectives and implementation arrangements; e) Review  and finalise 
the  targeting  strategy  for  the  selection  of  Kebeles,  watersheds  and  specific  beneficiary 
communities. Initiate the process of selecting the Kebeles, watersheds and specific beneficiary 
communities; etc. 
41. It is hoped that once the systems have been put in place, subsequent AWPBs will benefit 
and receive effective implementation. However, in the event that the specified activities get 
completed before the end of the Programme year, the FPCU will revise the AWPB  and include 
additional activities. When/if such a revision is done, the revised AWPB would be resubmitted 
to the PCU for review and approval  and to IFAD for review and provision of a No Objection. 
4.3 
Description of the Work Plan 
42.  Following below is the description of the work plan; this has been done by component 
and subcomponent. 
43. Component  1:  Community-Led  Climate-Smart  Productive  Landscapes  – 
The  Component  will  support:  a)  community-led  equitable  access  and  sustainable  use  of 
natural resources; b) market-led and climate adapted smallholder production and productivity 
enhancement of target crop commodities;  c) development of inclusive and  equitable water 
infrastructure;  and  d)  improved  dietary  diversity.  The  outcome  of  this  component  will  be 
sustainable access and utilisation of natural resources and increased agricultural productivity. 
The component will be implemented under four subcomponents. 
44. Subcomponent 1.1: Community-led Climate Resilient Development and Natural 
Resource  Management  –  Interventions  under  this  subcomponent  will  seek  to  empower 
communities  to  identify  pastoral  and  agricultural-sector-related  opportunities,  improve 
productivity and enhance climate resilience. The activities of the subcomponent include: a) 
Community  sensitization,  b)  Assessment  and  prioritization  of  landscapes  based  on  their 
degradation  status  and  climate  vulnerability  c)  Community  led  preparation  of  landscape 
development and investment plans  (LDIPs)  d) implementation of NRM including soil  health 
improvement  measures.;  e)  Soil  testing  facility  establishment;  f)  Construction  of  biogas 
facilities at household level; g) installation of cookstoves to reduce deforestation and access 
carbon markets. The LDIPs will identify climate resilient investments to achieve the vision and 
aspirations  of  the  community.  The  following  activities  are  planned  for  PACT’s  first  year to 
gradually contribute to the subcomponent’s objective: 
•  Assessments and prioritizations of landscapes 
o  Regional assessments of landscape areas and associated communities through 
zones – 5 assessments; 
o  Woreda level prioritization and selection of watersheds 
▪  Awareness raising and mobilisation of authorities and communities 
(including mainstreaming themes) – 150 watersheds; 
▪  Selection and training of community facilitators at woreda level – 5 
workshops; 
▪  Creation of Watershed Management Committees – 150 committees; 
▪  Sensitization in various thematic areas (Gender equality, youth Equity, 
Climate Change, Nutrition) using community conversations – 150 
watersheds; 
23 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
▪  Agriculture Risk Management (ARM) support with Risk Disaggregation for 
watersheds – 150 watersheds; 
▪  Costs for the carers of trainers and participants with disabilities – 1,000 
carers; 
▪  Operationalise Household Methodologies at household level35; 
•  Community sensitisation 
o  Training of Trainers (ToTs) (experts at the Federal and Regions) – 1 session; 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review the community development process & 
provide expert guidance – 20 person days; 
o  Training at Woreda level on the implementation of watersheds – 1 session; 
• 
Implementation of natural resource management and soil health improvement measures 
o  Awareness creation and training of WUA and watershed committees and kebele 
admin – 1 session per watershed for 150 watersheds; 
Implementation of soil and water management activities36  - 10,000 ha. 
o 
45. Subcomponent  1.2:  Climate  Resilient  Infrastructure  Development  –  This  sub- 
component will invest in climate-smart water and market-related infrastructure as identified 
and  prioritised  in  the  LDIPs.  All  infrastructure  will  be  prioritised  and  implemented  after 
feasibility assessments. Activities planned for the first year include: 
•  Development of improved farmer led small-scale irrigation systems 
o 
Identification of Potential Schemes and Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment – 3,600 
Ha 
•  Development of Multiple-Use Water Systems (MUS) 
o 
Identification of Potential MUS Sites and Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment – 50 
sites; 
o  Feasibility Studies – 45 sites; 
o  MUS Detailed Design and Works Supervision – 40 sites; 
o  Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies – 45 studies; 
•  Rehabilitation of existing water Infrastructure 
o  Site identification and Feasibility Studies – 200 ha; 
o  Schemes Detailed Design and Rehabilitation Works Supervision – 200 ha; 
o  Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies – 200 ha. 
46. Subcomponent  1.3:  Market-Oriented,  Nutrition-sensitive  and  Climate-Resilient 
Food  Production  and  Productivity  –  This  subcomponent  will  invest  in  activities  for 
improving  climate smart,  and  nutrition  sensitive  agriculture  production  and  productivity  as 
identified  and  prioritised  in  the  LDIPs  and  informed  by  market  opportunities  identified  in 
component  2.  The  activities  are  informed  by  the  national  horticulture  development  and 
marketing strategy30, to address the sector constraints of limited access to improved inputs 
due to inadequate extension capacity to introduce and disseminate  horticulture technologies. 
Activities planned for the first year include: 
•  Support to digital agriculture extension; 
o  Production of Video materials on ARM and other extension messaging for farmer 
training under FTCs – 1 set of video materials; 
35This will be integrated with gender model families’ approach and staggered implementation to cater for the scale 
up in phase 2. 
36Land rehabilitation and Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) activities will be done in the upper streams, water user 
associations and downstream areas. 
24 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review the digital modules content and training 
materials & provide expert guidance during trainings – 30 persons days; 
o  Promotion and Awareness for the Digital Platform through Cooperatives/FTCs and 
Agribusiness; 
•  Capacity building of extension staff 
o  Training on the SHEP approach through JICA to woreda/ kebele level staff – 300 
persons; 
o  Capacity building of DAs and Community agents on resilient practices by 
research/technical departments37  - 500 persons; 
o  Capacity building of DAs/Community agents on resilient practices by livestock forage 
department – 100 persons; 
o  Capacity building of DAs and Farmer Promoters (Community based agents/ Model 
Farmers) on digital extension and market platform/NSA38  – 200 persons; 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review the climate resilient practices training materials 
& provide expert guidance during trainings – 20 person days 
•  Support to farmers 
o  Support the FBS/FFS with inputs for demonstration of enterprises on the farm39 – 
12,000 groups; 
o  Demonstration support for rain fed agriculture at FTC40  - 90 FTCs 
•  Nutrition SBCC design TA and roll-out implementation support (mass media, community 
influencer training, M&E)41. 
47. Component  2:  Agribusiness  Development  –  The  LDIPs  will  identify  agriculture 
commercialisation  opportunities  in  the  area,  key  commodities  with  potential  for  food  and 
nutrition security and offtake to lucrative markets and the main actors. The outcome of this 
component will be strengthened capacities of farmer and pastoral organizations to improve 
access to finance and remunerative markets for small-scale women, men and  young farmers 
and  pastoralists,  including  PWDs  in  the  Programme  areas.  The  component  comprises  the 
following subcomponents. 
48. Subcomponent 2.1: Market Access Linkage Support – This subcomponent will seek 
to  develop  value  chain  business  linkages  in  the  Programme  areas  where  women  and men 
farmers  and pastoralists  will largely respond to market opportunities through the following 
interventions: 
• 
Inclusive digital value chain assessment and partner business companies’ identification; 
o  Digital data collection of base market information to feed into market platform42 - 1 
survey/study; 
o  Digital Mapping43  - 8 studies (one study per value chain); 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review content & expert guidance during promotion and 
awareness raising – 20 person days; 
•  Capacity building of experts 
o  Business facilitation skill training to ATI, BoA, Cooperative Promotion Office Staff44 - 
120 staff; 
37Each trainer is trained twice a year, on soil fertility and crop production and NSA/GALS 
38Two training per year for four years 
39Organized in groups of 25-30, 2 rounds of training per year 
40Reduced support for demos over time- 1 FTC per woreda 
41Barrier analysis in 4 regions, SBCC strategy design, content development by a firm, mass media airtime and 
other influencers' training 
42Engagement of youth to support data collection is foreseen 
438 selected Value Chain in the participating Regions 
4490 from Woreda and 30 from region and federal 
25 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
•  Develop Capacity of Cooperatives and Unions to Graduate to Professional Business 
Organizations45
o  Cooperative Graduation Training Package Trainers ToT Session46  - 6 sessions. 
49. Subcomponent  2.2:  Tailored  Business  and  Finance  Linkage  to  Young  men  and 
women  Agripreneurs  –  The  subcomponent  will  support  young  entrepreneurs  to  access 
business development support packages, including: a) tailored training for different types of 
agri-businesses  to  enhance  entrepreneurial  attitude  and  business  management  skills;  b) 
business  plan  development  support;  c)  seed  capital;  d)  skill-based  training  depending  on 
demand; e) mentorship; and f) engagement in policy dialogue. The following activities  are 
planned for the first AWPB: 
•  Online agripreneurship training 
o  Master trainer47  – 66 person days; 
o  Technical support48  - 1 package of support; 
o  Disability inclusion expert to review content 
•  ToT training49
o  Conduct ToT for 10 trainers per region50  – 75 persons; 
o  Participation of trainers51  - 300 person days; 
o  Localization of agripreneurship toolkit52  - 15 person days; 
o  Costs for the carers of trainers with disabilities. 
50. Component  3:  Institutional  and  Policy  Strengthening  and  Implementation 
Support  Services  –  This  will  be  a  cross-cutting  component  servicing  the  technical 
components and facilitating  pathways for the effective and inclusive functioning of the target 
value chains, from production to consumption. It comprises two subcomponents. 
51. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support – Interventions 
under this subcomponent will seek to avail a conducive environment for effective Programme 
activity implementation and to strengthen institutions for improved service delivery. 
52. There are no specific activities planned for the first AWPB. 
53. Subcomponent  3.2:  Programme  Coordination  and  Implementation  Support 
Services – This subcomponent’s objective will be to manage the Programme in an efficient 
including  planning  and 
and  effective  manner  by  providing  overall  coordination, 
implementation,  financial  management  and  control,  procurement  support,  monitoring  and 
evaluation, knowledge management, and progress  reporting. It will also ensure liaison and 
linkage with all other relevant projects/Programmes being implemented in the country that 
seek to address  similar or  related constraints; this  would be aimed at taking advantage of 
existent synergies and avoiding duplications. The following activities are planned: 
•  Vehicles 
o  Double Cabin Vehicles53  - 23 vehicles; 
o  Motorcycles – 150 cycles; 
•  Office Equipment for PCU 
45Cooperatives and Unions Business Leadership (Graduation) Program 
46Each session 20-25 participants with 6 ToT Sessions 
473 trainers, 22 days 
48provided by FAO 
4910 per region - 5 groups of 2 trainers 
503 Trainers, 25 days for training preparation and training facilitation 
5130 trainees, 10 training days 
523 trainers, 15 days for localization 
5315 at woreda level (cluster), 3 at federal level, 5 at regional level 
26 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
o  Desktop Computers – 140 computers’ 
o  Printer/Photocopier – 9 printers/photocopiers; 
o  Accounting software – 1 set; 
o  Office furniture54  - 140 sets; 
•  Audit and key studies 
o  External audit – 1 audit; 
o 
Internal audit – 2 audits 
o  Baseline study55  – 1 study; 
o  Specific Thematic Surveys – 3 surveys; 
o  Procurement of electronic tablets to be used for data collection56  - 90 tablets; 
o  Annual web-hosting for the MIS cloud servers57  – 1 event; 
o  Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan58  – 1 plan; 
o  Development of a Knowledge Management, Learning and Communication Strategy – 
1 strategy; 
o  Roll out and implementation of the Knowledge Management Action Plan59  - 1 plan; 
o  Training on M & E Related areas60
o  Development of Digital Knowledge Repository for Extension, ARM, Agric Practices and 
linkage to ADAC61; 
o  Mapping and Monitoring including implementation of the Resilience Design and 
Monitoring Tool62
o  SECAP (ESCMF) implementation63
•  Workshops 
o  Startup workshop – 1 workshop; 
o  Annual planning & review workshop – 1 workshop; 
•  Salaries and allowances 
o  Program coordination -Federal level 
o  Programme Coordinator – 12 months; 
o  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist – 24 months; 
o  Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist – 12 months 
o  Agronomist – 12 months; 
o  Agribusiness Specialist – 12 months; 
o  MIS/GIS specialist – 12 months; 
o  Irrigation Engineers – 24 months; 
o  Social safeguard specialist – 12 months; 
o  Climate change and watershed management specialist - – 12 months; 
o  Environmental safeguard specialist – 12 months; 
o  Capacity building and Gender specialist – 12 months; 
o  Nutrition Officer – 12 months; 
o  Senior procurement specialist – 12 months; 
541 set for each Officer. Set consists of a desk, chair, lamp and a file cabinet. Assumes a total of 140 staff members 
at the Federal and Regional levels 
55The baseline survey will be carried out using the COI survey methodology and will also serve as the COI survey  
baseline 
56Each of the Woredas PIUs will have a tablet for data collection and linked to the MIS 
57The MIS will use cloud-based servers for secure data storage and management. These will require annual 
subscription support for the entire duration of the project implementation period 
58A Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will be developed at the beginning of implementation of PACT to provide further 
guidance for M & E within the project 
59The implementation of the KMC strategy will be through the KMC action plan which will be implemented and 
updated on annual basis; 
60Staff including M & E unit staff will be trained on M & E related areas; 
61It includes support for knowledge updates and adding new knowledge products 
62This is for the establishment of geospatial information system for baseline and monitoring of progress and 
achievements including assessing resilience at HH and community levels 
63It includes compliance monitoring 
26 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
o  Finance manager – 12 months; 
o  Senior finance specialist – 12 months; 
o  Accountant – 12 months; 
o  Driver 48 months; 
o  Secretary – 48 months; 
o  Office assistant – 12 months; 
o  Programme coordination - Regional level 
o  Programme Coordinator – 72 months; 
o  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist64  - 60 months; 
o  Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist65  - 60 months; 
o  Agronomist – 72 months; 
o  Agribusiness Specialist66  - 48 months; 
o  MIS/GIS specialist – 72 months; 
o  Irrigation Engineers – 72 months; 
o  Social and Environmental safeguard specialist – 72 months; 
o  Climate change and watershed management specialist – 72 months; 
o  Capacity building and gender specialist – 72 months; 
o  Assistant Procurement – 72 months; 
o  Financial management specialist – 72 months; 
o  Driver – 288 months 
o  Secretary cashier – 72 months; 
o  Office assistant – 72 months; 
o  Program coordination - Woreda level67
o  Cluster Coordinator – 180 months; 
o  Cluster Accountant – 180 months. 
•  Operating Expenses 
o  General operating expenses for PCU – 9 PCUs; 
o  Vehicle O&M – 23 vehicles; 
o  Motorcycles O&M – 150 motorcycles; 
o  Field per diem for PCU staff68  - 70 staff members; 
o  Field supervision and monitoring of Programme interventions. 
V.  BUDGET ESTMATES AND FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS 
5.1  Summary Budget and Funding 
54. Presented  in  this  section  are  summary  tables  giving  an  overall  picture  of  financial 
resources required for the PACT Programme 2023 AWPB. The budget information is presented 
by  component,  financier  and  categories  of  expenditure.  The  total  budget  for  PACT’s  2023 
AWPB is about USD 12.6 million. A total of about USD 6.7 million (or 53.4% of the budget) is 
allocated to Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes; about USD 
300,000 (or 2.8% of the budget) is allocated to Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market 
Access; and about USD 5.5 million (or 43.8% of the budget) is allocated to Component 3: 
Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services. About 49.4% of 
the budget will be financed by the IFAD grant; 6.9% will  be from the Government; 15.3% 
from the ASAP+; 12.2% from the GTM; 15.5% from the beneficiaries, the remainder will be 
financed by the private sector and other financiers to be 
64One M & E Specialist will be stationed at each Regional PCMU 
65One KMC Specialist will needed for each of the 5 regions to be covered by the project 
664  regional  agribusiness  experts  (Oromia,  Amhara,  SNNPR,  Somali;  Sidama  not  considered,  the  thinking  with  a 
slim team was proposed as an option for Sidam that may be supported by the other agribusiness team). 
67Assumes a Cluster approach, a total of 15 Clusters with an average of about 6 Woredas per Cluster. 
68Assumes an average of US$500 per staff (technical staff and drivers) per year 
27 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
identified  (0.2%). The following tables present the PACT Programme AWPB by  component, 
category and financier. 
Table 3: First Year Annual Work Plan and Budget and Financing by 
Component (US$ million) 
Table 4: First Year Annual Work Plan and Budget and Financing by Category (US$ million) 
5.2 Detailed Budget by Components 
56. Presented  in  this  section  are  the  detailed  cost  tables  giving  an  overall  picture  of  financial  resources 
required for the 2023 AWPB and corresponding activities on which funds will be utilised. 
28 
 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeComponents by Financiers(US$ Million)LocalThe GovernmentIFADASAP+ (IFAD)GTMECIGREENFINTBCBeneficiariesPrivate sectorTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 1. Sub-component 1.1. Community-led climate resilient development and natural resource management 0.610.5--1.527.81.426.2------1.935.5--5.443.20.35.10.02. Sub-Component 1.2. Climate resilient infrastructure development  0.06.20.393.8--------------0.42.90.00.30.03. Sub-Component 1.3. Market-oriented production and productivity improvement of selected food commodities 0.05.00.336.10.444.30.112.4------0.02.1--0.97.30.10.80.0Subtotal Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes 0.69.50.710.01.928.61.522.9------1.929.0--6.753.40.46.20.1B. Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 1. Sub-Component 2.1. Market access linkage support 0.01.20.295.3------------0.03.50.32.10.00.20.02. Sub-component 2.2. Support to women and men agripreneurs ------------0.1100.0----0.10.70.00.1-Subtotal Component 2: Inclusive and equitable market access 0.00.90.271.5--------0.125.0--0.02.60.32.80.00.30.0C. Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 1. Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening and policy support -----------------------2. Subcomponent 3.2:  Programme coordination and implementation support services 0.24.05.396.0--------------5.543.81.63.40.5Subtotal Component 3: Institutional and policy strengthening and implementation support services 0.24.05.396.0--------------5.543.81.63.40.5Total PROJECT COSTS 0.96.96.249.41.915.31.512.2----0.10.71.915.50.00.112.6100.02.19.90.6 EthiopiaParticipatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeExpenditure Accounts by Financiers(US$ Million)LocalThe GovernmentIFADASAP+ (IFAD)GTMECIGREENFINTBCBeneficiariesPrivate sectorTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment Costs A. Goods 1. Equipment & materials 0.04.00.296.0--------------0.21.90.10.00.02. Vehicles 0.14.01.796.0--------------1.814.01.30.10.33. Goods, services & inputs 0.125.10.132.90.02.60.134.1------0.05.3--0.32.10.10.00.1Subtotal Goods 0.16.42.088.70.00.30.13.9------0.00.6--2.317.91.60.20.4B. Works 0.020.00.180.0--------------0.10.90.00.10.0C. Training and Workshops 0.46.60.58.71.731.11.323.0----0.11.51.629.00.00.25.644.30.35.3-D. Consultancies 0.38.32.371.10.25.50.25.2----0.00.20.39.8--3.326.10.23.1-E. Grants & subsidies -----------------------F. Credit Line -----------------------Total Investment Costs 0.87.24.943.81.917.11.513.7----0.10.81.917.40.00.111.289.22.18.70.5II. Recurrent Costs A. Operating costs 0.04.00.396.0--------------0.42.9-0.30.1B. Salaries & allowances 0.04.01.096.0--------------1.07.9-0.90.1Total Recurrent Costs 0.14.01.396.0--------------1.410.8-1.20.2Total PROJECT COSTS 0.96.96.249.41.915.31.512.2----0.10.71.915.50.00.112.6100.02.19.90.6 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
PACT 2023 AWPB Detailed Budget by Components and Subcomponents 
Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes 
Subcomponent 1.1: Community-led Climate Resilient Development and Natural Resource Management 
B 
29 
Ethiopia Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeTable 1. Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes   / Sub-Component 1.1. Community-led and climate resilient natural resources managementDetailed CostsBreakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)UnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Assessments and prioritizations of landscapes 1. Regional assessments of landscape areas and associated communities  through zones Number10005256201012. Woreda level prioritization and selection of watersheds --------Awareness raising and mobilisation of authorities and communities (including mainstreaming themes) Landscape3892115018847123754Selection and training of  community facilitators at woreda level workshop1000531820126Creation of Watershed Management Committees /a Number3892115018847123754Sensitization in various thematic areas (Gender equality, Equity, Climate , Nutrition) using community conversations Landscape3892115018847123754Costs for the carers of trainers and participants with disabilities Person250631641,0001031040Agriculture Risk Management (ARM) support with Risk Disaggregation for watersheds /b Number3892115038921151Operationalise Household Methodologies at household level (complement GMF curricular) /c lumpsum0000131820126Subtotal Woreda level prioritization and selection of watersheds ----67616942112,703Subtotal Assessments and prioritizations of landscapes ----70117544112,804B. Community sensitisation --------1. ToT to experts (Federal, Region) Session000014100152. Disability inclusion expert to review the community development process & provide expert guidance Day5100203100103. Training at Woreda level on the implementation of watersheds Session000011641063Subtotal Community sensitisation ----2251088C. Community-led development and investments plans preparation --------1. Preparation of the watershed management plans /d Number----------D. Implementation of natural resource management and soil health improvement measures --------1. Awareness creation and training to WUA and watershed committees and kebele admin Number000018200302. Implementation of soil and water conservation activities /e Ha2,5006251563910,00062815739102,5133. Implementation of soil and water conservation activities_credit line /f Ha----------4. Soil health and testing laboratory lumpsum----------5. Establishing and strengthening of tree nurseries /g Number----------6. Construction and operation of biogas /h Number----------7. Production and dissemination of cookstoves /i Number----------8. Experience sharing visit to kebele leaders, WUS and watershed committees /j Visit----------9. Participatory monitoring and evaluation --------Training to Federal and Regional Watershed experts abroad /k Session----------Subtotal Implementation of natural resource management and soil health improvement measures 63615940102,543Total 1,35934085215,435 _________________________________\a 50% will be women\b Trainings and support to ARM measures for 100 watershed committees\c This will be integrated with gender model families approach and staggered implementation to cater for the scale up in phase 2\d The plans will be prepared based on the national watershed managemnt plan preparation guideline. They'll include: biophysical and socio-economic survey; Identification and prioritization of interventions that bring change; Prepare development map,     inputs a\e Land rehabilitation and CSA activities will be done in the upper streams, water user associations and downstream areas. It will include terracing, stone bunds, tree planting, and nursery development, among many others.\f Land rehabilitation and CSA activities will be done in the upper streams, water user associations and downstream areas. It will include terracing, stone bunds, tree planting, and nursery development, among many others.\g Establish a nursery and support for one year\h Target HHs will have two livestock heads and access to water\i Unit cost covers two cookstoves. The activity targets a number of households equal to 1/3 of total beneficiaries\j One for watershed committees and one for water users associations\k Training on climate risk analysis at the University of Johannesburg 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Subcomponent 1.2: Climate Resilient Infrastructure Development 
30 
Ethiopia Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeTable 2. Component 1: Community-led and climate resilient natural resources management  / Sub-Component 1.2. Climate Resilient Infrastructure Development Detailed CostsQuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)UnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Water development for households, crops and livestock use 1. Development of improved farmer led small-scale irrigation systems --------Identification of Potential Schemes and Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment Ha9002255614360032820127Establishment of IWUAs /a Unit----------Capacity Building of IWUAs Session----------Feasibility Studies Ha----------Schemes Detailed Design and Construction Works Supervision Ha----------Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies Ha----------Construction of irrigation schemes /b Ha----------Construction of irrigation schemes_Credit line /c Ha----------Subtotal Development of improved farmer led small-scale irrigation systems ----328201272. Development of Multiple-Use Water Systems (MUS) --------Identification of Potential MUS Sites and Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment Unit1331050310010Establishment of MUS WUAs Unit----------Capacity Building of MUS WUAs Session----------Feasibility Studies Unit11310451431054MUS Detailed Design and Works Supervision Unit10310402051080Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies Unit1131045720027Construction of  MUS /d Ha----------Subtotal Development of Multiple-Use Water Systems (MUS) ----4311311723. Rehabilitation of existing water Infrastructure --------Site identification and Feasibility Studies Ha501331200510020Schemes Detailed Design and Rehabilitation Works Supervision Ha501331200820030Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design Studies Ha501331200310010Strengthening & Capacity Building of IWUAs Unit----------Rehabilitation of irrigation schemes Ha----------Disability inclusion expert to review the training materials  & provide expert guidance during ToT Day----------Subtotal Rehabilitation of existing water Infrastructure ----1541060Subtotal Water development for households, crops and livestock use ----902261359B. Local market-related infrastructure --------1. On-farm storage facilities ---0Design & Works Supervision of Pilot Zero energy storage technology (on farm) Unit00000---00Construction of pilot Zero energy storage technology Unit----------Subtotal On-farm storage facilities -----2. Warehouses for cooperatives and cooperative unions Identification, design and works supervision of warehouses for farmers primary cooperatives /e Unit----------Construction of warehouses for farmers primary cooperatives /f Unit----------Subtotal Warehouses for cooperatives and cooperative unions -----3. Markets Construction of road side market sheds Unit----------Design and construction works supervision of town market sheds Unit----------Construction of town/primary market sheds Unit----0-----Subtotal Markets -----4. Feeder roads spot rehabilitation Survey, design and works supervision Km----------Rehabilitation works Km----------Subtotal Feeder roads spot rehabilitation -----Subtotal Local market-related infrastructure -----Total ----359 _________________________________\a 1 IWUA/Irrigation Scheme. Average Command Area/Scheme = 100 Ha.\b The unit cost is an average cost to develop 1 Ha of irrigation, with construction elements depending on the site.\c The unit cost is an average cost to develop 1 Ha of irrigation, with construction elements depending on the site.\d A Multiple-Use System will supply water to Domestic and/or Livestock Uses, and may include a community garden where feasible. The unit cost is including: Digging a shallow well/borehole up to 50 m depth (up to 10,000 USD) + Solar Pump with adequate     specifi\e Estimated size for 5,000 quintals\f Estimated size for 5,000 quintals. Linked to graduation, aims at top tier cooperatives. 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Subcomponent 1.3: Market-Oriented, Nutrition-sensitive and Climate-Resilient Food Production and Productivity 
31 
Ethiopia Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeTable 3. Component 1: Community-led and climate resilient natural resources management  / Sub-Component 1.3. Market-Oriented Production and Productivity Improvement of Selected Food CommoditiesDetailed CostsBreakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)UnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Support to climate resilient production 1. Support to FTCs --------Equipping FTC with water harvesting structures and pumps Number----------Drip irrigation kits /a Number----------Inputs for demos for crops /b Number----------Soil moisture content meter Number----0-----Livestock inputs for demonstration /c Number----------Subtotal Support to FTCs ---------2. Support to digital agriculture extension --------Development of digital platform to support extension and NMIS for market linkages /d lumpsum----0-----ICT equipment ( Mobile Tablets and Training TVs for FTC/FBS) Set----------Production of  Video materials on ARM and other extension messaging for farmer training under FTCs lumpsum0000130820121Disability inclusion expert to review the digital modules content and training materials  & provide expert guidance during trainings Person820030410015Promotion and Awareness for the Digital Platform through Cooperatives/FTCs and Agribusiness lumpsum00001620025Subtotal Support to digital agriculture extension ----4010311613. Capacity building of extension staff --------Training on the SHEP approach through JICA to woreda/ kebele level staff Person75195130038921151Capacity building of DAs and Community agents on resilient practices by research/technical departments /e Person125318250031820126Capacity building of DAs/Community agents on resilient practices by livestock forage department Person25620100620025Capacity buiilding of DAS and Farmer Promoters (Community based agents/ Model Farmers) on digital extension and market platfrom/ NSA /f Person50133120031820126Building advisory content for Weather, Climate, Markets, ARM and promotion and dissemination through DAs and Model Farmers Number----------Disability inclusion expert to review the climate resilient practices training materials  & provide expert guidance during trainings Person day510020310010Subtotal Capacity building of extension staff ----10927724374. Support to farmers --------Organize farmers into commodity groups for training as FFS/FBS and operationalize GALs /g Group----------Support the FBS/FFS with inputs for demonstration of enterprises on the farm /h Group3,0007501884712000601541241Organize field days Day----------Demonstration support for rain fed agriculture at FTC /i Number236109021009Training of farmers on CSA, Agronomy- rainfed + NSA GALS Person----------Promotion of integrated home gardening among the most vulnerable households incl. HHs with a member with disability. /j Household----0-----Subtotal Support to farmers 6316412505. Seed certification ----Monitoring and certification visits by research lumpsum----------Training on seed multiplication lumpsum----0-----Subtotal Seed certification -----6. Nutrition SBCC design TA and roll-out implementation support (mass media, community influencer training, M&E) /k lumpsum----1----75Total ----924 _________________________________\a For land units of 0.25 ha\b Sliding support to 70 FTC\c 20 FTC for livestock\d One-off contribution- ATI to include financing from others e,g WB & BGMF - (adding PACT Regions and Commodities , Weather advisory, Climate and ARM) for access through 8028 Farmers hotline\e Each trainer is trained twice a year, on soil fertility and crop production and NSA/GALS\f Two training per year for four years\g This is for the four initial regions and depends on the number of irrigation sites/area in the four priority areas\h Organized in groups of 25-30, 2 rounds of training per year\i Reduced support for demos over time- 1 FTC per woreda\j Package: indigenous veg seeds and fruit tree seedlings, small livestock and tools provided to HHs with PLW and Childre U2\k Barrier analysis in 4 regions ,SBCC strategy design, content development by a firm, mass media airtime and other influencers' training 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Component 2:  Agribusiness Development/Subcomponent 2.1: Market Access Linkage Support 
32 
Ethiopia Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeTable 5. Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access  /  Sub-Component 2.1. Market Access Linkage SupportDetailed CostsBreakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)UnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Inclusive digital value chain assessment and partner business companies identification Digital data collection of base market information to feed into market platform /a Per year0.250.250.250.2512.512.512.512.5110Digital Mapping /b Study2.002.002.002.00830.1530.1530.1530.15121Disability inclusion expert to review content & expert guidance during promotion and awareness raising Person5.005.005.005.00202.512.512.512.5110Subtotal Inclusive digital value chain assessment and partner business companies identification ----35.1835.1835.1835.18141B. Capacity building of experts --------Business facilitation skill training to ATI, BoA, Cooperative Promotion Office Staffs /c Person30.0030.0030.0030.0012015.0815.0815.0815.0860Exposure visit and training to regional experts /d Person----------Training and exposure visit to Woreda experts and DAs on business /e Person----------Subtotal Capacity building of experts ----15.0815.0815.0815.0860C. Capacity building of farmers --------Training to farmers and pastoralists representatives/leads /f Person----------Nutrition sensitization workshop to processors and unions /g Person----------Exposure visit /h Visit----------Subtotal Capacity building of farmers ---------D. Develop Capacity of Cooperatives and Unions to Graduate to Professional Business Organizations /i --------Train Assessors/Trainers to become certified /j Person----------Payment to Access Dashboard and Tools for Assessment Planning Per year----------Assessment Using Certifed Assessment Tools and Trainers (Baseline and Benchmarking) and Reassessments /k Number----------Cooperative Graduation Training Package Trainers ToT Session /l Session1.501.501.501.50615.0815.0815.0815.0860Roll-out ALP Face to Face Training to Cooperatives and Union Leaders /m Number----------Agribusiness Leadership Graduation Support Coaching Roll-Out (6 rounds) - travel expense /n Day----------Cooperative Leaders exposure visit /o Person----------Unions capacity enhancement exposure visit and training /p Person----------Subtotal Develop Capacity of Cooperatives and Unions to Graduate to Professional Business Organizations ----15.0815.0815.0815.0860E. Facilitation of market alliance platforms (MAPs) /q Person----------F. Investments in cooperatives and unions --------Matching grants for primary cooperative investments /r Number----------Matching grants for Union investments /s Number----------Subtotal Investments in cooperatives and unions ---------G. Facilitation of business deal making --------Facilitation of B2B deal meetings with processors in IAPs and other buyers /t Person----------Business deal meetings facilitation, input suppliers/service providers with cooperatives/unions /u Person----------Subtotal Facilitation of business deal making -----Total 65.3365.3365.3365.33261 _________________________________\a Engagement of youth to support data collection is foreseen\b 8 selected Value Chain in  4 Regions\c 90 from Woreda and 30 from region and federal\d 5 days exposure and training @ 50USD/day\e 5 people from each Woreda, 3 times. It focuses on buyers quality requirement and business arrangement\f On buyers requirements, quality, business management and financial literacy - in partnership with buyers/processors and unions 1 day 3 sessions @ 100 USD/per participant, 30 farmers per Woreda per value chain (3 value chains per Woreda) 90 farmers lead     far\g 6 locations 2 sessions with 10 represntatives\h In business to business linkage in the country or abroad in main critical challnges to main stakholders from value chain actors and support organizations - 4 teams/visits with 10 members each\i Cooperatives and Unions Business Leadership (Graduation)  Program\j 10 Assessors to be renwed for 4 years until the final reassessment\k 125 Cooperatives and 12 Unions a total of 137 prodcuer organizations - baseline assessment, two years support follow-up/results assessment and fourth years final assessment\l Each session 20-25 participants with 6 ToT Sessions\m It includes: 2 rounds of training (3 days and 2 days) with travel days; daily cost of DSA and refreshment\n 137 Cooperatives/unions (125 cooperatives +12 unions) 1 day coaching for 6 rounds\o 125 cooperatives and 12 Unions 3 individuals from each organization in the different areas ateast 1 women leader - 3 exposure visits\p 12 Unions with 5 members each year in selected areas for relevant team\q 8 MSPs 2 per year for 3 years with 50 participants per MSPs\r Cooperatives matching grant for required investment as graduated cooperative\s Union matching grant for required investment as graduated Union\t Costs include travel, meeting arrangements, facilitation fees\u 3 events one from agribusiness participants and 2 from cooperative and unions, 1200 input suppliers + 120cooperatvies + 12 Unions 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Subcomponent 2.2: Tailored Business and Finance Linkage to Young men and women Agripreneurs 
33 
Ethiopia Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeTable 6. Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access  / Sub-component 2.2. Support to Women and Men AgripreneursDetailed CostsBreakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)UnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Online agripreneurship training Master trainer /a Person day16.5016.5016.5016.50664.974.974.974.9720Technical support /b lumpsum0.250.250.250.2515.035.035.035.0320Disability inclusion expert to review content lumpsum0.250.250.250.2511.261.261.261.265Subtotal Online agripreneurship training ----11.2611.2611.2611.2645B. ToT training /c --------1. Conduct ToT for 10 trainers per region /d Person18.7518.7518.7518.75755.655.655.655.65232. Participation of trainers /e Person day75.0075.0075.0075.003001.511.511.511.5163. Mentoring of trainers /f Person day----------4. Localization of agripreneurship toolkit /g Person day3.753.753.753.75151.131.131.131.1355. Costs for the carers of trainers with disabilities lumpsum0.250.250.250.2512.262.262.262.2696. Final workshop in Addis Ababa --------Participants /h Person----------Venue lumpsum----------Subtotal Final workshop in Addis Ababa ---------Subtotal ToT training ----10.5510.5510.5510.5542C. Agripreneurship training to young men and women --------Trainer honorarium /i Person day----------Participation of young agripreneurs /j Person----------Backstopping mission by technical agri experts by demand lumpsum----------Inspirational Talk with successful (female) agripreneurs lumpsum----------Costs for the carers of trainers with disabilities lumpsum----------Subtotal Agripreneurship training to young men and women ---------D. Business-Plan financing --------Business proposals selection /k Person----------Seed capital for young agripreneurs Number----------Seed capital for skilled young agripreneurs with disabilities Group----------Mentorship programme for young agrepreneurs /l Day----------Top-up finance for selected agripreneurs Number----------Subtotal Business-Plan financing ---------Total 21.8121.8121.8121.8187 _________________________________\a 3 trainers , 22 days\b provided by FAO\c 10 per region - 5 groups of 2 trainers\d 3 Trainers, 25 days for training preparation and training facilitation\e 30 trainees, 10 training days\f 3 Mentors, 2 days for 15 groups\g 3 trainers,  15 days for localization\h 30 participants; 2 day-workshop; costs include all expenses, such as transportation and perdiem\i 2 trainers per session, 32 sessions in three regions  and 5 groups per region -\j 600 youth trained per year\k Committee with 5 members\l 3 months mentoring/30days per month. 10 mentors per region 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services 
Subcomponent 3.2: Programme Coordination and Implementation Support Services 
34 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
35 
Ethiopia Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) ProgrammeTable 9. Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services / Subcomponent 3.2: Programme Coordination and Implementation Support ServicesDetailed CostsBreakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)UnitQ1Q2Q3Q4Total2023Q1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles and motorcycles Double Cabin Vehicles /a Number5.755.755.755.75231,156288.94288.94288.94288.941,156Motorcycles Number37.5037.5037.5037.50150603150.75150.75150.75150.75603Subtotal Vehicles and motorcycles ----1,759439.69439.69439.69439.691,759B. Office Equipment for PCO --------Desktop Number35.0035.0035.0035.0014014135.1835.1835.1835.18141Printer/Photocopier Number2.252.252.252.259143.393.393.393.3914Accounting software Set0.250.250.250.251205.035.035.035.0320Office furniture Set35.0035.0035.0035.00140287.047.047.047.0428Subtotal Office Equipment for PCO ----20350.6350.6350.6350.63203C. Audit and key studies --------External audit Number0.250.250.250.251205.035.035.035.0320Internal audit Number0.500.500.500.502102.512.512.512.5110Baseline study /b Number0.250.250.250.25111127.6427.6427.6427.64111Mid Term Review Number-----------Project Completion and Impact evaluation Number-----------Core Outcome Surveys /c Number-----------Specific Thematic Surveys /d Number0.750.750.750.753307.547.547.547.5430Design and setup of the MIS including training of  staff on its use lumpsum-----------Procurement of electronic tablets to be used for data collection /e Number22.5022.5022.5022.5090369.059.059.059.0536Annual web-hosting for the MIS cloud servers /f lumpsum0.250.250.250.25110.250.250.250.251Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan /g lumpsum0.250.250.250.251307.547.547.547.5430Development of a Knowledge Management, Learning and Communication Strategy /h lumpsum0.250.250.250.251307.547.547.547.5430Roll out and implementation of the Knoweldge Management Action Plan /i lumpsum0.250.250.250.25130.750.750.750.753Training on M & E Related areas /j lumpsum0.250.250.250.25151.261.261.261.265Development of Digital Knowledge Repository for Extension, ARM , Agric Practices and linkage to ADAC /k lumpsum0.250.250.250.25111127.6427.6427.6427.64111GIS Mapping and Monitoring including implementation of the Resilience Design and Monitoring Tool /l lumpsum0.250.250.250.251307.547.547.547.5430SECAP (ESCMF) implementation /m lumpsum0.250.250.250.2511,709427.13427.13427.13427.131,709Subtotal Audit and key studies ----2,126531.39531.39531.39531.392,126D. Workshops --------Startup workshop Number0.250.250.250.2515012.5612.5612.5612.5650Annual planning & review workshop Number0.250.250.250.251205.035.035.035.0320PCO participation to workshops Number-----------Subtotal Workshops ----7017.5917.5917.5917.5970E. PCO capacity building --------Capacity building on disability inclusion to inform project decision-making /n lumpsum-----------Capacity building on nutrition-sensitive agriculture use nutrition-related data to inform project decision-making /o lumpsum-----------Subtotal PCO capacity building ----------F. Development of Digital Knowledge Repository for Extension, ARM , Agric Practices and linkage to ADAC /p lumpsum-----------Total Investment Costs ----4,1571,039.301,039.301,039.301,039.304,157II. Recurrent Costs --------A. Salaries and allowances --------1. Program coordination -Federal level --------Programme Coordinator Month3.003.003.003.0012123.023.023.023.0212Monitoring and Evaluation  Specialist Month6.006.006.006.0024194.824.824.824.8219Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Agronomist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Agribusiness Specialist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110MIS/GIS specialist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Irrigation Engineers Month6.006.006.006.0024194.824.824.824.8219Social safeguard specialist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Climate change and watershed management specialist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Environmental safeguard specialist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Nutrition Officer Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Capacity Building and Gender Specialist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Senior procurement specialist Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Finance manager Month3.003.003.003.0012102.412.412.412.4110Senior finance specialist Month3.003.003.003.001292.352.352.352.359Accountant Month3.003.003.003.001292.352.352.352.359Driver Month12.0012.0012.0012.0048102.412.412.412.4110Secretary Month12.0012.0012.0012.0048102.532.532.532.5310Office assistant Month3.003.003.003.001220.390.390.390.392Subtotal Program coordination -Federal level ----19749.2349.2349.2349.231972. Program coordination - Regional level --------Programme Coordinator Month18.0018.0018.0018.00726516.2816.2816.2816.2865Monitoring and Evaluation  Specialist /q Month15.0015.0015.0015.00604511.3111.3111.3111.3145Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist /r Month15.0015.0015.0015.00604511.3111.3111.3111.3145Agronomist Month18.0018.0018.0018.00725413.5713.5713.5713.5754Agribusiness Specialist /s Month12.0012.0012.0012.0048369.059.059.059.0536MIS/GIS specialist Month18.0018.0018.0018.00725413.5713.5713.5713.5754Irrigation Engineers Month18.0018.0018.0018.00725413.5713.5713.5713.5754Social and enviromental safeguard specialist Month18.0018.0018.0018.00725413.5713.5713.5713.5754Climate change and watershed management specialist Month18.0018.0018.0018.00725413.5713.5713.5713.5754Capacity building and gender specialist Month18.0018.0018.0018.00725413.5713.5713.5713.5754Assistant Procurement Month18.0018.0018.0018.00725814.4714.4714.4714.4758Financial management specialist Month18.0018.0018.0018.00725413.5713.5713.5713.5754Driver Month72.0072.0072.0072.002884611.5811.5811.5811.5846Secretary cashier Month18.0018.0018.0018.0072143.623.623.623.6214Office assistant Month18.0018.0018.0018.007292.262.262.262.269Subtotal Program coordination - Regional level ----699174.84174.84174.84174.846993. Program coordination - Woreda level --------Cluster Coordinator Month45.0045.0045.0045.001805413.5713.5713.5713.5754Cluster Accountant Month45.0045.0045.0045.001804511.3111.3111.3111.3145Subtotal Program coordination - Woreda level ----9924.8724.8724.8724.8799Subtotal Salaries and allowances ----996248.95248.95248.95248.95996B. Operating Expenses --------General operating expenses for PCO lumpsum2.252.252.252.2594511.3111.3111.3111.3145Vehicle O&M Number5.755.755.755.752317343.3443.3443.3443.34173Motorcycle O&M Number37.5037.5037.5037.501509022.6122.6122.6122.6190Field per diem for PCO staff lumpsum17.5017.5017.5017.5070358.798.798.798.7935Field supervision and monitoring of project interventions lumpsum0.250.250.250.251153.773.773.773.7715Subtotal Operating Expenses ----35989.8289.8289.8289.82359Total Recurrent Costs ----1,355338.77338.77338.77338.771,355Total ----5,5121,378.071,378.071,378.071,378.075,512 _________________________________\a 15 at woreda level (cluster), 3 at federal level, 5 at regional level\b The baseline survey will be carried out using the COI survey methodology and will also serve as the COI survey baseline\c The project will not carry out annual outcome surveys. Instead it will carry out Core Outcome Surveys at baseline, midline and endline and will be required to use the COI survey methodology for the baseline to collect baseline information for the CIs\d Specific thematic surveys will be carried out in the place of annual outcome surveys\e Each of the Woredas PIUs will have a tablet for data collection and linked to the MIS\f The MIS will use cloud based servers for secure data storage and management . These will require annual subsrciption support for the entire duration of the project implementation period\g A Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will be developed at the beginning of implementation of PACT to provide further guidance for M & E within the project\h A KML&C Stratgey will be developed in the first year of implementation to guide Knoweledge Management within PACT\i The implementation of the KMC strategy will be through the KMC action plan which will be implementated and updated on annual basis\j Staff including M & E unit staff will be trained on M & E related areas\k It includes support for knowledge updates and adding new knowledge products\l This is for the establishment of geospatial information system for baseline and monitoring of progress and achievements including assessing resilience at HH and community levels\m It includes compliance monitoring\n costs for disability inclusion expert\o Nutrition dashboard\p It includes support for knowledge updates and adding new knowledge products\q One M & E Specialist will be stationed at each Regional PCMU\r One KMC Specialist will needed for each of the 5 regions to be covered by the project\s 4 regional agribusiness experts (Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR, Somali; Sidama not considered, the thinking with a slim team was proposed as an option for Sidam that may be supported by the other agribusiness team). 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
VI.  IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT 
1.1 Overall coordination and Link to the Review and Approval Process 
57. Project  Year  2023,  being  PACT’s  inaugural  implementation  period,  many  of  the 
Programme’s activities during the first few months will mainly be preparatory in nature. The 
PCUs  will  work  to  put  processes,  procedures  and  structures  in  place  for  effective  PACT 
implementation.  It  is  expected that  after  the inaugural  implementation  period,  the  rate  of 
activity implementation will pick up fast. 
58. As the PCUs coordinate the different PACT activities, due regard will be given to the time 
needed for the different institutions (IFAD and GoE, and other co-financiers) to review and 
approve  the  different  aspects  of  PACT  implementation.  This  will  be  important  to  avoid 
implementation delays. This will be particularly important for the procurement function. The 
PCUs will have to ensure that proper procedures with regard to prior review are adhered to. 
The time needed to accommodate the review and approval of the different procurements is 
incorporated  in  the  Procurement  Plan.  The  Programme  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  also 
provides guidance on all aspects of PACT implementation. The RPCUs will have to coordinate 
with the respective Regional, Woreda and Kebele administrations during the process of activity 
implementation;  this  should  include  planning,  implementation,  management,  reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation. 
59. In  order  to  implement  PACT  activities  effectively,  areas  which  lack  capacity  will  be 
addressed by providing the relevant capacity that is specific to the identified capacity gaps. 
Capacity building is the responsibility of one of PACT’s subcomponents.  Accordingly, capacity 
building programmes have been allowed for in the AWPB. 
1.2 Progress Reporting 
60. The PCUs will aim at providing informative progress reports; this is a formal requirement 
stipulated in the Financing Agreement. The six-monthly and annual reports will be prepared 
and submitted to IFAD, the GoE and all collaborating institutions. The FPCU will produce  a 
consolidated report for  all Programme activities. The consolidated implementation progress 
report  will  be  submitted  to  the  oversight  body  (PSC/TCs)  for  review,  comment  and 
endorsement.  The  PCU  would  address  any  comments  emanating  from  the  oversight  body 
before submitting the reports to IFAD. Efforts will be made to ensure a timely submission of 
the reports to IFAD. The progress reports will provide: 
a)  a review of implementation progress compared to planned activities, and expenditures 
compared to budgets; 
b)  details of problems encountered during the reporting period and any remedial actions 
taken to resolve the problems; 
c)  an analysis of strength and weaknesses, opportunities and threats; 
d)  a discussion of quantitative and qualitative progress made in achieving the overall 
objectives; and, 
e)  the strategic direction for the next planning cycle. 
61. In the process of producing progress reports, the PCUs will reflect on outputs, evaluate 
performance, and identify weaknesses that can be improved and successes that can be up- 
scaled.  It is  hoped  that  this  process  would lead  to  better  plans  and implementation  in the 
future. 
36 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
1.3 Monitoring and Evaluation & Knowledge Management 
62.  Performance  monitoring  will  be  the  primary  responsibility  of  the  Monitoring  & 
Evaluation/Knowledge Management team at the PCUs. The team will ensure that there are 
enough resources for  all entities involved in  implementing Programme activities. These will 
be assigned specific  M&E duties, to enable them to play an active part in the participatory 
M&E process. Resources will be provided for the operational costs related to M&E activities. 
The  essence  of  the  M&E  system  is  the  ability  to  supply  regular  data,  to  monitor  progress 
towards  the  achievement  of  set  objectives  and  to  detect  emergence  of  unexpected 
developments and to draw those developments to the attention of management. 
63. In  situations  where  Programme  activities  are  to  be  implemented  by  qualified  Service 
Providers, monitoring responsibilities may be formally agreed between the Service Providers 
as  part  of  the  agreements  to  be  signed  by  the  parties.  Each  of  those  Service 
Providers/Participating  Institutions  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  the  activities  they 
implement.  Heads  of  the  various  institutions  will  take  the  lead  role  and  responsibility  for 
monitoring, especially in setting implementation milestones, collection of  the necessary data, 
and  reporting  to  the  PCUs.      They  will  also  take  the  lead  role  in  interpreting  outcomes  of 
performance and impact M&E in terms of policy adaptations and requirements. To that end, 
the FPCU will provide a clear common framework for planning and progress reporting, and  to 
ensure  that  all  parties  have  a  clear  understanding  of  the  tools,  formats,  definition and 
applicability  of  indicators,  and  the  means  to  conduct  quality  assurance.  The  FPCU  will  be 
responsible for receiving and collating M&E data from the different institutions  and producing 
consolidated progress reports. Results of M&E will be shared with other implementing partners 
during the M&E and national planning and review workshops. The focus  will  be  to  ensure  a 
continuous  process  of  feedback  to  stakeholders  and  management to  enhance  timely 
responses. 
64. During the course  of  2023,  a  baseline  survey will  be  conducted to  provide information 
about verifiable indicators as a benchmark for assessing impact of PACT interventions in line 
with the Programme's goal, objectives and activities as contained in the logical framework. 
Such  benchmarks  will  be  developed  as  a  reference  point  when  organising  repeat  surveys 
and or when conducting programme Mid-term Review and end-of-programme evaluation. 
65. It  is  planned  that  supervision/monitoring  exercises  will  be  jointly  undertaken  by  IFAD 
and the GoE at least once every year. 
66. With regard to Knowledge Management (KM), the focus of this first year AWPB will be on 
the preparation of PACT’s KM action plan whose objectives would be to: a) identify knowledge 
gaps and prioritization of knowledge products to be developed; b) systematically document 
methods  to  ease  the  up-scaling  of  best  practices  in  Ethiopia  or  repackaging  of  innovative 
approaches  developed  elsewhere;  c)  disseminate  knowledge  using  various  communication 
tools.  The  dissemination  will  serve  as  an  avenue  for  sharing  relevant information  among 
implementing partners and other stakeholders. 
1.4 Procurement, Disbursements, Accounts and Finance Management 
67. Financial  management will involve budgeting, receipt of funds, procurement, making of 
payments, justification, generating withdrawal applications and reporting on all programme 
activities  implemented.  The  FPCU  will  establish  a  sound  financial  management  system  for 
the  programme,  consistent  with  the  requirements  of  IFAD  Guidelines  on  Financial 
Management covering the financial management cycle from Programme start-up  to financing 
closing including  budgeting,  accounting  and  financial reporting;  establishing 
37 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
internal  controls with internal  audit arrangements; funds flow management including 
disbursements; and statutory audit throughout the project cycle. 
68. The authority to incur expenditure is the approval of the AWPB with expenditure incurred 
outside the approved AWPB declared ineligible for financing from the grant funds. 
69. Regarding procurement, each contract to be financed by proceeds of IFAD’s investment 
will be included in the Project Procurement Plan (PPP) prepared by the PCU, certified by the 
and receiving No Objection from IFAD. The PCU procurement unit will be in charge of, inter 
alia,  procurement  planning,  handling  of  the  bidding  process,  conducting  bid  openings  and 
evaluations of bids, and contract monitoring. A Procurement Committee will be established at 
the  PCU  and  would  be  expected  to  review  and  certify the  following  documents  or  actions: 
procurement  plan,  draft  advertisements  and  bidding  documents,  evaluation  reports  and 
contract award recommendations, rejection of bids, contracts or  contract amendments above 
pre-defined thresholds. 
70. It  should  be  noted  that  this  being  the  inaugural  year  of  PACT  implementation,  the 
Procurement Plan was prepared by a consultant. In the subsequent years, the Procurement 
Plan  will  be  prepared  from  a  consolidated  list  of  goods  and  services  for  the  different  cost 
centres. 
VII.  EXPECTED BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES 
71. The planned period (2023) being the inaugural year of a 7-year implementation period, 
the focus is expected to be on putting in place processes and procedures to help guide PACT 
implementation  for  the  rest  of  the  Programme  period.  Therefore,  it  is  assumed  that  the 
number  of  beneficiaries  to  be  reached  will  be  less  than  in  subsequent  years. This  is 
consistent with PACT’s  projected disbursement by semester which is expected to be low at 
the beginning of the project and will increase in subsequent years. 
72. With regard to benefits, PACT will promote climate sensitive agricultural technologies or 
practices  and  these  are  expected  to  increase  productivity,  enhance  resilience  and  reduce 
carbon emissions. However, there will also be non-quantifiable benefits to accrue  to different 
institutions and/or individuals and these will likely be immediate. The different scenarios are 
presented hereunder: 
a)  There  will  be  more  capacity  to  coordinate  and  oversee  effective  Programme 
implementation; 
b)  The watershed management approach being adopted for PACT will lead to  longer term 
environmental rejuvenation and returns on improved soil and  sustainable access to 
water; and 
c)  There  are  other  non-tangible  benefits,  such  as  employment  creation  from  off  farm 
activities  and  an  overall  contribution  to  the  stability/livelihood  improvement  of  the 
target communities. 
VIII.  CONSTRAINTS, RISKS AND MITIGANTS 
73. Presented in the below table are the possible constraints and risks that may hamper the 
implementation  of  the  PACT 2023 AWPB.  The  table  also  provides the suggested mitigation 
measures. 
Table 6: Possible Constraints and Risks and Suggested Mitigation Measures 
38 
Ethiopia: Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Programme 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2023 
Risk 
Risk Mitigation Measures 
1.  Delay 
in 
resulting 
implementation. 
in 
procurement 
in 
delay 
2.  Delay  in  disbursement  of 
funds  resulting  in  delay  in 
implementation. 
3.  Delayed 
Objection 
resulting  in  delay  in 
receipt  of  No 
IFAD 
from 
•  Ensure the application/use of efficient procurement 
planning. 
•  Follow proper financial management procedures and 
ensure submission of all supporting documentation 
when asking for replenishments. 
•  Ensure proper planning that gives adequate time for 
receipt of requisite approvals. 
       implementation.
39 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Appendix 7 – Summary Procurement Plan Activities 
Subcomponent 1.1: Community-led Participatory Agricultural Development Planning  
S/N  Description  
Budget  Procurement?  Nature   Method 
1 
2 
3 
Training of Trainers (ToTs) (experts at the 
Federal and Regions) – 1 session 
Disability inclusion expert to review the 
community development process & provide 
expert guidance – 20-person days 
15,000 
Yes  
Services  
ICS 
10,000 
Yes 
Services  
ICS 
Training at Woreda level on the management of 
watersheds – session 
63,000 
Yes  
Services  
ICS 
Subcomponent 1.2: Integrated Natural Resource Management  
S/N  Description  
Budget  Procurement?  Nature   Method 
1 
2 
Awareness creation and training to WUA and 
watershed committees and kebele admin – 150 
watersheds 
30,000 
Yes  
Services  
ICS 
Implementation of soil and water management 
activities1 - 10,000 ha.  
2,513,000 
Yes, some 
procurement 
Subcomponent 1.3: Climate Resilient Water Development for Households, Crops 
and Livestock Use  
S/N  Description  
Budget  Procurement?  Nature  
Method 
Development of improved farmer led 
small-scale irrigation systems 
Identification of potential schemes and 
prefeasibility rapid assessment – 3,600 ha; 
Development of Multiple-Use Water 
Systems (MUS) 
Identification of Potential MUS Sites and 
Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment – 50 sites 
1 
2 
127,000 
Yes 
Services  
Force 
account 
10,000 
No  
Operational   N/A 
3 
Feasibility Studies – 45 sites 
54,000 
Yes 
Services  
4  MUS Detailed Design and Works Supervision – 
80,000 
Yes  
Services  
40 sites 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design 
Studies – 45 studies 
Rehabilitation of existing water 
Infrastructure 
Site identification and Feasibility Studies – 200 
ha 
Schemes Detailed Design and Rehabilitation 
Works Supervision – 200 ha 
Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design 
Studies – 200 ha. 
27,000 
Yes  
Services  
20,000 
No  
Operational   N/A 
30,000 
Yes  
Services  
10,000 
Yes 
Services  
MoU/Force 
account 
MoU/Force 
account 
MoU/Force 
account 
MoU/Force 
account 
MoU/Force 
account 
1Land rehabilitation and Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) activities will be done in the upper streams, water 
user associations and downstream areas. 
Subcomponent  1.4:  Market-Oriented  and  Nutrition-sensitive  Climate-Resilient 
Food Production and Productivity  
S/N  Description  
Budget  Procurement?  Nature  
Method 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Support to digital agriculture 
extension 
Production of Video materials on ARM and 
other extension messaging for farmer 
training under FTCs 
Disability inclusion expert to review the 
digital modules content and training 
materials & provide expert guidance during 
trainings – 30-person days 
Promotion and Awareness for the Digital 
Platform through Cooperatives/FTCs and 
Agribusiness 
Capacity building of extension staff 
Training on the SHEP approach through 
JICA to woreda/ kebele level staff – 300 
persons 
Capacity building of DAs and Community 
agents on resilient practices by 
research/technical departments2 - 500 
persons 
Capacity building of DAs/Community 
agents on resilient practices by livestock 
forage department – 100 persons 
Capacity building of DAs and Farmer 
Promoters (Community based agents/ 
Model Farmers) on digital extension and 
market platform/NSA3 – 200 persons 
Disability inclusion expert to review the 
climate resilient practices training materials 
& provide expert guidance during trainings 
– 20-person days 
Support to farmers 
Support the FBS/FFS with inputs for 
demonstration of enterprises on the farm4 
– 12,000 groups 
10  Demonstration support for rain fed 
agriculture at FTC5 - 90 FTCs 
11  Nutrition SBCC design TA and roll-out 
implementation support (mass media, 
community influencer training, M&E)6 
121,000 
Yes  
Services  
CQS 
15,000 
Yes  
Services  
ICS 
25,000 
No 
TA  
MoU/ATI 
151,000 
Yes 
125,000 
Yes   
25,000 
Yes 
126,000 
Yes   
Conference 
facilities,  per 
diem, etc. 
Conference 
facilities,  per 
diem, etc. 
Conference 
facilities,  per 
diem, etc. 
Conference 
facilities,  per 
diem, etc. 
Shopping 
Shopping 
Shopping 
Shopping 
10,000 
Yes   
Services  
ICS 
241,000 
Yes  
Goods  
NCB 
9,000 
Yes  
Goods  
Shopping  
75,000 
Yes  
Services  
CQS/LCS 
2Each trainer is trained twice a year, on soil fertility and crop production and NSA/GALS 
3Two training per year for four years 
4Organized in groups of 25-30, 2 rounds of training per year 
5Reduced support for demos over time – 1 FTC per woreda 
6Barrier analysis in 4 regions, SBCC strategy design, content development by a firm, mass media airtime and 
other influencers' training 
Subcomponent 2.1: Market Access Linkage Support  
S/N  Description  
Budget  Procurement?  Nature   Method 
Inclusive digital value chain 
assessment and partner business 
companies’ identification 
1  Digital data collection of base market 
10,000 
No  
Youth 
information to feed into market platform7 - 1 
survey/study 
2  Digital Mapping8 - 8 studies (one study per 
121,000 
Yes  
TA 
MoU/ATI 
value chain) 
3  Disability inclusion expert to review content 
& expert guidance during promotion and 
awareness raising – 20-person days 
10,000 
Yes  
Services  
ICS 
Capacity building of experts 
Business facilitation skill training to ATI, 
BoA, Cooperative Promotion Office Staff9 - 
120 staff 
Exposure visit10 - 1 of 4 planned visits 
4 
5 
6 
Cooperative Graduation Training Package 
Trainers ToT Session11 - 6 sessions 
60,000 
60,000 
Yes  
Services   CQS/LCS 
No 
Yes  
Services   CQS/LCS 
Subcomponent  2.2:  Tailored  Business  and  Finance  Linkage  to  Young  men  and 
women Agripreneurs  
S/N  Description  
Budget  Procurement?  Nature   Method 
Online agripreneurship training 
1  Master trainer12 – 66-person days 
2 
Technical support13 - 1 package of support 
20,000 
20,000 
3  Disability inclusion expert to review content 
5,000 
Yes  
Yes  
Yes  
Services  
ICS 
Services   MOU (FAO) 
Services  
ICS 
ToT training14 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Conduct ToT for 10 trainers per region15 – 
75 persons 
Participation of trainers16 - 300-person days 
Localization of agripreneurship toolkit17 - 15-
person days 
Costs for the carers of trainers with 
disabilities 
23,000 
Yes  
Services  
ICS 
6,000 
5,000 
No  
Yes  
9,000 
No  
Services  
ICS 
7Engagement of youth to support data collection is foreseen 
88 selected Value Chain in the participating Regions 
990 from Woreda and 30 from region and federal  
10In business-to-business linkage in the country or abroad in main critical challenges to main stakeholders from 
value chain actors and support organizations - 4 teams/visits with 10 members each  
11Each session 20-25 participants with 6 ToT Sessions 
123 trainers, 22 days 
13provided by FAO 
1410 per region - 5 groups of 2 trainers 
153 Trainers, 25 days for training preparation and training facilitation 
1630 trainees, 10 training days  
173 trainers, 15 days for localization 
Subcomponent 2.3: Local Market-Related Infrastructure  
There are no specific activities planned for the first AWPB. 
Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support  
There are no specific activities planned for the first AWPB. 
Subcomponent  3.2:  Programme  Coordination  and  Implementation  Support 
Services  
S/N  Description  
Budget  Procurement?  Nature   Method 
1 
Double  Cabin  Vehicles18  -  23  vehicles  per  target 
region (115 vehicles in total) 
1,156,000 
Yes  
Goods  
ICB 
2  Motor cycles  
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Desktop Computers – 140 computers 
Printer/Photocopier – 9 printers/photocopiers 
Procurement  of  electronic  tablets  to  be  used  for 
data collection19 - 90 tablets  
Office furniture20 - 140 sets 
Accounting software – 1 set 
External audit – 1 audit 
Internal audit – 2 audits 
10  Baseline study21 – 1 study 
11  Specific Thematic Surveys 
603,000 
141,000 
14,000 
36,000 
28,000 
20,000 
20,000 
10,000 
111,000 
30,000 
12  Annual web-hosting for the MIS cloud servers22 – 1 
1,000 
event 
Yes  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
Yes  
Yes 
Yes  
Goods  
ICB 
Goods  
Goods  
Goods  
NCB 
Goods 
Shopping 
Goods  
Shopping  
Services  
LCS 
Services   CQS 
Services 
ICS 
Services   Shopping  
13  Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan23 
30,000 
Yes  
Services 
ICS 
– 1 plan 
14  Development  of  a  Knowledge  Management, 
Learning and Communication Strategy – 1 strategy 
30,000 
Yes  
Services 
ICS 
15  Roll  out  and  implementation  of  the  Knowledge 
3,000 
NO 
Management Action Plan24 - 1 plan 
16 
Training on M & E Related areas25 
17  Development  of  Digital  Knowledge  Repository  for 
Extension,  ARM,  Agric  Practices  and  linkage  to 
ADAC26 
5,000 
111,000 
Yes  
Yes  
Services 
Services 
ICS 
ATI 
(MOU) 
1815 at woreda level (cluster), 3 at federal level, 5 at regional level 
19Each of the Woredas PIUs will have a tablet for data collection and linked to the MIS 
201 set for each Officer. Set consists of a desk, chair, lamp and a file cabinet. Assumes a total of 140 staff 
members at the Federal and Regional levels 
21The baseline survey will be carried out using the COI survey methodology and will also serve as the COI 
survey baseline 
22The MIS will use cloud-based servers for secure data storage and management. These will require annual 
subscription support for the entire duration of the project implementation period 
23A Monitoring and Evaluation Plan will be developed at the beginning of implementation of PACT to provide 
further guidance for M & E within the project 
24The implementation of the KMC strategy will be through the KMC action plan which will be implemented and 
updated on annual basis; 
25Staff including M & E unit staff will be trained on M & E related areas; 
26It includes support for knowledge updates and adding new knowledge products 
18  GIS  Mapping 
including 
implementation  of  the  Resilience  Design  and 
Monitoring Tool27 
and  Monitoring 
30,000 
Yes  
Services 
ICS 
19  Startup workshop – 1 workshop 
50,000 
20  Annual planning & review workshop – 1 workshop 
20,000 
Program Coordination Unit -Federal level 
Programme Coordinator (1) – 12 months 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists (2) – 24 
months 
Knowledge Management and Communication 
Specialist – 12 months 
Agronomist – 12 months 
Agribusiness Specialist – 12 months; 
MIS/GIS specialist – 12 months; 
Irrigation Engineers – 24 months; 
Social safeguard specialist – 12 months; 
Climate change and watershed management 
specialist – 12 months; 
Environmental safeguard specialist – 12 months; 
Capacity building specialist – 12 months; 
Gender specialist – 12 months; 
Senior procurement specialist – 12 months; 
Finance manager – 12 months; 
Senior finance specialist – 12 months; 
Accountant – 12 months; 
Drivers (4) – 48 months; 
Secretary (4) – 48 months; 
Office assistant – 12 months; 
Programme Coordination Unit - Regional 
level 
Programme Coordinator (6) – 72 months; 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist28 - 60 months 
Knowledge Management and Communication 
Specialist29 (5) - 60 months 
Agronomist (6) – 72 months; 
Agribusiness Specialist30 (4) - 48 months; 
MIS/GIS specialist (6) – 72 months; 
Irrigation Engineers (6) – 72 months; 
Social and Environmental safeguard specialist (6) 
– 72 months; 
Climate change and watershed management 
specialist (6) – 72 months; 
12,000 
19,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
19,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
9,000 
9,000 
10,000 
10,000 
2,000 
65,000 
45,000 
45,000 
54,000 
36,000 
54,000 
54,000 
54,000 
54,000 
Yes  
Yes  
Yes  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Goods  
Shopping  
Goods  
Shopping  
Services  
Services  
ICS 
ICS 
Services  
ICS 
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
Services  
ICS 
27This is for the establishment of geospatial information system for baseline and monitoring of progress and 
achievements including assessing resilience at HH and community levels 
28One M & E Specialist will be stationed at each Regional PCMU 
29One KMC Specialist will needed for each of the 5 regions to be covered by the project 
304 regional agribusiness experts (Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR, Somali; Sidama not considered, the thinking with a 
slim team was proposed as an option for Sidam that may be supported by the other agribusiness team). 
Capacity building and gender specialist (6) – 72 
months; 
Procurement Specialist (6) – 72 months; 
Financial management specialist (6) – 72 months; 
Driver – 288 months 
Secretary cashier (6) – 72 months; 
Office assistant (6) – 72 months; 
Program coordination - Woreda level31 
Cluster Coordinator (15) – 180 months 
Cluster Accountant (15) – 180 months 
54,000 
58,000 
54,000 
46,000 
14,000 
9,000 
54,000 
45,000 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Services  
ICS 
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
Services  
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
Services  
Services  
ICS 
ICS 
31Assumes a Cluster approach, a total of 15 Clusters with an average of about 6 Woredas per Cluster. 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation 
(PACT) Programme 
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL (PIM) 
1 
OVERVIEW OF THE PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSBILITIES .............................................. 8 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES .................................... 52 
PART III: PROGRAMME PROCEDURES ......................................................109 
PART IV: ANNEXES ...............................................................................140 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Overview of the Programme Implementation Manual .................................. 2 
Detailed Table of Contents ..................................................................... 3 
List of Figures ...................................................................................... 5 
List of Tables ....................................................................................... 5 
List of Textboxes .................................................................................. 5 
Abbreviations and Acronyms................................................................... 6 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSBILITIES .............................................. 8 
I.1: Definitions ..................................................................................... 8 
I.2: Programme Overview .................................................................... 10 
I.3: Targeting, Gender, Youth and Persons with disabilities Mainstreaming ... 13 
I.3.1 : Targeting ............................................................................... 13 
I.3.2 : Gender, Youth and Disability Inclusion Strategies ......................... 20 
I.3.3 : Food and Nutrition ................................................................... 38 
I.4: Climate and Environment ............................................................... 41 
I. 5: Institutional arrangements and responsibilities .................................. 42 
I.5.1 : Implementation Arrangements .................................................. 42 
I.5.2 : Programme Governance Structures ............................................ 43 
I.5.3 : Partnerships ........................................................................... 47 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES .................................... 52 
II. 1: Start-up ..................................................................................... 52 
II.2: Component 1: Community-led climate-smart productive landscapes .... 53 
II.2.1: Subcomponent 1.1: Community-led Climate Resilient Development 
and Natural Resource Management ..................................................... 53 
II.2.3 : Subcomponent 1.2:  Climate Resilient Infrastructure Development. 66 
II.2.4 : Subcomponent 1.3: Market-Oriented Production and Productivity 
Improvement of Selected Food Commodities ........................................ 86 
II.3: Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access ........................ 93 
II.3.1 : Subcomponent 2.1: Market Access Linkage Support ..................... 93 
II.3.2 : Subcomponent 2.2: Support to Young Women and Men Agripreneurs 
........................................................................................................ 98 
II.4: Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation 
Support Services ...............................................................................105 
II.4.1 : Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support 
...................................................................................................... 105 
II.4.2 : Subcomponent 3.2: Programme Coordination and Implementation 
Support Services.............................................................................108 
3 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
II.5: Annual Supervision .....................................................................108 
II.6: PACT Programme Mid-Term Review (MTR) ......................................108 
II. 7: Programme Completion ...............................................................108 
PART III: PROGRAMME PROCEDURES ......................................................109 
III. 1: Planning and AWPB Development .................................................109 
III.2: Monitoring and evaluation ...........................................................109 
III.3: Knowledge management, learning and communication ....................118 
III.4: Financial Management ................................................................120 
III.5: Procurement .............................................................................136 
Integration of SECAP Risks into Procurement .......................................140 
PART IV: ANNEXES ...............................................................................145 
Annex 1. Terms of reference of PCU staff ...............................................146 
Qualification and Experience ..........................................................164 
Qualification and Experience: .........................................................166 
Qualification and Experience: .........................................................167 
General issues: ............................................................................167 
Ensure access with financial institutions: ..........................................168 
Minimum Requirements .................................................................168 
Education & Experience: ................................................................169 
Education and Experience: .............................................................171 
Annex 2: Guidelines for Preparation of Annual Work Plan and Budget and 
Progress Reports ...............................................................................174 
Annex 3: PACT KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT PLAN ...................................175 
Annex4. Terms of Reference for Annual External Audit (External) ..............180 
ANNEX 5: GUIDANCE ON INTERIM FINANCIAL REPORTING .........................187 
4 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
LIST OF FIGURES 
LIST OF TABLES 
LIST OF TEXTBOXES 
5 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
ACC 
AfDB 
ADLI 
AGRA 
ASAP+ 
AEZ 
ATA 
AWPB 
B2B 
BMGF 
BOA 
BOQ 
BRAM 
CC 
CLA 
COSOP 
COVID-19 
CRGE 
CSA 
C-SA 
DA 
DP 
EARI 
EFA 
EFS 
EIB 
ESIA 
ESMF 
ESMP 
FAO 
FCA 
FEAPD 
FPCU 
FPIC 
GALS 
GAPs 
GBV 
GCF 
GDP 
GII 
GIS 
GMF 
GoE 
GTM 
GTP 
Ha 
HH 
ICB 
IGREENFIN 
IFC 
IFAD 
ICO 
ICRAF 
ICT 
IGIP 
IPM 
IWUA 
KM 
LDSF 
MoA 
M&E 
MoFED 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
Agricultural Commercialization Clusters 
African Development Bank 
Agricultural Development-Led Industrialisation 
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa 
Adaptation for the Smallholder Agriculture Program Plus 
Agro-Ecological Zone 
Agricultural Transformation Agency 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Business to Business 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
Bureau of Agriculture 
Bill of Quantity 
Borrowed Resources Access Mechanism 
Climate Change 
Collaborative Learning and Adaptation 
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
Corona Virus Disease-2019 
Climate Resilient Green Economy 
Central Statistics Agency 
Climate-Smart Agriculture 
Development Agent 
Development Partner 
Ethiopian Agricultural Research Institute 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Ethiopia Food System 
European Investment Bank 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 
Federal Cooperative Agency 
Federation of Ethiopian Associations of Persons with Disabilities 
Federal Programme Coordination and Management Unit 
Free Prior and Informed Consent 
Gender Action Learning Systems 
Good Agricultural Practices 
Gender Based Violence 
Green Climate Fund 
Gross Domestic Product 
Gender Inequality Index 
Geographic Information System 
Gender Model Family 
Government of Ethiopia 
Gender Transformative Mechanism 
Growth and Transformation Plan 
Hectares 
Household 
International Competitive Bidding 
Inclusive Green Finance 
International Financing Corporation 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
IFAD Country Office 
International Centre for Research in Agroforestry 
Information Communication and Technology 
Integrated Agro Industrial Parks 
Integrated Pest Management 
Irrigation Water Users’ Association 
Knowledge Management 
Land Degradation Surveillance Framework 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
6 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
MTR 
NAIP 
NAP-ETH 
NCB 
NGO 
NOTUS 
NPSC 
OFSP 
OPDs 
PACT 
PASIDP 
PASDEP 
PDO 
PDR 
PDT 
PHL 
PIM 
PwDs 
RPCU 
RPSC 
RUFIP 
SBD 
SECAP 
SDGs 
SNNPR 
SO 
SoE 
TVET 
UNFSS 
USD 
WASH 
WB 
WFP 
WUA 
Mid‑Term Review 
National Agricultural Investment Plan 
Ethiopia’s National Adaptation Plan 
National Competitive Bidding 
Non-Government Organisation 
No-Objection Tracking Utility System 
National Programme Steering Committee 
Orange-Flesh Sweet Potatoes 
Organisation of Persons with Disabilities 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme 
Participatory Small-Scale Irrigation Development Programme 
Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty 
Programme Development Objective 
Programme Design Report 
Project Delivery Team 
Post-Harvest Loss 
Programme Implementation Manual 
Persons with disabilities 
Regional Programme Coordination and Management Unit 
Regional Project Steering Committee 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme 
Standard Bidding Document 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region 
Strategic Objective 
Statement of Expenditure 
Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
United Nations Forum for Sustainability Standards 
United States Dollar 
Water Sanitation and Hygiene 
World Bank 
World Food Programme 
Water Users’ Association 
7 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSBILITIES 
I.1: DEFINITIONS 
Agro-pastoral  Field  School  (AFS)  approach  –  It  is  an  adaptation  of  the 
• 
innovative, participatory and interactive learning approach from the Farmer Field Schools 
(FFS), for pastoralist and agro-pastoralist (as known from Uganda, Ethiopia, Kenya). 
Carbon Farming: Carbon Farming is a whole farm approach to optimizing carbon 
• 
capture on working landscapes by implementing practices that are known to improve the 
rate at which CO2 is removed from the atmosphere and stored in plant material and/or 
soil organic matter. Generally, Carbon farming practices are management practices that 
are known to sequester carbon and/or reduce GHG emissions. 
Community-driven  Development Plan  (CDP)  –  Is  the  product  of  a  technically 
• 
guided facilitation process in which CBOs members - with interests in development within 
the menu of the project’s  activities  -  undergo, to articulate, prioritise and participate in 
defining the  pathways  they  will  take to  implement the  action  plans.  CDPs  are  effective 
demands arrived at under guided facilitation that can be implemented to be implemented 
as subprojects or activities.  The various activities prioritised are then consolidated into an 
actionable  plan,  both  immediate  and medium term, costed  and  approved  by  watershed 
management committee. 
Community facilitation - is  both a process and a tool that will be moderated by 
• 
trained female and male Community Facilitators [CFs]. As a process, it walks communities 
through their needs and challenges, enables them to articulate the issues and to prioritise 
them. And with the support of subject matter specialists, communities will translate these 
concerns into actionable community development plans [CDPs] that will be managed by 
them. As a tool, however, it is used to inform all areas of decisions by ensuring that every 
category of the beneficiaries are consulted [inclusiveness] and that new ideas and themes 
inform the  CDPs,  are  integrated  and/or  mainstreamed into the  CDPs  -  including  all the 
core themes of IFAD and government on gender, inclusivity, climate change, etc. 
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA)  –  Comprises  the actions needed to transform 
• 
and  reorient  agricultural  systems  to  effectively  support  development  and  ensure  food 
security  under  a  changing  climate.  It  aims  at  sustainably  increasing  agricultural 
productivity and incomes and adapting and building resilience to climate change. The term 
covers practices such as: a) Conservation Agriculture (CA), water and soil management, 
integrated  production  systems  with  efficient  use  of  resources  and  less  external  inputs, 
diversification to increase resilience, etc. 
Conservation Agriculture (CA) – A farming system that promotes minimum soil 
• 
disturbance (i.e. no tillage), maintenance of a permanent soil cover, and diversification of 
plant species. It enhances biodiversity and natural biological processes above and below 
the ground surface, which contribute to increased water and nutrient use efficiency and to 
improved and sustained crop production (FAO, 2016). 
Famer Field School (FFS) approach – It is a methodology originally developed by 
• 
the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO)  as  a  participatory  approach  for  people- 
centred learning. Practical field exercises using direct observation, discussion and decision 
making encourage learning-by-doing and participants can exchange knowledge in a risk- 
free environment. Local knowledge and outside scientific insights are tested, validated and 
integrated  directly  in  farmers’  gardens,  under  their  localized  ecosystems  and  socio- 
economic settings. 
Food Security - “Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical 
• 
and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs 
and food preferences for an active and healthy life”. (World Food Summit, 1996) 
Landscape  Development  and  Investment  Plans  (LDIPs)  are  consolidated 
• 
overviews of a given landscape, identifying geographical features of the landscape, of the 
8 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
main  economic  activities,  in  particular  farming  and  livestock,  as  well  as  the  local 
communities.  The  LDIPs  will  identify  the  main  agricultural,  environmental  and  climatic 
risks  on  given  landscape  and  the  adaptation  measures/solutions.  The  Solutions  will  be 
prioritized and will be ready for investment. 
Nature-based  Solutions  (NbS)  –  “Actions  to  protect,  sustainably  manage,  and 
• 
restore  natural  or  modified  ecosystems  that  address  societal  challenges  effectively  and 
adaptively, simultaneously providing human well-being and biodiversity benefits” (IUCN, 
2020) 
Nutrition-related Knowledge, Attitude and Practices (KAP) survey – It assess 
• 
and explore peoples’ KAP relating to nutrition, diet, foods and closely related hygiene and 
health issues. KAP studies are mainly used to: a) collect key information during a situation 
analysis, feeding into the  design  of  nutrition  interventions;  and  b) to  evaluate nutrition 
education interventions. 
Para-vets  –  These  are  community-based  extension  workers  who  have  received 
• 
simple training in veterinary services. They are private service providers who move around 
in the communities. They charge ‘reasonable’ fees for the services rendered, such as: a) 
Programme  Implementation Manual  (PIM)  –  It  is  an  annex  to  the  Project  Design 
• 
Report  (PDR).  It  provides  practical  guidance  to  Project  implementers  on  key 
implementation aspects. It describes in detail how the Project components and activities 
outlined  in  the  PDR  are  intended  to  be  implemented.  The  PIM  outlines  the  detailed 
mechanisms, processes and procedures, formats, eligibility criteria, etc. which will ensure 
efficient Project implementation and achievement of the envisaged results. The PIM is a 
living document and may be updated at any time, as needs arise, during implementation. 
Regenerative  Agriculture-  Regenerative  agriculture 
inclusive 
• 
agroecosystems  approach  for  conserving  land  and  soil,  biodiversity,  and  improving 
ecosystem services within farming systems. It focuses on the regeneration of living 
soil,  improved  micro  hydrology,  and  conserving  biodiversity  at  all  levels  while 
enhancing inputs use efficiency and ecosystem system services1 
is  an 
Social and Behaviour Change Communication - a research-based, consultative 
• 
process that uses communication to promote and facilitate behavior change and support 
the  requisite  social change for  the  purpose  of  improving  positive  behavioural  outcomes 
such as nutrition2. 
Time and Labour-Saving Technologies (TLST) and practices – These are tools 
• 
and  equipment  that  reduce  the  drudgery  and/or  improve  the  efficiency  of  performing 
various  farming,  off-farm  and  household  activities.  These  may  include:  a)  the  use  of 
draught animals for land preparation, planting, weeding and rural transport; b) cooking 
on fuel efficient stoves; c) harvesting roof water for domestic purposes, agro processing 
and value addition, etc. 
•  Watershed – It is a hydrological unit that discharges rainfall runoff to an outlet in 
the downstream. It has been described and used as a physical-biological unit that could 
be easily monitored using objectively verifiable indicators and also, on many occasions, as 
a socio-economic-political unit for planning and management of natural resources. 
1 
https://www.fao.org/publications/card/en/c/CB6018EN/#:~:text=Regenerative%20agriculture%20is 
%20an%20inclusive,ecosystem%20services%20within%20farming%20systems. 
2Ethiopia Ministry of Agriculture (2022). Food and Nutrition Social Behaviour Chance Implementation Guideline 
for Agriculture Sector. 
9 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
•  Water  Users  Association  (WUA)  –  It  is  a  local  institution  established  with  the 
objective  of  supporting  the  construction  of  water-related  schemes  and  managing  them 
after  completion.  Its  major  roles  include:  a)  creating  enabling  environment  (including 
community  contribution/mobilization) during  construction;  b)  ensure  proper  distribution 
of  water  after  construction;  c)  managing  water  conflicts  as  well  as  carrying  out  the 
operation  and  maintenance.  This  could  be  an  irrigation  scheme,  a  multipurpose  water 
system, etc. 
Twin-track  approach  to  disability  inclusion  -  UNDIS  defines  “twin-track 
• 
approach” as “Integrating disability-sensitive measures into the design, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of all policies and programmes and providing disability-specific 
initiatives to support the empowerment of persons with disabilities. The balance between 
mainstreaming strategies and targeted support should be tailored to address the needs of 
specific  communities,  but  the  overall  goal  should  always  be  to  integrate  and  include 
persons with disabilities in all aspects of society and development.” 
I.2: PROGRAMME OVERVIEW 
The  PACT  Programme  was  jointly  designed  by  GoE  and  IFAD.  The  Programme’s 
• 
rationale is  premised on the fact that, the combination of Ethiopia’s expected economic 
recovery and a high population growth rate imply an increase in demand for agricultural 
products. However, the country is a net import of agricultural inputs and food. But, the 
covid-19 pandemic and the Ukraine-Russia war have shown the negative impact of reliance 
on imported inputs and food supply due to supply logistics disruption and increased food 
prices. The need to increase local production of food, especially wheat and oilseeds, and 
improve rural households’ resilience to shocks has never been greater. Although IFAD has 
supported the country’s efforts to boost productivity of selected agricultural commodities 
through  different  investments  to  address  the  underlying  constraints,  Ethiopia  remains 
dependent  on  rain-fed  agriculture.  Considering  the  high  variability  of  rainfall  and  the 
Climate  Change-induced  increases  in  temperatures,  closing  the  productivity  gap  and 
producing  a  surplus  for  the  market  remains  a  challenge.  The  Programme  will  upscale 
successful  interventions  from  PASIDP  to  improve  resilience  and  productivity  and 
strengthen  farmer  organizations  while  also  bringing  in  innovative  approaches.  Beyond 
production and productivity, the PACT Programme will also build on PASIDP II and other 
development partners’ successful experiences to transform the food environment in order 
to ensure access and uptake of healthy diets for all. 
The Programme’s goal is ‘to contribute to inclusive and equitable poverty reduction 
• 
and improved resilience  in selected landscapes/woredas.’ The Programme Development 
Objective (PDO) is to ‘enable 150,000 rural households (men, women, youth and PWDs) 
in selected kebeles to sustainably improve incomes, food and nutrition security and build 
resilience to shocks. The Programme will be implemented over a seven-year period. 
The  Programme  will  be  implemented  with  particular  emphasis  on  the  following 
• 
themes: 
✓  Climate Change –  Ethiopia currently experiences  an annual average temperature 
of  23°C,  with  a  minimum  of  11.9°C  and  a  maximum  of  30.8°C.  Mean  annual 
temperature  is  projected  to  increase  by  1.6°C  until  2030,  by  1.8°C  until  2050 
compared to pre-industrial levels. The annual mean total precipitation is 900 mm 
per year,  with the  lowest  100 mm  and the  maximum  amount  above 1,900 mm. 
Projected precipitation changes are uncertain, but models agree on a precipitation 
increase during the second half of the century. The emission of Greenhouse Gases 
(GHGs) in Ethiopia was 274 MtCO2 in the baseline year of 2010 and is anticipated 
to  increase  to  403.5  MtCO2  in  2030  in  the  business-as-usual  scenario.  GoE  has 
updated its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC 2021) to limit emissions to 
125.8 MtCO2e through green development path; 
✓  Environment  –  In  Ethiopia,  livelihoods  are  closely  linked  to  natural  resources. 
However,  because  of  population  pressure,  unsustainable  use,  inappropriate 
10 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
management,  expansion  of  planned  development  (commercial  farms  and 
infrastructure  development),  weakness  in  enforcing  environmental  policies  and 
regulations,  etc.,  there  is  considerable  depletion  of  natural  resources  and 
environmental  degradation.  The  major  environmental  issues  that  increase  the 
vulnerability of Ethiopians, with the highest risk to political, economic  and social 
landscape, include: a) land degradation; b) Climate Change; c) deforestation; d) 
water scarcity; and loss of biodiversity. 
✓  Gender  – According to the Gender Inequality Index (GII), which reflects gender- 
based inequalities in health, empowerment and economic dimensions, Ethiopia is 
ranked  125th  out  of  162  countries.  Contributing  factors  include:  a)  entrenched 
discriminatory social norms; b) limited access to quality services, programmes and 
infrastructure;  and  c)  challenges  in  implementing  policies  and  administrative 
processes.  In  the  agricultural  sector,  although  women  make  up  more  than  40 
percent  of  the  labour  force  and  head  approximately  25  percent  of  all  farming 
households, women’s productivity is 36 percent lower than of men. This is mostly 
due to the fact that, compared to men, they have less access to land, farm inputs, 
extension,  climate-smart  technologies  and  financial  services  (especially  formal 
credit). Consequently, 76 percent of rural women have control over crop, land and 
livestock; 
✓  Youth – About 70 percent of the country’s population is less than 34 years old. In 
particular, 30 percent is between 15 to 29 years old, which falls under the Ethiopian 
classification of Youth. While the demographic dividend can serve as a strong force 
for innovation, progress and development, young people in Ethiopia are faced with 
a multitude of challenges, leaving them largely unemployed, underemployed and 
underpaid3.  In  rural  areas,  youths  have  limited  access  to  land  and  capital,  and 
productive  assets  that  would  enable  them  to  become  self-employed.  Non-farm 
employment opportunities  along the value chains are still scarce. The challenges 
faced by the youth pushed 15 percent of them to migrate to urban areas between 
2007  and  20134.  Young  women  are  particularly  vulnerable;  limited  access  to 
education, capital, finance and land make it difficult for them to thrive. This is made 
worse by a high prevalence of child marriage, teenage pregnancy and other forms 
of Gender Based Violence (GBV); 
✓  Nutrition – In rural Ethiopia, 40.6 percent of children under five are stunted and 
will not be able to reach their full potential. Poor dietary diversity is the main driving 
factor of malnutrition. Less than 6 percent of children under five have a minimum 
acceptable diet5 and 77 percent of households' energy intake derives from starchy 
staples  only,  with  little  inclusion  of  animal  source  foods,  vegetables  and  fruits. 
When  available,  nutrient-rich  foods  are  firstly  granted  to  children  and  male 
households'  members,  and  subsequently to  womeni.  The lack  of  access  to clean 
water, sanitation and health services is another important factor of malnutrition; 
✓  Marginalised Groups including Pastoralists – Ethiopia ratified the Convention on the 
rights of Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) in 2010. Furthermore, a National Plan of 
Action (NPA) of PWDs was adopted for the period 2012-2021, under the leadership 
of the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs in consultation with civil society and UN 
organizations.  Despite  this  favourable  institutional  context,  the  provision  of 
inclusive services and opportunities remain a challenge. Recent data suggest that 
only  one  percent  of  Ethiopian  buildings  and  roads  are  fully  accessible  to  the  disabled 
people. Yet accessibility is not only physical, but also social, cultural, and political. 
Marginalisation is factor to entrenched poverty. Official estimates suggest that 95 
percent of Ethiopia’s disabled live under the poverty line and are unemployed. 
3In  2018,  the  urban  youth  unemployment  rate  was  as  high  as  25.3  percent.  UNCT  Ethiopia  (2020).  Socio- 
economic impact of COVID-19 in Ethiopia. 
4Bezu S., Holden S., Are Rural Youth in Ethiopia Abandoning Agriculture?, World Development, Vol. 64, 2014, 
pp 259-272, ISSN 0305-750X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.06.013. 
5A diet of adequate diversity and frequency that meets their needs for physical and mental growth 
11 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
✓  Pastoralists  and  agro-pastoralists  are  highly  vulnerable  to  poverty  and  food 
insecurity. They reside in the lowlands, which receive less  amount of rainfall per 
annum and are mostly exposed to effects of climate variabilities, such as recurrent 
droughts in the last few years.  This has resulted in death of a huge number of their 
livestock due to severe shortage of water and pasture/feed and depletion of their 
herd size. Consequently, this has left them vulnerable to future similar risks and 
shocks. 
The  Programme’s  Development  Objective  will  be  achieved  through  the  effective 
• 
implementation  of  two  technical  components  and  a  third  component  that  will  focus  on 
augmenting  the  capacity  of  communities,  institutions,  and  contributing  to  a  conducive 
policy environment towards programme implementation. Job creation for young women 
and men, including persons with disabilities, will be a main focus of all investments in the 
PACT Programme. 
Following hereunder is a summary of the expected focus of the different components 
• 
and subcomponents. 
Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes – The 
• 
Component  will support: a) community-led equitable access and sustainable use of natural 
resources  and  carbon  farming;  b)  participatory  promotion  of  technological  change  for 
smallholder  market-led  adapted  production  systems  for  improved  production  and 
productivity of target crop and livestock commodities; c) improve inclusive and equitable 
access to water and adaptation to CC and reduce vulnerability to shocks; and d) improve 
dietary  diversity.  The  outcome  of  this  component  will  be  enhanced  adaptive  capacity 
conservation, productivity and sustainable utilisation of water and other natural resources 
as  well as emission reductions  and sequestration of  greenhouse gases  (GHGs) resulting 
from carbon farming. Interventions under this component will be supported by European 
Union  for  infrastructure  and  Climate  finances  such  as  the  Green  Climate  Fund  (GCF) 
through a green loan from the Inclusive Green Finance (IGREENFIN II) and grants from 
the  ASAP+  and  CompensAction.  Furthermore,  carbon  market  opportunities  will  be 
explored in collaboration with partners such as Vita and Rabo Bank. 
Component  2:  Inclusive  and  Equitable  Market  Access  –  The  outcome  of 
• 
interventions under this component will be enhanced access to remunerative markets for 
small-scale women, men and young farmers and pastoralists in the Programme areas. The 
focus will be on linking smallholder  women and men farmers to the private sector on a 
business-to-business linkage, which will strengthen the capacity of producer organizations 
and improve access to reliable remunerative markets. A market-based and private sector- 
led approach will be promoted for improved provision of services, increased private sector 
investments, and building capacities for smallholder farmers and their organizations. 
Component  3:  Institutional  and Policy  Strengthening  and  Implementation 
• 
Support  Services  –  This  will  be  a  cross-cutting  component  servicing  the  technical 
components  and  facilitating  pathways  for  the  effective  and  inclusive  functioning  of  the 
target value chains, from production to consumption. 
12 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Figure 1: From Productive Landscapes to Markets (sub-component linkages 
I.3: TARGETING, GENDER, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES MAINSTREAMING 
I.3.1 : Targeting 
PACT targeted regions: The Programme will, be implemented in six regional states 
• 
of  Amhara;  Oromia;  Southern  Nations,  Nationalities  Peoples  Region  (SNNPR);  Sidama; 
South  Western  and  Somali.  The  regions  have  been  selected  in  consultation  with  the 
government of Ethiopia based on the following criteria: a) high rural population; b) high 
poverty  prevalence;  c)  high  rate  of  food  and  nutrition  insecurity;  d)  presence  of 
economic/market opportunities relevant to the project; and e) impact of climate change 
and,  natural  resources  degradation.  Three  additional  Regions  (Afar  and  Tigray)  will  be 
included subject to: a) availability of additional funds; and b) improved security situation 
in some of the target Regions as applicable. Implementation will take a phased approach 
starting with six regions (Oromia, SNNPR, Amhara, Somali, Sidama, South West Ethiopia) 
to  conduct  the  various  project-wide  inception  activities  without  over-extending 
Government and management resources, security stability and to align with the pattern of 
project financing. 
Table 1: Geographic Area of Intervention Targets 
Region 
Amhara 
Oromia 
Sidama 
SNNPR 
Somali 
South West 
Woredas 
23 
35 
4 
14 
9 
5 
Target HH 
38,334 
58,333 
6,667 
23,333 
15,000 
8,333 
Total 
191,667 
291,667 
33,333 
116,667 
75,000 
41,666 
PACT phased implementation approach: PACT has taken this cautious approach to 
• 
try  project  activities from inception and  scale up  when  modalities  are  shown to be  effective.  
The  project structure  is  flexible  and  phasing  can  and  should  be  adjusted in the light  of 
experience gained in the first years, particularly with lessons learned from interventions. 
It is estimated that PACT will be active in target woredas for about four years to provide 
the core project support. A total of 90 food insecure woredas have been prioritized based 
on: 
13 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
✓  high poverty prevalence based on inclusion in the Productive Safety Net Program 
(PSNP); 
✓  No overlap with LLRP supported woredas in Somali (9), SNNPR (14) and Oromia 
(35); 
✓  Highly vulnerable (hotspot) based on composite indicators (Food security, poverty, 
gender inequality, water, education, agriculture); 
✓  The  level  of  degradation  of  the  productive  NR  base  (particularly  soil,  water  and 
trees); 
✓  Interventions at the woreda level will avoid overlap with kebeles under PASDIP II 
and where feasible leverage on the Synergies with AGP, WFP Fresh Food Voucher 
programme in Amhara. 
14 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Table 2 Target Woredas 
Woredas 
Region 
Amhara  Dessie Zuria, Kobo, Tehulederie, Gubalafto, Ambassel, Meket, 
Gidan, Lay Gayint, Bati, Janamora, Kalu, Tach Gayint, Argoba, 
Menz GeraMider, Worebabo, Habru, Gondar Zuria, Assagert, 
Artuma, Fursi, Sokota, Misrak Belesa, Mahal sayint, Dehana 
Total 
23 
Oromia 
Amigna, Chole, Dodota Gololcha (ARsi), Jeju, Merti, Seru, Sire, 
Berbere,  Delo  Mena,  Goro  (Bale),  Guradamole,  Harena  Buluq, 
Meda Melabu, Dilo, Dire, Dubuluk, Moyale, Yabelo, Dawe Kachen, 
Gololcha,  Legehida,  Babile,  Bedeno,  Chinakson,  Deder,  Fedis, 
Girawa,  Goro  Gutu,  Gursum,  Haro,  Maya,  Kurfa  Chele,  Melka 
Belo, Meta, Adama 
SNNPR  Mareko, Kemba, M/Badwacho, Kacha Bira, Ofa, Silte, Misrak 
Meskan, Hadaro Tunito, Deramalo, Gerese, Amaro, Sankura, 
Garda Martha, Denba Gofa 
Sidama 
Loka Abaya, Bona Zuriya, Bensa, Bilate Zuria 
Somali 
Qalafo, mustati, Hdhat, Qarsadulla, Gursum, Tulli, Raso, Babile, 
Limay Galbeed 
South West Disa, Gena, Loma, Tercha Zuriya, Zaba Gezo 
35 
14 
4 
9 
5 
2. Targeting (Households and People) 
PACT’s primary target groups will be: a) the poorest and poor households, identified 
• 
at inception through participatory methodologies appropriate to their circumstances; and 
b) vulnerable people who have little access to assets and economic opportunities due to 
social exclusion, marginalization and the negative impact of climate change, targeted for 
participation  in  economic  groups  (Farmer  Organisations,  Cooperatives  and  MSMEs) 
promoted  by  the  project.  Since  most  of  the  extremely  poor  groups  may  not  meet  the 
prerequisites for participation in market-led interventions, the support for this group will 
focus on capacity building to help them to eventually participate in commercial activities; 
group mobilization for collective interventions; nutrition training; collaborate with RUFIP 
through its  rural  finance  component  to  ensure  that the  various  business  groups  (FBOs, 
Cooperatives, Saccos)  have  access  to  financial services  to  strengthen their  capacity for 
commercialization;  and  access  to  employment  opportunities  generated  by  commercial 
activities in the commodity development and infrastructure construction. 
The Programme will therefore reach an estimated population of 150,000 households 
• 
(HHs). PACT’s primary target groups will be the poorest households (landless or holding 
on average average 0.96 ha of cultivable land), poor households, (holding less than 2 ha 
of  cultivable  land  with  limited  livestock)  and  vulnerable  people  within  the  poor  rural 
population  who  have  little  access  to  assets  and  economic  opportunities  due  to  social 
exclusion, marginalization and the negative impact of climate change, including women 
75,000 (50%), female and male youth between 18‑34 years 60,000 (40%) and persons 
with disability who are economically active 7,500 (5%). More specifically, the project has 
identified the following primary target groups: 
PACT’s primary target groups will be the poorest, the poor and the vulnerable people 
• 
and those who have little access to assets and opportunities due to social exclusion and 
marginalization. The poorest farmers  (75%) are the ones with less than 1 ha cultivable 
land  or  are  landless.  These  are  mainly  the  poorest  households  and  vulnerable  groups 
including women, under-employed and unemployed female and male youth between 18- 
35  years,  owning  small  or  no  land,  and  persons  with  disability.  These  will  also  be  registered 
under PSNP. Female headed households will primarily fall under this group. 
15 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Smallholder farmers living in food insecure areas; men and women farmers in this 
• 
category have large households and cultivate a limited area of land that is less than 1 Ha, 
cannot afford to purchase inputs to make their production market oriented. For those who 
own livestock, the overall average herd size is small and they have no access to proper 
extensions  services  and  improved  inputs  for  market-oriented  livestock  production. 
Farmers in this category do not have access to financial services from formal institutions. 
They are isolated from markets and have limited education. They are mostly organized in 
informal credit and saving groups at village level or at kebele (sub-district) level 
Smallholder farmers able to participate in markets; men and women farmers in this 
• 
group actively engage in climate-smart crop and livestock production at a larger scale than 
their subsistence counterparts with a market purpose. They use good husbandry practices 
but have limited bargaining power in the market and limited access to more commercial 
markets.  Formal  financial  institutions,  mostly  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (MFIs)  offer 
limited financial products to this group, which limits their ability to expand their production 
and productivity levels. 
Specialized  smallholder’s  farmers;  In  this  category,  the  beneficiaries  have  some 
• 
assets and are organized into formally established and legally registered operational and 
viable producers and/or processors cooperatives or union of cooperatives with productive 
and entrepreneurial potential. They have a good access to inputs and services and relative 
good but still limited access to finance. 
Subsistence  level  production  pastoralists  with  limited  potential:  These  poorer 
• 
households’  make  their  income  and  living  from  very  small-scale  livestock  coupled  with 
agriculture  and  other  incomes  derived  from  off-farm  activities  (petty  trade  performed 
mostly  by  women,  fattening,  poultry,  dairy  etc.)  and  also  combined  with  irregular 
remittances  from  occasional  labour  (men  and  younger).  These  include  poor  men  and 
women  from pastoralist and agro pastoralists communities farming small  areas of dry land, 
or irrigated areas, along irrigations schemes/rivers banks of up to 0.5 to 1 ha. They usually 
grow some fruits / vegetables for domestic consumption and keep some livestock, having 
limited access to rangelands for animal feed. 
Commercially  oriented  pastoralists  with  high  potential  are  men  and  women 
• 
pastoralists and agro pastoralists who typically own larger number of animals and practice 
intensive as well as extensive herd management. They have access to natural resources, 
including  rangelands  areas  and  water  resources  (with  different  degrees)  but  lack 
connectivity  to  networks  and  markets,  including  market  information,  technical  capacity 
and  scale.  Their  livestock  production  provides  more  than  50%  of  their  annual  income 
(agro-pastoralists)  and  being  close  to  full  time  for  “pure”  pastoralists.  They  have  the 
potential  to  provide  consistent  increased  quantity  and  quality  of  their  output  to  meet 
compliance standards and market requirements (local/regional).  In this category men are 
mostly  responsible  for  cattle  and  camels  while  women  are  mostly  engaged  in  small 
ruminant production (sheep and goats) and milking cows. This groups can be defined as 
the better off, compared to the other categories. 
Former  pastoralists  (drop  outs):  These  are  groups  of  former  pastoralists  who  because 
• 
of  livestock losses  (natural  causes  or  mismanagements  of  herds  and/or  lack  of  support 
from  community  for  restocking/animal  diseases)  have  abandoned  pastoralism  and  are  now  
surviving  on  alternative  livelihood  options,  moving  from  the traditional livelihood-based 
system (and settlements) to a more sedentary model in search of opportunity for work, 
cultivable lands, and going closer to basic social services. 
Female  farmers  (including  female-headed  households);  Female  holders  are,  on 
• 
average, older than male holders by about five years. Female holders also tend to have 
smaller household sizes than do male holders. Nationally, on average, female holders have 
1.6  fewer  household  members  than  their  male  counterparts.  This  has  important 
implications  for  household  labour  availability  and  access  to  labour  through  social 
arrangements, which is an important source of agricultural labour in rural Ethiopia. Female 
holders are also less educated, on average, than male holders. Illiteracy rate is about 31 
16 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
% higher than male holders. Over 97 percent of both male and female holders own land, 
suggesting  that  there  are  no  major  gender  gaps  in  landownership  among  holders. 
However,  the  size  of  land  managed  by  female  landholders  is,  on  average,  43  percent 
smaller than the size of land managed by their male counterparts. Only about 12 percent 
of female holders have a pair of oxen, required for plowing, as compared to more than 30 
percent  of  male  holders.  This  lack  of  oxen  ownership  may  hinder  female  holders  from 
accessing  land  through  renting.  Oxen  ownership  has  significant  implications  for  the 
livelihoods of farm households in rural Ethiopia. In contrast, more than half of male holders 
own one ox or more. Both female and male holders participate in the crop production of 
cereals, pulses and oil crops production. However, female holders tend to participate less 
in the production of each type of crop with some variation by crops and regions. 
Pregnant and lactating women (PLW) with children under two, and adolescent girls: 
• 
they are the most at risk of having inadequate diets, because of their higher nutritional 
needs  and  the  discriminatory  practices  which  contribute  to  deprioritizing  them  in  intra 
household food distribution. Households with PLW are already identified in the kebeles as 
beneficiaries of PSNP. They will receive special support via home garden promotion and 
tailored nutrition behaviour change communication. 
Rural underemployed and unemployed youths owning no or small land: In 2018, the 
• 
urban  youth  unemployment  rate  was  high  as  25.3  %.  Estimates  on  rural  youth 
unemployment  are  more  difficult since  agriculture is  the  dominant  source  of  livelihood. 
Yet,  battered  with  land  scarcity,  shrinking  farm  sizes  and  growing  landlessness,  young 
people  rely  on  land redistribution,  inheritance  and  small rental markets  to  access  land. 
Land sales are prohibited and restrictions on long-term land renting remain, making land 
inheritance  the  prime  source  of  access  to  agricultural  land  and  agricultural  livelihood. 
Limited access to finance, assets, agricultural inputs, mechanization services coupled with 
low  employability  skills  push  young  people  to  look  for  unskilled,  off-farm  wage  employment 
elsewhere. 
The rural elderly who have no supporters: if some rural elders are considered 
• 
as leaders in communities, a large number of the rural elderly are marginalised, especially 
women. Defined as persons above 60 years old, the rural elderly who have no supporters 
are  the  most  vulnerable  to  be  hit  by  different  shocks  and  they  have  no  resources  to 
withstand them. 6.3% of Ethiopia’s elderly population have access to the Rural Productive 
Safety  Net  Programme  that  provides  a  minimum  pension.  PACT  design  can  provide 
opportunities for rural elderly to engage in common interest groups for income generating 
activities.  Even  if  they  would  contribute  less  to  labour  intensive  activities  than  their 
younger  counterparts,  the  elderly  could  play  a  critical  leadership,  advisory,  and 
motivational role. 
Persons  with  disabilities  living  in  rural  areas:  Majority  of  Ethiopia's  persons  with 
• 
disabilities  live  in  rural  areas  where  access  to  basic  services  is  limited  so  they  mostly 
depend on family, neighbour and friends’ support. Recent reviews show that persons with 
disabilities continue to face multidimensional marginalisation, yet most are not helpless 
and represent an enormous untapped potential, particularly skilled youth with disabilities 
and skilled women with disabilities. 
Targeting Approach 
The  programme  targeting  approach  has  three  important  aspects:  (a)  ensure 
• 
selection  of  commodities  that  have  credible  potential  for  inclusion  of  poor  households, 
women  and  youth  and  potential  impacts  on  nutrition  and  climate  change  through  a 
targeting  strategy;  (b)  mapping  of  production,  market  demand,  stakeholders,  poverty, 
social  and  demographic  trends  to  determine  geographical  locations  (i.e.  Woredas  and 
Kebeles); (c) targeting in Kebeles will be based on potential of poor smallholder producers, 
women  and youth to  profitably engage in  the particular  commodity.  In  line  with IFAD’s 
targeting  guidelines  PACT  will  reach  the  target  group  through  a  combination  of 
geographical targeting, community targeting (PWDs), self-targeting and direct targeting 
mechanisms. The primary safeguards against elite capture will be the self-targeting plus 
17 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
the participatory identification of the poor and priority households and rigorous screening 
to ensure the inclusion of these households as beneficiaries, in the group level business 
plans implemented with project support. In adherence to IFAD’s mainstreaming objectives, 
the  targeting  will  include  special  provisions  regarding  gender,  youth,  nutrition,  climate 
vulnerability, and for persons with disabilities (PWD) 
Self-targeting  will  be ensured  through  the  participatory  formulation  of community 
• 
level  development  plans  and  group  of  RIs  coming  together,  and  standalone  MSMEs 
business plans which will serve as the key investment tools for directing project support 
to the communities. Participatory development of these planning and investment tools will 
ensure that the activities which are identified correspond to the priorities and capacities of 
the target group. Amongst other activities, the selection of pro-poor activities around the 
selected value chains which involve agricultural practices that generate high levels of rural 
employment, involve low input costs and contribute to food security and family nutrition, 
will  lead  to  self-targeting.  The  selection  of  agricultural  and  village  enterprise  related 
machinery/equipment will be based on the relevance of such tools in smallholdings and 
their labor reduction and time saving benefits for priority target groups such as women, 
PWD  and  female  and  male  youth.  Self-targeting  will  be  facilitated  through  the  use  of 
gender-sensitive delivery systems (e.g. delivering non-residential training at village level 
respecting the appropriate timing for women). Moreover, capacity-building will be tailored 
to  the  needs  of  women,  female  and  male  youth  and  PWD  based  on  continuous 
consultations with the beneficiaries in regularly organized consultative forums. 
Direct targeting: Direct targeting will be one of the key mechanisms for reaching the 
• 
poorest  households  and  vulnerable  groups.  Direct  targeting  will  aim  at  achieving  the 
outreach targets of 70-80% very poor and poor households, and at least 50% women, at 
least 40%  youth  (50%  young  women;  50% young  men),  at least 5%  PWD  (within  the 
groups  of  women  and/or  youth)  participating  in  project  activities.  The  mechanism  for 
maximizing outreach will prioritize targeting of existing Rural Institutions and MSMEs with 
at least 50% of poor and very poor including vulnerable groups. In case, such groups do 
not  or  insufficiently  exist,  the  project  will  foster  their  formation.  The  project  will  also 
identify very poor beneficiaries who are not members of RIs and MSMEs and will promote 
their integration in such institutions / MSMEs, especially the ones that will be eligible for 
the more concessional project support. 
The women headed households, women male headed households, households with 
• 
under-and unemployed female and male youth, and PWD in the different socio-economic 
groups  will  also  be  identified  during  the  process.  Subsequently,  the  business  plans 
developed at the group level will list the names of all the potential beneficiaries/households 
along  with  their  socio-  economic  category  and  priority  group  (women,  f/m  youth,  and 
PWD). The project will screen these business plans by checking that they comply with the 
direct  targeting  guidelines  for  the  particular  business  activity,  and  by verifying that the 
details  of  the  potential  beneficiary  households  match  their  socio-economic  and  priority 
group status identified in the cluster plans. 
Safeguards against elite capture: The primary safeguards against elite capture will 
• 
be  the  self-targeting  plus  the  participatory  identification  of  the  poor  and  priority 
households  and  rigorous  screening  to  ensure  the  inclusion  of  these  households  as 
beneficiaries,  in  the  group  level  business  plans  implemented  with  project  support. 
Additionally,  PACT  will  create  a  high  level  of  awareness  about  the  project  benefits  and 
eligibility criteria amongst all target groups using community level open announcements, 
focus  group  discussions  and  consultations  with  community  institutions  and  implementation 
committees.  PACT’s  rural  institutions  capacity  building  inputs  will  address  elite  capture 
through  measures  such  as  representative  governance  structures  with  members  from 
various  targeted  categories  and  priority  groups,  fixed  tenure  of  governing  members, 
regular stakeholder meetings, and setting up transparent rules, regulations and decision- 
making  processes.  Additionally,  detailed  screening  of  business  plan  proposals  on 
commercial viability, conflicts of interest and corruption will be undertaken.  Compliance 
18 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
with  pre-approved,  objective  selection  criteria  and  transparent  information-sharing  and 
decision-making will be ensured. 
Targeting Approach in Pastoralist Areas 
Watershed/landscape-based  targeting  (land-based  targeting)  –  land  is  owned 
• 
privately (settlement areas, farmland or fenced enclosure areas owned individually or by 
group like cooperatives), communal lands (pasturelands, water points, hills, forests, etc.). 
The communally owned land could also belong to a clan than the larger community and a 
clan owned land might cover a portion of a kebele or even kebeles. Clan is a traditional 
governance  system  where  the  IPs  further  divide  themselves.  Therefore,  it  would  be 
important  to  ensure  good  participation  of  important  segments  of  community  when 
considering targeting based on watersheds/landscape or identifying land for water points 
or for crops/fodder production. FPIC should be undertaken to get the consent of the people 
in  and  around the lands  being  considered  and targeting  who  will  be  get  what from  the 
activities to be implemented on the watershed. 
Targeting  based  on  socio-economic  status/situation  –  The  pastoralists  are 
• 
categorized  as  pure  pastoralists  and  agro-pastoralists  in  most  parts  of  Ethiopia.  The 
demarcation is fluid, though and it is common to come across households practicing both 
in crops farming and livestock rearing in different proportions. When it comes to targeting 
households based on their socio-economic profiles (wealth status), conducting contextual 
wealth  ranking  would  be  important  in  the  pastoralists  area  of  the  project.  This  can  be 
initiated once project woredas and kebeles are selected. Wealth ranking should be done 
when the mobilization of the communities in the kebeles is done, project sensitization is 
done  and  when  preliminary  beneficiaries  selection  criteria  is  presented  to  the  wider 
communities or their representatives. For the wealth ranking, the communities themselves 
will  be  brainstormed  to  make  wealth  categorization,  which  will  base  on  the  number  of 
livestock an ideal household in their area owns and the size of cropland she/he cultivates. 
The  categories  include  a  better-off  household,  middle/average  wealth  status  household 
and  the  poor  household.  This  targeting  approach  is  recommended  when  selecting 
households  for  specific  project  activities  such  as  inclusion  into  producers’  primary 
cooperatives or being selected to produce the selected value chain commodities. 
Gender  and  disabilities  responsive  targeting  –  As  with  other  communities  in  the 
• 
country,  there  exists  gender  inequality  among  pastoralists.  There  is  differential  lack  of 
access to resources and services for women than men in these areas or the rural areas of 
Ethiopia in general. Women have many responsibilities, such as their household’s chores 
and community roles in addition to their reproductive roles. It might not be fair to just 
ensure gender targeting and hence, the Programme should give more attention to women 
in the  pastoralists’  areas,  as  they  are  more  affected  and  most  at  risk  segment  in  their 
communities. For this, it will be important to ensure targeting of women both in Female- 
Headed Households (FHHs) and women in Male-Headed Households (MHHs). 
From  the  visits  made  in  Somali  region  and  other  areas  where  pastoralists  live,  women  
• 
and girls are differentially affected than their male counterparts. Climate-induced shocks, 
like drought, are increasing their vulnerability. The long distances women have to travel 
to  collect  animal  fodder  (carry  it  on  their  back)  from  often  difficult  landscape,  fetching 
water, staying without food for long hours, regardless of their physiological status (breast 
feeding or being pregnant), not eating or eating last when they are around due to lack of 
food,  etc.  are  worsening  the  situation  for  women.  In  addition,  they  have  less  say  and 
control over some household (and wider community) resources and decisions. There might 
not  be  lots  of  FHH  in  most  parts  of  Ethiopia  due  to  some  cultural  practices,  such  as 
inheritance of wife of the deceased husband by a brother. Polygamy due to inheritance and 
marrying  additional  wives  is  a  common  practice  (cultural  and  religious).  Existing  FHH  cases  
would be the ones under polygamous marriages. A general practice with other projects is 
that  one  wife  will  be  registered  with  the  shared  husband  and  remaining  wife/s  will  be 
registered as FHH. Therefore, to meet IFAD’s 40% women Programme beneficiaries, FHH 
under polygamous marriage, genuine FHHs and women in MHHs should be considered. If 
19 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
community  members  are  informed  of  the  criteria,  that  women  should  be  selected  and 
registered as Programme beneficiaries in the required proportion, their male counterparts 
would not have objections or it would be less if genuine community participation during 
Programme sensitization is made. 
Like women, persons with disabilities also need attention in pastoralists areas. Due 
• 
to  poor  awareness  level,  worst  in  these  areas  than  other  rural  areas,  persons  with 
disabilities  are  mostly  marginalized  and  discriminated  against.  Therefore,  Programme 
should consider activities that are in line with their conditions/capacities. 
Targeting of youth and pastoralists dropouts – From the visit to Somali Region and 
• 
other areas, the emergence of pastoralist drop outs was highlighted. With the increasing 
frequency and severity of emergencies in recent years, the number of people falling under 
this category is increasing. These are former pastoralists, mostly young men and adults, 
who could not continue in the pastoral economy due to loss of all or partial livestock assets 
and  who  would  no  longer  afford  the  means  of  production  to  produce  on  their  land  (if 
formerly farming). Some move close to the woreda centres (towns) just to make sure that 
they are visible to the woreda government and will get food aid and other assistances for 
their  households’  survival.  They  move  close  to towns  to  also  get  casual  labor.  These  groups  
could be targeted and benefit from Programme activities that are not related to land and 
other  natural  resources.  They  could  be  targeted  under  component  two,  as  they  can 
participate on some aspects of the value chain or market areas. They can also participate 
in group crops or fodder production activities, if the woredas would allocate them land to 
be owned by groups. 
I.3.2 : Gender, Youth and Disability Inclusion Strategies 
Purpose  of  the  strategy  –  With  PACT’s  ambition  to  contribute to  climate  resilient, 
• 
inclusive  and  equitable  agricultural  income,  improved  dietary  diversity  of  vulnerable 
groups  and social and economic empowerment of women and youth, it is pivotal to set 
forth mechanisms for rigorous social inclusion of the most marginalized, including persons 
with disabilities, to leave no one behind. Building on the targeting strategy, the gender 
and  social  inclusion  strategy  will  guide  Programme  staff  and  implementing  partners  in 
ensuring  targeted  groups  are  adequately involved  and  equally  benefit from  programme 
activities. 
The gender and social inclusion strategy will serve as  a living reference document 
• 
for  programme  staff  and  implementing  partners,  which  shall  be  adjusted  as  deemed 
relevant to address socio-economic and cultural barriers hampering PACT’s target groups 
to equally benefit and meaningfully engage in all Programme activities. 
• 
The objectives of the strategy are as follows: 
✓  Gender  and  social  inclusion  dimensions  are  adequately  reflected  in  all  Programme 
components; 
✓  Identification of clear entry points for sensitization and capacity building on gender and 
social inclusion; 
✓  Promote  social  and  economic  empowerment  of  women,  youth  from  different  socio- 
economic dimensions, including persons with disabilities, pastoralists, as empowered 
value-chain actors; 
✓  Ensure  PACT  target  groups  access  and  benefit  from  small-scare  irrigation  schemes, 
multi-purpose  water  infrastructure  and  market-led  infrastructure  constructed  within 
the watersheds; 
✓  Increase  membership  and  leadership  positions  in  decision-making  bodies  and  at 
household level; 
✓  Promote  balanced  and  reduced  workloads  for  women  towards  equitable  sharing  of 
workload burden; and 
✓  Promote  a  conducive  institutional  and  policy  environment  for  women,  youth  and 
marginalized groups to thrive. 
20 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Policy environment and coordination mechanism 
Gender - The Ethiopian Government is a signatory to most international instruments, 
• 
conventions and declarations such as; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination  Against  Women  CEDAW  (1979),  the  Declaration  on  the  Elimination  of 
Violence  Against  Women  DEVAW  (1993),  the  Beijing  Platform  for  Action/BPA  (1995) 
including  the  domestication  of  the  international  instruments.  The  GoE  adopted  the 
Women’s Policy of Ethiopia (1993) and a National Action Plan on Gender and Development 
(2006)  led  by  the  Ministry  of  Women’s  Affairs.  The  Labour  Proclamation  and  the  Civil 
Servants  Proclamation  prohibit  discrimination;  protect  pregnant  women  and  maternity 
rights. The Government also revised the Family Law in 2004 and the Criminal Code in 2005 
to address issues linked to women’s rights and guarantee women’s control of assets and 
right  to  pursue  a  profession.  The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  developed  Agricultural  Gender 
mainstreaming  guidelines  in  2011.  Gender  and  social  inclusion  is  recognised  as  one  of 
eight key strategic pillars of the Ethiopia Ten-Year Development plan (2021-2030), with 
specific  targets  in terms for  women and youth’s  rights to land tenure, participation and 
economic development. 
Youth - The Government of Ethiopia adopted a National Youth Policy in 2004 to drive 
• 
youth  participation  in  governance,  economic  empowerment,  access  to  education  and 
training  as  well  as  healthcare.  It  is  reinforced  by  the  Rural  Job  Opportunity  Creation 
Strategy (RJOCS) in 2017 to address a key challenge faced by young people in rural areas. 
As laid out in the country’s first digital strategy, the GoE aspires to create millions of jobs, 
especially  digital  jobs,  to  spur  the  digital  economy.  Youth  will  play  a  pivotal  role  in 
modernizing Ethiopia's agricultural sector. In doing so, the following key stakeholders will 
be engaged to drive job creation and youth outcomes: Ministry of Agriculture, including 
the  Directorate  of  Rural  Job  Creation  Development  and  the  Bureau  of  Job  Creation  and 
Enterprise  Development;  Directorate  of  Agricultural  Extension,  Directorate  of  Women, 
Youth and Children, and Agricultural Mechanization; Technical and Vocational Educational 
Training Institutions; Ministry of Women and Social Affairs. 
People  with  disabilities  -  The  Constitution  of  Ethiopia  recognises  the  State’s 
• 
responsibility  to  provide  necessary  rehabilitation  and  support  services  for  people  with 
disabilities.  In  2010,  the  GoE  ratified  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of 
Persons  with  Disabilities  (CRPD).  Additionally,  the  Government  adopted  multiple 
Proclamations to protect their right to productive and decent work, as well as a National 
Plan of Action of Persons with Disabilities (2012-2021) to create building blocks for persons 
with disabilities to fully participate in all spheres of society and development. 
Gender in PACT – Women’s dual reproductive roles and work responsibilities place 
• 
them and their children at greater risk of poor health outcomes. Women in rural areas are 
obliged to carry out a large number of reproductive tasks. 
PACT is gender Transformative. Overall, 50% women outreach will be targeted. PACT 
• 
will  address  the  barriers  to  women’s  participation  and  empowerment  prevalent  in  the 
geographical  context  of  the  project.  Involvement  in  training,  educational  and  income 
generating activities will be promoted by ensuring there is enough time to reach everybody 
through  community  meetings  and  that  activities  are  arranged  in  a  way  convenient  to 
women’s lives. PACT will include activities expected to attract women’s participation, such 
as  savings  and credit groups. Gender targeting in PACT includes  the inclusion of young 
women  (youth)  and  women  with  disabilities  (PWDs).  Particular  focus  will  be  on  the 
identification and implementation of opportunities where women and men alike can act as 
agents of change in managing current and future risks related to climate change. 
Increased participation in training, educational and income generation activities will 
• 
be promoted by spending enough time for mobilization on targeting to reach everybody at 
community  meetings.  A  mix  of  community-based  targeting,  direct  targeting  and  self- 
targeting will be applied depending on the type of intervention. Men will be encouraged 
through advocacy to support women’s participation through guarantee of land and other 
21 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
resources  required.  PACT intends to generate several positive results for women, 
including: 
• 
• 
• 
Improve participation in household decision making (HH methodology) 
Improve their production and adaptive capacity by strengthening their 
agricultural productive skills, climate adaptation knowledge and access to 
appropriate technology 
Increase in women´s financial literacy including households' economics; business 
plans 
•  Development / strengthening women´s income generation activities to support 
• 
the value chain 
Improvement of household dietary intake through nutrition-sensitive HH-based 
livelihood interventions. 
A. Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes 
Subcomponent 
Activities 
1.1: Community-led 
and Climate 
Resilient Natural 
Resources 
Management 
Gender sensitive risk analysis including Agriculture, Climate 
Socially inclusive consultation with specific meetings for women. 
Community sensitization on gender and climate awareness 
Integrate CD4ARM tools for risk assessments 
Implement change catalyst sessions in target communities. The 
participants of these workshops’ sessions will then implement 
what they have learned with their respective groups (farmer 
organizations, women’s groups). 
Participatory social norms diagnostics will involve both men and 
women as change agents, in identifying and tackling norms that 
perpetuate gender disparities. 
The organisations of the watershed committees will have at 
least 50% women membership with 30% of leadership positions 
reserved for women. 
Women in leadership positions will be supported with targeted 
leadership skills training to enhance their roles. 
Energy saving technologies for NRM (cookstoves and biogas) will 
prioritise women headed households and women in male headed 
households. 
22 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
1.2: Climate 
Resilient 
Infrastructure 
Development 
1.3: Market- 
Oriented Production 
and Productivity 
Improvement of 
Selected Food 
Commodities 
PACT will support rural organizations to increase women’s 
engagement in quality leadership or decision-making positions. 
This will involve enhancing women leadership potential by 
appointing women to high quality leadership positions (as 
opposed to administrative positions) in all farmer groups (WUAs, 
Farmer Research and Extension Groups, Watershed 
Management Teams, and farmer cooperatives). This will be 
advanced by supporting the groups to set 30% quota for 
leadership and d working with the existing membership and 
leadership to address cultural and other barriers to women’s 
leadership. Activities will include an assessment of existing 
constraints; identification of mitigation strategies and behavior 
change strategies to shift norms and raise expectations around 
women’s leadership. The achievement of quotas will also be 
monitored. 
Target WAUS to increase and enhance the quality engagement 
of women in leadership and decision making. Review and amend 
by-laws to remove any potential barriers to membership 
especially in IWUAs. (Find working modalities in e.g. loaning 
land to landless women and youth from members with more 
than 0.25ha of irrigation land WUAs membership wil have at 
least 50% of women membership. Given that land ownership is 
by both spouse, representation of especially male headed 
households should be by both the man and the woman. 
Targeted trainings to women to strengthen their leadership and 
decision-making skills within the various watershed committees. 
At least 30% of leadership positions within Rural Institutions will 
be reserved for women 
Alternative production technologies like hillside irrigation will be 
promoted to support especially landless women or women with 
limited land. 
Infrastructure for water will consider the needs for women both 
in terms of access and utilisation. As such, proposed water 
development i.e. boreholes will have provisions for energy 
saving through either solarisation of the pumps or other 
mechanism to ensure ease of use by women. 
Target women will be the priority recipients of market 
infrastructure. Market infrastructure will prioritise the needs of 
rural women traders. The construction of market sheds will 
consider privacy and sanitary needs for women. 
Development agents offering extension support services will be 
undergo a a mindset change training to enable them become 
aware of prohibitive norms that could prevent women from 
accessing extension support/ inputs etc. This will enable the 
DAs to provide Extension services adapted to ease of access by 
women including customizing meeting times to women 
availability 
Support women micro enterprises outside of the major 
commodities: Gender sensitive value chain assessment to 
ensure that women are meaningfully engaged along commodity 
value chains. A complementary market assessment will be 
23 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
conducted to identify strategic entry points for women that PACT 
will support to grow into profitable enterprises. 
Technologies promoted will also be favourable for use by women 
and advance their commodities of choice. 
Integration and / adoption of tools from GALs to support 
engagement of value chain actors through FFS, FBS, VESAs and 
Cooperatives will address inequitable distribution of power 
prevalent throughout the production and trade of high-value 
crops, which are often dominated by male actors. GALs will help 
mitigate the risk of male capture of women’s high-value crops 
through the promotion of greater gender-balanced decision- 
making. 
2.  Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access 
2.1: Market Access 
Linkage Support 
Market information strategies. Medium for dissemination of 
market information will be adapted to the literacy level of 
majority women. 
2.2 Tailored 
Business and 
Finance Linkage to 
Agribusiness 
Gender market studies: These studies will identify value chains 
with potential for engaging with women producers (in 
cooperatives and groups) and the core constraints they face in 
accessing markets. This intervention will build on the gender- 
specific analysis across eight PACT value chains to be 
conducted. 
GTM grant will support improved participation in digital 
technology will be facilitating access to mobile phones by poor 
female headed households graduating as GMF. This will enable 
them access information on extension (8028), weather and 
market information. 
Market infrastructure will  prioritise the needs of women farmers 
including prioritising market shades for women. Facilities will be 
Gender assessment of group membership PACT will Conduct an 
assessment to establish the participation of women in farmer 
organisations and define mitigation strategies. The objective is 
to increase the women’s membership in rural institutions 
including FBS, Cooperatives etc 
30% quota for women only cooperatives will be instituted 
Collaborative working with MFIs through RUFIP III to tailor 
financial products to the needs of women, deliberately target 
PACT supported cooperatives etc. This could be complemented 
by gender assessment of MFIs products that will be supported 
under GTM. The assessment will contribute towards informing 
the development of products that respond to the needs and 
status of women. 
Financial access will be promoted through connecting groups to 
MFIs that are already gender-responsive to cooperatives that 
have women as most members. 
3.  Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services 
24 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
3.1: Institutional 
Strengthening and 
Policy Support 
Policy support to advance scaling up of gender transformative 
way of supporting government programmes and activities 
Support gender transformative mindset shift among financial 
institutions by introducing training modules that ensure staff 
participate in ongoing, critical self-reflection on gender, social 
and power norms to increase their own understanding of women 
as viable and valuable clients and skills for delivering gender- 
responsive services. This will be supported through GTM and 
informed by MFI assessment. 
3.2: Programme 
Coordination and 
Implementation 
Support Services 
Introduce a capacity building module for PCMU and 
implementing partners to demonstrate that gender injustice is a 
key cause of poverty and important to the women and men in 
the communities where they work. This will include (i) evidence- 
based project monitoring including use of GEWE data to improve 
intervention strategies (ii) incorporate gender considerations in 
programming and policy adoption 
4. Monitoring and Evaluation 
Assessments and 
studies 
Empowerment Index at baseline, Mid- term and Endline included 
in the project wise survey 
Institutional assessment of skills on GEWE principles and 
integration in programming 
Socio assessment in component 1.1 for gender sensitive 
agricultural risks 
Value Chains assessment 
Research element based 
Household Methodologies 
Household  methodologies  to  enhance  gender  equality  Household  methodologies 
• 
(HHMs)18 are innovative approaches to enable more poor households to be reached and 
to  improve  intra-household  gender  relations.  The  purpose  of  such  methodologies  is  to 
empower  members  of  households  to  realize  their  development  potential  and  create 
stronger, more resilient, and sustainable smallholder farming and rural livelihood systems. 
Although  the  focus  of  HHMs  is  to  stimulate  change  at  the  household  level,  it  is  also 
necessary to engage at the community level and beyond. The various methodologies share 
four basic principles: 
✓  Focus  on  people.  Household  strategies  are  designed  by  and  for  household 
members who define whom they want to be and what they want to do. They define 
and implement their own strategies for developing and improving their livelihoods, 
based on their goals, strengths, opportunities and assets. 
✓  Empowerment. The cornerstone of the HHM empowerment process is 
strengthening the capacity of individuals or groups to make choices and to 
transform those choices into desired actions and outcomes. This can be achieved 
by building on a mutual understanding of different roles and responsibilities. 
✓  Self-generated solutions. Willingness to change is generated by household 
members themselves (women and men of all ages) by placing them in the 
driver’s seat of the development process. They take responsibility for the changes 
they want to see and work closely with one another, friends and the community 
to make them happen. 
25 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
✓  Equal opportunities. Women and men, as well as youth, PWD and other 
vulnerable groups, have an equal voice in setting the household vision and equal 
access to development opportunities, productive assets, decision-making and 
benefits. Some HHMs explicitly address gender relations with a “gender justice” 
lens, making the promotion of gender equality an essential goal of any type of 
intervention. In others, gender inequalities emerge as a factor limiting the 
achievement of household goals and the ability of households to better use the 
productive resources available to them, and participants commit to addressing 
gender issues as their own choice. 
• 
The four Steps in the household methodology process at the household level are: 
✓  Step 1: Creating a household vision and situational analysis; 
✓  Step 2: Preparing an action plan; 
✓  Step 3: Implementing the action plan and monitoring progress; 
✓  Step  4:  Graduating  and  sustaining  the  use  of  HHMs.  As  preferred  HHM  tool  for 
visioning PACT will use the Gender Action Learning System (GALS). The goal is to 
address gender and social justice in economic development efforts with an inclusive  and 
participatory  process.  The  methodology  aims  at  empowering  men  and  women to 
achieve a better and happier life. It is using simple mapping and diagram tools for 
visioning and planning in order to empower men and women to make changes in 
their lives. The process embeds a broader change philosophy. A GALS’ process is 
based on a series of principles, tools and stages, implemented over a period of two 
to three years. 
• 
GALS principles – Four sets of principles are integrated: 
✓  Principles of social inclusion: everyone is a leader (regardless of sex, age, ethnicity, 
and  status),  human  rights  are  non-negotiable,  inclusion  and  equity,  respect 
difference; 
✓  Principles  of  gender  justice:  women  are  intelligent  agents  of  development  (not 
victims), men are allies in change, gender is fun, gender transformation, women’s 
right are non-negotiable in regard of the CEDAW rights; 
✓  Principles of empowerment: inspire with visions, every event is focused on action 
for  change,  from  individual  to  collective  action,  respect  differences,  building 
capacities, removing all forms of “power over” some people or groups, in order to 
gain “power within” (confidence, self-efficiency), “power to” take action and “power 
with” to act collectively (as a family, a group or community); 
✓  Principles  of  sustainability:  start  with  individual  self-interest  and  ownership,  a 
pyramidal  peer  sharing  mechanism  that  leads  to  self-upscaling,  integration  in 
existing activities at community level, movement for gender and social justice at 
various levels (community, project, country). 
Youth in PACT – With about 70 percent of the country’s population estimated to be 
• 
less than 34 years old, PACT intends to unlock the potential of the most vulnerable youth 
in the rural areas to innovate and co-drive the agricultural sector in Ethiopia. 
A combination of geographical, community, self and direct targeting mechanisms will 
• 
avoid  elite  capture;  this  will  ensure  that  the  youth  coming  from  the  poorest  and  poor 
households  with  little  access  to  assets  and  economic  opportunities  get  selected  and 
supported under PACT. Close consultation with Kebele authorities, Bureaus of Job Creation 
and  Enterprise  Development  and  one-stop  job  centres  will  support  in  identifying 
underemployed  and  unemployed  youth  in  targeted  areas.  While  various  assessments 
conducted  under  PACT  will  clarify  gaps  and  opportunities  for  youth  in  rural  areas,  the 
Programme will be deliberate in consulting targeted youth from different socio-economic 
backgrounds, ensuring their needs and priorities are met and adequately supported. 
26 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
• 
The following youth groups will be targeted: 
Youth groups 
Characteristics 
challenges 
and 
Opportunities within PACT 
Rural 
underemployed 
and unemployed 
youth owning no 
or small land 
•  Rely on land redistribution, 
inheritance 
small 
rental  markets  to  access 
land; 
and 
•  Limited  access  to  finance, 
assets, agricultural inputs, 
mechanization 
services, 
climate-smart 
technologies; 
•  Limited  access  to  training 
job 
secured 
and 
opportunities; 
•  Pushed 
to 
urban 
migration; 
•  Limited voice in watershed 
IWUAs, 
farmers 
communities, 
cooperatives, 
organizations; 
•  May have access to FTC 
Young women 
Economically 
active youth with 
disabilities 
•  Limited 
access 
to 
education,  capital,  finance 
and land; 
•  High  prevalence  of  child 
teenage 
other 
marriage, 
pregnancy 
forms of GBV; 
and 
•  Limited access and voice in 
committees, 
cooperatives, 
watershed 
IWUAs, 
farmers organizations 
•  Have  productive  capacity 
to 
take  advantages  of 
improved access to assets 
and 
for 
opportunities 
agricultural production and 
market access; 
•  Face stigma and prejudice 
in  the  communities  and 
within the household; 
•  Limited  access  to  land, 
inputs; 
finance, 
technologies; 
•  Limited  access  to  training 
opportunities; 
27 
•  Active 
engagement 
in 
participatory 
development 
community-led 
agricultural 
planning; 
•  Training and capacity building on 
NRM and adaption measures; 
•  Access  to  jobs  under  1.2,  1.3 
and 2.2; 
•  Access  to  land  for  nurseries 
under 1.2 
•  Training  to  provide  extension 
support and services to farmers 
through  the  Farmer  Promoter 
Model; 
•  Access  to  agripreneurship  and 
technical  training,  seed  capital, 
skill-based training; 
•  Enhanced  access 
cooperatives, 
organizations 
to  WUAs, 
farmers 
•  As above; 
•  Leadership training under GALS; 
• 
Increased 
ownership over resources; 
agency 
and 
•  Enhanced  access  to  research 
climate- 
inputs, 
services, 
technologies; 
•  Enhanced  voice,  participation 
in  WUAs, 
farmers 
leadership 
and 
cooperatives, 
organizations; 
•  Active 
engagement 
in 
participatory 
development 
community-led 
agricultural 
planning; 
•  Access 
to 
capacity-building 
opportunities under 1.2; 
•  Access 
to 
agripreneurship 
training  and  seed  capital  and 
targeted support under 2.2; 
•  At  least  five  agribusinesses  led 
by skilled youth with disabilities 
will be financially supported; 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
•  Enhanced  access  to  research 
climate- 
inputs, 
services, 
technologies; 
•  Enhanced engagement in policy 
dialogues; 
•  Enhanced access to markets and 
B2B support; 
•  Enhanced  access 
to  market 
information; 
•  Access 
to 
agripreneurship 
training  and  seed  capital  in 
second 
of 
implementation; 
phase 
•  Enhanced 
and 
participation in policy dialogues 
voice 
•  Limited access and almost 
in  watershed 
no  voice 
committees,  IWUAs, 
cooperatives, 
organizations; 
farmers 
Young 
pastoralists and 
pastoralists 
dropouts 
•  Former 
pastoralists, 
mostly  young  men  and 
adults,  who  could  not 
continue  in  the  pastoral 
economy due to loss of all 
or  partial  livestock  assets 
and  who  would  no  longer 
afford 
the  means  of 
production  to  produce  on 
their land; 
•  Some  move  close  to  the 
woreda  centers  (towns) 
just to make sure that they 
are  visible  to  the  woreda 
government  and  receive 
other 
food 
aid 
assistances 
their 
households’ survival; 
and 
for 
•  Migration  to  towns 
for 
casual labor 
Young 
agripreneurs 
•  Access to some level of 
•  Access 
to 
agripreneurship 
education; 
training and seed capital; 
•  Limited  access  to  finance, 
land; 
•  May  have  a  bachelor 
degree, but due to scarcity 
of job  opportunities,  are  on 
the 
for 
lookout 
employment 
•  Enhanced  access  to  research 
climate- 
inputs, 
services, 
technologies; 
•  Enhanced 
and 
participation in policy dialogues 
voice 
Pathways to social and economic empowerment – Poor infrastructure, limited access 
• 
to  agricultural  inputs,  climate-smart  technologies,  and  finance  along  with  limited 
employability  and  entrepreneurship  skills,  rural  youth  are  pushed  to  look  for  job 
opportunities elsewhere. Against the backdrop of two million youth entering the domestic 
labor market every year, PACT will address bottlenecks faced by youth in the rural areas 
and  enable  a  pathway  to  innovate  the  agricultural  sector  and  create  employment 
opportunities.  Youth  empowerment  will  be  achieved  via  the  following  pathways:  a)  creating  
employment opportunities along selected value chains; b) targeted support to young men 
and  women  agripreneurs  with  business  packages,  including  agripreneurship  training,  seed - 
capital and mentorship; c) enhancing access to technology and mechanization services, 
agricultural inputs, market-led infrastructure; d) access to skill-based training, including 
CSA,  NRM,  fattening,  etc.;  d)  promoting  youth  membership  and  leadership  in  cooperatives,  
IWUAs,  farmers  organisations,  especially  for  young  women;  and  e)  facilitating  policy 
dialogue to create an enabling environment for youth to thrive in rural areas. 
• 
The pathways are summarised in the diagram below: 
28 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Aim 
Socially and economically empower youth as strong value-chain actors in PACT 
Outreach 
At least 40 percent of the beneficiaries will be young people ( 50% young women) 
Economic empowerment 
Increased Decision-making and 
representation 
Objectives 
Creating sustainable employment opportunities along 
the value chains 
Enhanced marketable and skill-based 
competencies and knowledge 
Increased access to finance, agricultural inputs, 
technology 
Increased voice and representation in 
decision-making bodies 
• Investment in value chains promising to youth 
and where youth are already involved 
• Create IGA under Component 1.2 
• Capacity building for young people on CSA 
• Facilitate training as service provider, extension 
service officer, aggregator… 
• Improved access to mechanization technologies, 
extension services, agricultural inputs; 
• Enhanced access to market information; 
• Tailored support for young women and men 
agripreneurs with access to business packages, 
including training, mentoring and start-up 
budget; 
• Linkage of young agripreneurs with private 
sector 
•
•
Involvement of young men and 
women in  community-led 
participatory agricultural development 
planning 
Increase youth membership in IWUAs 
and Agricultural Cooperatives 
• Representation of youth in IWUAs and 
Cooperatives community decision- 
making bodies 
• Ensure voices of youth are heard in 
policy engagement activities 
• Ensure involvement of youth in value- 
chain development 
• Leadership training 
• Enhanced voice in household-decision 
• Support linkages to markets, agro-industrial 
making via GALS 
Activities 
parks; 
• At least 40 % of capacity building activities will 
be youth 
• Implementing market-oriented business plans 
via agripreneurship training and seed capital 
• Access to demand-driven business development 
services 
• Enhance access to rural finance and services 
M&E 
Age-disaggregated indicators 
Indicator CI 2.2.1: Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities 
Social empowerment – Cognizant of the patriarchal structures and age hierarchies, 
• 
PACT will boost confidence and leadership skills through GALS, supporting women, youth, 
especially young women, to take ownership over resources and enhance membership and 
leadership in cooperatives, farmers organizations and WUAs. The methodology serves as 
an entry point to achieve gender transformation by tacking the underlying social-cultural 
norms and set forth a change of power relations in the household and at the community 
level. Close consultation with elders and local authorities will be sought from the onset for 
sensitization and support so that women and youth can benefit from PACT activities in an 
equitable manner. 
Economic empowerment –  Entry points for  youth engagement and job creation 
• 
by component and subcomponent: 
Component 
Component 1 Community-Led Climate Smart Productive Landscapes 
Youth Strategic intervention 
29 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Sub-component 1.1 Community- 
led and Climate Resilient Natural 
Resources Management 
Sub-component 1.2 Climate 
Resilient Infrastructure 
Development 
Sub-component 1.3 Market- 
Oriented Production and 
Productivity Improvement of 
Selected Food Commodities 
•  A participatory social norms diagnostic study will be conducted to 
help the community identify and discuss social norms perceptions 
and expectations that shape and constrain inclusive participation of 
youth, women and persons with disabilities; 
Involvement of young men and women in community-led 
participatory agricultural development planning, including the 
identification of agricultural-sector related challenges and 
opportunities for economic empowerment; 
• 
•  Adequate youth active participation in the development of 
Landscape development and investment plans (LDIPs), which ought 
to be gender and climate-responsive and align to market demand 
•  Creation of green jobs 
• 
IGA: 
o  Establishment of 150 new and strengthening of 100 
agroforestry nurseries and trees planting, including 
production and planting of quality and resilient seedlings 
(50 % to rural youth, owning no land); supported youth 
will develop business plans and access green loans from 
IGREENFIN; seedlings will be sold to WUAs; 
o 
o  Production and distribution of improved cookstoves, 
especially geared towards women, including young women; 
o  Biogas construction, operation and maintenance; 
o 
Start-up input supply will be provided by PACT; 
•  Ensure young male and female farmers benefit from agroforestry 
carbon farming and selling; 
•  Enhanced access to Farmer Field Schools and Farmer Business 
• 
• 
• 
Schools; 
Increase participation and membership of youth in watershed 
committees to 30 % membership and 10 % in leadership positions 
Land distribution to young female and male farmers/agripreneuers 
within watershed for agribusiness activities 
Job creation as part of the development of small-scale irrigation 
systems (temporary daily labor); 
• 
Young female and male agripreneurs supported under sub- 
component 2.2 will benefit from climate-resilient, market-related 
infrastructure 
Training to provide extension support and services to farmers 
through the Farmer Promoter Model; 
Young female and male agripreneurs supported under sub- 
component 2.2 will benefit from: 
Skill-based training on improved crop protection systems, 
including integrated pest management practices; production of 
sheep and goats and poultry; improved production of forage 
and feed for livestock 
Capacity building on CSA; 
Strengthened access to research and extension services (e.g., 
Farmers Research and Extension Groups, Farmers Field 
Schools) and e-extension services for innovation; 
Access to mechanization technologies (Linkage with  Lersha); 
Access to agricultural inputs, e.g improved seeds and adapted 
crop varieties 
30 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Component 2: Inclusive Market access 
Sub-component 2.1 Support to 
Agri-business development 
• 
Access to nutrition education 
Youth- and gender-sensitive value chain assessment for 8 
commodities to identify potential private sector interested in 
establishing long-term business linkages with smallholder producers, 
especially with youth, women and men; 
•  Capacity strengthening of cooperatives, especially on leadership, for 
• 
increased voice and participation of women and youth; 
Young female and male agripreneurs supported under sub- 
component 2.2 will benefit from: 
o  Gender-specific value-chain assessment to identify gaps and 
barriers faced by women and youth; 
o  Enhance access to markets, agro-industrial parks; 
o  Enhanced access to private sector, including Dutch companies; 
o  Access to digital market-information platform, adapted to 
ensure inclusivity and literacy level of young farmers and 
agripreneurs; 
o  Enhanced access to Business development services, including 
participation in deal making meetings 
Sub-component 2.2 Support to 
Young Women and Men 
Agripreneurs 
•  Support 3000 young women and men agriprepreneurs to innovate 
agriculture and increase agricultural production and productivity 
•  Receive (i) extensive agripreneurship training; (ii) skill-based 
training; (iii) access to an innovative matching grant window; (iv) 
Mentorship; (v) participation in policy dialogues; 
•  Matching Grant Window: 300 proposals will receive a matching 
grant of max. 5000 USD (10 % contribution by youth); upon 
demonstrating proof of concept and sound up-scaling strategy, 60 
agribusinesses can quality for a top-up of max. 15000 USD (youth 
contribute 50 %) 
•  Enhanced access to agro-industrial parks, private sector, including 
• 
Dutch companies, markets; 
PACT will leverage existing financial services available to enable 
increased access for rural youth and women; Series of inspirational 
talks with successful female agripreneurs; 
Component 3: Community, Institutional and Policy Strengthening 
Sub-component 3.1 
Institutional Strengthening and 
Policy Support 
• 
Policy support will ensure adequate inclusion and meaningful 
participation of youth, including young women, pastoralists, youth 
with disabilities to advance strategies and policies that tackle 
youth-related bottlenecks and create a conducive environment for 
youth empowerment; 
Sub-component 3.2 Programme 
Coordination and Implementation 
Support Services 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
•  Capacity building of PMU and implementing partners on GEWE and 
youth empowerment; 
•  Gender and Social Inclusion Officer will advise and support PMU 
and implementing partners in effective mainstreaming of targeting, 
gender and social inclusion in project activities, especially ensuring 
youth-related investments are adequately operationalized; 
• 
•  All person-based indicators will be disaggregated by sex, age, and 
• 
other socio-economic dimensions, if possible; 
Intentional indicator selection will allow tracking social and 
economic performance of youth, including CI 2.2.1; 
•  Reporting formats and planning tools will be socially inclusive and 
facilitate reporting that clearly demonstrate participation in terms 
of gender, youth and other marginalized groups; 
•  Various gender- and youth-sensitive assessments conducted under 
PACT will allow for evidence-based programming and informed 
policy support; 
31 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Creation of decent jobs for youth – PACT drives to increase income and nutritional 
• 
intake from sustainable and climate-resilient agricultural production and water resources 
development for smallholder women, men and youth. As such, PACT draws on innovative 
approaches and brings in the private sector for increased mechanization in the agricultural 
sector. Naturally, young female and male farmers and agripreneurs are key in innovating 
the sector, but continue to face tremendous challenges, such as limited (entrepreneurial) 
skills, access to finance, inputs, and technologies. 
PACT  will  address  these  bottlenecks  and  develop  a  job  creation  strategy  to 
• 
intentionally  create  job  opportunities  along  the  selected  value-chains  by  up-skilling 
underemployed and unemployed youth, including youth with disabilities and pastoralists, 
living in and around selected watersheds, and providing youth with seed capital to establish 
viable agribusinesses. Concrete avenues for job creation are the following: (a) IGA, such 
as  nurseries  establishment,  including  production  and  planting  of  quality  and  resilient 
seedlings;  biogas  construction,  operation  and  maintenance,  cookstove  production and 
dissemination  under  sub-component  1.2;  (b)  water  infrastructure  maintenance  under 
component  1.3;  (c)  training  to  provide  extension  services  to  farmers  through  Farmer 
Promoter  Model  under  sub-component  1.4;  (d)  support  young  female  and  male 
agripreneurs under sub-component 2.2. Along with the creation of job opportunities for 
youth, PACT will enhance most needed skills and capacities to promote market-oriented 
and  climate-resilient  food  production  and  productivity.  As  such,  youth  will  access  the 
following  training  opportunities  for  enhanced  agricultural  knowledge  and  capacities:  (i) 
skill-based  training  on  CSA,  NRM,  post-harvest  waste  management;  etc,  and  (ii) 
agripreneurship training to build entrepreneurial and business skills. 
Persons with Disabilities in PACT – Ethiopia ratified the Convention on the rights 
• 
of persons with  disabilities in 2010. Furthermore,  a  National Plan of Action (NPA) of Persons  
with  Disabilities  was  adopted  for  the  period  2012-2021,  under  the  leadership  of  the 
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs in consultation with civil society and UN organizations. 
Despite  this  favourable  institutional  context,  the  provision  of  inclusive  services  and 
opportunities remain a challenge. Recent data suggest that only one percent of Ethiopian 
buildings  and  roads  are  fully  accessible  to  the  disabled.  Yet  accessibility  is  not  only  a 
physical, but also a social, cultural, and political. Marginalisation is factor to entrenched 
poverty.  Official estimates  suggest that 95 percent of Ethiopia’s  disabled live under  the 
poverty  line  and  are  unemployed.  Many  are  reported  to  beg  or  depend  on  family  and 
friends  for  their  livelihood.  Data  on  persons  living  with  a  disability  is  deficient,  but  the 
World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  estimates  17.6  percent  of  Ethiopians  live  with 
disabilities. Most are not helpless and represent an enormous untapped potential. Yet, an 
overwhelming majority remain uneducated and unemployed. 
As per the (draft) Disability Act of Ethiopia, “Persons with Disabilities” are defined as 
• 
persons  who  have  one  or  more  permanent  physical,  sensory,  mental  or  intellectual 
impairments which in interaction with various attitudinal and environmental barriers, may 
hinder or limit their full exercise of rights or full and effective inclusion in society, on an 
equal basis with others. PACT design can provide opportunities for persons with disabilities 
by supporting disability inclusion in agriculture through digital tools, offering farmers with 
disabilities paths to financial inclusion, ensuring accessibility of capacity building trainings 
including  accessible  training  materials,  ensuring  inclusion  of  persons  with  disabilities 
during community led agriculture development planning, accessible market infrastructure, 
capacity building of public and private sector institutions on disability inclusion. Additional 
actions  would  include  targeting  households  with  members  with  disabilities  that  would 
benefit from  the irrigation  schemes,  be  part  of  the WUAs  and  cooperatives targeted  by 
PACT.  PACT  can  further  specifically  target  skilled  youth  with  disabilities  to  become 
agripreneurs, through participation in extensive agripreneurship training; access to start- 
up loans/grants; mentorship; and participation in policy dialogues. 
32 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
About 5%6 of all Programme participants  for  PACT will be persons  with disabilities 
• 
living in the targeted rural areas. This will include skilled youth with disabilities7  that have 
the productive capacity to take advantages of improved access to assets and opportunities 
for  agricultural  production  and  market  access;  skilled  women  with  disabilities8  who  are 
engaged in income generation activities (such as shoat fattening, poultry production and 
managements,  home  gardening  in  the  production  of  fruit  and  vegetables);  households 
with a member/members with disability. 
Disability  inclusion  for  PACT  will  be  achieved  through  a  twin  track  approach  to 
• 
disability  inclusion:  a)  mainstreaming  disability  inclusion  in  all  PACT  components,  sub- 
components and activities; and b) actions targeted to persons with disabilities themselves, 
to enable access on an equal basis with others. 
Mainstreaming  disability  inclusion  by  supporting  disability  inclusion  in  agriculture 
• 
through digital tools, offering farmers with disabilities paths to financial inclusion, ensuring 
accessibility of capacity building trainings including accessible training materials, ensuring 
inclusion  of  persons  with  disabilities  during  community  led  agriculture  development 
planning, accessible market infrastructure, capacity building of public and private sector 
institutions on disability inclusion. Additional actions will include targeting households with 
members with disabilities that would benefit from the irrigation schemes, be part of the 
WUAs and cooperatives targeted by PACT. 
Targeted  actions  for  disability  inclusion  will  be under  sub component  2.2 that  will 
• 
specifically  target  skilled  youth  with  disabilities  to  become  agripreneurs,  through 
participation  in  extensive  agripreneurship  training;  access  to  start-up  loans/grants; 
mentorship; and participation in policy dialogues. 
Forming  strategic  partnerships  with  the  Federation  of  Ethiopian  Associations  of 
• 
Persons with Disabilities (FEAPD) and their affiliates at regional, zonal and Woreda levels; 
OPDs at the regional and Zonal levels; and specialist Disability Inclusion organisations and 
individual  experts  is  key  to  mainstream  disability  inclusion  in  PACT,  including  capacity 
building  key  institutions  and  organisations  under  PACT  (such  as  but  not  limited  to  the 
FPMU/RPMU/FOs etc) and in ensuring disability inclusion of relevant trainings under PACT. 
• 
PWD groups to be targeted are presented in the table below: 
PWD groups 
Characteristics 
challenges 
and 
Opportunities within PACT 
in 
Persons  with  disabilities 
living 
rural  areas; 
Economically active youth 
with  disabilities;  Skilled 
women  with  disabilities; 
Households 
a 
member/members  with 
disability 
with 
HH level functional 
disability stands at 
25.8%9
95% live in poverty, 
are largely 
uneducated and 
unemployed (even 
when skilled through 
TVET) 
Depended on family, 
neighbour and friends’ 
support 
Multidimensional 
marginalisation with 
women with 
disabilities faced with 
Active engagement 
in community-led 
participatory 
agricultural 
development 
planning (Target 
5%); 
Training and 
capacity building on 
NRM and adaption 
measures (Target 
5%); 
Access to capacity- 
building 
opportunities under 
1.2 (Target 5%); 
6In line with the quota system for employment in the National Disability Act of Ethiopia 2022 (Draft) 
7List of skilled youth with disabilities/youth with disabilities groups available 
8Supported by the “The Empowerment of Women with Disabilities towards Full and Effective Participation and 
Gender Equality” Project that is implemented by FEAPD funded by the embassy of Finland. 
9https://disabilitydata.ace.fordham.edu/country-briefs/et/ 
33 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Access to jobs 
under 1.2, 1.3 and 
2.2 (Target 5%); 
Access to 
agripreneurship 
training and start- 
up loans and 
targeted support 
under 2.2 (Target 
5%); 
Enhanced access to 
research services, 
inputs, climate- 
technologies 
(Target 5%); 
Enhanced 
engagement in 
policy dialogues 
(Target 5%); 
Access to 
agripreneurship 
training, start-up 
loans, skill-based 
training (Target 
5%); 
Enhanced access to 
WUAs, 
cooperatives, 
farmers 
organizations 
(Target 5%) 
Leadership training 
under GALs (Target 
5%) 
Enhanced access to 
research services, 
inputs, climate- 
technologies 
(Target 5%) 
additional burdens + 
barriers 
Widespread barriers 
(attitudinal, 
institutional, 
environmental) 
Accessibility issue 
(infrastructure + 
facility  including 
health centers and 
schools + 
communication 
barriers + inaccessible 
venues to trainings 
and meetings) 
Attitudinal and 
Institutional barriers 
Additional challenges 
faced by women and 
girls with disabilities 
include: 
Discrimination/neglect 
including marriage 
prospects 
Difficulty carrying out 
HH work and care 
responsibilities 
Menstrual health and 
hygiene management 
Face stigma and 
prejudice in the 
communities and 
within the household; 
Limited access to 
land, finance, inputs; 
technologies; 
Limited access to 
training opportunities; 
Have productive 
capacity to take 
advantages of 
improved access to 
assets and 
opportunities for 
agricultural production 
and market access. 
Based  on  beneficiary  selection  criteria,  persons  with  disabilities  and  HHs  with  a 
• 
member/members  with  disabilities  living  in  and  around  targeted  watersheds  will  be 
selected for PACT activities. 
Pathways  to  social  and  economic  empowerment  –  The  table  below  provides  a 
• 
summary of pathways to social and economic empowerment of people with disabilities: 
34 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Entry points for disability mainstreaming and targeted support by component and 
• 
Sub-component: 
Disability Inclusion Strategic intervention 
Component 
Component 1 Community-Led Climate Smart Productive Landscapes 
Sub-component 1.1 
Community-led and Climate 
Resilient Natural Resources 
Management 
• 
Involvement of persons with disabilities and HHs with a 
member/members with a disability in community-led 
participatory agricultural development planning, 
including the identification of agricultural-sector related 
challenges and opportunities for economic 
empowerment; 
The community mobilization/development manual will 
go through a disability inclusion lens review to ensure 
disability inclusion 
Persons with disabilities and HHs with a 
member/members with disabilities’ participation in 
Agricultural Development Plan development, which 
• 
• 
35 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
ought to be gender, disability inclusive, equitable, 
climate-responsive and align to market demand 
•  Ensure farmer HHs with members with a 
disability/disabilities benefit from agroforesty carbon 
farming and selling; 
•  Enhanced access to Farmer Field Schools for farmers 
• 
with disabilities; 
Increase participation and membership of persons with 
disabilities in watershed committees 
•  Ensure HHs with members with a disability/disabilities 
benefit from irrigation systems (including disability in 
the selection criteria for WUAs and Cooperatives for 
support to prioritse support to PWDs and their HHs – 
WUAs and Cooperatives with 5% PWDs membership 
and 1% in leadership positions) 
•  Disability inclusion needs integrated in the training 
materials and during ToT 
•  Disability Inclusion needs integrated in digital modules 
and in training 
•  Disability inclusion needs integrated in climate resilient 
practices training materials and during trainings 
•  Ensure HHs with a member/members with disability 
benefit from the homestead gardening support (target 
5% PWDs) 
•  Access to nutrition education 
Sub-component 1.2 Climate 
Resilient Infrastructure 
Development 
Sub-component 1.3 Market- 
Oriented Production and 
Productivity Improvement of 
Selected Food Commodities 
Component 2: Inclusive Market access 
Sub-component 2.1 Support 
to Agri-business development 
•  Disability inclusion needs integrated data collection to 
identify gaps and barriers faced by skilled persons with 
disabilities and the opportunities 
Sub-component 2.2 Support 
to Young Women and Men 
Agripreneurs 
Sub-component 2.3 Local 
Climate resilient, Market- 
related infrastructure 
•  Disability inclusion needs integrated in the digital 
platforms, content, promoting and awareness raising 
•  Disability inclusion needs integrated in the online 
agripreneurship training to target skilled youth with 
disabilities as well 
•  Ensure atleast one trainer per region is a trainer with 
disability with costs for the caretaker of the trainer 
budgeted for 
•  Ensure at least one agri business led by skilled youth 
with disabilities is supported each year with access to 
seed money (in the form of a USD 5000 grant) 
Integrating accessibility needs in new market 
infrastructure construction (ramps to access market 
sheds, accessible door size, ramps to access toilet and 
hand washing facilities at the market shed, etc) 
• 
Component 3: Community, Institutional and Policy Strengthening 
Sub-component 3.1 
•  Awareness creation at all levels, including community 
on disability inclusion through parternship with 
Federation of Ethiopian Associations of Persons with 
Disabilities (FEAPD) and their affiliates at regional, 
zonal and Woreda levels, OPDs at regional and Zonal 
levels and Specialist Disability Inclusion Organisations 
and individual experts 
Target PWDs in staffing at different levels 
• 
•  Capacity building of public and private sector 
institutions on disability inclusion 
Policy support on the Draft Disability Act of Ethiopia 
• 
Sub-component 3.2 
Institutional Strengthening 
and Policy Support 
36 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
• 
Monitoring and assessing targeting performance 
All people-based indicators will be disaggregated by sex, youth, indigenous people and 
persons with disabilities, if possible 
Indicato 
r 
Multipliers 
Baselin 
e 
Mid- 
term 
End 
target 
Source 
Frequenc 
y 
Responsibility 
CI IE 2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement 
in empowerment 
COI 
Survey 
Baseline 
PCMU 
Midline 
Endline 
37500 
25 % 
18750 
13 % 
18750 
13 % 
Total person 
Total  persons 
(%) 
Males - Number   
Males - % 
Females- 
Number 
Females - % 
of   
of   
Number 
young 
Number 
indigenous 
peoples 
Number 
of   
persons  with 
disabilities 
CI  2.2.1  Persons  with  new 
opportunities 
Total number 
Male - Number 
Female 
Number 
Young 
Number 
-   
-   
Young  male  -   
Number 
Young female – 
Number 
Indigenous 
people 
Number 
- 
Persons  with 
disabilities 
- 
Number 
jobs/employment  COI 
Baseline 
PCMU 
Survey 
Midline 
Endline 
15000 
7500 
7500 
6000 
3000 
3000 
2250 
750 
37 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
The Financial and human resources needs to deliver activities for poverty targeting 
• 
and social inclusion – Adequate financial and human resources will be allocated to deliver 
gender and social inclusion-related activities. To this end, a Gender and Social Inclusion 
Officer  (with  focus  on  youth  and  disabiltiy  inclusion)  will  be  recruited  to  oversee 
implementation,  ensure  social  inclusion  dimensions  are  adequately  considered  and 
addressed,  and  monitor  and  evaluate  implementation  progress.  Gender  and  Social 
Inclusion  officer  will  work  closely  with  the  MoA  Directorate  of  Rural  Job  Creation 
Development and the regional Bureaus of Job Creation and Enterprise Development  and 
liaise  with  Technical  and  Vocational  Educational  Training  Institutions  to  drive  rural 
employment creation, especially for young women and men, and persons with disabilities. 
Staff  Terms  of  Reference  (ToRs)  with  targeting,  gender  and  social  inclusion  related 
responsibilities are annexed to the PIM. Further, the Programme shall aim for a gender- 
balanced PMU. Adequate capacity building on cross-cutting themes and gender-responsive 
budgeting and monitoring and evaluation will be provided to the PCMU and Implementing 
Partners. 
PACT shall  earmark funds  for  targeting,  gender  and  social inclusion  interventions. 
• 
Adequate financial allocation shall be duly integrated in the AWPB. 
I.3.3 : Food and Nutrition 
The PACT Programme will support: a) market-oriented production of diversified and 
• 
nutritious  foods;  b)  nutrition-sensitive  agriculture  model  villages;  c)  direct  support  for 
integrated home gardening for the most vulnerable households; d) improved post-harvest 
handling at household and group levels; e) enhanced livelihoods to increase affordability 
of healthy diets; f) Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) on healthy diets; and 
g) household methodologies to improve joint decision making on food related issues. PACT 
will put emphasis on policy engagement and engage actively in the Ethiopia Food System 
transformation  agenda.  The  paragraphs  below  provide  some  guidance  on  the 
implementation of these activities, that will be further fleshed out in the PACT Nutrition 
strategy and action plan developed at inception stage. 
Contribution to increase availability of diverse, safe and nutritious foods at market 
• 
and  household  levels:  The  activities  hereunder  aim  at  availing  nutritious  foods  to  the  target  
beneficiaries. 
Activity  1  –  Farmers  benefiting  from  Subcomponent  1.4  will  receive  dedicated 
• 
support via the government extension system to enhance production and productivity of 
selected commodities. The assumption is that the supply of foods will be higher on markets 
and  farmers  will  also  reserve  some  of  their  produce  for  home  consumption. In  collaboration 
with Government Research institutes (EIAR), partner research institutions (such as World 
Vegetable  Centre)  and  the  Agricultural  Transformation  Institute  (ATI),  training  content 
(including weather, climate and market information) will be developed and disseminated 
to the farmers organized in Farmers Field Schools. In addition, PACT will leverage the EU- 
funded FAO initiative improving early generation seed supply for biofortified crops such as 
Orange Flesh Sweet Potatoes and Iron-Zinc beans. Scale up the approach from PASIDP II, 
ICRISAT  will  support  PACT  with  dissemination,  multiplication  and  adoption  of  these 
biofortified crops in suitable landscapes. 
Activity 2: Nutrition-Sensitive Agriculture (NSA) model villages – As part of the effort 
• 
to expand JICA and IFAD collaboration across country of operations, PACT will contribute 
to  JICA initiative  supporting the  Ministry  of Agriculture  Food  and  Nutrition  Coordination 
Office  (FNCO)  with  the  establishment  of  NSA  model  villages.  PACT  and  the  FNCO  will 
identify  suitable  woredas  for  the  NSA  model  villages,  potentially  functional  PASIDP  II 
schemes producing diverse crops and benefiting from adequate access to markets. This 
way, PACT will contribute to first pillar of the MoA NSA strategy on the availability of diverse 
38 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
and nutritious foods while JICA will provide higher-touch technical assistance on nutrition 
promotion and education components. 
Activity  3:  Targeted  support  for  integrated  homestead  production  –  this  will  be 
• 
provided to vulnerable households in the watershed with pregnant and lactating women, 
children under two years old and persons with disabilities. Building on the experience from 
PASIDP II (as well as the NSA activities of AGP II  and SURE), households will receive a 
package of indigenous vegetable seeds, fruit tree seedlings, small livestock and gardening 
tools.  The  crops  selected  will  depend  on  the  agro-ecological  zones  —  they  include  pumpkin, 
abesha  gomen  (kale),  lettuce,  kosta  (swiss  chard),  carrots,  mango  (for  lowlands)  and 
apple (highlands). The small livestock kit could include 5-layer hens and feeds for three 
months. Depending on the area, fish could be considered in the livestock kit. Households 
should  also  be  encouraged  to  buy  goats  via  their  village  saving  and  loans  associations 
(VSLAs). Additionally,  all  households  receiving the home  garden  package  will share the 
multiplied vegetable and fruit seeds, the livestock offspring as well as the tools with their 
neighbours  as  a  contribution  to  the  community.  Although  this  intervention  is  nutrition- 
targeted intervention, it should be coupled when feasible with water harvesting promotion 
under  sub-component  1.2  and  support  to  youth-women-group  businesses  such  as 
vegetable and fruit tree seedlings nurseries or poultry under sub-component 2.1. 
Activity  4  –  Food  security  and  dietary  diversity  indicators  are  significantly  lower 
• 
during lean season. PACT will support all farmers’ households with training on safe post- 
harvest handling to preserve food nutritional value and extend shelf-life. Demonstrations 
of storage technologies such as Purdue Improved Crop Storage (PICS) bags for grains and 
locally made cooling systems for vegetables and fruits will be conducted at FTCs. The MoA 
Food and Nutrition Coordination Office (FNCO) has already developed a training guide on 
nutrient-preserving  and  processing  practices  (e.g.,  drying,  pickling,  dehydration, 
fermentation for mangoes, tomatoes, onions and other vegetables). They will provide the 
ToT to cascade to the DAs. At cooperative level, PACT farmers will also be able to access 
larger scale post-harvest technologies such as zero-energy cooling chambers, threshers, 
harvesters, solar dryers for food commodities intended for markets. Cooperative members 
should also be trained on food safety aspects, leveraging training materials harmonised 
under the EU-funded FAO initiative. 
Activity  5  –  These  activities  will  improve  farmers  households’  livelihoods,  which 
• 
should increase farmers’ purchasing power for nutritious diets. 
Household  members  make  informed  choices  to  improve  their  dietary  quality  and 
• 
subsequently  create  demand  for  nutrient-rich  crops  –  The  activities  hereunder  aim  at 
enabling the target households to make informed choices about their diets. 
Activity 6: Social and Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) – This is undertaken 
• 
through integrated, multichannel strategies and has proven to be effective in improving 
nutrition outcomes of children and women. In Ethiopia, Alive and Thrive’s (A&T) package 
of nutrition messaging promoted by DAs, food demonstrations, priest’s sermons and radio 
drama showed a 7-percentage point-increase of children with minimum dietary diversity10. 
To  sustain  changes  in  nutrition-related  behaviours,  the  audience  needs  to  be  reached 
through  multiple  channels  focusing  on  specific  behaviours.  Similarly,  WFP  experience 
showed  that  women  who  received  SBCC  messages  and  participated  in  cooking 
demonstrations had much higher chance to meet dietary diversity requirements than not 
exposed  women  (39.1%  versus  23.4  percent)11.  Save  the  Children  experience  showed  that 
10 Kim S. et al (2017). Cluster-randomized program evaluation of a multi-sectoral community-based approach to 
improving infant and young child feeding in Amhara, Ethiopia. International Food Policy and Research Institute 
(IFPRI), Alive and Thrive. 
11  WFP  Fresh  Food  Voucher  SBCC  external  evaluation  –  World  Food  Programme.  Centre  for  Evaluation  and 
Development C4ED (2021) External Evaluation Report: Support for strengthening resilience of vulnerable groups 
in Ethiopia: the Fresh Food Voucher Programme expansion in Amhara region. January 2018 to December 2020. 
39 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
SBCC  programming  focusing  on  dietary  diversity  should  target  men  and  women  separately, 
in addition to promote couple communication and joint decision making12. 
PACT  will  adopt  an  intentional  and  holistic  Nutrition  SBCC  strategy  to  effectively 
• 
influence beneficiary households’ behaviours and create demand for nutrient-rich crops, 
following the Ministry of Agriculture Social and Behaviour Change guidelines developed in 
2022. In the guidelines, clear  steps  are described to develop and tailor the PACT SBCC 
strategy to  each regional context.  The first step  comprises  a  barrier  analysis  aiming  to 
identify the key barriers and enablers to the promoted behaviours at individual and socio- 
ecological  levels.  Using  the  Knowledge  Attitude  Practices  (KAP)  survey  model  with  a 
human-centred  design  approach,  this  formative  research  is  key  to  unpack  nutrition 
behaviours and identify potential influencers in households and communities. 
The second step is the development of the PACT Nutrition SBCC strategy: a guiding 
• 
document defining a targeted, multi-level approach that seeks to enable community-based 
social  support for  improve  nutrition  behaviours,  while improving  knowledge,  awareness 
and  skills  among  beneficiary  households.  The  strategy  identifies  key  messages13,  their 
audiences,  channels,  tones  and  formats14  drawn  on  the  barrier  analysis  and  existing 
evidence. The PMU will contract a SBCC consultant to develop the strategy and a detailed 
action  plan  per  region.  The  consultant  will  also  be  in  charge  of  developing  and  testing 
context-based  messages  for  the  identified  audience,  as  well  as  ensuring  that  SBCC 
interventions  are  gender  responsive  (e.g.,  appropriate  timing  for  in-person  and  digital 
messaging,  suitability  of  venue  for  mothers).  The  consultant  will  train  the  PACT 
implementing  agencies  on  the  SBCC  strategy  and  action  plan  to  ensure  they  own  the 
operationalisation. 
Regarding the message packaging, PACT PMU will contract a communication content 
• 
development company (e.g., production company for radio spots, designer for posters) to 
ensure the message effectively reaches the audience. Throughout this process, Alive and 
Thrive  and  Save  the  Children  International  will  be  available  to  provide  technical  assistance.  
PACT  PMU  will  supervise  the  roll-out  of  the  SBCC  campaign.  The  right  mix  of 
communication channels and materials to effectively reach the target audiences, including 
but not limited to NSA extension services15. In fact, DA and HEWs have very limited time 
and capacities  to cover nutrition topics  and follow up on household practices. Alive and 
Thrive report shows that 7 percent of households had a contact with their DA in the last 
three months. 
The use  of mass  media such  as  radio  and  posters  will lead to  higher exposure to 
• 
messaging16 while additional mutually supportive in-person channels should be considered, 
including  religious  leaders,  cooking  demonstrations17,  home  garden demonstrations, 
gender model family discussions, community mobilisation via watershed committees and 
WUAs. The strategy’s success will be measured at regular intervals by the PMU. These data 
will be used to refine the intervention, track performance, and ultimately measure impact 
on dietary diversity. 
12 Save the Children, USAID, The Manoff Group (2014) Mothers’ Infant and Young Child Feeding Practices and  
their  Determinants  in  Amhara  and  Oromia  Regions.  A  Report  on  Formative  Research  Findings  and 
Recommendations for Social and Behavior Change Communication Programming in Ethiopia. April 2014. Addis  
Ababa, Ethiopia 
13  The  approach  should  focus  on  specific  behaviours  such  as  “ensuring  that  eggs  and  leafy  vegetables  are 
available for children and mothers year-round”. These messages should be adapted to each regional context. 
14 WFP SBCC evaluation showed that women tend to care about their children’s diets at the expense of theirs.  
Messages should emphasize the  importance of dietary diversity for women in particular, who are vulnerable to 
malnutrition, especially during pregnancy and lactation. 
15 IFAD supported the development of the Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture training curriculum for pastoralist areas, 
via the Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project (LLRP). PACT will leverage these existing resources. 
16 From Alive and Thrive’s experience (Kim et al. 2017): exposure to various interventions and greater intensity  
of exposure was associated with ≥2 times higher odds of Minimum-Dietary Diversity. 
17 WFP experience showed that women who received SBCC messages and participated in cooking demonstrations 
had much higher chance to meet dietary diversity requirements than not exposed women (39.1% vs. 23.4%). 
40 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Activity  7:  Gender  equity  is  key  to  drive  nutrition  outcomes  –  the  Gender  Model 
• 
Family  (or  GALS)  will  be  used  to  improve  joint  decision  making  in  households  and 
communities regarding food and nutrition, and increase balance workload to make women 
available for cooking, feeding and child care (see more details in the Gender section of the 
PIM). 
Activity 8 – The support to multi-purpose water infrastructure under sub-component 
• 
1.3  will complement nutrition activities in the targeted sites.  Access to clean water is  a 
key strategy to reduce diseases that interfere with people’s ability to absorb nutrients from 
the  food  they  eat  and  to  reduce  women’s  time  to  fetch  water.  Strong  protocols  and 
maintenance systems will be implemented to ensure the potability of water according to 
the Drinking water specifications  of the Ethiopian Standards Agency. Additionally, given 
the  low  household  awareness  on  Water  Sanitation  and  Hygiene  (WASH)  practices18, 
messaging on the importance of using safe water and  handwashing at critical moments 
will be disseminated to the beneficiaries to prevent diseases and Do No Harm via the NSA 
training curriculum. 
In  terms  of  targeting,  while  the  mainstreamed  interventions  regarding  enhanced 
• 
production  and  productivity  of  food  commodities,  improved  post-harvest  handling  and 
training  on  nutrition-sensitive  agriculture  should  reach  most  of  the  farmers,  the  SBCC 
strategy will be tailored to the relevant audience per geographical area. Special attention 
will be given to the most nutritionally vulnerable groups, such as pregnant and lactating 
women,  caregivers  with  children  under  two  years  old  and  adolescent  girls.  The  higher 
touch interventions  of the nutrition SBCC strategy and the home garden promotion will 
target households with vulnerable populations, including persons with disabilities. 
As  a  nutrition-sensitive  programme,  PACT  will  support  the  Ethiopia  Food  System 
• 
(EFS) Transformation process by allocating resources under Component 3 to strengthen 
the inter-ministerial body in charge of the multisectoral coordination the EFS, to organise 
sensitisation and planning workshops for food system transformation at regional and zonal 
levels,  and  to  support  NSA  supervision  and  tools  development.  To  coordinate  these 
interventions, PACT PMU will recruit a dedicated Nutrition officer at Federal and Regional 
levels,  and  appoint  a  social  inclusion  focal  point  at  woreda  level.  Additional  enabling 
measures  will  include  the  sensitization  of  PACT  PMU  at  all  levels,  communities  and 
implementers  on  nutrition-sensitive  agriculture  in  the  food  system  transformation 
framework. 
I. 4: CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT 
Target communities and watershed will be selected based on vulnerability to climate 
• 
change and level of environmental degradations. Priority will then  be given to the most 
vulnerable communities with low adaptive capacities and severely degraded landscapes. 
Natural  Resource  management  and  climate  adaptation  and  mitigation  interventions 
pursuant measures specified into the Ethiopia’s Climate Resilient Green Economy Strategy 
(CRGE,  2011),  National  Adaptation  Plan  (NAP,  2017)  and  the  Updated  Nationally 
Determined  Contributions  (NDC,  2021)  will  be  implemented  in  target  regions  and  Woredas.  
PACT  implementation  will  use  participatory  and  landscape  approaches  in  which  target 
communities and other stakeholders will be consulted to identify environment and climate 
challenges and prioritizes proved traditional and innovative technologies  and techniques 
to address the challenges. Besides, the prioritized adaptation measures identified with the 
IFAD’s Climate toolbox (CARD, Adaptation framework and EX-ACT Carbon Balance Tool) 
will  be  revised  and  validated  with  targeted  communities.  Integrated  NRM  and  climate 
adaptation and mitigation measures will be integrated into Programme intervention and 
implemented across the landscape. 
18Ethiopian Public Health  Institute (EPHI), National  Information Platform for Nutrition (NIPN) and  International  
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) (2021). The Productive Safety Net Programme and the Agri-Food System 
in Ethiopia: Key outcomes and challenges. 9 June 2021. 
41 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
I. 5: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
I.5.1 : Implementation Arrangements 
The Ministry of Agriculture will be the lead executing agency (but will seek to include 
• 
key agencies and private sector partners in innovative areas of the Programme). MoA will 
be  responsible  for  overseeing  the  overall  implementation  of  the  Programme.  The  MoA 
Minister  of  State  will  be  responsible  for  overseeing  the  overall  PACT  Programme 
coordination  with  support  from  the  Directorate  of  Small-Scale  Irrigation.  The  PACT 
Programme will be coordinated following a decentralised government structure. Thus, the 
Programme’s institutional arrangements for coordination will be specified at three levels − 
Federal, Regional, and Woreda. MoA will delegate the role of the lead executing agency to 
a  Federal  Programme  Coordination  Office  (FPCU)  that  will  be  established  at  that  level. 
Composition of the FPCU is presented hereunder and the respective ToRs/JoDs of all the 
FPCU staff are presented in the Annex. 
a)  Programme coordinator 
b)  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (2) 
c)  Knowledge Management and communication Specialist (1); 
d)  Agribusiness Specialist 
e)  Agronomist 
f)  MIS/GIS specialist 
g)  Irrigation Engineer 
h)  Civil/Infrastructure Engineer 
i)  Social safeguard specialist 
j)  Climate change and watershed management specialist 
k)  Environmental safeguard specialist 
l)  Nutrition Officer 
m)  Capacity Building and Gender Specialist 
n)  Senior Procurement Specialist 
o)  Senior Finance Specialist 
p)  Finance manager 
q)  Accountant 
r)  Driver (4) 
s)  Secretary 
t)  Office assistant 
At the Regional level, the Programme will be managed by the respective Bureaux of 
• 
Agriculture;  the  Heads  of  the  Bureaux  of  Agriculture  will  provide  overall  leadership.  In 
addition, the structures will be strengthened, under subcomponent 3.1, to ensure that the 
Regions  have  adequate  capacity  to  implement  the  Programme  in  accordance  with  the 
overall strategic priorities and contribute to the achievement of Programme’s development 
objective.  Regional  Programme  Coordination  Offices  (RPCUs)  will  be  established  in  all 
participating  regions  and  will  be  responsible  for  the  day-to-day  coordination  of  the 
Programme.  Composition  of  the  RPCUs  is  presented  hereunder  and  the  respective 
ToRs/JoDs of all the RPCU staff are presented in the Annex. 
a)  Programme coordinator 
b)  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
c)  Knowledge Management and Communication Specialist; 
d)  Agribusiness Specialist 
e)  Agronomist 
f)  MIS/GIS specialist 
g)  Irrigation Engineer 
h)  Social and Environmental Safeguard Specialist 
i)  Climate Change and Watershed Management Specialist 
j)  Capacity Building Specialist 
k)  Procurement Specialist 
42 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
l)  Finance Management Specialist 
m)  Driver 
n)  Secretary/Cashier 
o)  Office assistant 
At the Woreda and Programme site level, experience from PASIDP II suggests that 
• 
there is a need to have dedicated Programme staff at the Woreda level for effective and 
efficient implementation. A clustering approach will be used at this level with six Woredas 
forming  a cluster. Accordingly, the  PACT  Programme  will have two  staff  at the Woreda 
Cluster level:  a)  Cluster  Coordinator;  and  b)  Cluster  Assistant Accountant.  The  duo  will 
work with a team of three Development Agents (government extension staff) per Woreda 
to oversee activity implementation. The skill mix of the Development Agents will depend 
on priority interventions in a given Woreda. The Woreda Coordinator, having close linkages 
on the ground, will be handling day-to-day issues in Programme implementation in close 
collaboration with the regional RPCU. 
I.5.2 : Programme Governance Structures 
Programme  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  –  In  order  to  respond  to  emerging  policy 
• 
issues critical for timely programme implementation, MoA will establish a PSC. Steering 
Committees at federal, regional  and  woreda levels play key roles for oversight and major 
decision-making.  Steering  Committees’  key  roles  and  functions  across  the  different 
Programme levels (all from federal to woreda level) will include: 
✓  providing  overall  oversight  and  strategic  guidance 
to  PACT  Programme 
implementation; 
✓  ensure  that  the  Programme  contributes  to  the  higher- l e v e l sector  policy  and 
strategic goals; 
✓  en s u r e  that  the  Programme  is  moving  in  the  right  direction  towards  achievement  of 
its development objective; 
✓  review and approve the AWPB submitted by the respective PCUs at the different 
levels; 
✓  review  and  approve  implementation  performance  progress  reports  prepared  by  the 
PCUs and oversee the implementation of the  corrective actions; 
✓  updating respective senior management within their ministries/bureaux on strategic 
✓ 
and policy related issues of Programme developments; 
facilitating strategic partnerships with high level senior stakeholders within the 
Government; 
✓  ensure  inter-ministerial  coordination, harmonization  and  alignment  with  other 
programmes and initiatives in the sector. 
The State Minister of Agriculture will chair the Federal PSC and the Federal Project 
• 
Coordinator will serve as the Committee’s S e c r e t a r y . The Committee will meet at least 
twice a year to review and approve the AWPBs and the implementation progress reports. 
It will comprise of high-level key officials from relevant line ministries, agencies and other 
relevant stakeholders. An indicative list of the PSC members is presented hereunder: 
State Minister, MoA – Chair; 
Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands; 
Ministry of Finance; 
Ministry of Planning and Development; 
Ministry of  Livestock and  Fisheries; 
Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity; 
Ministry of Trade; 
Ministry of Industry; 
Federal Cooperative Agency; 
Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Institute; 
43 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Ethiopian Environmental Protection Authority; 
Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research (EIAR); 
Heads, Bureaux of Agriculture of all the Regions participating in the PACT 
Programme; 
Federal PACT Programme Coordinator- Secretary. 
Regional Steering Committees (RPSCs) – The RSCs will be chaired by the respective 
• 
Heads  of  the  Regional  Bureaux  of  Agriculture.  They  will  provide  policy  and  strategic 
guidance in planning, prioritization and implementation of Programme investments. This 
will  be  done  in  accordance  with  the  Government  vision  and  medium-term  goals  for 
agriculture  development  in  the  Regions,  and  overall  Programme  approach  and 
implementation strategy. It will  approve the AWPBs and key Programme documents, such 
as implementation progress, financial and audit reports. The RPSCs are expected to provide 
guidance in the process  of selecting priority commodity  value  chains  in  the  Programme 
target areas in a more focused manner, so as to see tangible results in productivity, ability 
to access markets and increase income of Programme beneficiaries. The RPSCs will meet 
at least twice a year but as frequently as needed to effectively provide the oversight function. 
An indicative list of the PSC members is presented hereunder: 
✓  Bureau of Agriculture (BoA), Chair; 
✓  Bureau of Water and Energy  (BoWE); 
✓  Bureau of Livestock and Fisheries  (BoLF); 
✓  Bureau of Finance (BoF); 
✓  Bureau of Trade (BoT); 
✓  Bureau of Irrigation and Land Use (BoIL) 
✓  Cooperative Agency (CA); 
✓  Bureau of women’s affair (BoWA); 
✓  Bureau of Job Creation and Enterprise Development 
✓  Regiona Environment Protection Authority (REPA); 
✓  Regional Institute of Agricultural Research (RARI); 
✓  Heads of Zone Agriculture in PACT Programme Woredas; 
✓  Regional PACT Programme Coordinator, Secretary. 
Woreda  Steering  Committee  (WSCs)  –  These  will  be  chaired  by  the  respective 
• 
Woreda  Administrators.  The  WSCs  will  provide  guidance  in  planning,  prioritization  and 
implementation  of  Programme  investments.  This  will  be  done  in  accordance  with  the 
Government vision and medium-term goals for agriculture  development   in   the Woreda, 
and  overall  Programme  approach  and  implementation  strategy.  They  will  approve  the 
AWPBs and key Programme documents, such as implementation progress,  financial and 
audit  reports.  The  WSCs  will  meet  at least  twice  a  year  but  as  frequently  as needed  to 
effectively provide the oversight function. 
Technical Committees (TCs) – TCs will be responsible for providing technical advice 
• 
to the respective PSCs to ensure that decisions made by the PSCs  are evidence-based. 
TCs will a l s o p r o v i d e technical support t o the  PCUs  on  the  quality  of  special studies, 
guidelines,  documentation  of  best  practices,  and  M&E  reports.  The  following  is  a 
summary of the role of the TCs at all levels: 
✓  provide  t e c h n i c a l  advice  to  steering  committees  on  PACT Programme  activities; 
✓  support  the  PACT  Programme  PCUs  at  all  levels  through  technical backstopping 
and  supervision; 
✓  review  AWPBs  and  implementation  progress  reports  and provide  comments  and 
recommendations on improving the documents; 
✓  review  implementation  progress  on  an  ongoing  basis  and  provide  advice  on  any 
institutional and other capacity building as may be found appropriate; 
✓  review all  documents prepared as part of the PACT Programme implementation and 
advise on the technical appropriateness or lack thereof. 
44 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
At the Federal level, the TCs will be composed of senior technical staff from relevant 
• 
implementing institutions; consideration will be given to include representatives of service 
providing agencies. At the regional, zonal and woreda levels, the TCs will be established 
with high-level experts from the relevant implementing institutions. The TCs will meet at 
least quarterly at the federal, regional and zonal levels, monthly at the woreda levels. The 
summary for TCs at the different level is provided hereunder: 
Federal  Technical  Committee  (FTC)  –  The  FTC  will  be  chaired  by  the  FPCU 
• 
coordinator. The composition of the federal TC committee will include technical persons 
drawn from each federal government implementing agency including Ministry of Planning 
and Development. 
Regional  Technical  Committees  (RTCs)  –  The  RTCs  will  be  established  to  provide 
• 
technical  support  to  the  RPSCs.  The  RTCs  will  be  chaired  by  the  RPCO  Coordinator. 
Depending on the regional context, members of the team will be drawn from the relevant 
technical  bureaus  and  institutions.  The  role  of  the  RTC  will  be  to  review  Programme 
documents,  including  physical  and  financial  progress  reports,  procurement  documents, 
AWPBs, and synthesize issues or areas that need decision and guidance of the RPSCs. 
Woreda Technical Committee (WTCs) – PACT Programme implementation will involve 
• 
technical staff in Woreda offices. The technical committees will be chaired by the Heads of 
Office of Agriculture. They WTCs will comprise Irrigation Agronomists, Irrigation Engineers, 
Watershed/Soil  and  Water  Conservation  Experts,  Gender  Experts,  Environmental 
Protection  Experts,  IWUA  Organizers,  Cooperative  Promotion  Experts,  Cooperative 
Marketing  Experts.  The  team  will  provide  technical  support,  monitor  and  supervise 
Progamme activities  at Woreda and Kebele levels. The Woreda  Coordi n at ors  will serve 
as the Secretary  of the team. 
The  WTCs  will  be  responsible  for  providing  technical  on-site  support  in 
• 
implementation  of  Programme  interventions  in  target  Kebeles  to  ensure  that  the 
Programme  is  implemented  appropriately  and  in  a  coherent  manner.  The  capacity  of 
woredas  will  be  strengthened  (under  Subcomponent  3.1)  based  on  capacity  needs 
assessment. The WTCs will: 
✓ 
facilitate  their  respective  Kebeles  in  identification  of  priority  interventions  in 
accordance  with  agreed  regional  priorities  and  overall  Programme  approach  and 
strategy for planning and prioritization of interventions; 
✓  coordinate the preparation of the Woreda AWPBs; 
✓  supervision of Programme activities and technical backstopping; 
✓  coordinate  the  preparation  of  monthly  and  quarterly  Programme  implementation 
progress reports; 
✓  provide  advice  on  the  capacity  development  of  farmers’  organizations  at  grassroots 
level  (such  as  IWUAs,  cooperatives,  etc.)  to  enhance  their  technical  capacity  and 
management skills; 
✓  Coordinate t h e annual Woreda implementation Review Meetings  that  will  bring together 
implementing agencies from all Kebeles, value chain partners and other donor financed 
projects  to  reflect  on  Programme  implementation  progress,  learn  and  share  best 
practices/innovations,  discuss 
issues  and  challenges,  and  build 
partnerships. 
implementation 
45 
Schematic Representation of the PACT Programme Institutional and Oversight Arrangements 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Ministry of Finance 
Federal Cooperatives 
Commission 
Ministry of Irrigation and 
Lowland 
Ethiopian Institute of 
Agricultural Research 
Ethiopian Environmental 
Protection Commission 
Ethiopian Agricultural 
Transformation Institute 
NR state Minister 
FPSC 
FTCL 
FPCU 
Small Scale 
Irrigation 
Directorate 
Horticulture 
Development 
and technology 
transformation 
Directorate 
Crop 
development 
Directorate 
Soil fertility 
Directorate 
Agricultural 
Extension 
Directorate 
Nutrition  and 
Food  System 
Coordination 
Unit 
Women and 
Children affairs 
Directorate 
Agricultural job 
creation 
Directorate 
Marketing and 
Infrastructure 
development 
Directorate 
Natural 
Resource 
management 
Directorate 
Environment 
and Climate 
change 
development 
directorate 
Poultry 
Development 
Directorate 
Forage 
Development 
Directorate 
RTCL 
RPCU 
BoA 
RCoop 
RBoWE 
REPA 
BoIL 
WTCL 
WPCU 
WBoA 
Stakeholders 
KAO 
FOs (Associations and Cooperatives) 
I.5.3 : Partnerships 
PACT Programme implementation will seek to coordinate and harmonize with ongoing 
• 
and/or  planned  projects  financed  by  various  development  partners  that  support  PACT-
related thematic areas. The objective will be to: a) take advantage of existent synergies 
and  avoid  duplications;  and  b)  explore  the  possibility  for  co-financing  and/or  parallel 
financing. While some potential partners have been listed hereunder, the list is, by no means 
exhaustive and PACT Programme stakeholders will be on the lookout for others during the 
course  of  implementation.  The  list  of  potential  partners  for  collaboration  is  presented 
below: 
Potential PACT Programme Collaboration Partners 
Partner 
Project (existing or planned)  Potential areas of collaboration 
1.  Food and 
Agriculture 
Organisation (FAO) 
of the UN 
✓  EU-funded programme on 
food safety regulatory 
framework and biofortified 
crops value chain 
development (including 
Orange-Flesh Sweet Potatoes 
and Iron-Zinc beans). 
✓  Agripreneurship 101 
2. Ministry of 
✓  Technical support on their 
Agriculture - 
Ethiopian 
Agriculture 
Transformation 
Institute (ATI) 
Digital platforms 
✓  Business-to-business 
facilitation 
PACT will leverage the 
food safety frameworks 
and training materials 
developed by FAO for the 
cooperatives under 
Component 2. 
PACT will also leverage the 
findings of FAO study to 
identify marketable 
pathways for biofortified 
crops and benefit from 
early generation seeds 
developed by EIAR with 
FAO support. 
Dissemination and 
systematization of CSA 
practices and technologies. 
Joint support to Rural 
Extension Directorate of 
MoA 
PACT will collaborate with 
FAO on sub-component 
2.2 to provide adequate 
support to (young) 
agripreneurs and create a 
conducive environment for 
agribusinesses in Ethiopia 
Climate-resilient crop 
varieties, practices and 
technologies for 
dissemination within PACT 
targeted regions 
Scaling up of inclusive and 
accessible Digital 
Platforms to support E- 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
extension services, market 
linkages and E-voucher. 
Opportunities to develop 
bundled services bringing 
together an inclusive and 
accessible digital platform 
that supports productivity 
market access and ARM 
related information 
dissemination. 
Support and engage in 
business-to-business 
relationships building in 
their initiatives in the 
different commodity 
clusters 
Support and implement 
cooperative and union 
capacity development 
activities 
Support forward and 
backward business-to- 
business relationship 
development 
Support access to financial 
services by enhancing 
RUSACos and other 
cooperatives’ capacity and 
linkage with different 
funds and financial 
institutes 
The FNCO will provide 
instrumental technical 
support to the PACT PMU 
to develop the programme 
nutrition strategy and key 
technical materials, as well 
as leading Training of 
Trainers initiatives on Food 
preservation methods and 
other relevant topics. 
3.  Federal 
Cooperative 
Commission and 
Regional 
Cooperative 
Promotion Agency 
✓  Enhance cooperatives and 
Unions’ capacity and 
business-to-business 
relationship development 
4. Ministry of 
✓  As the technical entity in 
Agriculture - Food 
and Nutrition 
Coordination Office 
(FNCO) 
charge of nutrition 
mainstreaming in the 
Ministry of Agriculture, the 
FNCO is driving several 
initiatives, including the 
development of Nutrition- 
Sensitive Agriculture training 
materials and Social 
Behaviour Change guidelines 
for nutrition in the 
agricultural sector. 
5.  Ethiopian Institute 
of Agriculture 
Research (EIAR) 
6.  World Bank 
✓  Regional research stations 
Seed certification and 
training of seed multipliers 
48 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
7.  Acorn/Rabobank 
✓ 
8.  Vita 
✓ 
 Opportunities will be 
explored to benefit farmers 
engaged in agroforestry 
practices (planned) 
 Investment on the 
production and dissemination 
of improved cookstoves 
(planned 
9.  Lersha/Hello 
Tractor 
✓  One-stop digital service to 
smallholder and commercial 
farmers and enables them to 
access farm inputs (crops 
and livestock), renting of 
mechanization services and 
dynamic agro-climate 
advisory (present in Oromia, 
Amhara, SNNPR, Sidama, 
Somali) 
10. Digital Green 
✓  Farmer Registry- Farm Stack 
11. Alive and Thrive 
✓  Supported MoA to develop 
SBCC guidelines and 
materials in Amhara region 
12. Save the Children 
International 
✓  Supported MoA to strengthen 
Nutrition Sensitive 
Agriculture capacities at 
Federal and Regional level, 
as well as implementing 
SBCC Nutrition campaigns 
with Alive and Thrive. 
Carbon trading 
Energy saving/carbon 
trading 
Provision of mechanisation 
services 
Leverage on gender- 
responsive services, 
explore disability-inclusion 
to facilitate access of 
inputs and mechanization 
services to farmers with 
disabilities 
Scale of the Farmer 
Registry supported by 
department of Extension 
Services 
Technical support to 
develop and roll-out PACT 
Nutrition SBCC strategy. 
Ready to use SBCC 
materials for Amahra 
region, need to 
contextualise for other 
regions. 
Technical support to PACT 
PMU to develop Nutrition 
SBCC strategy, share 
readily available SBCC 
materials. 
13.  JICA 
✓  Note on the SHEP approach 
SHEP approach 
✓  Closing the SHEP project in 
Oromia, designing the next 
phase in October 2022. 
NSA model villages in 
Amhara and Oromia 
regions 
✓  Nutrition sensitive 
agricultural model villages 
programme under design 
with the MoA Food and 
Nutrition Coordination Office. 
49 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
14. CD4RM/PARM 
✓  Proposal developed 
15. World Food 
Programme 
16. Global Alliance for 
Improved Nutrition 
(GAIN) 
17. Federation of 
Ethiopian 
Associations of 
Persons with 
Disabilities 
(FEAPD) and their 
affiliates at 
regional, zonal and 
Woreda levels 
18. ENGEA- Ethiopian 
Network for 
Gender Equality in 
Agriculture 
19. TRAIDE 
(foundation) 
✓  Climate resilience initiatives 
in Somali (water 
conservation technologies, 
index-based crop and 
livestock insurance schemes 
using an “insurance for 
works” approach). 
✓  Fresh Food Voucher (FFV) 
programme increasing 
demand for vegetables, fruits 
and eggs in Amhara and 
Somali. 
✓  Create and support Scale-Up 
Nutrition (SUN) Business 
network, including private 
sector actors involved in the 
food value chains (e.g., 
wheat mill processors for 
fortification) 
✓  They have formed VESA - 
Village Economic and Social 
Associations including 
women only VESAs. Have 
supported women with 
disabilities who are engaged 
in income generation 
activities (such as shoat 
fattening, poultry production 
and managements, home 
gardening in the production 
of fruit and vegetables) as 
part of “The Empowerment 
of Women with Disabilities 
towards Full and Effective 
Participation and Gender 
Equality” Project. 
Currently reviewing the Gender 
strategy 
Orange Corners Initiative, 
flagship programme of the Dutch 
Enterprise Support Agency 
50 
DRR technical support, 
platform for DRR 
Develop synergies for 
extension of insurance 
coverage of PACT 
beneficiaries in Somali 
Region through a 
benchmarked targeting 
Use WFP FFV supported 
retailers as buyers for 
PACT supported 
cooperatives producing 
vegetables, fruits and eggs 
in overlapping areas. 
PACT will liaise with the 
SUN Business network for 
B2B initiative under 
subcomponent 1.2 
PACT will liaise with FEAPD 
and its affiliates at 
regional, zonal and 
Woreda levels during 
disability inclusion 
mainstreaming in all 
components (community 
led planning, digital 
extension services, 
accessible market 
infrastructure, institutional 
and organisation capacity 
building and policy 
support) and for actions 
targeted for youth with 
disabilities under 2.2. 
PACT will liaise with 
ENGEA to influence and 
inform the review of the 
gender strategy 
Collaborate with TRAIDE 
to identify Dutch 
agribusinesses operating 
in targeted areas and 
facilitating business 
opportunities with 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
v.  Development Bank 
of Ethiopia (DBE) 
Inclusive Green Finance 
(IGREENFIN) DBE is the apex 
institution 
agripreneurs supported 
under sub-component 2.2 
Aligned with priorities set 
by the Dutch Embassy and 
TRAIDE, focus will be on 
job creation for female and 
male youth 
IGREENFIN will provide 
loan for climate adaptation 
and resilience 
interventions under 
component 1 of PACT 
51 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES 
II. 
1: START-UP 
MoA will develop a workplan and the associated budget for preparatory activities and 
• 
liaise with IFAD to organize a start-up workshop. Such preparatory activities could include: 
Action 
Who 
a)  Sign the financing agreement (following IFAD board approval) 
GoE/IFAD 
b)  Establishment of the Federal Project Coordination Unit and the 
GoE in consultation with IFAD 
Regional Project Coordination Units. 
c)  Open Designated Accounts and identify signatories (ID and 
GoE 
signature specimen). 
d) Sign MoUs/Memoranda of Cooperation between the Federal 
MoF/MoA/participating Regions/Woredas 
Government and the participating Regions, Regions and Woredas 
and between MoA and the other participating line Ministries, 
specifying the expected responsibilities and outcomes. 
e)  Review and finalise the first year AWPB and Procurement Plan 
FPCU/RPCUs 
f)  Review and finalise draft PIM 
FPCU/RPCUs 
g) Establish the Federal Programme Steering Committee and 
MoA 
introduce the PACT Programme to it. Agree on how to proceed 
with the provision of the oversight function (frequency and 
modality of meetings) 
h)  Establish the Programme Steering Committees in the Regions 
MoA/BoAs 
and Woredas 
i)  Procurement and installation of an off the shelf accounting 
FPCU/RPCUs 
software at the FPCU and RPCUs and the chart of accounts coded 
to the detail possible 
j)  Hold the official PACT Programme start-up workshop. This would 
be used to orient the FPCU/RPCUs/FPSC/RPSCs/WPSCs/other 
stakeholders. 
MoA/BoAs 
k)  Initiate the undertaking of the PACT Programme baseline survey 
FPCU/RPCUs 
l) 
Initiate the process of undertake a capacity and system’s needs 
assessment to elaborate capacity building plan 
FPCU/Consultant 
m)  Conduct awareness creation on Programme objectives and 
FPCU/RPCUs 
implementation arrangements 
n)  Review and finalise the targeting strategy for the selection of 
PCU/Regions/Woredas 
Kebeles, watersheds and specific beneficiary communities. 
Initiate the process of selecting the Kebeles, watersheds and 
specific beneficiary communities. 
IGREENFIN and GTM 
The Inclusive Green Financing initiative-II (IGREENFIN-II) for climate-resilient and 
• 
low  emission  smallholder  agriculture  will  support  strategic  gender  sensitive  INRM 
interventions. : IGREENFIN has prepared a gender action plan[1] in which there will be 
several areas of complementarity with PACT initiatives including: (i) capacity strengthening 
on  gender  mainstreaming  in  climate  smart  agriculture  for  project 
52 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
implementers,  stakeholders  including  MFIs,  and  target  groups;  (ii)  capacity  building  to 
ensure climate adaptation, mitigation and resilience is integrated into business plans and 
skills training for target groups on climate smart agriculture and income generating off- 
farm activities; and (iii) ensuring gender equitable access to climate smart technologies 
for  agricultural  productivity.  Gender  considerations  will  be  mainstreamed  into  project 
management, including the appointment of a gender specialist in the project management 
unit. Based on this, GTM and IGREENFIN will complement PACT through three principal 
opportunities: 
Component 1: The GTM and IGREENFIN will co-finance the cost of biogas systems 
• 
for 2000 households which will yield direct benefits to women in terms of their health, time 
management and workload as well as the opportunities to use biogas residues for home 
gardening  and  agroforestry  practices.  Priority  will  be  placed  on  households  headed  by 
women,  those  with  persons  with  disabilities  and  those  participating  in  household 
methodologies to ensure equitable access, joint decision making and a fairer distribution 
of workloads and benefits arising from biogas investments 
The  GTM  and  IGREENFIN  will  co-finance  the  establishment  of  vegetable  seed 
• 
multiplication  nurseries  at  community  level.  The  nurseries  will  be  linked  to  research 
centres to  multiple the foundation  seed  which will  be  developed  by  PACT.  They  will  be 
located  within  the  command  area  of  irrigation  schemes.  Women  and  youth  groups  will 
develop business plans to secure green financing to operate the nurseries as a livelihood 
diversification opportunity, as well as contributing to adaptation. 
Component  2:  The  GTM  will  conduct  a  gender  and  climate  institutional  and 
• 
operational assessment of MFIs’ financial products and work with selected MFIs to tailor 
their  products  to  meet  women’s  priority  needs.  IGREENFIN’s  gender  assessment  in 
Ethiopia identifies MFIs as a potential entry point to channel support towards rural women 
as  they  provide small-sized financial transactions  to people who usually fall outside the 
reach  of  formal  finance  services.  However,  many  MFIs  have  a  shortage  of  finance:  a 
CIMMYT  report  of  2016  estimated  that  80%  of  the  potential  rural  demand  for  loans  is 
unmet.[2]  Hence  access  to  climate  finance  through  IGREENFIN’s  support  to  MFIs  is 
essential to enable women to access climate smart products.  The GTM contribution will 
be to ensure the relevance of the green products and services on offer. 
Component  3:  The  GTM  and  IGREENFIN  will  co-finance  policy  support  for  the 
• 
implementation and inter-agency coordination of National Adaptation Plan at regional level 
to ensure they deliver on their declarations and commitments to rural women. Assessment 
of implementation status  and identify any bottlenecks leading to joint develop of action 
plans  and  investment  plans  to  ensure  gender  and  climate  considerations  are  fully 
embedded to deliver transformative results. 
II.2: COMPONENT 1: COMMUNITY-LED CLIMATE-SMART PRODUCTIVE LANDSCAPES 
• 
The Component will support: a) community-led equitable access and sustainable use of 
natural resources; b) market-led and climate adapted smallholder production and productivity 
enhancement  of  target  crop  commodities;  c)  development  of  inclusive  and  equitable  water 
infrastructure;  and  d)  improved  dietary  diversity.  The  outcome  of  this  component  will  be 
sustainable access and utilisation of natural resources and increased agricultural productivity. 
The component will be implemented under three subcomponents. 
II.2.1: Subcomponent 1.1: Community-led Climate Resilient Development and 
Natural Resource Management 
Interventions  under  this  subcomponent  will  seek  to  empower  communities  in  90 
• 
Woredas  to  identify  pastoral  and  agricultural-sector-related  opportunities  for  their 
economic  empowerment,  prepare  and  implement  development  plans  in  150  selected 
landscapes. The activities of the subcomponent include: a)  Community sensitization,  b) 
Assessments  and  prioritizations  of  landscapes  based  on  their  degradation  status  and 
climate vulnerability c) Community led preparation of landscape development and 
53 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
investment plans d) implementation of NRM including soil health improvement measures.; 
e) Soil testing facility establishment; f) Construction of biogas facilities at household level; 
g)  installation  of  cookstoves  to  reduce  deforestation  and  access  carbon  markets  .  The 
investment  plans  will  identify  all  required  climate  resilient  investments  to  achieve  the 
vision and aspirations  of the community. PACT will focus  on investments  in agriculture, 
NRM and access to markets. The LDIP, will guide investments under components 1 and 2. 
The expected outcome of this subcomponent is enhanced resilience to climate impacts of 
rural communities and productive landscapes. 
The programme will recruit one national consultant and five regional consultants to 
• 
lead preparation of the 150 LDIPs. The consultants will prepare a strategy (guideline) that 
will  guide  the  programme  prepare  LDIPs.  Other  specific  activities  expected  from  the 
consultants are: (i) Preparation of training/awareness material and generic template that 
will be used to prepare the LDIPs, (ii) train Federal and Regional PMUs and Woreda PIUs 
on community planning and preparation of LDIPS, (iii) training of community facilitators, 
(ii) lead awareness creation programmes for communities (iv) support the synthesis of the 
data/information collected during consultations and preparation  of  the LDIPs and finally 
(v) presentation to the programme stakeholders and documentation of lessons learnt and 
knowledge  products  (management).  The  programme,  through  the  support  of  Woreda 
bureaus  of  Agriculture  and  PIUs,  will  recruit  Community  Facilitators  (CFs)  from  the 
landscape to facilitate the process of LDIP preparation. The CFs will be gender-balanced 
and  will  be  trained  in  facilitation  skills,  to  moderate  the  entire  process  of  problem 
identification and agreement on the development plans. Specifically, the CFs will facilitate 
the  communication  with  the  Kebele  administration,  DAs  and  communities  during 
sensitization, awareness and consultations, identification of HHs for the consultation and 
language translation. 
Community Facilitation Process – Facilitation is a tool and a process that will enable 
• 
the beneficiaries to gain understanding of the own environment, by into or own the entire 
process,  embrace  proposed  change  envisioned in  the  outcomes,  when  well  guided.  The 
CFs, recruited from within their own communities, will be trained in facilitation skills, to 
moderate the entire process of problem identification and agreement on the development 
plans.  The  process  aims  to  educate  them  about  their  surroundings,  and  other  sector 
specific issues, gain knowledge about the resources around them, their rights and what 
the Programme is capable of doing towards improving their livelihoods.  CFs will be trained 
and mentored,  expected to have  good  listening  abilities,  objective  and  to  good  probing 
and encouraging skills, engaging all categories of people in the community.  They will help 
identify relational issues among members and ensure that they are addressed as part of 
social repair. Their backgrounds including academic qualifications, social orientations and 
willingness to transverse both geographical and technical spaces and bring the voices of 
every member of the watershed representative committee on board, will be important. 
CFs recruited come from within their communities and therefore with good understanding 
of the people, language and local context. Once, the target areas and/or population have 
been  selected  with  the  help  of  Local  Authorities,  CFs  set  up  series  of  meetings,  some 
targeting  specific  categories  of  the  community,  that  would  lead  to  sub-project 
identifications.  Where  necessary,  CFs  would  invite  subject  matter  specialists  from 
Agribusiness, Climate, Agronomy, Gender, Social inclusion, Nutrition, (irrigation) Engineer 
etc., to participate and inform decisions on technical issues in the community meetings. 
The  first  community  meetings  will  be  organised  in  consultation  with  the  relevant  Local 
Authorities  at  woreda/  kebele  levels.  The  meeting  to  be  attended  by  all  categories  of 
inhabitants  of the  area. The  purpose  is  to introduce  PACT: its  intentions,  eligibility  and 
procedures  of  operation,  among  other  things.  This  is  considered  important  in  laying 
grounds for operations. It's on the basis of this meeting that the relevant authorities will 
permit  the  CFs  to  formally  work  with  the  communities  in  the  area.  Participatory  social 
norms diagnostics study will enable the communities identify and discuss norms, 
54 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
perceptions  and  expectations  that  shape  and  constrain  inclusive  participation  of  all 
members of the community including women, youth and persons with disabilities 
Community  sensitization:  The  programme  will  conduct  awareness  raising  and 
• 
mobilisation  of  the  local  communities  on  landscape  planning  process.  Led  by  the  CFs, 
equitable participation in the landscape planning process of all community members will 
be enhanced by addressing embedded social-cultural norms that may perpetuate gender 
inequalities  and  social  exclusion.  Before  the  LDIPs  are  compiled,  a  participatory  social 
norms  diagnostic  study  will  help  the  community  identify  and  discuss  social  norms 
perceptions and expectations that shape and constrain inclusive participation of especially 
women,  youth  and  PWD.  Social empowerment tools  including community  conversation, 
household  methodologies  including  Gender  Model  Family  (GMF)  will  be  used  to  engage 
communities and households. 150 landscape communities are strengthened to undertake 
self-governance in landscape management. 
Other  activities  in  the  selected  landscape  communities  will  include  formation  of 
• 
Landscape  Coordination  Committee  (again  with  an  emphasis  on  gender  and  youth 
inclusion), training and sensitisation on gender transformation, inclusiveness and equity, 
climate  change  and  nutrition;  and  training  in  the  participatory  landscape  development 
processes for the Watershed Associations. 
Landscape  Coordination  Committees  (LCCs):  Is  a  group  of  farmers  from  the 
• 
landscape who, in collaboration with DAs and Kebele administration, will oversee/lead the 
overall preparation and implementation  of the LDIPs. The LCCs  will be elected from the 
landscapes using a participatory approach. Under the umbrella of the LCCs, there will be 
associations  (sub-associations) who will manage the day-to-day performance of specific 
activities.  These  includes:  Water  Users  Association  (WUA),  watershed  committee, 
cooperative association/committee. 
Watershed Committees: Once the landscape is selected, the command areas will be 
• 
defined followed by the identification of target HHs. Where interest is strong, the community 
leadership decides to commit to PACT and opportunities exist around the target  value chains, 
a  gender  balanced  watershed committee  will  be  established to interact  with the  project. 
The Watershed Committee will oversee the planning and implementation of the project at 
the watershed level. 
Water  Users  Associations  (WUA):  This  association  is  consisting  of  HHs  benefiting 
• 
from  small scale  irrigation schemes  and  other water  and their  main  responsibilities  are 
overseeing the overall construction and development of water resources, distribution and 
efficient use of water resources, maintenance of schemes among others. 
To  support  the  mobilization,  sensitization  and  awareness  raising  efforts  at  the 
• 
watershed  and  community  levels,  Woreda  officials,  Development  Agents,  Community 
Facilitators and other technical staff will be trained by TA consultants (Training of trainers) 
to conduct the mobilization, sensitization campaigns and support the watershed planning. 
PACT PCU teams will monitor and exercise oversight functions over these personnel and 
their activities. 
Regional  and  Woreda  Consultations:  The  project  will  seek  to  secure  community 
• 
interest  in  PACT  and  the  approaches  it  is  promoting  with  a  series  of  interactive 
consultations at regional and woreda levels. The stakeholders will be sensitized and seek 
the cooperation of their decentralized agencies at the regional and woreda levels in the 
roll  out  of  PACT.  PACT  will  engage  the  services  of  technical  assistance  to  support  the 
launches and roll out of the project in the regions and woredas 
Assessments  and  prioritizations  of  landscapes  –  Through  community 
• 
engagement  and  a  pre-set  criterion,  the  programme  will  identify  150  landscapes.  The  most  
important  criteria  can  be  landscapes:  (i)  experiencing  sever  land  degradation  and  (ii) 
inhabited by poor farmers. The prioritized landscapes will be delineated using Geographic 
55 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Information System (GIS). The programme will apply various tools to identify agricultural, 
environmental  and  climatic  risks  prevailing  in  the  landscape  and  also  prioritize  agro- 
ecology/Kebele specific adaptation measures. The most important tools are the Capacity 
Development for Agriculture Risk Management (CD4ARM) tool, Adaptation Framework25, 
Climate  Adaptation  in  Rural  Development  (CARD)  Assessment  tools26,  Geofolio  and 
Regioclim and the Resilience Design and Monitoring Tool (RDMT).  The assessments will 
be  gender  and  climate  sensitive  assessments,  based  on  priority  commodities, 
opportunities and constraints, market dynamics, infrastructure gaps. The federal, regional 
and Woreda level PMUs as well as bureaus of agriculture will take role in the application of 
the tools during LDIP preparation. To this effect, training on the application of the tools as 
well  as  preparation  and  implementation  of  LDIPs  will  be  given  prior  preparation  of  the 
plans. 
Community-led development and investments plans preparation: Through a 
• 
guided  and  technical facilitation targeted  process, targeted  communities  are moderated 
and supported  by  CFs  and independent  consultants to  prepare  Landscape  Development 
and  Investment  Plans  (LDIPs).  The  LDIPS  will  identify  the  constraints  to  sustainably 
improve  resilience,  agriculture  and livestock  production  and the  market  linkages,  along 
with  proposed  measures  to  overcome  these  constraints.  The  LDIPs  will  also  identify 
investments in (i) carbon farming and integrated natural resources management such as 
terracing,  agroforestry,  regenerative  agriculture,  rehabilitation  of  degraded  land, 
construction  and  operationalization  of  biogas  digester, improved  cook  stoves,  (ii)  water 
infrastructure for  households,  irrigation  and livestock,  (ii)  crop  and  livestock  production 
enhancement and (iv) market access improvement, to be financed under components 1 
and 2. Market access, adaptation to climate change nutrition and gender transformation 
will  be  key  criteria  for  selection  of  interventions.  The  programme  will  assist  in  the 
preparation  of  150  LDIPs  for  the  selected  landscapes.  The  LDIPs  are  socially  inclusive, 
gender  sensitive,  climate  responsive  and  aligned  to  market  demand  and  community 
nutrition and food security needs. The LDIPs will be cleared by the regional PMU. The LDIPs 
will  underpin  the  local  investments  and  remain  with  the  leaders  of  the  LCC  and  Local 
Authorities  as  a  living  document  to  guide  development  and investment  planning  during 
and after Programme implementation. 
Tailored training on the implementation of the LDIP will be given to federal, regional and 
Woreda level climate and NRM/Watershed experts as well as Kebele administration DAs 
and LCC. Specifically, training of trainers (ToT) will be given to federal and regional experts 
by universities or research institutions which will eventually be cascaded to Woreda and 
kebeles. The main capacity development thematic areas will be identified in the LDIPs and 
may include implementation of landscape management and monitoring, implementation 
of  climate-smart  agro-ecological  practices  and  technologies  including  Nature-based 
Solutions (NBS), Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EBA) measures, regenerative agriculture 
practices,  Carbon  Farming,  adoption  of  new  technologies  including  improved  cookstove 
and biogas, through a gender equity, and social inclusion approach. The training will be 
delivered  prior  to  the  physical  implementation  of  the  LDIPs.  This  capacity  building  is  a 
continuous process and will be delivered until project completion. 
Some features of the plan include: 
▪  Engage local communities and use their indigenous knowledge to identify and 
prioritize risks/challenges as well as interventions; 
▪  Specifically, agricultural, environmental and climatic risks of each landscape will 
be identified and prioritized. This will follow with identification and prioritizations 
of interventions/adaptation measures. The plan will include baseline 
data/information, such as hectarage of arable land, forest, degraded land and 
available natural resources (e.g., soil, water) etc.; 
▪  The landscape development and investment plan (LDIPs) will also identify the 
farming practices, problems on soil fertility, agricultural inputs etc and will 
prioritize best available farming practices/technologies that will suit to the agro- 
ecology of the watershed. 
56 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
▪  Programme engineers as well as regional/Woreda water resource specialist will 
support the process in the identification of potential areas for small scale 
irrigation and rainfed agriculture followed by demarcation of command areas. This 
will also use to define the areas that should be developed by the integrated 
natural resource management interventions. 
In addition to the risks and adaptation measures, the watershed management 
plans will also define the roles and responsibilities of all actors, such as target 
HHs, DAs and government bodies at all levels; 
▪ 
▪  Programme PCUs at Federal, regional and Woreda levels as well as the 
community facilitators, LCC, WUA, Watershed and Cooperatives Committees will 
all be very engaged in facilitating the process of preparing the LDIPs. 
The LDIP process 
Phase 
Activity 
Phase 1: 
Community 
Mobilization 
Timeframe 
1-2 months 
4 months 
Selection of Community facilitators: 2 community 
facilitators per Landscape to be identified from the respective 
communities. Selection criteria will be prepared and the CF 
will be selected in consultation with Woreda Bureaus of 
Agriculture and community representatives 
Training of Community facilitators: in facilitation skills for 
guiding discussions at community level in an open and 
inclusive manner. 
the 
Establish  Landscape  Coordination Committee (LCC): Is 
a  group  of  farmers  from  the  landscape  who,  in 
collaboration  with  DAs  and  Kebele  administration,  will 
and 
overall 
oversee/lead 
implementation  of  the  LDIPs.  The  LCC  will  elect  its 
leaders  using  a  participatory  approach.  Under  the 
umbrella  of  the  LCC,  there  will  be  associations  (sub- 
the  day-to-day 
associations)  who  will  manage 
performance of specific activities. These includes: Water 
Users  Association 
(WUA),  watershed  committee, 
cooperative association/committee. 
preparation 
Strengthen/training of LCC, the water user's association, 
watershed committees, cooperatives committees: The 
training areas include, but not limited to, gender 
transformation, inclusiveness and equity, climate change and 
nutrition; 
Introduction into communities through meetings with 
relevant leaders and stakeholders. Introduce PACT, 
objectives and approach of a facilitated community driven 
development. 
Meetings to be held at kebele and woreda level 
Initiate Community meetings for identification of 
Landscape. 
Phase 2: 
prioritization 
and selection of  Under the guidance of the Landscape consultants, the CFs 
landscapes 
will mobilize targeted communities on specific dates and time 
to explain the requirements 
  4 Months 
Assessments of landscapes in selected woredas: 
Degraded landscape will be selected in collaboration with 
57 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Phase 3: 
Elaboration 
Landscape 
Investment 
Development 
Plans (LIDPs) 
Phase 4: 
Implementatio 
n of LIDPs 
regional and Woreda Bureaus of Agriculture and 
environment. 
The selected landscape will be delineated using GIS and 
Remote Sensing applications 
Risk assessment: The agricultural, environmental and 
climatic risks/challenges prevailing in the landscape will be 
identified and prioritized using different tools. This will be 
followed by the identification and prioritization of 
adaptation/mitigation measures. The landscape consultants 
and CFs will ensure measures identified by the communities 
are within the scope of the programme.  
Participatory Social Norms diagnostic to identify norms 
that curtail the meaningful participation of community 
members and identify appropriate remedial strategies for 
their inclusion. Norm identification will be focused on 
engagement in agricultural productive activities including 
access to land, inputs, extension services, market 
participation and involvement in key rural institutions 
(Cooperatives, Saccos). 
Community facilitators will guide the discussions at 
community level to support watershed committees to identify 
priority activities for their communities. CFs will apply 
strategies to ensure the participation of all. For instance, 
where women or youth may not be able to express 
themselves in groups, CFs will hold separate meetings to 
solicit their opinions for consideration in the LIDPs. 
CFs will be backstopped by the consultants and when needed 
experts from Woreda PIU and Regional PMUs such as 
Climate, Environment, (infrastructure) Engineer, 
Agribusiness, Gender, Nutrition, Agronomist) 
Development of comprehensive LDIPs that are socially 
inclusive, gender sensitive, climate responsive and aligned to 
market demand and community nutrition and food security 
needs. 
A specific monitoring plan will be developed for each of the 
LIDPs 
Launch of subprojects (herein as activities): Priority 
activities identified in the LIDPs will be actualized within 
components 1 and 2: 
Inclusive climate resilient agricultural productivity: sub 
component 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4) and 
Inclusive profitable markets: Component 2 
PACT technical specialists will ensure identified priorities are 
implemented with community provided with in built 
community feedback mechanism. 
Social empowerment approaches integrated within the 
implementation of the LIDPs i.e., community conversations, 
household methodologies 
6 months 
From Year 2 
and 3 of 
PACT 
Mobilisation  of  Rural  Institutions  (IWUAs,  FBS,  FFS  Cooperatives,  VESAs 
• 
etc):  PACT  will  initially  target  rural  community  institutions  at  the  level  of  the  target 
command area as they are well established and present in most villages. The project will 
encourage the  formation  of new  RIs  in  communities  within the programme  watersheds 
that do not have the relevant RIs to serve as members of the watershed committees. The 
strengthening and formation of RIs will emphasise the targeting criteria comprising more 
than 50% members with access to land of 1 ha or less and 50% women, 40% youth and 
5% people with disability. During the selection of beneficiaries, vulnerable groups 
58 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
(including  landless,  marginalised  groups,  the  poorest  of  the  poor,  women,  youth,  etc) 
within the watersheds will be identified. Efforts will be made to incorporate them in existing 
or  newly  formed  RIs.  The  PACT  teams  at  the  PCU  in  collaboration  with  the  Woreda 
administration and TA support will give special attention to mobilisation and strengthening 
of the RIs in the target watersheds. 
Implementation  of  NRM  and  soil  health  improvement  measures:  –  The 
• 
Programme  will  support  the  restoration  and  improved  management  of  100,000ha  of 
rangelands and farmlands as identified in the LIDPs. For every irrigation and rainfed land, 
approximately 6 ha of land will be rehabilitated. However, the level of rehabilitation will be 
dictated by the degree of land degradation. 
Soil and water conservation measures: The programme will finance preparation of 
• 
terraces, making of contours, vegetative windbreaks among and rainwater harvesting for 
the most vulnerable, other activities. The Programme will cover the costs for equipment 
and  material  supplies  such  as  hoes,  shovels,  stone  bunds,  and  gabion,  and  soil 
amendments  and  communities  will  provide  labour.  The  community  contribution  will  be 
through the GoE mass mobilisation programme for landscape management activities. The 
community contribution is estimated to be between 46-54%. Quality of the work will be 
ensured through training, sensitization and monitoring, which will be undertaken prior and 
during implementation of the soil and water conservation activities. 
Pasture  land  management:  In  addition,  improved  pasture  land  management 
• 
activities  will be undertaken in the pastoral and agropastoral zones/areas mainly in the 
Somali,  Oromia  and  SNNPR  regions.  These  activities  may  include  i)  area  closures;  ii) 
invasive species control, iii) controlled grazing; fodder conservation; among others. The 
subcomponent  will  ensure  that  women  and  youth  including  those  with  disabilities 
adequately  benefit  from  enhanced  landscape  restoration  and  management.  All  of  the 
activities will be identified in the LDIPs in consultation with the pastoral and agro-pastoral 
communities. 
Agroforestry: The programme will support theE establishment and strengthening of 
• 
agroforestry nurseries and tree planting:  The project will establish 150 new medium sized 
nurseries and strengthen a further 100 existing nurseries in the selected landscapes. The 
capacity of the new nurseries will be up to 150,000 seedlings annually. The nurseries will 
mainly produce seedlings such as fruit and fertilizer trees for the purpose of agroforestry. 
The  new  nurseries  maybe  owned  by  rural  youth  and  women  groups  or  woreda 
administration.  The  criteria  to  select  the  youth  and  women  will  include  poverty  level, 
under- and unemployment, owning no land. Skill development training will be given to the 
selected  youth  and  women  groups  on  seedling  development  and  business  skills.  The 
programme will cover 70% of the cost for nurseries (both new and for the rehabilitation 
of existing ones) and regional/Woreda administration and nursery owners will finance the 
remaining 30%. Targeted youth and women groups will be assisted to develop a business 
plan to access a green loan from IGREENFIN II to cover their 30% contribution. Nursery 
owners will cover operational expenses and repay the loan by selling the seedlings to the 
communities.  The  Woreda  and  kebele  level  land  administrations,  DAs  and  Watershed 
Association  will  allocate  land  to  the  youth.  The  DAs,  LCC,  WUA,  Watershed  and 
cooperatives  committees  will  play  a  pivotal  role  in  linking  the  nursery  owners  with  the 
landscape  communities.  Wherever  possible,  seedlings  can  also  be  sold  to  communities 
outside  of the  landscape.  The  nursery  owners will  also  be supervised to  ensure  quality 
production of seedlings and proper savings and to repay the loan. 
National Soil Testing Facility Establishment: As part of the soil health enhancement 
• 
programme, the  programme  will  facilitate the establishment  of  a soil testing  laboratory 
facility at the Federal level with 50% co-financing by the GoE. The facility will be provided 
with  testing  kits,  materials  and  equipment  for  soil  analysis  services  to  farmers  and 
cooperatives. Soil samples will be collected at regional and woreda levels in line LDIPs for 
processing at the federal facility. The programme will also make provisions to enable the 
laboratory personnel  to provide technical  assistance services and recommendations and 
59 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
guidelines for area specific soil fertility management practices. The facility will run on a fee 
service basis and be linked with the rural extension services of the MoA for the technical 
backstopping to farmers. 
Compensation of smallholder farmers for Carbon farming: Smallholder farmers in the 
• 
landscape  will  be  supported  to  transition  to  agroforestry  due  to  its  multiple  benefits  in 
improving soil health and soil carbon sequestration, increased carbon stocks and climate 
resilience,  increased  diverse  nutritious  foods,  diversified  income  streams  and  land 
restoration. Using the criteria set by Rabo Bank (table below), the programme will identify 
a local partner who will facilitate the carbon market processes between smallholders and 
Rabo Bank. Smallholder farmers will also be selected using Rabo Banks eligibility criteria 
(Table) and the carbon sequestrations will be monitored by satellites and Remote sensing, 
to quantify CRU eligible for sale. From sales revenue, 10% will be retained by Rabo Bank, 
10%  retained  local  partner  and  80%  paid  out  to  farmers  at  least  once  a  year.  The 
Programme  aims  to have  32,000ha  of  land under  agroforestry  with fruits  and  non-fruit 
tree species in both rain-fed and irrigated areas. 
Given  that  some  regions  are  already  engaged  in  carbon  market  and  thus  the  emission  
• 
reductions  from  agroforestry  practices  are  already  committed,  then  region  and  woreda 
selection will be done in collaboration with the Ethiopian Environmental Protection Authority 
(EPA) and Ethiopian Forest Development. 
• 
Table: Eligibility criteria to select Local Partner 
Proj 
ect 
deta 
ils 
Name 
local 
partner 
Project 
location 
(country 
) 
Date of 
assessm 
ent 
Requested information 
Local partner eligibility checklist 
Topic  Sub- 
topic 
Organiza 
tional 
structur 
e 
Organiza 
tional 
capacity 
Org 
aniz 
atio 
nal 
capa 
city 
Provide a description of your organizational 
structure and roles of each organization 
involved for the project (attach 
diagram/table). 
Provide a description of your “on the 
ground” capacity to undertake long-term 
community-led project(s) and implement 
agroforestry 
The local partner agrees with the 
Rabobank's sustainability policy. 
The local partner's current data handling 
policies are compliant with GDPR 
regulations. 
Describe how the project is organized, or in 
the process of being organized, into 
cooperatives, associations, community- 
based organizations or other organizational 
forms able to contribute to the social and 
60 
Sustaina 
bility 
GDPR 
Participa 
nt 
organiza 
tion 
Result 
<description 
of 
organizational 
structure> 
<description 
of 
organizational 
capacity> 
<description 
of participant 
organization> 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Project 
effects 
Entity 
Local 
presenc 
e 
Local 
policies 
Influenc 
e 
Resourc 
es 
economic development of the participants 
and their communities, and which is 
democratically controlled by the 
participants. 
The project strives to not contribute, or 
does its utmost to avoid, environmental or 
(agricultural) biodiversity harm. 
The local partner is an established legal 
entity that takes responsibility for the 
project and for meeting the requirements of 
the Acorn Framework for the duration of the 
project. 
The local partner has a strong in-country 
presence and the respect and experience 
required to work effectively with local 
participants and their communities. 
The local partner has a solid understanding 
of local policies and can confirm that the 
country’s policy allows individual CRUs to be 
sold. 
The local partner is capable of negotiating 
and dealing with government, local 
organizations and institutions. 
The local partner is focused and has the 
organizational capability and ability to 
mobilize the necessary resources to develop 
the project (e.g. including access to 
seedlings, inputs, agronomic knowledge, 
monitoring and technical support). 
The local partner can provide reliable data 
(i.e. GPS polygons, phone numbers, other 
KYC data). 
Data 
collectio 
n 
Training  The local partner has the ability to mobilize 
and train participants, and implement and 
monitor project activities. 
The local partner recognizes that the 
participant’s involvement in the project is 
entirely voluntary. 
The local partner recognizes that 
participants own the carbon benefits of the 
project intervention. 
The project coordinator ensures that 
payments are made in a transparent and 
traceable manner. 
The project coordinator ensures that mobile 
payments to participants are either already 
possible or there are no foreseeable 
obstacles for this in the near future. 
Conditio 
n (i) 
Conditio 
n (ii) 
Participa 
nt 
payment 
s (i) 
Participa 
nt 
payment 
s (ii) 
61 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Lan 
d- 
tenu 
re 
and 
carb 
on 
righ 
ts 
Sust 
aina 
ble 
land 
use 
acti 
vity 
Contribu 
tions 
Participa 
nt 
identity 
Land- 
tenure 
and 
carbon 
rights (i) 
Land- 
tenure 
and 
carbon 
rights 
(ii) 
Land 
use 
Project 
design 
Deforest 
ation 
Addition 
ality 
Existing 
agrofore 
stry (i) 
Existing 
agrofor
e 
(ii) 
Existing 
agrofore 
stry (iii) 
stry 
The local partner does not draw more than 
10% of sales income for ongoing 
coordination, administration and monitoring 
costs. Exceeding this percentage is only 
possible in exceptional circumstances where 
justification is provided and Acorn formally 
approves a waiver. 
The local partner is able to collect and 
provide proof of participant’s identity. 
Provide a description of how land tenure is 
organized amongst the target project 
participants. 
<description 
of how land 
tenure is 
organised> 
<description 
of current land 
use activities> 
<if no, 
describe cause 
and 
preventing 
measures> 
The project applies to land over which the 
participant/community has 
(formal/informal) ownership or long-term 
user rights. 
Provide a description of the current land use 
activities, before the start of the project 
intervention, within the project. 
The project is/will be designed to promote 
sustainable land-use and has/will have a 
feasible business case underwritten by 
agronomist(s) and community 
representatives. 
The local partner confirms that no 
deforestation has taken place five years 
before the start of the project intervention 
(project baseline). 
If this cannot be confirmed, please describe 
the cause of the deforestation, including the 
measures that have been taken to prevent 
deforestation from happening again. 
The local partner ensures project 
additionality and ensures a durability period 
of 20 years. 
Agroforestry at the farm level has been 
implemented less than 5 years before the 
start of the project intervention. 
Participants and local partners confirm that 
previously sequestered CO2  on the land has 
not yet been monetized. 
Existing agroforestry has been funded 
largely by donors/grants. 
62 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
New 
agrofore 
stry 
Naturaliz 
ed 
species 
Current 
habitat 
There is a sufficient supply of seedlings, 
inputs, water and other required resources. 
The local partner promotes the use of 
native species. The use of naturalized 
species is acceptable under the conditions 
outlined in the Framework. 
Provide a description of the current 
ecosystem and flora and fauna species of 
the project area. 
<description 
of current 
habitat> 
Table: Eligibility criteria to select Participants (smallholder farmers) 
Project 
details 
Name local 
partner 
Project location 
(country) 
Date of 
assessment 
Participant eligibility checklist 
Topic 
Organizati 
onal 
capacity 
Sub-topic 
Smallholder 
labor force 
Smallholder 
farm size 
Resources 
Result 
Requested information 
The participants are not 
structurally dependent on 
permanent hired labor, and 
manage their land mainly by 
themselves with the help of 
their families. 
The cultivated land of 
participants does not exceed 10 
ha. 
The participants, with the 
support of the local partner, 
have the ability to mobilize the 
necessary resources to 
implement the project. 
Data collection  The participants can allow 
Condition (i) 
Participant 
identity 
Land-tenure 
and carbon 
rights (i) 
Land- 
tenure and 
reliable data to be collected for 
the project (i.e. GPS polygons, 
phone numbers, other KYC 
data). 
The participants are aware that 
their decision to participate in 
the project is entirely voluntary. 
The participants are able to 
provide proof of their identity. 
Provide a description of how 
land tenure is organized. 
<description 
of land 
tenure> 
63 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
carbon 
rights 
Land-tenure 
and carbon 
rights (ii) 
Land use 
Sustainabl 
e land use 
activity 
The project applies to land over 
which the 
participants/community has 
(formal/informal) ownership or 
long-term user rights. 
A description of the current land 
use activities within the project. 
Deforestation 
Additionality 
The participants confirm that no 
deforestation has taken place 
five years before the start of 
the project intervention (project 
baseline). 
If this cannot be confirmed, 
please describe the cause of the 
deforestation, including the 
measures that have been taken 
to prevent deforestation from 
happening again. 
The participants ensure project 
additionality and is aware that 
the project has a durability 
period of 20 years. 
Participants confirm 
agroforestry at the farm level 
has been implemented less 
than 5 years ago. 
The participants confirm that 
previously sequestered CO2  on 
the land has not yet been 
monetized. 
Current habitat  Provide a description of the 
Existing 
agroforestry 
(ii) 
Existing 
agroforestry (i) 
current ecosystem and flora 
and fauna species of the project 
area 
<description 
of current 
land use> 
<if no, 
describe 
cause and 
preventing 
measures> 
<description 
of current 
ecosystem 
and 
species> 
Promotion of improved cookstoves: The Programme will support the production and 
• 
distribution of an indicative amount of 91,200 improved cookstoves (45,600 Mirt for Enjera 
baking and 45,600 Tikkl for cooking and boiling) to benefit 45,600 HHs26. This  activity 
has  multiple benefits in reducing deforestation, women’s  workload in fetching firewood, 
enhancing health benefits through reduction of smoke pollution in the kitchen and avoided 
carbon emission. In addition, it will create jobs for 2,700 women (30 per woreda) involved 
in the making of the cookstoves. 
Through the partnership with VITA (an international NGO experienced with improved 
• 
cookstove  programs  in  Eastern  Africa)  farmers  will  access  carbon  markets  from  use  of 
improved stoves. Vita will apply phased approach and first phase of implementation will 
be  started  in  Amhara,  SNNPR  and  Sidama  regions.  Amhara  and  SNNPR  regions  are 
selected  because  Vita is  currently  operating  in these  regions  and Sidama  can  be  easily 
reached out with minimal management cost. The program will eventually be expanded to 
Oromia. This intervention will primarily create job opportunities to rural Women, including 
young women owning no or small land, through training and skill to produce cookstoves. 
64 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Programme will train women (50 percent) and youth (40 percent, with 20 percent young 
women) to produce and disseminate improved cookstoves. The programme will collaborate 
with  regional  and  Woreda  bureaus  of  agriculture,  energy  and  youth  to  ensure 
sustainability.  IFAD  will  fund  Programme  development  costs  and  Vita  will  fund  carbon 
accreditation  and  marketing  costs.  More  information  on  the  financing  model  and 
implementation arrangement is available in the annex. As far as targeting is concerned, 
the programme targeting strategy will be applied. To avoid double counting of emission 
reductions (for the carbon market), Landscapes/Woredas that will not be targeted from 
biogas will be considered for improved cookstoves. From Vitas experience in Amhara and 
SNNPR, communities  will contribute 50% of the cost and the programme will cover the 
remaining 50% and PACT will adopt this model. 
Biogas  systems  for  cooking  and  lighting28:  Biogas  systems  are  environmentally 
• 
friendly  technologies  that  help  to  reduce/avoid  GHG  emissions.  Using  these  systems, 
animal  dung  and  agricultural  wastes  are  used  to  generate  energy  and  the  biodigester 
residues  are  used  to  improve  soil  fertility  for  home  gardening,  agroforestry  and  crop 
production. The Programme will support the construction and operationalization of 2,000 
biogas systems in the target regions. The programme will cover 60% of biogas production 
cost and the remaining 40% will be from an IGREENFIN II loan. The program will select 
HHs based on criteria set by the government, for example, HHs who have four livestock 
kept  around  the  home,  water  access  from  the  irrigation  scheme,  women-headed, 
households with a member with disability. As per the standard, the lifespan of biogas is 21 
years and 2000 biogases will create jobs for 2793 youth and women, the main activities 
being  demand  collection,  construction  of  biogas,  installation  and  maintenances.  The 
programme  will  collaborate  with  the  Ministry  of  Water  and  Energy  and  its  equivalent 
structures  at  Region  and  Woreda  level  to  facilitate  implementation  as  well  as  explore 
opportunities  for  carbon market.  A specific  provision/guideline  on  the  provision  of  loan, 
percentage  contributions  of  HHs,  government,  Programme  and  other  partners  will  be 
prepared during early programme implementation. 
Farm Plan – farmers will be encouraged to develop a pager farm plan. The plan will 
• 
include  the  feasible  and  profitable  interventions  such  as  seedling  requirements,  farm 
practices,  type  and  number/amount  of  inputs  etc.  Farmers  will  then  request  possible 
support from the programme through the facilitations of DAs and LMA. 
Job  Creation  through  landscape  management  activities:  These  activities  aim  to 
• 
create  job  opportunities  for  rural  youth  and  women through  the implementation  of the 
LDIPs.  Some  of  the  potential  employment  areas  include:  a)  nursery  establishment, 
including  production  and  planting  of  quality  and  resilient seedlings  (e.g.  fruit trees). In 
here,  15  rural  youth  and  women  are  grouped to  establish  a nursery;  b)  biogas  system 
construction, operation and maintenance; and c) cookstove production and dissemination. 
A group of 30 women per Woreda will be trained to produce improved cookstoves. To this 
effect, a job creation strategy will be prepared by the Federal PMU… This subcomponent 
of the Programme will create job around 4,742 for youth, women and PWD in rural areas. 
Time table for the implementation of Component 1.1. 
Activities 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Recruitment of 
national and 
regional 
consultant, 
Community 
Facilitators 
Training to PMU 
and CF 
x 
x 
x 
x 
65 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Sensitization and 
awareness to 
communities 
Assessment and 
prioritizations of 
landscapes 
Establishment of 
LCC, WUA, WSC, 
cooperative 
committees 
Preparation of 
Landscape 
Development and 
Investment Plan 
Capacity 
development on 
the LDIPs 
Implementation 
of LDIPs 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
II.2.3  : Subcomponent 1.2:  Climate Resilient Infrastructure Development 
The expected output of this subcomponent is the development of climate resilient water 
infrastructure for irrigation, livestock and household use in addition to local market related 
infrastructure. 
1.2.1.  Water Development for Households, Crops and Livestock Use 
The  target  for  irrigation  is  15,000  ha  which  would  comprise  13,500  ha  new 
• 
irrigation schemes and the rehabilitation/upgrade of another 1,500 ha of existing irrigation 
to sustainably raise and stabilize agricultural productivity and annual income, and enhance 
resilience  to  food  insecurity,  the  effects  of  climate  change  and  economic  shocks. 
Additionally, investments will be done in multi-purpose water infrastructure construction 
(up to 150 systems) and rehabilitation (up to 50 systems) to supply water for livestock and 
human  consumption,  particularly  in  the  dry  areas  of  the  targeted  Woredas  and  may  serve 
community  gardens  where  feasible  to  help  communities  build  resilience  in times  of 
droughts. The multi-purpose water infrastructure will increase access to and use of clean 
and  safe  water,  as  a  key  strategy  to  improve  nutrition  outcomes  and  reduce  women’s 
burden, including women with disabilities. 
Irrigation enables smallholder farmers to extend the growing season and to produce 
• 
crops  all-year long, increasing availability and affordability of diverse foods  on markets. 
By  investing  in  irrigation  schemes  construction,  modernization  or  rehabilitation,  this 
subcomponent aims to support rural and agro-pastoral communities to sustainably raise 
and  stabilize  their  agricultural  productivity  and  annual  income,  and  enhance  their  resilience 
to  food  insecurity,  the  effects  of  climate  change  and  economic  shocks.  Investments  in 
multi-purpose  water  systems  will  build  beneficiaries  resilience  to  drought  and  climate 
shocks by supplying them and their livestock with quality drinking water. 
To  ensure  ownership  and  sustainability,  the  Programme  will  adopt  a  participatory 
• 
approach  when  developing  the  subcomponent  activities,  from  the  identification  of 
intervention sites, conduction of feasibility studies and detailed designs, until reaching the 
construction or rehabilitation phase of water infrastructure. 
66 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Community development plans  established under subcomponent 1.1 would inform 
• 
the present subcomponent 1.2 if the development of an irrigation or a water infrastructure 
is listed among community development priorities. The water infrastructure development 
will adopt a participatory approach which is consisting of the following 3 phases: 
✓  Assessment  Phase  (mainly  includes:  field  reconnaissance  and  prefeasibility 
assessment,  screening  of  potential  intervention,  community  awareness  and 
feasibility studies); 
✓  Preparatory  Phase  (mainly  includes:  elaboration  of  water  infrastructure  detailed 
engineering design, establishment of WUA and signature of scheme development 
agreement); 
✓  Implementation Phase (including: tendering and execution of construction works, 
WUA  capacity  building,  and  signature  of  water/irrigation  asset  management 
transfer agreement). 
Assessment Phase 
Application  submission:  Once  the  development  of  an  irrigation  or  multi-purpose 
• 
water infrastructure is listed among community development priorities, the programme in 
collaboration with the regional and Woreda agricultural office will inform and sensitize the 
concerned  community represented  by  a  formal  or  informal  WUA to  formally  prepare  an 
application for the construction/rehabilitation of a new/existing irrigation scheme or multi- 
purpose  water  system.  In  this  regard,  the  Kebele  administration  and  the  development 
agents (DAs), would provide necessary assistance to the community with preparing and 
submitting the application to the BoWI[1]  at Woreda level which should register and review 
the submitted application. 
Field Reconnaissance and Pre-Feasibility Assessment: The identified schemes will be 
• 
subjected to a rapid pre-feasibility assessment which should comprise collection and desk 
review of secondary data and GIS maps in addition to a reconnaissance field visits for a 
rapid assessment of relevant aspects possibly including i) size of arable and cropped area, 
ii)  salient  features  of  the  existing  SSI  system,  including  type  of  headwork,  number  of 
irrigation  blocks  as  well  as  type,  number  and  length  of  irrigation  canals  and  drainage 
structures,  otherwise  irrigation  potential  suitability  (for  new  sites),  iii)  water  resources 
quantity and quality, in addition to existing and potential upstream and downstream water 
withdrawals, iv) soils and land capabilities, v) existing cropping pattern and yields of main 
crops, vi) agricultural economics and community sociology. 
The reconnaissance  field visit should involve a multidisciplinary team including, at 
• 
least an irrigation engineer, agronomist, socio-economist and environmental specialist. In 
terms of outputs, the rapid technical assessment, should: 
− 
Identify the potential for the development of the requested water infrastructure, 
which may consist of construction of a new irrigation scheme/Multi-purpose water 
system, or rehabilitation/improvement of an existing one; 
−  Exclude  severe  limiting  factors  to  investment  which  make  schemes  unworthy  of 
− 
feasibility study; 
Include a first estimate of the likely incremental costs and benefits of the proposed 
investment,  from  which  a  first  estimate  of  financial  viability  can  be  made.  The 
Reconnaissance  Team  must  elaborate  and  submit  a  Pre-Feasibility  Report to  the 
BoWI1  for its review and approval. 
Screening of potential intervention. If the number of potential schemes is large, the 
• 
RPCU,  in  collaboration  with  the  BoA  of  each  region,  will  proceed  with  screening  all 
possibilities  using  a  multi-criteria  analysis  which  enables  the  scoring  of  several 
characteristics that, when weighted and combined, provide a preliminary indication of the 
likely  viability  and  sustainability  of  each  potential  scheme.  Two  separate  screening 
67 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
exercises  will  be  conducted,  one  for  new  schemes’  development  and  another  one  for 
schemes’ rehabilitation. The main criteria to be considered should be defined by the FPCU 
and  MoA  in  consultation  with  the  RPCUs  and  the  respective  regional  BoA.  For  new 
constructions, these criteria can include, but not limited to: 
✓  Technical Criteria, e.g., i) reliable water supply and quality for both irrigation and multi- 
purpose  water systems, ii) estimated increase of crop yields  (assessed for the most 
commonly cultivated crop and reflects the potential irrigation value addition in terms 
of crop productivity in order to compare the agricultural performance of each potential 
scheme with the maximum value for all potential schemes. Higher normalized indices 
(ranging from 0 and 1) are assumed to be better), iii) land suitability for irrigation, iv) 
Length  of  Growing  Period  LGP5  (an  indicator  expressing  the  potential  for  rainfed 
agriculture. Sites with relatively higher indices are assumed to have lower priority for 
irrigation  development  since  the  development  potential  for  rainfed  agriculture  is 
relatively high). 
✓  Socio-Economic Criteria, e.g., i) Land Tenure status, ii) market potential, iii) women 
participation, iv) estimated initial investment cost, v) Operation and Maintenance costs 
(for a given performance of hydraulic structures, these estimated costs shall be used 
as  indicators  to  compare  the  irrigation  infrastructure  investment  and  O&M  costs  of  each  
potential  scheme  with  the  maximum  value  for  all  potential  schemes.  Smaller 
normalized indices are assumed to be better). 
✓  Environmental  Criteria,  e.g.,  i)  potential  impact  on  natural  resources  depletion,  ii) 
potential  use  of  fertilizers  (can  be  estimated  based  on  a  preliminary  soil  fertility 
assessment.  By  assuming  that  a  proportion  of  agricultural  discharge  water  reaches 
rivers and groundwater, this indicator  serves  as  a proxy for  water pollution impacts 
from  agricultural  production.  Potential  schemes  with  smaller  normalized  indicators, 
compared with maximum value for all potential schemes, will be preferred, in order to 
reduce environmental impacts of agricultural production). 
For rehabilitation/upgrading interventions, the same sets of criteria (technical, socio- 
• 
economic,  environmental)  can,  as  much  as  possible,  be  adopted  with  consideration  of 
additional technical indicators  reflecting for  example: the current status/performance  of 
the irrigation system or the multi-purpose water system including water conveyance and 
distribution systems efficiencies, status of pipes and canals (lined/earthen, percentage of 
cracking sections, seepage loses, sedimentation issues, etc.), status of control structures, 
other deficiencies, etc. 
The weights  of each set of criteria (technical, socio-economic, environmental) and 
• 
the weights of each single criterion within a given set of criteria can be determined using 
different  approaches,  e.g.,  the  Analytical  Hierarchy  Process  and/or  through  the  use  of 
specific  questionnaires to be compiled by selected technical and managerial staff of the 
implementing  ministry  and  the  most  relevant  partner  ministries  both  at  federal  and 
regional levels. The interpretation of questionnaires’ answers will indicate national/federal 
priorities and would enable calculating the different weights and therefore calculation of 
an overall score for each potential scheme and consequently establishing a ranking. 
Feasibility Studies.  Those  potential  candidates  scoring highest in  the  multi-criteria 
• 
analysis will then be selected for a full feasibility study to demonstrate that the investment 
will  be  technically  feasible,  economically  viable  and  environmentally  and  socially 
sustainable.  The  BoWI[1]  with  assistance  of  the  PCMU  will  ensure:  i)  preparation  of 
necessary bidding documents for the procurement of consulting services to conduct the 
feasibility study, ii) invitation of bids and evaluation. 
Technical  feasibility  may  sometimes  be  difficult  to  assess  due  to  unavailability  of 
• 
hydrologic  data especially in case of ungauged catchments. The feasibility study should 
develop  necessary  alternative  assessment  approaches  including  modelling  or  adapted 
68 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
empirical  approaches  to  minimize uncertainties.  The  feasibility study  should  assess  and 
report on the following aspects: 
✓  Available  land  and  water  resources  (including  soils,  topography,  hydrologic  or 
hydrogeologic  analysis  including  assessment  of  existing  and  forecast  of  future 
upstream and downstream water commitments taking into consideration potential 
climate change impacts scenarios); 
✓  Land and water governance, as well as an assessment of any legal or institutional 
constraints to access; 
✓  Geological and Geotechnical conditions; 
✓  The local economy and people; 
✓  Existing agriculture, land use and land tenure; 
✓  Physical features of the proposed project; 
✓  Agronomy, cropping patterns and farming models without and with the project; 
✓  Agricultural production and market prospects; 
✓  Likely impacts on individual producers; 
✓  Anticipated social and environmental impacts (including details of any resettlement 
required); 
✓  Likely costs (based on a detailed design of a sample area corresponding to 10% of 
the total area to be developed, or on the costs of a similar recent project in the 
region or in the country); 
✓  A cost-benefit analysis. 
The  study  should  identify  potential  options  to  develop  a  gravity  or  pressurized 
• 
system. The contracted consulting firm should prepare a preliminary design including the 
type of headworks, layout, type of distribution and drainage system, type and estimated 
number  of  control,  distribution  and  canal-related  structures.  If  two  or  more  different 
options  for  the  development  of  the  scheme  have  been  identified  during  the  feasibility 
studies, it is necessary to prepare a preliminary design and cost estimates for each option 
to  facilitate  comparison  and  future  selection  of  the  best  option.  Additionally,  the  study 
should assess any potential negative impact on water availability for  downstream users 
and/or environmental flow especially during the dry season and the peak water demand 
period and should come up with adequate mitigation measures. 
When the programme intervention consists  of scheme upgrading or rehabilitation, 
• 
the study should assess the possibility to support the conjunctive use of groundwater in 
addition  to  the  existing  surface/canal  water.  In  fact, the  groundwater  recharge  will  increase 
from  canal  operation  and  on  farm  irrigation,  and  consequently,  the  availability  of 
groundwater  for  irrigation  will  improve  inducing:  i)  a  larger  command  area  with  more 
farmers  receiving  irrigation  water,  ii)  more  cultivation  of  high  value  crops,  such  as 
vegetables, and iii) less risk of waterlogging due to better control of groundwater level, 
and  iv)  higher  economic  rate  of  return  due  to  relatively  larger  command  area  and 
cultivation of more high value crops. 
In  the  interests  of  sustainability,  the  study  should  include  consultation  with  all 
• 
communities likely  to  be  affected  by  the  project. This not  only  keeps  them informed  of 
progress, but also serves to benefit from their local knowledge and collect data on the real 
needs and challenges, cropping patterns and practices, crop yields and diseases, historical 
observations  of  extreme  events,  and  seek  their  feedback  on  the  project  concept  as  it 
develops,  its  potentially  negative  impacts  and  measures  to  address  these  impacts.  A 
Community Awareness meeting will be useful to inform the concerned male and female 
landholders having  land in the  (envisaged)  command  area  of the  scheme  about:  i)  the 
participatory approach for planning, design, construction and management of the scheme, 
ii) establishment, registration and capacity building of the WUA, iii) the expected role and 
responsibilities of the farmers/pastoralists/agro-pastoralists during the different stages of 
the formation of the WUA, design and construction of the scheme, and management of 
the scheme, including the payment of an annual irrigation service fee (ISF) to finance the 
69 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
O&M of the irrigation and drainage infrastructure; iv) if necessary, reallocation of irrigable 
plots  of  land  (including  the  possibility  of  land  lease  for  landless  households  from 
households  having  land  area  exceeding  0.25  ha),  taking  into  consideration  that  the 
programme is aiming to support development of irrigation for 0.25 ha/household and v) 
expected benefits in terms of increased agricultural production and farm incomes due to 
supply/improved  supply  of  irrigation  water  and  provision  of  irrigation  extension  and 
support services. The beneficiaries have to become aware that they themselves have to 
participate actively in all stages of the scheme development, operation and maintenance. 
The FPCU will subsequently review the quality and findings of the draft feasibility studies 
and will decide on whether the potential candidates passing the feasibility study test can 
be prioritized for detailed engineering design and construction/rehabilitation. In terms of 
quality assurance, and in addition to the internal review of the draft feasibility report, an 
external  review  by  a  highly  qualified  contracted  consultant  or  consulting  firm  is  highly 
recommended. 
For new construction, the programme is strongly encouraged to consider potential 
• 
schemes within the targeted Woredas and which are already supplied with valid feasibility 
studies  or  detailed  designs  developed  by  other  programmes  or  projects  in the last  five 
years, while for rehabilitation purpose, the programme is encouraged to target deficient 
schemes which were constructed and handed over to communities more than five years 
ago. 
Preparatory Phase 
Water  Infrastructure  Detailed  Engineering  Design.  Based  on  feasibility  studies 
• 
recommendations  in  terms  of  the  selected  development  option,  the  programme  will 
prepare  necessary  bidding  documents  for  the  procurement  of  services  to  conduct  a 
detailed engineering design and work supervision. The detailed design will be carried out 
with a particular focus on the identified technical option related to water infrastructure and 
management  either  for  irrigation  purpose  or  for  livestock  and/or  domestic  uses.  Both 
surface and groundwater sources are targeted if deemed adequately available and suitable. 
When developing Multiple-Use Water Systems, groundwater sources will be privileged, in 
particular  shallow  aquifers,  in  order  to  ensure  water  potability  and  compliance  with 
Ethiopian drinking water quality standards without the need for any specific treatment. In 
case  of  surface  water  source,  gravity  water  diversion  will  be  considered  as  much  as 
possible. When gravity irrigation is not possible, pressurized systems with the possible use 
of water storage facilities and use of renewable energy sources will be promoted, especially 
solar  pumping.  Depending  on  the  crops  and  commodities  prioritized,  the  use  of  highly 
efficient  and  water  saving  irrigation  distribution systems,  particularly  localized  irrigation 
(drip, sprinkler, mini sprinkler, etc.), will be promoted. When the natural internal drainage 
of  soils  is  not  sufficient  and  the  soil  salinization  risk  is  substantially  high,  an  adequate 
drainage system will be designed. 
The  design  of  water  infrastructure  should  comply  with  the  national  guidelines  for 
• 
small  scale  irrigation  development  and  should  optimize  a  sustainable  balance  between 
investment costs,  robustness to  the  impacts  of  climate  change  and  extreme  events,  in 
addition to simplicity and affordability of operation and maintenance. The Programme will 
seek  technical  support  from  relevant  entities  including  the  Ethiopian  Agricultural 
Transformation  Institute  (ATI) for  a  specific  assessment  of shallow  groundwater  depth, 
yield and potentialities in all targeted Woredas and intervention sites, and the Directorates 
of Small-Scale Irrigation (SSI) to ensure that the designs and works meet the established 
quality standards. The FPCU will be responsible for Quality Assurance, careful review and 
final approval of the engineering designs. Specific attention will be paid to the adequacy 
and accuracy of the design and completeness of the Bill of Quantities (BOQ) to minimize 
contracts’ variations risk. 
70 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Parts of the water infrastructures’ designs will consider developing or rehabilitating 
• 
multi-purpose  water  systems  to  provide  beneficiary  farmers,  pastoralists,  and/or  gro- 
pastoralists with adequate quality water for livestock and/or domestic uses. These designs 
will therefore take into consideration the development of social structures, such as drinking 
water points, washing places, and animal drinking troughs, to ensure the sustainability of 
the constructed irrigation facilities. 
To develop a sense of ownership and responsibility for future O&M, it is required that 
• 
the  beneficiaries  are  involved  in  all  development  stages  of  their  irrigation  scheme,  in 
particular  during  the  detailed  design  stage  as  the  most  important  decisions  are  made 
during this stage. To ensure such an effective participation, it is important to consider the 
elaboration of the design as a step-by-step process during which beneficiaries’ priorities 
and  preferences  are,  as  much  as  possible,  matched  with  technical  and  financial 
possibilities. 
Establishment, Strengthening and Engagement of Water User Associations (WUAs). 
• 
When existing, WUAs will act as the farmers' representative starting from the early stage 
of scheme identification. If not existing, the program, wwith the support of woreda and 
kebele officials and involving the respective DA, will support WUA establishment as a legal 
entity with a bylaw to be approved by the Woreda council. 
The  process  of  establishing  the  WUA  starts  with  the  formation  of  the  Founders 
• 
Committee consisting of not more than 12 potential members  representing all potential 
members of the proposed WUA. The Founders Committee has to elect its Chairperson and 
adopt  its  own  rules  of  procedure  to  undertake  all  necessary  activities  preceding  the 
establishment  of  the  WUA.  In  particular,  the  Founders  Committee  has  to  prepare  the 
following documents: 
✓  Draft memorandum and preparation of the bylaws of the WUA. In order to ensure that 
the WUA Management Committee is representative and that the interests of all male 
and  female  landholders  are  duly  represented,  each  WUA  must  specify  the  following 
conditions  related  to  the  composition  of  the  WUA  Management  Committee:  i)  each 
village,  religious  community  or  ethnic  group  must  be  represented  by  at  least  one 
elected member in the WUA Management Committee; ii) at least 33% of the seats in 
the WUA Management Committee must be reserved for elected members representing 
the landholders in the lower reach of the command area; and iii) at least 20% of the 
seats in the WUA Management Committee must be reserved for female landholders; 
✓  Plan of the proposed service area showing the size and location of the units. During 
the  preparation  of  the  plan/map  of the service  of  the  proposed WUA,  the  Founders 
Committee must identify and clearly describe the units of land (irrigation blocks) within 
the service area that will receive irrigation water through an irrigation system operated 
by the proposed WUA from one or more water supply points. 
✓  Application for the  establishment of the proposed WUA. This application must be signed by 
at least 50% of the potential members of the proposed WUA; 
✓  List  of  all  potential members  of the  proposed  WUA  that  must  include  description  of 
each  member's  landholding,  land  certificate  number,  and  signature.  The  Founders 
Committee must take into account that the following persons are  eligible to become 
an WUA member: i) any person possessing land that is located within the service area 
of the proposed WUA; ii) any person using land located within the service area of the 
proposed WUA on the basis of a lease agreement for more than 3 years; and iii) any 
person leasing land for not more than 3 years provided that the lessee may exercise 
the membership right of the lesser (landholder) based on a written authorization given 
by the lesser. 
✓  Draft annual work plan and budget of the proposed  WUA. During the preparation of 
the  first  annual  work  plan  for  the  proposed  WUA,  the  Founders  Committee  must 
address the following topics: i) establishment of WUA office and procurement of office 
furniture and  equipment; ii)  assess the need for  employment  of administrative staff 
71 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
and  Operation  and  Maintenance  staff;  iii)  procurement  of  basic  O&M  tools  and 
equipment; iv) participation in various training courses related to governance, scheme 
operation  and  maintenance,  water  management,  administrative  and  financial 
management, as well as assessment, billing and collection of water service fee (WSF), 
v)  formulation  and  adoption  of  Internal  Rules  and  Regulations,  including  rules  for 
operation/water distribution and eventually water uses prioritization in case of drought 
and  water  shortage,  vi)  formulation  and  adoption  of  WSF  policy  establishing  an 
equitable way on how to determine the WSF for each member to avoid conflicts. WSF 
should for example be proportional to the volume of water diverted/withdrawn by each 
member or to the farm size and/or cropping pattern. 
Once  registered  (through  the  support  of  regional  relevant  bureaus[1]),  the  WUA 
• 
chairperson and secretary should open a bank account in the name of the WUA and deposit 
the registration fees collected from the WUA members. 
Before the detailed design is undertaken, WUAs will need to express willingness and 
• 
to provide formal commitment to: i) contribute to the investment cost of the scheme of at 
least 10%, in labour or in kind, by contributing to the construction or rehabilitation works, 
and  ii)  ensure scheme  maintenance.  During  the  design, WUAs,  community leaders  and 
Kebele authorities will be consulted to ensure local acceptance. Before the commencement 
of  construction,  an  agreement  will  be  made  between  WUA,  and  the  Woreda  indicating 
clearly the role and duties of all parties. 
Agricultural  Development  Plans  (ADP):  For  irrigation  schemes,  and  at  the  time  of 
• 
preparation  of  detailed  design,  arrangements  will  be  made  for  the  preparation  of  an 
agricultural  development  plan  for  each  scheme.  No  scheme  will  be  approved  for 
construction  without  appropriate  agricultural  development  plan.  The  procedures for  the 
preparation of the ADP in a participatory manner are: 
✓  Review of Feasibility Report by BoA experts at woreda and zonal level and first site 
visit to the scheme; 
✓  Identification and priority ranking of problems and constraints related to irrigated 
agriculture by the WUA, BoA zonal/woreda experts and DAs; 
✓  Formulation of appropriate and feasible solutions for each of the (highest) ranked 
problems  and  constraints  by  the  members  of  the  Agriculture  Sub-Committee 
together with the zonal/woreda experts and DAs; 
✓  Preparation of draft ADP; 
✓  Review  of  draft  ADP  by  WUA  Management  Committee  and  head  of  BoA  at 
woreda/zonal level; 
✓  Preparation of final version of ADP; and 
✓  Approval of final version of the ADP by WUA Management Committee and head of 
BoA at woreda/zonal level. 
Implementation Phase 
Water  Infrastructure  Implementation  Agreement.  Before  the  commencement  of 
• 
construction  works,  an  agreement  will  be  made  between  the  WUA  and  the  Woreda 
indicating clearly the role and responsibilities, and obligations of all parties. The agreement  will 
also indicate a tentative time frame for the completion of activities and WUA-specific roles. 
The establishment of the Scheme Implementation Agreement should involve the WUA, the 
BoA and the BoWI and should cover the following aspects: 
✓  An overview of all the earthworks & structures to be included in scheme 
construction; 
✓  Implementation schedule of planned construction works and activities; 
✓  Rights and obligations of all parties directly involved in the implementation; 
✓  Farmers’ contributions to investment costs; 
72 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
✓  An outline of the scheme organization, draft constitution and WUA by-laws; 
✓  Explanation of scheme ownership and procedures for handing over to WUA; 
✓  Modalities for equitable reallocation of irrigable plots of land within the command 
area of the irrigation scheme (if foreseen). 
✓  Right-of-Way for contractor and responsible staff; 
✓  Modalities for joint  progress  monitoring  &  quality control  during  execution  of  works; 
✓  Modalities for joint final inspection of completed construction works; 
✓  WUA capacity building in governance, scheme O&M and water management, 
administrative and financial management; 
✓  Implementation of extension and support services in accordance with the approved 
ADP. 
WUA  Participation  in  Construction:  In  all  new  schemes  using  LCB  and  NCB 
• 
procurement  procedures,  clear  division  of  role  and  responsibilities  between  the 
participating beneficiaries and Woreda will be made in the agreement to be signed between 
the Woreda and WUA. The following will be the typical activities to be carried out by the 
WUA  and  beneficiaries:  Site  clearing,  Excavation  of  Canals  and  for  on-farm  structures, 
Supply of local construction materials, Land development, Cart away and backfill, etc. 
Prior to the signature ceremony, the WUA members have to review and approve the 
• 
Scheme  Development  Agreement  during  an  extra-ordinary  meeting  of 
the 
General/Representative Assembly.  The Agreement  will  be mutually  signed  by the WUA, 
the Woreda and Kebele administration. 
Execution of construction works. The water infrastructure development will follow a 
• 
phased approach and it is planned that all works should be achieved at the sixth year of 
the  programme  life,  which  means  one  year  before  the  closure  of  PACT.  Based  on  the 
bidding  documents  prepared  during  the  design  phase,  the  BoWI  with  assistance  of  the 
PCMU will handle the whole procurement process for construction/rehabilitation works of 
water infrastructure from call for tenders until bid evaluation. Priority should be given to 
qualified  bidders,  especially  those  construction  companies  which  demonstrated 
satisfactory  performance  in  conducting  similar  works  financed  by  previous  or  on-going 
IFAD funded projects (PASIDP II, LLRP, etc.). 
In  addition  to  irrigation  schemes,  the  programme  will  also  develop  multi-purpose 
• 
water  infrastructure.  Interventions  will  focus  on  the  development  and  management  of 
water for livestock and human consumption, particularly in the dry areas of the targeted 
Woredas. Investments in project areas will be designed to help communities be resilient 
in times of droughts and will build capacity for maintenance (especially for young people) 
and sustainable management of the resources. The multi-purpose water infrastructure will 
increase access to and use of clean and safe water, as a key strategy to improve nutrition 
outcomes and reduce women’s burden. 
Construction  or  rehabilitation  works  will  be  conducted  according  to  the  technical 
• 
specifications provided by the detailed engineering designs and will be supervised by the 
design engineers in close collaboration with PCMU engineers. Some of the works including 
digging wells, will be performed during the dry season to ensure water availability all over 
the year. The construction/rehabilitation process can adjust and align with any unforeseen 
situation, after discussion with the work supervisor and WUA. Similar to PASIDP II, PACT 
will use a unit cost ceiling for each type of work, which, however, should be reviewed down 
the road in case market prices of fuel, equipment and construction material would observe 
considerable increase and inflation. The BoWI[1] will play an important role in controlling 
the  costs  of  infrastructure,  avoiding  underbidding  and  subsequent  excessive  cost 
variations. 
Supervision of  construction works. This is a fundamental activity aiming to ensure 
• 
that works implementation is  on schedule and complying with the technical/engineering 
specifications and drawings. The entity developing the detailed design should ensure the 
supervision  of  work  in  collaboration  with  the  BoWI  and  RPCU  engineers  who  will  be 
73 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
responsible  for  the  overall  quality  control process. Additionally,  and  as  the WUA  will  be 
responsible for the O&M of the entire water infrastructure/irrigation scheme following the 
completion of the construction works, it is important that the WUA is formally involved in 
monitoring  the  physical  progress  achieved  in  comparison  with  the  implementation 
schedule. 
Joint final Inspection  of  works.  As soon  as  the contractor  and  WUA have issued  a 
• 
notice that all construction works have been completed, a joint inspection of these works 
must be planned within two weeks following the issue of the notice. The final inspection 
supervising 
team  must 
regional/zonal/woreda BoWI engineer and/or private consulting firm contracted for design 
and  supervision,  in  addition to  Irrigation  DA  (if  any).  During the  joint  inspection  of the 
completed works, the team has to check if all construction works have been carried out in 
accordance with the detail designs and the signed contract. 
representatives, 
consist  of 
the  WUA 
contractor, 
Following the joint inspection of the completed construction works, a Final Inspection 
• 
Report must be prepared by the supervising regional/zonal/woreda BoWI engineer and/or 
contracted  private  consulting  firm,  in  which  the  main  observations,  conclusions  and 
recommendations  are  summarized.  During  a  joint  meeting,  the  members  of  the  joint 
inspection team have to review and approve the Final Inspection Report. Nevertheless, if 
the  joint  inspection  of  the  construction  works  reveals  that  some  works  have  not  been 
completed properly, the Final Inspection Report must specify these observations clearly 
and mention the main reason(s) for non-completion or unsatisfactory completion of these 
works.  In  addition,  the  Final  Inspection  Report  must  specify  the  modalities  for  the 
execution of the outstanding works, including a tentative work plan, by the contractor. 
Preliminary  handing  over  of  scheme.  If  the  final  inspection  has  revealed  that  all 
• 
construction works have been completed properly, the contractor must preliminarily hand 
over the scheme back to the responsible government institution (BoWI). 
Test  run  of  the  scheme.  Following  the  preliminary  handing  over,  the  water 
• 
infrastructure/irrigation  scheme  must  be  tested  during  the  entire  first  irrigation  season 
(the defects  liability period) in order to assess if all structures are functioning properly. 
The  test  run  of  the  entire  scheme  must  be  closely  monitored  by  the  WUA,  supervising 
regional/zonal/woreda BoWI engineer and Irrigation DA (if any). If the test reveals that 
the system has some deficiencies and cannot be operated as designed, the BoWI engineer 
with the support of the Irrigation DA (if any) must investigate the cause(s) and identify 
any remedial measures, which have to be discussed with the contractor and the WUA. If 
the malfunctioning is the result of one or more construction faults, the contractor has to 
out the necessary repair and/or reconstruction works at its own expense. However, if one 
or more design faults are the reason for the malfunctioning of the scheme, any remedial 
works  extra  cost  should  be  discussed,  case  by  case,  between  PACT,  BoA,  BoWI  while 
consulting IFAD if the remedial works cost is exceeding 5% of the contract amount. 
Final handing over of the scheme. At the end of the defects liability period, and if the 
• 
test run has revealed that the entire scheme is fully functional, the final handing over of 
all  water  related  infrastructure  from  the  contractor  to  the  responsible  government 
institution (BoWI) can take place. 
Signature of asset management transfer agreement. Before the WUA can take over 
• 
the responsibility for the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of the irrigation scheme, the 
BoWI will prepare an Irrigation Management Transfer Agreement (IMT) to be signed by 
the WUA and the BoWI. The following topics should be covered in the IMT Agreement: 
✓  Detailed inventory of all irrigation and drainage (I&D) infrastructure for which the 
WUA will take over the O&M responsibility; 
✓  Functions of the WUA with regard to the O&M of the I&D within the command area; 
✓  Responsibilities  of  the  BoWI  and  BoA  with  respect  to  the  provision  of  regular 
training and support to the WUA in order to enhance its technical, organizational, 
74 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
administrative and financial management skills required for the management of the 
WUA in an effective, accountable and transparent manner; 
✓  Minimum standards for the maintenance of all I&D infrastructure; 
✓  Communication and reporting procedures; 
✓  Procedures for settlement of disputes. 
As  soon  as  the WUA General/Representative  Assembly has  formally  approved the 
• 
IMT Agreement, a scheme handover certificate will be signed between regional authorities 
and the WUA, and witnessed by the Kebele authorities. Subsequently, each scheme will 
effectively  be  handed  over  to  the  respective  WUA  which  entails  the  transfer  of  all 
responsibilities  for  the  sustainable  operation,  maintenance  and  management  of  the 
scheme. 
WUA capacity building. The transfer of the O&M responsibility for the scheme to the 
• 
WUA  can  only  be  successfully  implemented  if  the  WUA  members  have  the  necessary 
knowledge and skills to carry out their roles and responsibilities properly. Therefore, it is 
paramount for the successful development of an effective & sustainable irrigation scheme 
that  a  comprehensive  capacity  building  program  for  the  WUA  will  be  prepared  and 
implemented. The programme will assess WUAs training needs and would potentially build 
their capacities in the following fields: 
✓  Administrative and Financial Management; 
✓  Irrigation  Service  Fee  (ISF)  policy  (composition,  assessment,  collection  & 
recovery); 
✓  Sustainable water resources management and irrigation scheduling; 
✓  Schemes Operation and Maintenance and scheme governance; 
✓  Mediation and conflict/dispute resolution. 
Technical Assumptions 
The size of a new irrigation Scheme will be determined by different factors including 
• 
appropriate  hydrological  or  hydrogeological  analysis  and  water  balance  calculation  to 
establish prior water rights. Nevertheless, whenever possible, an average size around 100 
ha will be considered. Average landholding would be in the range of 0.25 ha. An exception 
for Wheat cultivation where landholding can exceed 0.25 ha up to 1 ha maximum. 
A multipurpose water system will generally be supplied from shallow groundwater, 
• 
with  a  maximum  depth  considered  at  50  meters.  Deeper  wells/boreholes  can  still  be 
considered  if  strongly  justified  by  the  feasibility  study  in  socioeconomic  and  technical 
terms. If community gardens irrigation is feasible, command area would depend on aquifer 
yield and the consequent water availability, however for cost effectiveness, such command 
area should, as much as possible, be maximized. Solar pumping will be promoted. Water 
can either be pumped to elevated reservoirs/tanks and then distributed by gravity to water 
points  for  domestic  use  or  water  troughs  for  watering  livestock,  otherwise  water 
distribution can be pressurized directly from the pump, if technically justified. The number 
of local suppliers of solar pumps is continuously increasing in Ethiopia. 
• 
Irrigation schemes’ water sources and withdrawal techniques to be considered are: 
✓  Surface Water (Rivers, Lakes, Ponds): by diversion or by pumping; 
✓  Groundwater: by pumping from boreholes, shallow wells  or  hand dug wells, and 
rarely from deep wells; Springs. 
The  on-farm  irrigation  systems  to  be  considered  are  those  water-saving  that  are 
• 
characterized by relatively high-water application efficiency: 
✓  Localized Irrigation Systems (drip, micro-sprinkler, sprinkler, etc.); and 
✓  Modernized surface irrigation with lined canals. 
75 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Considering the set of crops targeted by the programme (Avocado, Wheat, Onion, 
• 
Tomato, Cabbage, and fodder crops), the following table depicts a preliminary assessment 
of  the  irrigation  technique  adaptability  to  each  crop  in  the  absence  of  specific  limiting 
factors. Feasibility and design studies will refine this assessment, especially in case of  - 
specific  limiting  factors  such  as  water  quality  issues  (turbidity/suspended  solids, 
salinity/electrical conductivity, pH), high wind speed, topography, soil characteristics, etc. 
Crop 
Wheat 
Avocado 
Onion 
Tomato 
Cabbage 
Fodder crops 
Drip 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
Irrigation Technique adaptability (Y/N) 
Micro-sprinkler 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
Sprinkler 
Y 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Surface 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Considerations for the assessment of various water demands 
Domestic water demand. The water demand for domestic activities includes mainly: 
• 
i)  water  for  drinking,  ii)  water  for  food  preparation,  and  iii)  water  for  bathing  and 
sanitation. To estimate the amount of water needed to meet domestic use, it is important 
to know the population size and dynamics of growth, as well as the per capita demand for 
water.  This  can  be  obtained  from  secondary  data  sources  or  by  doing  primary  data 
collection through conducting a census at community level. According to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), between 50 and 100 liters of water per person per day are needed 
to ensure that most basic needs are met and few health concerns arise. 
Livestock water demand. To estimate the water demand for the animals, the number 
• 
of animals per household and the species must be determined. The water demand can be 
determined by multiplying the number of animals with the daily water demand per animal. 
The  amount  of  water  needed  /  recommended  for  each  species  can  be  obtained  from 
secondary sources (such as the local livestock department). 
Crop water requirements. In order to assess crop water requirements, the cropped 
• 
area,  the  cropping  pattern,  the  cropping  intensity  and  cropping  calendars  have  to  be 
determined. The FAO Penman Monteith method (FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper n° 56, 
1986)  is  recommended  to  be  as  much  as  possible  applied  in  estimating  reference 
evapotranspiration,  crop  coefficients,  crop  evapotranspiration,  effective  rainfall  and 
consequently net and gross irrigation water requirement. Additional water requirements 
should be considered if needed, such as: i) water demand for an early season heavy dose 
needed for land preparation, ii) capital/reclamative leaching water requirement (in case of 
existing  soil  salinity  issues  and  the  amount  depends  on  the  soil  electrical  conductivity 
measured  and  on-site  leaching  tests  performed),  and  iii)  water  demand  for  leaching 
fraction to be added to the irrigation dose in case  water salinity is relatively high either 
permanently  or  seasonally  (to  be  assessed  through  measurement  of  water  electrical 
conductivity). 
1.2.2.  Local market related infrastructure Development and Management 
The  programme  will  support 
interventions  aimed  at  addressing  market 
• 
infrastructure-related  constraints  faced  by  farmers  and  other  relevant  actors  operating 
within the targeted value chains; the focus will be either at storage, transportation, and 
marketing  levels.  Planned  interventions  will  include  supporting  climate-resilient  rural 
infrastructure investments that: a) can add market and nutritional value at the location; 
b) guarantee food safety and extend shelf life; c) upgrade performance of enterprises; and 
d)  support  associated  agricultural  producers,  including  women  and  youth,  to  become 
competitive, sustainable commercial businesses in an environmentally friendly manner. 
76 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Climate-resilient  and  accessible  infrastructure  investments  will  be  verified  with 
• 
communities  and  business  actors  in  the  respective  value  chains  and  will  be  prioritized 
according to community business plans, linkages along the value chain and social impact 
potential.  In  terms  of  storage,  the  programme  will  encourage  joint  investments  of 
businesses  to  create  better  storage  facilities  that  enhance  postharvest  handling.  The 
Programme will support construction of 40 warehouses for farmers’ primary cooperatives 
(5,000  quintals  average  capacity),  in  addition  to  20  pilot  low-cost  Zero  energy  cooling 
units. 
The programme will invest in designing spot rehabilitation of 100 km of feeder roads, 
• 
and the construction of 20 town/primary market sheds for fruits and vegetables (50% co- 
financed by woredas), in addition to 200 low-cost roadside market sheds. 
In the selection of the investment and technology, a nutrition lens will be applied, 
• 
leveraging post-harvest practices and infrastructure to preserve and enhance nutritional 
quality  of  the  foods  produced.  It  is  expected  that  these  infrastructure  investments  will 
foster job creation for youth and women. 
To  ensure  ownership  and  sustainability, the  Programme  will  adopt  a  participatory 
• 
approach  when  developing  the  market  related  infrastructure  activities,  from  the 
identification  of  intervention  sites,  conduction  of  detailed  designs,  until  infrastructure 
construction. Community development plans established under subcomponent 1.1 would 
inform  the  present  subcomponent  1.2  if  the  development  of  specific  infrastructure  like 
warehouses, road side market sheds or the spot rehabilitation of feeder roads are listed 
among  community  development  priorities.  While  for  town/primary  markets,  the 
identification  exercise  will  be  involving  Woredas’  authorities.  The  market  related 
infrastructure activities will be developed according to the following phases: 
✓  Identification and screening Phase; 
✓  Design Phase; 
✓  Implementation Phase (including: tendering, execution of construction works, and 
handing over). 
Construction of Pilot Zero Energy Cool Chambers for Storage at farm level 
Due to their high moisture content, vegetables have very short life and are liable to 
• 
spoil.  Moreover,  they  are  living  entities  and  carry  out  transpiration,  respiration  and  r ipening 
even after harvest. The spoilage of vegetables can be controlled by reducing the storage 
temperature.  Refrigerated  cool storage  is  not  only  energy intensive  and  expensive,  but 
also  involves  large  initial  capital  investment.  As  a  low  cost  and  environment  friendly 
alternative, Zero Energy Cooling Chamber (ZECC) is a storage facility consisting of a small 
chamber  made  out  of  bricks  and  sand  where  farmers  can  temporarily  store  freshly 
harvested produce at farm level for few days before it is transported to market. The ZECC 
can  keep  the  temperature  10-15OC  cooler  than  the  outside  temperature  and  maintain 
about 90% relative humidity. It works on evaporative cooling principles that provides  a 
cool environment which increases the shelf life of vegetables as well as their quality. This 
reduces  the  rate  of  deterioration,  allows  more  time  for  marketing  the  crop,  and  allows 
higher quality produce to reach consumers. 
In this regard, PACT will support 20 farmers’ organizations by the construction of 20 
• 
pilot low-cost Zero Energy Cooling Units (ZECU). Each ZECU will be made of 10 to 20 Zero 
Energy  Cooling  Chambers  (ZECCs)  depending  on  chambers’  size  and  capacity.  ZECCs 
following  steps: 
construction  process  will  be 
identification/screening,  design,  procurement,  construction  works,  supervision  and 
handing-over. Activities will start in the third year of the programme and will be achieved 
in the same year. 
implemented  based  on 
the 
77 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Identification/screening. ZECCs suitability will be assessed at feasibility study phase 
• 
of the irrigation scheme. 20 irrigation schemes will be selected. Priority will be given to 
those schemes that satisfy the following criteria: 
✓  have already been constructed or which construction achievement is scheduled by 
the third year of the programme, as the ZECCs will not be operational without a 
continuously available water source; 
✓  are producing the vegetables targeted by PACT i.e., Tomato and Cabbage, while 
the use of ZECC is generally not recommended for crops requiring a low humidity 
environment, like Onion; 
✓  the respective cooperatives are not benefitting from PACT interventions in terms of 
warehouses construction; 
✓  are characterized by particular climate conditions (Low Relative Humidity < 40% 
and  High  Daily  Maximum  Temperature  >  25°C)  during  the  specific  vegetables’ 
harvesting months. ZECCs are more effective under these climate conditions. 
✓  demonstrate  ownership  and  express  willingness  to  provide  land/space  where  to 
construct the ZECCs and which would not result in any land compensation claims 
and would not result in serious adverse social or environmental impacts. 
These priority criteria will be assessed according to the above order  of listing and 
• 
each candidate will not be assessed for the criterion “n+1” if it doesn’t satisfy the criterion 
“n”. The ideal candidate should consequently satisfy all the 5 criteria. This exercise will be 
conducted at federal level by the FPCU in collaboration with the RPCUs based on the above- 
mentioned criteria. If the number of sites is still exceeding the target (20), regional equity 
should be considered. The RPCUs will consult with all the selected beneficiaries to obtain 
a commitment from all parties to setup an operations and maintenance system for their 
infrastructure. 
Design  and  Construction.  ZECU/ZECCs  design  will  preferably  be  included  in  the 
• 
selected  irrigation  scheme  design  bidding  documents  and  contract.  Same  preference 
should be considered for  the procurement process for ZECU/ZECCs  construction. If  this 
will not be possible, the design (and construction works) can be undertaken by another 
competitively recruited consulting (and construction) firms. 
The design should be site specific. Since Cooling Chambers can be constructed over 
• 
a range of sizes, each Cooling Unit will be made of a series of 10 medium or up to 20 small 
ZECCs depending on construction costs and storage volume needed. The minimum size of 
one ZECC will be around: 165 cm Length x 115 cm Width x 70 cm Height of double wall 
constructed in bricks and 7.5 cm cavity between the double wall filled with wet sand. This 
size  can  progressively  be  larger;  however,  its  construction  will  also  be  more  and  more 
expensive. The size  of  an  ZECC can  be chosen  to  meet  a  range  of  user  storage  needs, 
however, the vegetables  that need storage should be carefully considered, since not all 
produce can be stored together because some release ethylene (like tomato), which can 
accelerate  ripening  or  reduce  post-harvest  quality  of  ethylene  sensitive  crops  (like 
Cabbage). 
ZECCs locations should be chosen in such a way to be: i) close to a source of water 
• 
supply (ideally an irrigation system), ii) exposed to wind/breeze, iii) in a slightly elevated 
place to avoid waterlogging risk, and iv) if possible, well shaded, otherwise a shed must 
be designed and constructed to protect the chamber from direct sun and rain (see Figure 
1). The importance of the source of water supply is justified by the need to drench the 
chamber  (walls, sand and top cover) with water  at least twice  daily in order to achieve 
desired temperature and relative humidity. This can be realized by installing a drip system 
with plastic pipes and micro tubes connected to an overhead water source. 
78 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Figure 1 – Zero Energy Cooling Chamber under a shed 
Clean  construction material  (bricks  and  sand) should  be  used. Additionally,  bricks 
• 
must be unbroken and with good porosity, while sand should be free of organic matter and 
clay. 
The  consulting  firm  that  designs  the  ZECU/ZECCs  will  be  responsible  for  works 
• 
supervision and will be reporting to the relevant RPCU. The construction contractor  will 
provide necessary O&M training to farmers’ organizations mainly in terms of: i) chambers 
watering frequency/season, ii) periodic chambers maintenance, cleaning and disinfection 
to protect from fungus, insect, pests, and reptiles, iii) chambers bricks replacement (every 
3 years). 
Defects liability period and hand-over. At the completion of construction works, each 
• 
ZECU  will  be  put under  a  liability  period  of  at least three  months  after  which  it  will  be 
handed over to the programme and then to the beneficiary farmers’ organizations that will 
be  responsible  of  the  ZECU  management,  operation  and  maintenance  through  the 
formation of a committee for the day-to-day management. The direct beneficiaries, will be 
paying a user fee to sustainably manage the ZECU/ZECCs. 
Construction of Warehouses for Cooperatives 
Investing in storage facilities and warehouses construction has enormous potential 
• 
to reduce post-harvest quantitative and qualitative losses, market provision regulation and 
stabilization of targeted commodities prices. Additionally, it enables the creation of market 
linkages  between  producers  and  buyers.  In  this  regard,  and  in  order  to  support  the 
targeted value chains, PACT will support 40 primary cooperatives (out of 150 cooperatives 
to  be  established)  by the  construction  of  40  warehouses  with  a  5,000 quintals  average 
capacity each. 
The  warehouses  construction  process  will  be  implemented  based  on  the  following 
• 
steps:  identification/prioritisation, design,  procurement,  construction  works,  supervision 
and handing-over. Activities  will start in the second year of the programme and will be 
achieved by the sixth year to ensure that expected impacts are visible before the end of 
the programme lifecycle. 
• 
Identification/prioritisation. Priority will be given to those cooperatives that: 
✓  have  effectively  developed  a  graduation  path  to  professional  producers' 
organisations; 
✓  have smooth accessibility and proximity to production area; 
✓  have a relatively higher levels of production with specific focus on the most relevant 
and sensitive targeted commodities; 
✓  demonstrate  ownership  and  express  willingness  to  provide  land/space  where  to 
construct the warehouse which would not result in any land compensation claims 
and would not result in serious adverse social or environmental impacts. 
79 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
The  most  important  criteria  (adoption  of  graduation  path)  will  be  attributed  the 
• 
higher  importance  following  a  weighting  approach.  All  warehouse  opportunities  will  be 
prioritised following a rating system. The higher the score, the higher the priority of the 
warehouse construction. The screening/prioritisation exercise will be conducted at federal 
level by the FPCU in collaboration with the RPCUs based on the above-mentioned criteria 
while trying to ensure that at least 20% of warehouses are dedicated to pastoralists/agro- 
pastoralists’ cooperatives in the lowlands in case some of the above criteria will contribute 
to their exclusion from the competition process. 
The  RPCUs  will  consult  with  all  the  stakeholders  of  the  ranked  infrastructures  to 
• 
obtain a commitment from all parties to setup an operations and maintenance system for 
their  infrastructure.  The  system  should  be  responsive  to  the  routine,  periodic  and 
emergency  maintenance  that  is  envisaged  for  each  particular  infrastructure.  Such 
commitment  will  represent  a  necessary  condition  before  proceeding  with  warehouses 
design and construction. 
The warehouse infrastructure that will thus have qualified will be submitted to the 
• 
FPCU for approval of funding. Once the funding approval is secured, the RPCU will facilitate 
the formalization through an agreement between PACT and the beneficiaries which should 
clearly  set  out  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  each  party  and  particularly  the  O&M 
responsibility of the beneficiaries. 
Warehouses Design. Each warehouse design will be undertaken by a competitively 
• 
recruited consulting firm demonstrating adequate experience in conducting similar designs 
and  appropriate  staffing  inclusive  of  an  Architect,  a  Civil/Infrastructure  Engineer  and 
eventually  an  Agronomist.  The  design  process  should  take  into  consideration  the  site 
specific  conditions,  the  desired  storage  capacity,  in  addition  to  the  specific  storage 
requirements  of  the  targeted  commodities  (e.g.,  including  concrete  drying  floors, 
aeration/ventilation,  etc.  while  excluding  cold  storage)  and  has  to  comply  with  the 
national/international  construction  standards  in  terms  of  foundation,  superstructure 
material, etc. in addition to necessary provision for electrical installation, auxiliary facilities, 
water and sanitation systems (with the possibility of using solar energy where needed), 
emergency exit, etc. The design process will be concluded by the development of Bill of 
Quantities BoQs and preparation of bidding documents. Design packages will be subject 
to approval by the FPCU Civil Engineer prior to implementation. 
Procurement. Procurement process will be launched based on the bidding documents 
• 
prepared  at  design  stage.  The  following  will  be  considered  in  selecting  competitively 
recruited contractors, to ensure good quality and timeliness of works: i) past experience 
on  warehouses  and  storage  facilities  construction  (at  least  five  years);  ii)  number  of  similar  
constructions works successfully implemented (at least three); iii) quality and ownership 
of  relevant  construction  equipment;  iv)  qualified  and  experienced  staffs;  and  v) 
demonstrated  financial  capacity.  If  the  warehouse  site  is  close  to  the  production 
site/irrigation  scheme,  it  will  be  possible  for  the  programme  procuring  the  warehouse 
construction as a unique lot (with the irrigation scheme). 
Construction works and Supervision. All construction works will be carried out by the 
• 
selected contractor in line with the design technical specifications and BoQs. Beneficiaries 
will  contribute  10%  of  the  total  construction  costs.  This  contribution  will  be  through 
unskilled  labour  and,  possibly,  construction  material  (only  if  this  is  of  good  quality  as 
approved  by  the  contractor).  The  contractor  will  provide  necessary  O&M  training  to 
Cooperative representatives  as needed. The consulting firm that designs the warehouse 
will  be  responsible  for  works  supervision  as  per  design  guidelines  and  according to  the 
contractor  work  chronogram  which  serves  as  a  tool  to  assess  the  quantitative  and 
qualitative  progress  of  works.  In  consultation  with  the  RPCU,  the  consulting 
firm/supervising engineer will carry out day-to-day site supervision visits, provide timely 
guidance and recommendations to address technical issues or work deficiencies, and will 
submit a comprehensive monthly report on the work progress. 
80 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Defects liability period and hand-over. At the completion of construction works, each 
• 
warehouse will be put under a liability period of at least six months after which, it will be 
handed over to PACT (by contractors) and on a second level to the respective Cooperative 
(by the programme). Management of the warehouses and its facilities will be in the hands 
of the beneficiary cooperatives who can opt for different management options including: 
i) forming a committee for the day-to-day management; or ii) hiring a manager, etc. The 
direct beneficiaries, members of the cooperatives will in any case be paying a user fee to 
sustainably manage the facilities. 
Construction of Market Structures 
The programme will invest in the construction of 20 town/primary market sheds for 
• 
fruits and vegetables, in addition to 200 low-cost roadside market sheds. The objective of 
these facilities is to avail marketing outlets in the Woredas/clusters where production will 
be  taking  place.  It  is  expected  that  rural  women  farmers  will  be  targeted  as  priority 
recipients of low-cost roadside market sheds and that rural women traders will be targeted 
as priority beneficiaries of primary market sheds. 
Activities  will start in the first year  of the programme and will be achieved by the 
• 
sixth year. Similarly to the other infrastructures, the construction process of the primary 
market  sheds  will  observe  the  following  steps:  identification/prioritisation,  design, 
procurement, construction works, supervision and handing-over. 
Identification/prioritisation.  Primary market  sheds  will  be co-financed  by Woredas’ 
• 
authorities at 50% and will be localized in Woredas’ main towns. Preliminary identification 
will exclusively be through a consultation and sensitisation processes that the programme 
will undertake with Woredas’ authorities at a very early stage following the programme 
start-up. Interested Woredas should submit a formal application requesting market shed 
construction  co-financing  while  specifying  adequate  land/space  availability.  In  case  the 
number of applications is exceeding the target of 20 town market sheds, priority will be 
given to: i) woredas observing a high level of production and/or a relatively higher number 
of irrigation schemes in general and those targeted by PACT in particular, and ii) a  relatively 
lower estimated investment cost (including costs of borehole/tube wells drilling which can 
vary  considerably  according  to  groundwater  resources  and  aquifer  depths,  etc.).  The 
screening/prioritisation  exercise  will  be  conducted  at  federal  level  by  the  FPCU  in 
collaboration with the RPCUs based on the above-mentioned criteria while trying to ensure 
that at least 20% of market sheds are dedicated to the driest woredas in the lowlands in 
case the above criteria will hamper their prioritization. 
The  RPCUs  will  consult  with  all  the  top  ranked  and  selected  woredas  to  obtain  a 
• 
commitment to setup an operations and maintenance system for their market sheds. The 
system  should  be  responsive  to  the  routine,  periodic  and  emergency  maintenance 
requirement.  Such  commitment  will  represent  a  necessary  condition  before  proceeding 
with market design and construction. 
Once the funding is approved by the FPCU, the RPCU will facilitate the formalization 
• 
through an agreement between PACT and the beneficiaries which should clearly set out 
the roles  and responsibilities  of each party and particularly the management, operation 
and maintenance responsibilities of the woredas. 
Market sheds Design. Each market shed design will be undertaken by a competitively 
• 
recruited consulting firm demonstrating adequate experience in conducting similar designs 
and  appropriate  staffing  inclusive  of  Architects  and  Civil/Infrastructure  Engineers.  The 
design  process  should  take  into  consideration  the  site-specific  conditions,  the  desired 
market area and capacity, in addition to the specific requirements in terms of number of 
stalls, number of storage areas, etc., and has  to comply with the national/international 
construction  standards  in  terms  of  foundation,  superstructure,  fitting,  finishes,  etc.  in 
addition to landscaping and auxiliary works. 
81 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
When  needed,  the  primary  market  sheds  will  be  provided  with  a  borehole  water 
• 
supply. The boreholes/tube wells would be equipped with solar pumping systems including 
submersible  pump,  solar  panels,  control  panels,  overhead  storage  tank,  and  piped 
distribution within the facility. The design of market sheds will also consider privacy and 
sanitary needs for women in addition to integrating accessibility needs  for persons with 
disabilities (ramps to access market sheds, ramps to access toilets). 
The  design  process  will  be  concluded  by  the  development  of  drawings,  BoQs  and 
• 
preparation  of  bidding  documents.  Design  packages  will  be  subject  to  approval  by  the 
FPCU Civil Engineer prior to implementation. 
Procurement. Procurement process will be launched based on the bidding documents 
• 
prepared at design stage. The potential contractor should demonstrate having adequate 
experience and capacity to implement such kind of constructions. The possibility of partial 
subcontracting of works  should be foreseen to facilitate the implementation of auxiliary 
works including the borehole water supply systems. 
Construction works and Supervision. All construction works will be carried out by the 
• 
selected  contractor  (and  eventual  subcontractors)  in  line  with  the  design  technical 
specifications  and  BoQs.  The  contractor  will  provide  necessary  O&M  training  to  the 
beneficiaries  as  needed.  The  consulting  firm  that  designs  the  market  shed  will  be 
responsible  for  works  supervision.  In  consultation  with  the  RPCU,  the  consulting 
firm/supervising engineer will carry out day-to-day site supervision visits, provide timely 
guidance and recommendations to address technical issues or work deficiencies, and will 
submit a comprehensive monthly report on the work progress. 
Defects liability period and hand-over. At the completion of construction works, each 
• 
market shed will be put under a liability period of one year after which, it will be handed 
over  to  PACT  (by  contractors)  and  on  a  second  level,  to  woreda  authorities  (by  the 
programme)  that  will  be  responsible  for  future  management.  The  direct  beneficiaries, 
traders  of  fruits  and  vegetables  will  be  paying  a  user  fee  to  sustainably  operate  and 
maintain market facilities. 
low-cost  roadside  market  sheds.  The  identification  will  be  through  LDIPs  while 
• 
interested  smallholder  farmers  should  be  owning  lands  neighbouring  the  road  side  or 
authorized by communities or local authorities to occupy and explore part of the road side. 
The  FPCU  Civil  Engineer  will  be  developing  simple  typical  designs  of  low-cost  roadside 
market sheds that can be replicated in different targeted sites depending on construction 
material availability. Average dimensions could be 3.0-3.5 m Length x 1.2-1.5 m Width x 
1.8-2.2  m  Height.  Construction  material  can  be  wood,  bricks,  concrete  or  a  mixture. 
Construction works are somewhat simple and would be included in the irrigation scheme 
construction bidding document and contract or it can be handled by communities with the 
support of a professional to be hired locally. 
Feeder Roads Spot Rehabilitation 
Investing in farm to market roads  rehabilitation has  enormous  potential to fill the 
• 
gaps from production to related markets, reduce post-harvest losses, reduce transport and 
transaction  costs,  and  improve  the  competitiveness  and  the  ability  of  poor  farmers  to  reach  
their productive potential and to access and effectively participate in markets. 
In order to ensure that sustainable physical connections between selected farms and 
• 
markets are provided throughout the year, the programme will support spot improvement 
of  100  km  of  feeder  roads.  In  fact,  specific  sections  of  the  roads  that  are  not  in  good 
physical  condition  will  be  determined  and  treated  through  earthworks  (excavation, 
backfilling,  compaction,  etc.)  and/or  construction/rehabilitation  of  adequate  drainage 
structures to allow permanent and continuous traffic. 
The road rehabilitation process  will be implemented based on the following  steps: 
• 
identification/prioritisation, survey/design, procurement, rehabilitation works, supervision 
82 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
and  handing-over.  Activities  will  start  in  the  third  year  of  the  programme  and  will  be 
achieved by the sixth year to ensure that expected impacts are visible before the end of 
the programme lifecycle. 
Identification/screening  of  roads.  Investment  by  PACT  through  road  improvement 
• 
activities  will  be  guided  by  LDIPs,  and  proportional  to  the  overall  distribution  of  its 
investment among the targeted value chains. The more the investment in one value chain, 
the higher the importance of infrastructure provided to support the value chain, whatever 
the Woreda. Within each Woreda, and when the number of potential roads is exceeding 
the target, a set of criteria will guide the prioritisation process of the roads, including: 
✓  Economic  criteria  (value  for  money)  will  be  the  most  important  of  all.  Road 
improvement activities will be in the most productive areas; 
✓  Social  criteria  are  expressed  by:  i)  population  served  by  the  road,  specifically 
smallholder  farmers/pastoralists/agro-pastoralists;  ii)  number  of  social  facilities 
(education, health, markets, etc.) served by the road; 
✓  Technical  criteria:  reflecting  the  level  of  complexity  in  implementing  targeted 
rehabilitation/construction works. 
✓  Environmental criteria to be considered are: i) length of the road passing through 
landslide/eroded area in the mountain or  a flooding prone zone in plain area; ii) 
number of trees to be cut down; iii) the area of forest that should be encroached 
by the road; iv) level of alteration of surface water hydrology crossed by the roads. 
The importance of impacts for these criteria is evaluated through the likelihood of 
remediating them. 
All pre-identified roads will be scored according to areas provided by each criterion 
• 
above.  The  most  important  criteria  (economic/value  for  money)  will  be  attributed  the 
higher importance following a weighting approach. All roads will be prioritised following a 
rating system. The higher  the score, the more important the priority of the road during 
further steps. 
Roads  Survey  and  Design.  These  will  be  undertaken  by  a  competitively  recruited 
• 
private  consulting  firm.  Site  survey  will  be  preceded  by  an  appraisal  and  analysis  of 
available data including existing topographic, hydrological, geological and meteorological 
data  in  addition  to  anecdotal  information,  maps  and  aerial  imagery  indicating  key  land 
uses  and  critical  infrastructure  along  the  road.  Site  survey  will  then  be  conducted  and 
would generally include: i) Estimation of the existing road traffic volume, ii) topographical 
survey, iii) soil and geotechnical investigations, in addition to iv) an assessment of specific 
sections  necessitating  improvement  and/or  drainage  infrastructure  including  spot 
interventions like culverts and bridges. All surveys will identify unexpected hazards to be 
mitigated.  Location  of  best  construction  materials  (in  sufficient  quantities)  will  also  be 
determined for further use during works. 
Based  on  all  information  and  elaborations  above,  an  optimized  design  will  be 
• 
developed  specifying  the  scope  of  works,  design  criteria  for  the  carriageway  specific 
sections,  its  geometry,  drainage  and  structural  elements,  construction  specifications, in 
addition to environmental, social and natural hazard management parameters. The design 
process should comply with the Ethiopian Roads Authority (ERA) technical specifications 
as indicated in the Design Manual for Low Volume Roads and will result in the development 
of Bill of Quantities BoQs (including drawings, line diagrams, safety measures, etc.) and 
preparation  of  bidding  documentation  to  be  used  for  further  advertisement.  Design 
packages will be subject to approval by the FPCU Civil Engineer prior to implementation. 
If  needed,  the  programme  can  seek  the  ERA  collaboration  in  reviewing  the  design 
documents through a specific Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). 
Procurement. Procurement process will be launched based on the bidding documents 
• 
prepared  at  design  stage.  The  following  will  be  considered  in  selecting  competitively 
recruited contractors, to ensure good quality and timeliness of works: i) past experience 
on road infrastructure construction (at least five years); ii) number of similar rehabilitation 
83 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
or construction works implemented (at least five); iii) quality and ownership of relevant 
construction  equipment  (e.g.,  grader,  wheel  loader,  tank  truck,  compactor,  etc.);  iv) 
qualified and experienced staffs; and v) demonstrated financial capacity. PACT  will plan 
the  procurement  process  and  contract  award  to  allow  execution  of  works  during  dry 
seasons.  Each  contractor  will  be  assigned  a  duration  of  not  more  than  six  months  to 
complete targeted works. 
Rehabilitation/Construction works. All road works will be implemented by contractors 
• 
hired on a competitive basis and will be executed through the equipment-based approach. 
All interventions will be in line with specifications and guidelines prescribed by the BoQs. 
Before  starting  with  works,  sensitisation  of  the  target  beneficiary  communities  will  be 
carried out by PACT, especially when their contribution is required in terms of provision of 
local  material  (aggregate,  water,  etc.)  and  unskilled  labour  which  will  be  paid  by  the 
contractor. It is expected that such community involvement will contribute to build their 
capacity to maintain the rehabilitated roads. 
Supervision of works. The consulting firm that designs the roads will be responsible 
• 
for  supervising  implementation  of  works,  following  guidelines  of  the  design.  The 
supervision  framework  can  include  stationed  staffs  assigned  on  sites  based  on 
geographical  locations  (remoteness  of  various  sites)  and/or  periodic  field  visits  by  a 
supervising engineer. After the contract is awarded, each contractor will update the work 
chronogram to serve as a tool to assess the progress (quantity and quality) of works and 
monitor  the  overall  target.  In  consultation  with  the  RPCU  and  ERA,  the  consulting 
firm/supervising engineer will carry out day-to-day site supervision visits and will submit 
a  comprehensive  monthly  report  on  the  work  progress.  It  is  expected  that  during  site 
supervision  visits,  he  will  provide  timely  guidance  and  recommendations  to  address 
technical issues or work deficiencies arising on the sites during implementation of works. 
This  will  ensure  that  the  deliverables  are  sustained  and  aligned  with  technical 
specifications. 
Defects liability period and hand-over. All roads will be under a defect liability period 
• 
of at least six months, after completion of rehabilitation/construction works. During that 
period,  all  deficiencies  and  other  problems  identified  during  or  later  than  provisional 
reception  will  be  fixed  by  the  contractors.  Upon  satisfaction  of  the  RPCU,  ERA  and  the 
supervising engineer, each road will be first handed over to PACT (by contractors) and on 
a second level, to woreda relevant authorities (by the programme) that will be responsible 
for future routine and periodic road maintenance and management. 
Implementation Sequencing and Budget 
1.2.1 - Climate Resilient Water 
Development for Households, Crops and 
Livestock Use 
1. Development of improved farmer led 
small-scale irrigation systems 
Identification of Potential Schemes and 
Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment 
Feasibility Studies 
Schemes Detailed Design and Construction 
Works Supervision 
Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design 
Studies 
Quantities 
Unit of 
measur 
e 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Y 
7 
Total 
Unit 
Cost 
(US$ 
) 
Total 
Cost 
(US$) 
90,567,00 
0 
Ha 
Ha 
Ha 
Ha 
360 
0 
330 
0 
300 
0 
480 
0 
480 
0 
180 
0 
120 
0 
440 
0 
400 
0 
440 
0 
400 
0 
165 
0 
150 
0 
110 
0 
100 
0 
300 
0 
400 
0 
400 
0 
150 
0 
100 
0 
1620 
0 
1485 
0 
1350 
0 
1350 
0 
35 
567,000 
200 
2,970,000 
300 
4,050,000 
100 
1,350,000 
Establishment of IWUAsa 
Unit 
30 
70 
70 
30 
10 
210 
1,000 
210,000 
84 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Capacity Building of IWUAs 
session 
30 
70 
70 
30 
10 
210 
2,000 
420,000 
Construction of irrigation schemes b 
Ha 
300 
0 
400 
0 
400 
0 
150 
0 
100 
0 
1350 
0 
6,000 
81,000,000 
2. Development of Multi-purpose Water 
Systems (MWS) 
Identification of Potential MWS Sites and 
Prefeasibility Rapid Assessment 
Feasibility Studies 
MUS Detailed Design and Works Supervision 
Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design 
Studies 
Establishment of MWS WUAs 
Unit 
Unit 
Unit 
Unit 
Unit 
4,674,000 
50 
70 
70 
50 
180 
200 
36,000 
45 
65 
65 
45 
165 
1.200 
198,000 
40 
60 
60 
40 
150 
2.000 
300,000 
45 
65 
65 
45 
150 
600 
90,000 
20 
50 
50 
30 
150 
1.000 
150,000 
Capacity Building of MWS WUAs 
session 
20 
50 
50 
30 
150 
1.000 
150,000 
Construction of MWSc 
3. Rehabilitation of existing water 
Infrastructure 
Irrigation schemes' identification and Feasibility 
Studies 
Irrigation schemes Detailed Design and 
Rehabilitation Works Supervision 
Quality assurance of Feasibility and Design 
Studies 
Unit 
20 
50 
50 
30 
150 
25,00 
0 
3,750,000 
5,275,000 
Ha 
200 
300 
400 
300 
300 
1,500 
100 
150,000 
Ha 
200 
300 
400 
300 
300 
1.500 
Ha 
200 
300 
400 
300 
300 
1.500 
Strengthening & Capacity Building of IWUAs 
Unit 
2 
3 
4 
3 
3 
15 
Rehabilitation of irrigation schemes 
Ha 
200 
300 
400 
300 
300 
1,500 
MWS identification and pre-feasibility rapid 
assessment 
MWS Rehabilitation Design & Works 
Supervision 
Rehabilitation of MWS 
Unit 
Unit 
Unit 
10 
20 
20 
10 
20 
20 
10 
20 
20 
50 
50 
50 
Disability inclusion expert to review the 
training materials & provide expert guidance 
during ToT 
Days 
20 
Total 
20 
500 
10,000 
100,526,0 
00 
a: 1 IWUA/Irrigation Scheme. Average Command Area/Scheme < 100 Ha. 
b: 6000 USD is an average cost to develop 1 Ha of irrigation. Depending on the site, this cost is including: cost/ha 
of  headworks  or digging  and  equipping  wells  + eventual  storage  water tanks/reservoirs  +  conveyance  and  on 
farm distribution system (surface/drip/sprinkler). 
c:  A  Multiple-Use  System  will  supply  water to  Domestic  and/or  Livestock  Uses,  and  may  include  a  community 
garden where feasible. The unit cost is including: Digging a shallow well/borehole up to 50 m depth (up to 10,000 
USD)  +  Solar  Pump  with  adequate  specification  according  to  the  site  (average  3,000  USD)  +  Elevated  tanks 
(average 7,000 USD) + Construction of Water Points for Domestic and/or Livestock Uses (average 5,000 USD). 
1.2.2 - Local Market-Related Infrastructure 
Unit of 
measure 
Quantities 
Unit 
Cost 
Total costs 
Y1  Y2  Y3 
Y4  Y5  Y6 
Y7 
Total 
(US$) 
(US$) 
85 
150 
225,000 
50 
75,000 
1,000 
15,000 
3,000 
4,500,000 
200 
10,000 
1,000 
50,000 
5,000 
250,000 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
A. Pilot Storage Facilities at farm level 
198,000 
Design & Works Supervision of Pilot Zero energy 
cooling units for storage at farm level 
Unit 
Construction of pilot Zero energy cooling units 
for storage at farm level 
Unit 
20   
20   
20 
900 
18,000 
20 
9,000 
180,000 
2,200,000 
B. Warehouses for Cooperatives 
Identification, design and works supervision of 
warehouses for farmers primary cooperatives 
(5,000 quintal) 
Unit 
10 
10 
10 
10 
40 
5,000 
200,000 
Construction of warehouses for farmers primary 
cooperatives (5,000 quintal) 
Unit 
10 
10 
10 
10 
40 
50,000 
2,000,000 
C. Markets 
4,560,000 
Construction of road side market sheds 
Design & construction works supervision of 
primary market sheds 
Construction of primary market shed 
D. Feeder Roads Spot Rehabilitation 
Survey, design and works supervision 
Feeder roads Spot rehabilitation 
Total 
Unit 
Unit 
Unit 
Km 
Km 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40   
200 
3,000 
600,000 
5 
5 
5 
5   
20 
18,000 
360,000 
5 
5 
5 
5   
20 
180,000 
3,600,000 
3,300,000 
30 
40 
30   
100 
3,000 
300,000 
30 
40 
30   
100 
30,000 
3,000,000 
10,258,000 
II.2.4  : Subcomponent 1.3: Market-Oriented Production and Productivity 
Improvement of Selected Food Commodities 
Interventions under this  subcomponent will address  production-related  constraints 
• 
of target crops and livestock selected by women and men farmers. The expected outcomes 
will be improved productivity (for 60000 irrigated and 90000) rain fed and agropastoralist 
farmers of selected value chains in the targeted watersheds. The  expected outcomes of 
the  interventions  is  that  75%  of  the  beneficiaries'  report  improved  production  and 
productivity following access and adoption of improved technologies. The second outcome 
is improved nutrition. The value chains to be supported will include fruits and vegetables 
(avocado, tomatoes, cabbage, onion,), wheat, forage, shoats and poultry. Each irrigator 
will irrigate on average 0.25ha and non-irrigators on 1 ha. 
The horticulture and fruit value chain is still under development in MoA and has had 
• 
minimal support from both research and extension services  due to the priority given to 
staple  crops.  This  has  resulted  in  the  production  of  the  targeted  value  chains  to  face 
challenges of limited access to improved seed, poor soil fertility and and low productivity. 
To  support  the  horticulture  and  agribusiness  strategy  of  the  GOE,  PACT  will  support 
extension services to fully support the sector and promote Integrated Homestead Farming 
and  biofortified  crops  for  improved  nutrition  and  support  rainn-fed  production  with 
technical training for improved productivity. 
GALS will be integrated within these activities to support the participation of women 
• 
and increase their skills and productive resources to manage their farms as enterprises. 
86 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Young male and female entrepreneurs, supported under sub-component 2.2, will benefit 
from services, research, and training offered under this component. 
Assumptions 
Strengthen capacity of extension services for targeted value chains – Enhancing the 
• 
capacity of DAs and FTs through Farmer Training Centres to effectively provide extension 
support for the value chain will be essential for effective delivery of extension information 
access  to  inputs  and  uptake  of  improved,  climate-smart  production  practices  and 
ultimately improved production. Capacity building will be provided as highlighted below: 
✓  In  collaboration  with  the  departments  of  research  ,  Horticulture,  Livestock 
directorate, Small Scale irrigation directorates, the Programme will provide training 
of  extension  staff  on  climate  smart  agriculture,  good  agriculture  practices  of the 
identified value chains, seed handling, ISFM, IPM. This training will be coupled with 
demonstrations at farmer level and at FTC level. The DAs/ FT will participate in two 
training sessions per year to allow for all the topics to be adequately covered and 
one  refresher  training  in  the  second  year  each  covering  3  days;  They  will  also 
receive training on gender equality and social inclusion. 
✓  JICA  will  conduct  a  once  off  TOT  on  Farming  as  a  business  (FBS)  using  the 
Smallholder  Horticulture  Empowerment  and  Promotion  (SHEP  approach)  to  the 
200DAs/ FT. Reference materials/modules will be provided to the DAs 
In addition, capacities of extension staff will be  developed, with the support of the 
• 
MoA  Food  and  Nutrition  Coordination  Office,  to  demonstrate  nutrient-preserving  and 
processing techniques (including vegetable and fruits drying, pickling, dehydrating. Using 
training  manuals  developed  for  the  agro-pastoralist  and  pastoralist  areas,  the  training 
would  be  organized  through  theory  and  practical  training  and  follow  up  for  technical 
backstopping. Also, PACT will strengthen collaboration linkages between research centres 
and rural extension structures such as the Regional Research Extension, Farmers Linkage 
Advisory  Council  (REFLAC)  and  FREG  (Farmer  Research  Extension  Group),  to  access 
improved varieties and technologies for the targeted value chains to ensure adoption and 
efficient support to DAs, 
To promote improved market-oriented production and productivity, dissemination of 
• 
extension  services  through  a  digital  platform  would  be  key.  Digital  extension  services 
would promote efficiency in extension to ensure producers have access to information on 
weather, climate, inputs and markets. PACT will partner with Agriculture Transformation 
Institute (ATI) to scale the use of the digital extension services platform to reach farmers 
supported under PACT. 
87 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
The first point is to ensure that DAs and FTCs are equipped with needed devices to 
• 
support them  disseminate information to farmers. To this  end, the programme through 
the  department  of  extension  services  and  ATI  will  procure  mobile  devices  and 
communication devices such as TVs and capacity development for extension and advisory 
services. Thus, PACT will support the department of extension services by equipping DAs 
and  FTCs  with  devices  which  will  be  used  to  disseminate  information  from  the  8028  farmers  
hotline. ATI through the 8028 will push messages on climate, weather, inputs availability 
to the  DA  devices  who will then use this information to provide  advisory to small producers.  
This  information  will  be  both  SMS/IVR  based.  For those  farmers  who  have  access  to  feature  
phones or smart phones these advisory will be available by dialling 8028 on their devices 
to  register  and  access  the  advisory  information.  PACT  PMU  through  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture  can  negotiate  with  Mobile  Network  Operators  such  as  Ethio  Telecom  and 
Vodacom to offset costs of SMS and zero rate the SMS services under 8022 to enable ATI 
to create a feedback mechanism that will allow two-way communication between farmers 
and DAs and overtime create more advisory content to reach farmers beyond PACT. 
To  ensure  the  DAs  have the  capacity to  use  the  platform  effectively through  ATI, 
• 
Research  Institutes  and  Department  of Extension Services  at  Zonal  and  Regional levels 
will provide training to the DAs and members of FTC on the digital platforms as well as 
supporting with the development of the content to be disseminated to the small producers. 
ATI will be responsible for the update and management of the advisory content based 
• 
on  farming  seasons,  changes  in  weather,  climate  and  risk  information.  Specifically, the 
access  to  tailored  climate  information  and  weather  forecasts  via  SMS,  ICT  and  other 
communication  channels  such  as  videos  shown  in  the  FTC  will  enhance  smallholders 
‘planning  and  decision-making  capacity  for  adaptive  crop  and  livestock  production  and 
markets. 
PACT will also utilise the ICT hardware for the DAs and FTC for data collection and 
• 
dissemination  of  advisory  services  (including  simple  messages  on  dietary  diversity  and 
climate  information).  PACT  will  support  scaling  up  the  current  Extension  services 
information  dissemination  system  (the 8028  Farmer  Hotline) in  partnership  with  ATI to 
reach  more  beneficiaries,  adding  more  crop  series  (supported  under  PACT)  as  well  as 
ensure equal access to information including those with disabilities. ATI will also support 
with the training of the DAs alongside the Department of Extension Services on usage of 
system, defining the content to support capacity development of DAs to ensure effective 
dissemination of information to FTCs. FTCs  will be key  to build capacity of farmers  and 
ensure information on extension is disseminated and trickle down to farmers through lead 
farmers/youth agents or for those farmers who have access to both feature phones and 
smartphones can have access to the farmer hotline through the 8028 line. 
By  engaging  with  ATI,  PACT  will  promote  the scalability  of  existing  platforms  and 
• 
sustainability and through the department of extension services under the MoA continue 
to disseminate advisory to farmers post PACT project. 
Supporting  Farmer  Training  Centres (FTCs)  –  Farmer  training  centres  and  Farmer 
• 
Business Schools will be key entry points to support production and strengthen community 
capacity. PACT will provide simple water harvesting and drip irrigation kits for small-scale 
irrigation  where  there  is  a  need,  targeting  particularly  50  FTC  that  service  FFS/FFS 
identified  by the  programme.  FTC  will  also  be equipped  with  soil  moisture  metres.  The 
selection criteria for the FTC will include proximity to the targeted landscapes, must be a 
functional  FTC  at  the  time  of  the  programme  implementation  with  basic  infrastructure 
available, potential for water harvesting practices to implemented irrigation. The purpose 
of  equipment  is  to  demonstrate  via  the  FTC  climate-smart  production  practices  for  the 
identified crops. 
The programme will also support the procurement of inputs, agricultural tools and 
• 
small-scale equipment for demonstration purposes.  The support will be for one demo per 
88 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
FTC  per  year in 50  FTC  and  will  promote,  onion,  avocado,  cabbage  and tomato  forage, 
demonstrations  based  on  the  priorities  for  the  regions/  area.  The  FTC  will  host 
demonstrations for rain-fed production value chains once per year. This financial support 
for inputs will be scaled down from hundred percent and reduce to 75%, 50% and 25% 
and 0% over the life of the Programme  after which extension will need to fund the activities  
through  a  revolving  fund  mechanism.  The  DA/FT  will  need  to  demonstrate  on  the 
enterprise  that  is  relevant  to  the  FFS/FBS  that  will  be  supported  in  the  area.  The 
programme  will  support  the  organization  of  field  days  in  each  FTC  per  year  to  benefit 
farmers in the catchment area supported by the FTC in the programme. These approaches 
will  be  tailored  to  the  needs  of  women  and  will  build  their  confidence  both  by  shifting 
mindsets  and  providing  practical  experiences  and  women-led  demonstrations  on use  of 
climate smart agricultural technologies. This will also include opportunities to practically 
learn how to use any new labour-saving technologies 
Services  at  FTCs  will  include  consideration  for  women  participation  by  setting 
• 
appropriate timing for  women  to be  able to  attend meetings.  As  much  as  possible, the 
Programme  will  explore  alternative  channels  used  by  women  to  communicate.  Due  to 
social norms, women may not be present at formal meetings, but informal groups like self- 
help  groups  can  offer  appropriate  platforms  to  reach  out  to  them;  therefore,  where 
possible, linkages to these groups could be established by FTCs. 
For  livestock  production  (poultry  and  shoats),  public  extension  staff  will  receive 
• 
capacity  training  from  the  livestock  department  to  train  farmers  on  improved  livestock 
management practices including housing, fodder  production, animal health and climate- 
resilient pasture and management. PACT will support 30 FTC for livestock production in 
the Somali for forage, Amhara for goats and poultry in SNNPRS where these interventions 
are relevant. 
Development agents will need to keep records and record production data from the 
• 
FTC  demos. As  these  interventions  are  also  favoured  by  women,  PACT  will  ensure that 
farmers organisations supported are women led or have majority women membership of 
at least 50%. 
Considering the high turnover of DAs, PACT will work with the Cooperatives to adopt 
• 
“community-based  change  agents’  approach”,  promoted  by  the  MoA  Extension 
Directorate, supporting Youth and lead farmers to be trained to provide extension services 
through  the  Farmer  Promoter  Model.  To  ensure  sustainability  of  the  model  small  incentives  
such  as  participating  in  trainings  or  business-related  trainings  will  be  encouraged  to 
support  the  youth  active  engagement.  Gender  and  social  inclusion  elements  will 
accompany these trainings to develop skills to effectively deliver services in an inclusive 
manner cognisant of norms that affect women. 
Coordination of DA/FT activities will be through the Bureaux of Agriculture; the BoAs 
• 
will also coordinate the training activities targeted at DA/FT on technical training through 
research and the SHEP approach provided through JICA 
To ensure seamless usage of the system for extension and market linkages, PACT 
• 
will  support  ATI  through  MoA  to  Bundle  the  farmer  hotline  portal  and  the  NMIS.  This 
activity will have to be delivered in collaboration with the World Bank, BGMF and other 
ATI’s  donors  (such  as  the  Italian  Development  Cooperation  Agency,  Mastercard  foundation,  
etc.) and other donors financing digitalization of agriculture systems. Considering that the 
systems are available at Federal level, coordination mechanisms need to be ensued with 
Regions and Zonal structures for effective adoption and usage of the solutions. The Federal 
team  is  responsible  for  the  overall  management  of  the  key  ATI  activities,  establishing 
implementation modalities, providing technical backstopping of the digital systems, and 
consolidating the annual plans of the regions, while the Regions through the Agricultural 
Transformation Centres drive the implementation of activities. The regional staff will be 
responsible to develop annual plans for their respective regions, coordinate and implement 
activities with Research Institute, Cooperatives/ Unions and FTCs, and ensure alignment 
with regional priorities. The implementing unit will ensure that the teams have expertise 
89 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
in  digital  extension  services  market linkages  and  digital finance  to  ensure the  activities 
can create the intended impact. 
As part of emergency response and mitigation preparedness, PACT will build capacity 
• 
of DAs for Agriculture risk management. This training will be provided by PARM through 
component 3.1. PACT will also support development of knowledge repository that will host 
knowledge  products  on  ARM,  agriculture  practices,  climate  adaptation  and  markets.  In 
cases of emergencies declared by the government, PACT will integrate activities such as 
direct input provision and provision of storage facilities to farmers affected by emergencies 
following the LLRP emergency response model 
• 
The table below presents the activity sequencing for support to MoA’s DAs. 
Activity 
Equipping FTC  X 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year5 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
of 
on 
Training 
DAs 
technical 
subjects, 
SHEP, 
ARM, 
livestock/crop 
s/digital 
advisory 
Demos in FTC 
CSA 
Development 
and 
management 
of knowledge 
repository to 
also support 
CD4ARM 
of 
 Bundling 
services 
for 
Extension  and 
NMIS 
Capacity development of farmers on the selected value chains and on nutrition – The 
• 
DAs/FT in the targeted landscape will provide extension services based on the identified 
value  chains  and  areas  of  support  identified  during  community  planning  process  in 
component 1.1. The DA/FT watershed entry points will be through formation of commodity 
focused  FFS/FBS,  identification  of  existing  and  potential  entreprenuers  within  the 
watershed  that  can  support  the  value  chains.  These  entreprenuers  could  be  seed 
multipliers, input suppliers, tree nursery producers, vermicompost and compost making, 
or mechanization services that will benefit the producers. Groups and entrepreneurs that 
include  young  people  and  women  will  be  prioritized,  in  particular  young  agripreneurs 
supported under component 2.2 will receive preferential access to extension services and 
training 
PACT  will  support  seed  multiplication  of  new  varieties  to  farmers  through  seed 
• 
multipliers and private input suppliers. These seed suppliers will be identified by the DAs 
through the FBS/FFs and will be accredited by the program. seed multipliers will receive a 
package  for  demonstrating  all  the  stages  of  production  for  the  chosen  crop  with  seed 
multipliers  for  their  practical  learning.  To  ensure  sustainability  of  activities,  the  department 
of  seed  services  will  certify improved  seed  to multipliers  on  a  cost  recovery  basis.  The 
Programme will support fully the seed inspection in the first year and gradually reduce by 
25%  every  year.  Women  organisations  benefiting  from  this  intervention  will  receive 
targeted support for 
90 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
As value chain activities will be advanced through farmer groups and cooperatives, 
• 
GALs  tools  will  be  adapted  and  used  in  the  training  of  market  chain  development. 
Participatory decision-making, value chain mapping and analysis, and multi-stakeholder 
platforms will help these actors to gain a better understanding of the constraints affecting 
the women in the value chain, and thus sharpen the focus of the advice and services they 
provide. Visioning activities will be used to engage various actors along the value chain by 
identifying unequal power relations and negotiating and planning win-win strategies. This 
process is expected to lead to increased trust and collaboration, a more equal distribution 
of benefits, and opportunities for women actors to move up the chain. Support to women 
will  further  be  enhanced  through  targeting  of  30%  of  women  only  groups  either  from 
cooperatives n saccos or farmer organisations. 
DAs/FT will provide extension services to all these  groups as  part of the FFS/FBS. 
• 
The agriprenuers will be assisted to access seed capital through capacity development and 
linkages to financial sources in component 2.2. Extension staff will organize farmers into 
gender and youth-sensitive 2000 Farmer business school (FBS) and farmer field schools 
(FFS) each with between 25 to 30 commodity focused members including agri-prenuers 
where they receive business skills training (SHEP) and technical support for the identified 
value  chains.  The  FBS/FFS  training  will  be  supported  by  a  demonstration  as  a  Farmer 
Research Group on the production practices for the selected enterprise for one season and 
will  include  carbon  farming,  efficient  water  management,  agroforestry,  and  other  CSA 
practices. The demonstration plots will be on the production and management of the crop 
enterprise through to harvesting with support of the Programme through input package 
for one season. This will ensure that farmer groups practically apply what they learn from 
the FTC in their own farms. The FBS/FFS will then venture into the market led enterprise 
with constant backstopping by extension agents. Proceeds from the demo would benefit 
the group as a source of capital to start their business -oriented activities. The demos will 
include  Climate  Smart  Agriculture  and  carbon  farming  water  management,  good 
agriculture practices, ISFM, IPM. As part of capacity development of farmers, GALS will be 
included in the training specifically focusing on livelihood planning, institutional awareness 
raising and changing power relations and to promote inclusive collective action for gender 
advocacy. 
In addition to the demos, farmers will receive theoretical training at the demo site 
• 
on the specific subject, four times per year to ensure all production activities are covered 
in line with the production season. 
Support  to  rain-fed  farmers  –  Rain-fed  farmers  will  largely  be  producing  major 
• 
cereals and other crops which have generally received a lot support from the government. 
However,  yields  are  still  way  below  world  averages.  According  the  CSA  report  (2021) 
Cereals productivity is currently at Qt/ha were 41.79, 30.46, 26.9, 25.26, and 18.82 for 
maize, wheat, sorghum, barley, and teff respectively. These figures show productivity in 
Ethiopia is below the international average of 58.2, 35.5, and 31.1 Qt/ha for maize, wheat 
and  barley  respectively  (FAOSAT,  2019).  The  Programme  will  support  the  DAs/FT  to 
provide training to farmers organized into a FFS (3,000) and will target 90,000 farmers. 
The aim is to increase productivity by 50% for the cereals and encourage intercropping 
with  legumes  or  crop  diversification,  agroforestry  practices,  conservation  agriculture 
through Demos at the FTC. 
Access to  climate-smart  production  inputs  –  The  FFS/FBS  will  be linked to  access 
• 
inputs from agriprenuers supported by the Programme (seed multipliers) or through credit 
arrangements  with  off-takers.  DA,  Woreda  level  experts  and  watershed/landscape 
committees will identify potential private sector players that can support input supply and 
be accredited by the Programme. PACT will also facilitate access to relevant, affordable, 
climate smart inputs and technologies from farmer groups that demonstrate (at least 50% 
membership of the groups  will be women) by prioritising interventions to them. Farmer 
organisation supported by PACT will have to meet the minimum requirements for social 
inclusion, including female membership of at least 50%. Group memberships have shown 
to be important medium for women to access various services including inputs. 
91 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
PACT will use the ATI E-voucher system designed to automate enrolment, issuance, 
• 
redemption,  reconciliation,  loan  collection,  and  reporting  processes  over  all  the  Input 
Voucher  System  and  gain  access  to  real-time  data  on  the  distribution  of  inputs.  The 
platform will enable tracking both the supply and demand of inputs as well as the payment 
of  loans.  It  also  enables  financial  institutions  and  cooperatives  to  benefit from  reduced 
transaction costs and timely reconciliation of records. Furthermore, the system prevents 
fraud  and  error  and  reporting  on  timely  access  to  inputs  for  the  farmers  across  value 
chains. 
PACT  will  explore  partnerships  with  Lersha,  a  private  company,  which  provides 
• 
farmers  with  a  digital  service  to  access  farm  inputs  (crops  and  livestock),  rental 
mechanization services, and dynamic agro-climate advisory using technology in Oromia, 
Amhara,  SNNPR,  Sidama  and  Somali.  To  ensure  scalability  and  uptake,  the  PMU  will  involve 
ATI  in  the  potential  engagements  with  Lersha  to  ensure  there  is  no  redundancy  or 
duplication  in  the  digital  platforms  used  for  extension  services  and  access  to  mechanisation  
services. 
The producers will also access mechanization services for land preparation/minimum 
• 
tillage,  weeding,  harvesting  provided  through  a  paid  service  provided  by  the  entrepreneurs  
supported in component 2.2. Cooperatives, youth and unions will be key to providing these 
services in ensuring return in investment through leasing services and/or pay back loans 
for mechanisation services. Adopted mechanisation will also consider women priority value 
chains, needs  and  ease  of  access  and use.  The  table  below  presents  a  schedule  of  the 
planned activities. 
Nutrition  Social  Behaviour  Change  Communication  (SBCC)  –  Traditional  nutrition 
• 
education  interventions  using  linear  “expert-learner”  approaches  have  shown  limited 
impact  on  sustainably  changing  practices.  PACT  will  leverage  behavioural  sciences  and 
social marketing to move the needle on dietary outcomes. Multiple experiences in Ethiopia 
have been impactful, using an intentional SBCC strategy targeting the right audience with 
specific  messages  through  a  mix  of  channels.  For  instance,  Alive  and  Thrive’s  (A&T) 
package of nutrition messaging promoted by DAs, food demonstrations, priest’s sermons 
and radio drama showed a 7 percent increase of children with minimum dietary diversity. 
Given  the  above  background,  the  PACT  Programme  will  adopt  an  evidence-based 
• 
Nutrition SBCC action plan to influence change in key behaviours affecting diets, for both 
household members and value chain actors. Extension will be one of the entry points to 
channel  messages  in  different  formats  (e.g.,  in-person  dialogue,  digital  content  on  DA 
tablets), in addition to mass media, religious leaders or watershed committees. The recent 
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines will be used to develop messages. Key SUN partners, such 
as  A&T  or  Save  the  Children,  will  provide  technical  support  to  the  PACT  PCU.  The 
recruitment of an SBCC expert and a communication firm, on an as-needed basis, will be 
required to ensure the efficacy of SBCC interventions. The MoA already possesses a large 
amount of evidence, lessons learned and SBCC materials (e.g. job aids, radio drama, food 
recipes). Therefore, a substantive part of the work and efforts will involve tailoring these 
existing resources to PACT targeted regions and measuring impact. 
Integrated homestead  gardening  –  This  is  another important  pathway to  increase 
• 
the contribution of the agricultural sector to healthy diets and resilient food systems. PACT 
will promote adoption of home gardening among the most vulnerable households  (rural 
poor  households  with  pregnant  and  lactating  women,  children  under  two  years  old, 
adolescents  or  persons  with disabilities)  coupled with SBCC. Building on the experience 
from PASIDP II, the targeted households will receive a package of indigenous vegetable 
seeds, biofortified seeds, fruit tree seedlings, small livestock, small tools and a training to 
start their home gardens.  The package will be tailored to the agro-ecological zones and 
cultural preferences and climate risk analysis. All households receiving the home garden 
package will pass on the multiplied seeds and livestock offspring with their neighbours as 
a  contribution  to  the  community  following  a  pass  on  guideline  to  be  developed  by  the 
programme. The guidelines. PACT will improve post-harvest handling at household level 
92 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
by promoting improved storage and small-scale processing. Extension staff will promote 
the  use  of  PICS  bags  for  cereals  and  locally-made  cooling  systems  for  vegetables  and 
fruits. The latter can be produced by established women and youth-led groups. 
Year 1 
X 
X 
X 
Activity 
Development 
of a seed and 
small stock 
pass on 
guideline 
Identification 
of Commodity 
groups 
Planning of 
interventions 
Capacity 
building on 
technical and 
nutrition and 
GALs 
Establishing 
demonstration 
plots 
Conduct field 
days 
Support pass 
on process 
Farmer 
technical 
backstopping 
visits 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
7 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
x 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
II.3: COMPONENT 2: INCLUSIVE AND EQUITABLE MARKET ACCESS 
The  outcome  of  this  component  will  be  strengthened  capacities  of  farmer 
• 
organizations  to  improve  access  to  finance  and  remunerative  markets  for  small-scale 
women, men and young farmers and pastoralists, including those living with a disability in 
the Programme areas. 
II.3.1  : Subcomponent 2.1: Market Access Linkage Support 
The objective of the subcomponent is to enhance  value chain business linkages in 
• 
the  Programme  areas  where  women  and  men  farmers  and  pastoralists  will  respond  to 
market  opportunities  in  their  planning  and  practice  to  benefit  from  their  participation. 
Planned  interventions  include  a)  business-to-business  linkage  development;  b)  develop 
the  capacity  of  cooperatives  and  unions/farmer  organizations  with  increased  women’s 
voice;  c)  digital  market  information  platform.  Further,  facilitating  access  to  digital 
technologies  shall  attract  young  farmers  and  pastoralists  to  actively  engage  in 
agripreneurship. Furthermore, PACT will identify market opportunities and address market 
access  constraints,  women  will  be  equipped  with  the  skills  and  the  opportunities  to 
effectively participate in market systems. Both productivity and the ability to derive income 
from farming activities will be the core pillars of these interventions. 
Inclusive  value  chain  assessment  and  partner  business  companies' 
• 
identification: Inclusive value chain studies will be conducted for 8 commodities, using 
digital tools. The studies will help to identify the potential private sector that is interested 
to establish a long-term  business linkage with smallholder producers  (and opportunities 
for  engaging  women,  men,  and  youth),  existing  capacity,  critical  constraints,  and 
opportunities for inclusiveness to develop the business relationships.  The study will assess 
the potential for existing companies in the Integrated Agro-industrial parks (IAPs) and in 
other parts of the country to enter into business relationship with smallholder farmers. To 
enhance the  meaningful  participation  of women  and youth, the value  chain  assessment 
93 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
will  be  gender,  and  youth-sensitive  and  will  take  different  socio-economic  profiles  into 
account, including persons with disabilities, and pastoralists. This intervention will make 
use  of the  “High-Value  Crop  Assessment” tool developed  by  ATI to  determine the  crop 
value chains for each irrigation scheme. A nutrition lens will be applied in the selection of 
processors[1]. The PACT Programme will conduct a mapping data collection of the existing 
pathways across the value chain including all different actors in which farmers and buyers 
engage to ensure the market platform includes the current value and supply chain realities 
and including commodities supported under PACT. 
The processing companies in the IAIPs are the business partners to which the PACT 
• 
beneficiary farmers are to be linked. Some of the companies have started operation and 
are sourcing from farmers (like (Avocado processing companies in Yirgalem IAIPs) while 
others  are planning to start operation in a year’s  time (Avocado and Tomato in Bulbula 
IAIPs). However, there are a significant number  of Woredas that are far from the IAIPs 
outreach areas where PACT will engage potential other processors and buyers. To have 
complete list of active and potential processors and buyers from the PACT landscapes at 
the start of the Programme, an inclusive value chain study will be conducted (8 VCs study) 
to  identify  the  potential  private  sector  stakeholders  interested  to  establish  a  long-term 
business linkage with producers  in PACT outreach areas. The study findings  will help to 
understand the specific possible business arrangements in respective priority value chains, 
existing  capacities,  critical  constraints  and  inclusiveness  to  develop  the  business 
relationships in the specific PACT operational areas. Based on the findings, the potential 
business  relationship  arrangements  and  required  investment  estimate  for  the  different 
priority value chains will be packaged as an option of menu for the community planning 
and prioritization of investments in priority value chains. The assessment will inform the 
incentives for win-win business arrangements and guide the selection of organizations that 
are willing to work with cooperatives and unions in PACT outreach areas. 
Once  the  potential  value  chains  for  the  different  landscapes/clusters  are  known, 
• 
potential buyers will be invited for engagement in PACT potential areas with the facilitation 
of  the  Programme.  Business  to  business  discussion  will  be  started  with  producer 
organizations  in  the  watersheds.  Based  on  the type  of  the value chains  selected  in the 
watersheds/landscapes, where relevant, a nutrition lens will be applied by engaging the 
Scale-Up Nutrition (SUN) business network and reference will be made to the nationally 
approved  proclamation  in  the  selection  of  processors[2].  Beyond  the  processors, 
institutional  buyers  like  WFP,  universities,  and  others  will  be  considered  to  become 
sustainable buyers of different commodities. PACT will leverage the findings of a feasibility 
study (conducted in 2021 to link up PASIDP II irrigation farmers organized in cooperatives 
and WFP Fresh Food Voucher retailers. In areas where feasible WFP Fresh Voucher retailers 
will be connected with primary cooperatives  and/or  primary cooperatives/unions  will be 
considered as retailers. 
Develop the capacity of cooperatives and unions/farmer organizations with 
• 
increased  women's  voice:  Cooperatives  face  the  following  key  challenges;  lack  of 
leadership and business  management skills; lack of access to credit; lack of inputs and 
weak  customer  relationships.  Professionalization  of  cooperatives/unions/producer 
organizations  is  a  critical  if  the  Programme  is  to  strengthen  individual  smallholder  for 
sustainable business linkages. 
• 
The  capacity  building  of  cooperatives  will follow  the  IFC’s  Agribusiness  Leadership 
Program for smallholder farmers producer organizations which involve the following 
steps:  a)  Identification  and  establishment  of  150  primary  cooperatives  and  12  Unions  
that  serve  the  producers/pastoralists  in  Programme  areas  following  the  IFAD  and 
programme  guidelines  on  targeting  to  ensure  inclusivity  ;  b)  Recruitment  of  10 
certified assessors for baseline assessment and reassessment c) conducting baseline 
assessment  using  approved  tools  through  an  independent  service  provider;  d) 
Developing a clear graduation path for each cooperative; e) design training sessions 
based on identified gaps; f) provide coaching support to cooperative/union leaders. 
94 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The Identification and establishment of 150 primary cooperatives will be done with 
a principle of having at least one primary cooperative in each watershed /scheme 
developed by PACT. In cases where there is more than one primary cooperative, the 
most inclusive and promising primary cooperative will be selected by the community 
and Woreda technical team with the coordination of the regional agribusiness officer. 
To  coordinate  the  assessment  and  training  support,  the  selected  primary 
cooperatives  will  be  clustered  into  a  geographic  proximity  group.  Then  the 
assessment and training will be organized per cluster. For the assessment about 10 
clusters  are  planned,  1  assessor  aimed  to  cover  15  primary  cooperatives  and  1  union.  
For  each  cluster,  one  assessor  will  be  assigned  that  will  be  trained  by  a  service 
provider and get access to the service provider platform/tools. 
The  selection  of  a  competent  service  provider  for  the  assessment  platform  and 
training provision will be handled by the national agribusiness officer. The selection 
will be done by inviting candidate organizations that have the experience and system 
that was used by ALP or other similar programs in the country. After the selection of 
the service provider, recruitment of 10 certified assessors will be conducted under 
the  coordination  of  the national  agribusiness  officer  in  collaboration  with  assessor 
service  provider  selected.  The  selected  assessors  will  get  the  training  from  the 
service  provider  and  will  conduct  the  baseline  and  annual  reassessment.  The 
assessment/reassessment  results  will  be  uploaded  to  the  dashboard,  then  will  be 
shared with respective cooperatives/unions and trainers. 
Training  material  reparation  and  ToT  delivery  will  be  handled  by  ALP  training  package  
certified  trainers  that  will  be  selected  on  competitive  bases.  The  selected  ToT  provider  
will  deliver  6  ToT  sessions  in  central  locations  for  the  different  clusters  with  the 
coordination of the national agribusiness officer. The training and coaching will be 
delivered  by  ToT  trained  cooperative  promotion  experts  from  respective  Woredas 
where the schemes and selected cooperatives are located. 
The training will be cascaded with two rounds of face-to-face sessions to 150 primary 
cooperatives and 12 unions based on the gaps identified. At least 2 sessions of 3- 
and 2-das training will be delivered based on the baseline assessment results of the 
producer organizations with about 5 leaders from each organization, with at least 1 
woman and 1 youth included from each primary cooperative with due consideration 
of the training arrangement for an inclusion of any leader with disability. Gender and 
other mainstreaming issues will be considered in the training messages and training 
venue  selection.  The  trainers  will  deliver  one-to-one  coaching  support  on  path  of 
graduation. It is aimed with at least with 6 coaching session each cooperative/union 
with agreed action and development plan until graduation to professional producer 
organization. 
Matching grant facility for graduating cooperatives/unions: The facility will support 
with 50% matching grants, to cooperatives/unions that have graduated based on a 
business plan developed during the graduation support path. The cooperatives that 
in the right track to professionalization will be invited to submit their proposal based 
on the business expansion trajectory to receive the matching grant. The matching 
grant facility that is allocated in PACT will be managed by the agribusiness officer, 
assisted  by  two  independent  technical  teams  at  regional  and  federal  levels  for 
proposal review and approval. The technical teams will review and assess the project 
proposal for each cooperative/union based on the graduation path. Then the technical 
review team will pass the reviewed and passed proposals to the grant administration 
team. To guide the grant administration process, a grants administration manual will 
be prepared  during the first year of implementation. The grant will be managed as 
per the detail of the grant administration and will be coordinated by the Agribusiness 
officer. 
• 
Small-scale  technologies  and  postharvest  infrastructure  investments,  such  as 
threshers for cereals, zero-energy cooling chambers for vegetables, and processors, 
95 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
such as solar  dryers for tomatoes  or mill for cereals will be eligible for support as 
part of the business plan under the matching grant support. PACT will leverage EU- 
funded  FAO  programme  on  food  safety  regulatory  framework  harmonisation  and 
training materials development to build cooperatives’ knowledge and skills in post- 
harvest handling. 
Initiating and Developing Business-to-Business Relationships: Following the 
• 
value  chain  and  business  identification,  the  programme  will  initiate  and  facilitate  a 
sustainable business  relationship between the producer representative organization and 
potential processors. This will be through facilitation of B2B sessions/ deal making and the 
implementation of jointly agreed actions with the private sector active engagement. 
Participation  of  the  private  sector  will  be  promoted  with  the  business-to-business 
• 
relationship  development  between  producer  organizations  and  processing  companies 
inside the Integrated  Agro-Industrial  Parks  (IAIPs)  or  other  processors/buyers  near the 
Programme  areas.  The  business-to-business  relationships  will  be  enhanced  with  the 
promotion  and  support  of  processing  companies  and  other  buyers’  backward  support 
through partnerships or joint ventures, contract farming, or other business arrangements. 
In the forward business to business linkage, it is aimed to create market linkage for a total 
of 70,000 HHs (46,000 irrigated and 23,000 rain fed). The forward business to business 
linkage interventions and steps proposed are outlined hereunder. The selected households 
will fulfil PACT criteria of 50% women and 40% youth target. 
The  programme  will  finance  the  travel  costs  of  the  producer  organization 
• 
representatives to go to the meetings or the buyers' premise or the buyers/processors to 
come to the community on a declining basis for two years. These meetings will assist in 
enhancing the trust-building process. The Programme will facilitate follow-up discussions 
between produce buyers, input suppliers/service providers with cooperatives and unions. 
The  Programme  will  cover  events/travel  allowance  for  3  events  in  cost-sharing/travel 
allowance for 3 events in cost-sharing with the declining principle. Young women and men 
agripreneurs will be supported to attend the deal making meetings. Special attention will 
be made to facilitate business deal making meetings between small-scale producers and 
agribusinesses in the IAPs. Support in contract enforcement and business management – 
to enhance the Cooperatives capacity in reaching out to their members and to deliver their 
contract commitment, support will be provided to create more awareness  on long-term 
business relationship, contract negotiation and enforcement. Support will be provided in a 
form  of  grant  to  enhance  their  investment  on  testing  kits,  digital  access,  improved 
communication, record keeping, quality safety assurance and office facility investments. 
Exposure visit will be facilitated for a better business to business exposure. 
Enhancing stakeholders’  engagements  and  contract farming  legal framework  –  To 
• 
minimize  side  selling  and  default  of  agreements  from  both  sides,  PACT  will  facilitate 
frequent  communication  and  discussions  for  the  business  relationship  with  the 
stakeholders in the region. To address the constraints in the business environment in the 
respective clusters and minimize the negative influence, focused support will be provided 
to  enhance  joint  action  of  the  stakeholders  in  the  VC  Alliances  in  the  ACC  or  relevant 
stakeholders’  platforms.  To  get  a  strong  buy-in  in  the  business-to-business  relationship 
under  development,  a  biannual  meeting  is  proposed  for  the  relevant/respective 
stakeholders  at  the  regional  level  for  the  first  three  years.  To  keep  good  practices  of 
business-to-business  arrangement,  contract 
finalization,  and 
implementation support will be provided by PACT in collaboration with other stakeholders 
using the stakeholders’ platform and training sessions. 
farming  guideline 
The business-to-business facilitation will be promoted with partners like ATI in the 
• 
different  commodity  clusters  and  in  collaboration  with  the  cooperative  commission  and 
trade  offices  at  different  layers,  respectively.  Business  facilitators  from  ATI,  Regional 
Bureaux, and cooperation promotion officers, will be trained to facilitate the sessions. In 
total, A total of 120 facilitators, 90 from each Woreda and 30 from region and federal level 
will be trained. The Programme team will coordinate the required facilitation activities in 
96 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
the  different  areas  with  well-developed  business-to-business  facilitation  skills.  The 
Programme will enhance the business facilitation skill of the respective responsible entities 
in the different clusters with appropriate training and coaching support at the beginning of 
the Programme period with experienced service providers in the area. Experience sharing 
and exposure will be facilitated to regional and Woreda experts to enhance their facilitation 
role  at local  level.  Gender  equality  and  social inclusion module  will  be  embeded in  this 
training to ensure gender dynamics of entrepreneurship developed are addressed. 
To  enhance  the  meaningful  participation  of  women  and  youth,  the  value  chain 
• 
assessment will be gender  and youth-sensitive to map market opportunities  for  women 
and  men.  The  study  will  take  different  socio-economic  profiles  into  account,  including 
persons  with  disabilities, pastoralists.  Through the GTM,  gender-specific  market  studies 
will be conducted to identify market opportunities for women. These studies will identify 
value  chains  with  potential  for  engaging  with  women  producers  (in  cooperatives  and 
groups)  and  the  core  constraints  they  face  in  accessing  markets.  This  intervention  will 
build on this gender-specific market analysis across eight value chains to be conducted. 
The value chain assessment will inform potential areas and specific issues that need to be 
addressed for engaging women, men, and youth (in all segments in the value chain) and 
the  core  constraints  they  face  in  accessing  markets.  For  instance,  there  will  also  be 
strategies support to increase women’s access to climate smart services e.g. by supporting 
input  suppliers  to  map  the  demand  for  relevant,  affordable,  climate  smart  inputs  and 
technologies  from cooperatives  with majority  women  membership  and  connecting these 
suppliers to the groups. 
Facilitation  of  market  alliance  platforms  (MAPs):  The  Programme  will  facilitate 
• 
frequent communication and in advance discussion for the required enabling environment 
for the business relationship with the stakeholders in the region. Support will be provided 
to enhance joint action of the stakeholders in the MAPs. The MAPs will meet biannually for 
the first three years (5 market alliance platform meetings twice per year for 3 years with 
about  50  participants).  Contract  farming  guideline  finalization,  and  implementation 
support  will  be  provided  by  federal  and  regional  authorities  in  collaboration  with  other 
stakeholders using the stakeholders’ platform and training sessions. 
Digital  Market  Information  Platform:  Inclusive  and  accessible  knowledge  and 
• 
information  is  fundamental  to  enhancing  the  competitiveness  in  each  of  the  selected 
agricultural  value  chains.  Access  to  inclusive  information  and  e-extension  services  platform 
linkages  will  be  enhanced  to  ensure  that  market  information  is  accessible  to  small 
producers,  with  particular  emphasis  on  the  needs  of  women,  youth  and  persons  with 
disabilities.  To  enhance  further  the  business-to-business  relationship  and  empower  the 
producers  and other  value chain actors, the Programme will adapt digital-based market 
information services, leveraging the current National Market Information System (NMIS) 
under ATI. 
To initiate the implementation and adoption of NMIS, the PCMU would have to collaborate 
with the cooperatives and ATI to undertake the following activities. 
✓  First  conduct  an  exercise  of  creating  a  farmer registry  for  all  farmers  supported 
under PACT in collaboration with  Cooperatives and FTCs. ATI and other partners 
such  as  Digital  Green  will  coordinate  with  Department  of  Extension  services  to 
support farmers with the Registration. Details of the process will be coordinated by 
the PMU and ATI. 
✓  Employ enumerators  or  Community  youth to  collect  data  on  the  output markets 
and  agribusinesses/off-takers  as  well  as  standard  baseline  market  pricing 
information at Kebele level 
✓  Map all existing actors across the value chain. 
✓  Onboard  all  the  value  chain  actors  on  the  NMIS  platform  based  on  location  and 
commodity 
97 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
✓  ATI will also seek collaboration with ECX on pricing information for  export potential 
tradable  commodities  and  triangulate  the  market  information  under  NMIS  to  ensure  
farmers receive accurate pricing information for their commodities. 
This  mapping  will  inform  the  value  chain  market  linkage  development  and 
• 
information flows for output markets. This map will (i) include cooperatives and producer 
clusters, local traders, agribusinesses, off takers and external processing markets such as 
Agro Industry parks; (ii) focus on expanding data collection and improving data quality at 
the kebele level and inclusion of PACT program priority commodities to ensure accurate 
pricing information. 
PACT in partnership with ATI will identify the most appropriate media through which 
• 
to  deliver  market  information  on  crop  prices,  regulatory  changes,  market  demand  to 
women these could range from SMS/IVR and FTCs. The PMU will also collaborate with ATI 
to develop market content that can be delivered via Videos and disseminated through the 
FTCs. The FTCs will also be used an avenue to deliver market information to support the 
cooperatives increase their market share and reduce any information gaps between small 
holder  producers  and  traders.  The  NMIS  platform  will  serve  as  a  basis  of  engagement 
between  produce  buyers,  cooperatives  and  unions  to  determine  availability  of  produce 
based on location, tonnage available and negotiate price (both on the platform and offline). 
PMU  will  work  with  ATI to  customise  the  NMIS  to  allow  Cooperatives/FTCs  view  information 
on the available buyers and their requested quantities. 
Market information will then be disseminated to the farmers from NMIS via SMS/IVR 
• 
and  through  DAs  and  FTCs  a  part  of  extension  services  for  those  with  no  access  to 
smartphone  or  feature  phone.  The  data  collection  process  to  ensure  accurate  market 
information will be conducted in the first year to create base market information which will 
then be updated on bi-annual basis to inform  market  analytics conducted by ATI. ATI  would 
also  collaborate  with  Ethiopia  Commodity  Exchange  to  provide  any  market  information 
related to those commodities traded through ECX. 
Lessons from Mercy Corps AgriFin model that provides market information through 
• 
digital avenues will also be leveraged to deliver information to women, youth and persons 
with disabilities. 
On the other hand, opportunities for integration of digital payments will be identified. 
• 
Awash Bank and the Cooperative Bank of Oromia are examples of two potential partners 
who have worked with the private sector in the past to support e-payment systems for 
value  chain  payments  which  is  a  critical  piece,  and  sometimes  a  blocker  to  smoother  supply  
chain transactions on a digital marketing platform. 
The  digital  market  platform  will  ensure  literacy  levels  are  accounted  for  through 
• 
backward and forward compatibility of smartphone and feature phone enabled SMS/USSD 
and  IVR  (Interactive  Voice  Response)  based  services.  An  important  aspect  will  be  the 
delivery  of  regular  market-relevant  information  to  increase  the  avenues  through  which 
market-relevant information is available to women producers, including the use of radio 
clubs,  videos  and  mobile  phone  facilities.  The  MAPS  will  also  be  used  as  an  avenue  to 
discuss market pricing and produce availability as well as engagement of produce buyers, 
input suppliers/service providers with cooperatives on the digital market platform. 
To  support the  platform  to  be  self-sustaining, PACT  PMU in  collaboration  with  ATI 
• 
would also consider options for subscription model where off-takers and agribusiness can 
pay a small fee to be onboarded on the platform, this can support ATI create some revenue for 
the future financing and management of the platform post PACT. Considering that the NMIS 
platform  is  an  already  existing  platform  this  proposed  model  would  have  to  be  further 
analysed by ATI and MoA to determine the Willingness to Pay (WTP) of the off takers and 
agribusinesses and determine best pricing model for the platform. 
II.3.2  : Subcomponent 2.2: Support to Young Women and Men Agripreneurs 
98 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
To  tap  the  opportunities  in the  different  value chains,  existing  agribusinesses  and 
• 
new  start-ups  (men,  women  and  youth)  need  organized  support  in  their  business 
management  and  access  to  finance. Existing  and  new  agribusinesses  (e.g.,  engaged in 
seedling production and distribution, agro-dealers, mechanization service providers) will 
be supported to address the different value chain constraints and to enhance opportunities 
in the different areas. 
Agribusinesses  Business  Management  Capacity  Enhancement  –  with  low  business 
• 
management  capacity,  many  agri-businesses  are  not  able  to  seize  the  emerging 
opportunities along the different value chains. Learning from PASIDP II experiences, young 
women  and  men  require  focused  support  to  propel  climate-smart  and  socially-oriented 
agribusinesses to innovate and increase production and productivity. In partnership with 
FAO,  PACT  will  leverage  the  untapped  potential  of  rural  youth  and  create  livelihood 
opportunities in targeted areas. Supported entrepreneurs will access business development 
support packages, including: a) tailored training to different types of agri- businesses to 
enhance  entrepreneurial  attitude  and  business  management  skills;  b)  business  plan 
development support;  c) seed capital; (iv) skill-based training depending on demand;  d) 
mentorship;  and  e)  engagement  in  policy  dialogues.  Concretely,  the  support  will 
encompass  fin-person  and  online  training  and  mentorship  in  entrepreneurship, business 
management,  financial  literacy,  climate  change  adaptation,  nutrition-sensitive  value 
chains, leadership, and digital skills, establishing mentoring services, and develop female 
leadership  role  models. This way,  relevant  capacities will be strengthened to boost more 
viable and profitable agribusinesses along the targeted value chains. 
Selected Pilot Regions – Oromia, SNNPR and Sidama were pre-selected due to the 
• 
proximity  to  agro-industrial  parks,  presence  of  private  sector  entities,  especially  Dutch 
companies, and to build on FAO’s value-chain support around the agro-industrial parks. 
Upon a successful pilot and availability of additional funding, the training and support for 
young agripreneurs will be expanded to the remaining PACT regions. 
Selection  of  young  agripreneurs  –  Preference  will  be  given  to  young  men  and  women, 
• 
including youth with disabilities, owning no or small land, residing in and around targeted 
landscapes, and who have actively engaged in the development of LDIPs under component 
1. Close consultation with Kebele authorities, DAs, Bureaus of Job Creation and Enterprise 
Development  and  one-stop  job  centers  will  support  in  identifying  underemployed  and 
unemployed youth in targeted areas. Identification of skilled youth with disabilities will be 
facilitated  through  the  Federation  of  Ethiopian  Associations  of  Persons  with  Disabilities. 
Rigorous  application  of  direct  and  self-targeting  will  serve  the  purpose  to  avoid  elite 
capturing.  Identified  youth  will  get the  opportunity  to  submit  an expression  of interest, 
detailing their motivation and agricultural-related areas of interest, in particular specifying 
the type of agribusiness, which can be modified at a later stage19. 
PACT  focuses  on  benefiting  rural  young  women  and  men,  notably  the  most 
• 
vulnerable, including youth living with disabilities, different educational backgrounds, etc. 
The  targeting  strategy  will  detail  mechanisms  to  target  the  most  vulnerable  in  PACT 
implementing areas. To spark  inspiration, especially among the female agripreneurs, PACT will 
organize  a  series  of  inspirational  talks  with  successful  female  agripreneurs,  including 
persons  with  disabilities.  A  total  of  3,000  young  agripreneurs  will  be  trained  and  300 
agribusinesses will be financially supported via matching grants of max. 5000 USD with 
10 % contribution by the youth while 60 agribusinesses can qualify for a top of up max. 
15,000 USD. 
Targeted  actions  for  disability  inclusion  under  this  sub  component  will  specifically 
• 
target  skilled  youth  with  disabilities  to  become  agripreneurs,  through  participation  in 
extensive  agripreneurship  training;  access  to  matching  grants;  mentorship;  and 
participation  in  policy  dialogues  through  partnership  with  Federation  of  Ethiopian 
Associations of Persons with Disabilities (FEAPD) and their affiliates at regional, zonal and 
19 Youth groups interested in establishing nurseries under 1.2 will be prioritized. 
99 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Woreda  levels,  OPDs  at  regional  and  Zonal  levels  and  Specialist  Disability  Inclusion 
Organisations and individual experts. At least five agribusinesses led by skilled youth with 
disabilities will be financially supported under 2.2. 
Implementation arrangement: FAO will provide Technical Assistance to the PCMU to 
• 
implement  the  sub-component.  Selection  of  trainers  and  young  agripreneurs  will  go  in 
tandem with the PCMU and the Agribusiness specialist. 
Phases 
Phase I: 
Preparatory 
phase 
Activities 
Recruitment of master trainers 
Development of Matching Grant Manual 
Contextualization of online and offline 
agripreneurship training 
Timeframe 
Year 1 
Roll-out of online agripreneurship training in 
targeted areas, including mass mobilization 
Training of Trainers (ToT) for Selected Pilot Regions 
Phase II: 
Implementation 
Selection of aspiring young agripreneurs 
Agripreneurship training for (young) agripreneurs 
to build entrepreneurial and business skills 
4 - 6 months 
Business plan development 
Enterprise-related capacity training under 
component 1 to enhance capacities and knowledge 
on climate smart agricultural practices and 
production 
Selection of business plans for max. 5000 USD per 
proposal (10 percent contribution by youth) 
Linking young agripreneurs to markets, agro- 
industrial parks and directly with private 
companies, including Dutch companies 
Mentoring & inspirational talks for motivation 
Enhancing exchange with existing incubation hubs 
for knowledge exchange and networking 
Selection of promising agribusinesses with potential 
for scale-up (max. 15 000 USD) (50 percent 
contribution by youth) 
Mentoring 
6 months 
1 year, 
including 
mentoring 
Phase III: 
Business plan 
financing 
Phase IV: Scale- 
up 
Phase II – III to be repeated until Year 6 
Phase IV to be repeated until Year 7 
Toolkit conceptualization – The toolkit will be reviewed under a gender- and disability-
• 
inclusion lens and conceptualized to reflect the Ethiopian context. To that end, PACT will 
consult the Federation of Ethiopian Associations of Persons with Disabilities and adjust the 
content  to  consider  and  embrace  disability  inclusion.  In  addition,  nutrition-  and climate 
responsive  content  will  be  integrated  onto  the  updated  toolkit  to  align  with  PACT’s 
objectives. Cognizant of the low literacy rate in rural areas, the training will be adjusted 
and conducted in an accessible and inclusive manner. 
Roll-out of online agripreneurship training – PACT will widely roll out the evidence- 
• 
based Agripreneurship 101 training, developed by FAO, which has been tested, evaluated 
and scaled up in a demand-driven way. The course combines entrepreneurial best practices 
with  personal  initiative  training  linked  with  the  value  chain  approach.  The  personal 
initiative  training  was  piloted  in  Ethiopia  and  other  countries  and  it  was  particularly 
effective for female entrepreneurs. Women who received personal initiative training saw 
100 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
their profits increase by 40 percent, compared to 5 percent for traditional business[1][2]. As 
a  way  to  build  capacity  within  the  Government  and  related  actors  in  the  agribusiness 
sector, PACT will open the agripreneurship training to a broader audience, including the 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  FTC  staff,  Technical  and  Vocational  Educational  Training 
Institutions,  Incubation  Hub  officers,  ATI  and  the  private  sector.  Programme  staff  will 
closely  follow  participants'  engagement,  and  potential  to  identify  suitable  trainers  and 
mentors for the ToT. The following criteria will be critical for the selection of trainers: (I) 
individuals/institutions  with  mandate  to  train  young  agripreneuers;  (ii)  demonstrated 
experience  in  conducting similar  training  programmes;  (iii)  demonstrates  willingness  to 
learn  and  deliver  new  approaches  to  agripreneurship  (iv)  gender  parity;  (v)  Disability 
Inclusion .  After successful completion, participants will receive a certificate from FAO. 
• 
Agripreneurship 101 – Outline 
Lesson 1: Introduction 
By the end of this lesson, learners will be 
able to: 
Lesson 2: Identifying Opportunities 
By the end of this lesson, learners will be 
able to: 
•  Define agripreneurship 
• 
Identify misconceptions about 
agripreneurship 
•  Describe the process of structured 
experimentation in agripreneurship 
•  Recognize the three facets of 
'personal initiative' and how they 
apply to agripreneurship 
•  Understand value chain thinking 
and explain their own value 
chains; 
Identify unmet needs in their 
chosen value chains; 
• 
•  Select one unmet need in their 
chosen value chain to work on 
based on their resources and the 
market; 
Lesson 3: Understanding Customers 
By the end of this lesson, learners will be 
able to: 
•  Utilize market segmentation and 
• 
• 
research; 
Identify the most promising 
market to target first; 
Test your assumptions regarding 
the needs of their target market; 
•  Appreciate how to develop a 
comprehensive understanding of 
their target market through an 
end-user profile and customer 
persona. 
Lesson 4: Developing a prototype 
By the end of this lesson, learners will be 
able to: 
•  Conduct research to determine the 
top priorities of their customer; 
•  Use the two top priorities to 
conduct competitive 
differentiation; 
•  Develop a value proposition; 
•  Design a prototype for their 
solution (Minimum Viable Product); 
•  Outline/create an elevator pitch for 
their business. 
Lesson 5: Sorting out the financials 
By the end of this lesson, learners will be 
able to: 
• 
Identify costs and high level 
financials; 
•  Estimate the value of their 
offering; 
Lesson 6: Agripreneurial goals and 
planning 
By the end of this lesson, learners will be 
able to: 
•  Set SMART goals for their business 
•  Develop a business plan 
•  Monitor the progress of attaining 
•  Develop an income statement and 
goals 
• 
quantify their TAM; 
Identify investment need and 
revenue model. 
Training of Trainers (ToT) for Selected Pilot Regions – Master trainers will be selected 
• 
and  tasked  to  provide  ToT  for  selected  trainers  (ten  per  region),  including  extension 
officers, TVET officers, business trainers, staff at FTC centers, etc. While the first intensive 
training series will be conducted at Woreda level, the ToT training will end in Addis Ababa, 
where participants collectively finalize the localization  of the agripreneurship toolkit and 
101 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
collect  relevant  case  studies  from  the  regions.  Further,  this  space  will  allow  for  rich 
exchanges, share best practices, and suitable approaches to young agripreneurship and 
build  a  sense  of  community.  The  master  trainers  will  provide  continued  support  and 
mentoring throughout the PACT Programme cycle. 
Agripreneurship training for (young) agripreneurs – Over the course of four months, 
• 
trainers will build rural youth’ entrepreneurial, business, and leadership skills to develop 
market-oriented  business  plans  to  be  funded  under  this  component.  The  training  will  nudge  
youth agripreneurs to come up with business plans that are not only profitable but observe 
relevant  aspects,  such  as  climate  resilience,  nutrition  sensitivity,  and  social  benefits, 
climate-smart  technologies  into  the  training,  setting  a  foundation  for  agribusinesses  to 
drive innovation with a social and climate-lens. However, the trainers and youth will not 
operate  in  a  vacuum.  Instead,  selected  youth  already  played  an  integral  part  in  the 
development of the LDIPs and the subsequent identification of gaps and agripreneurship 
opportunities  to  be  addressed  by  young  agripreneurs.  Linked  to the markets  and  agro- 
industrial parks supported under PACT, the Programme will enable youth to reap the fruits 
from  the  landscape  approach  applied  to  the  watersheds.  That  way,  competitive  and 
demand-driven  agribusinesses  can  be  established  along  the  selected  value  chains 
supported under component one. 
Access  to  seed  capital  –  Loan  eligibility  criteria,  especially  land  ownership  for 
• 
collateral, reduces chances for a rural young person to access funding, let alone a credit 
to start  a business. In the absence  of opportunities for rural youth to access capital for 
self-employment, PACT will offer a matching grant financing window that will be inclusive 
to youth while also de-risking the investment associated to a young person with limited 
agribusiness experience to increase chances for more funding from other sources, such as 
RUFIP III as the business expands. 
Anchoring  young  agripreneurs  with  PACT  through  Business  Plan  Financing  (three 
• 
pilot regions) 
Total 
Max. USD 
5,000 per 
business 
Objective 
Draft eligibility 
criteria 
300 young agribusinesses/MSMEs financially supported via seed capital; 
3,000 young agripreneurs trained 
At least 5 agribusinesses led by youth with disabilities 
Open to individuals and groups (cooperatives, farmers organizations, MSMEs 
…)  successfully completed the agripreneurship training under PACT 
Ignite inclusive and innovative investments in agribusiness development 
Assist economic active young smallholder farmers to engage in market- 
oriented production, processing and marketing 
Provide resources to purchase productive assets, agricultural inputs to 
improve business performance 
•  Successfully completed the agripreneurship training under PACT; 
• 
The business plan is aligned with PACT’s objectives and community 
priority investment; 
The agribusiness will benefit PACT target groups and contribute to 
social impacts, such as food security, gender equity…; 
• 
•  Set mechanism for equitable inclusion and benefit sharing of all 
members with emphasis on women, youth and PWDs; 
The agribusiness will enhance climate resilience (CSA, climate-smart 
technologies, ….); 
The agribusiness selected at least one commodity supported under 
PACT, and has identified a target market; 
The investment will take place within one year (max. two years in 
exceptional cases); 
The proposal was submitted before the deadline; 
The applicant has a bank account 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Eligible 
investments 
On-farm agricultural equipment, on-farm processing equipment; agricultural 
inputs; marketing; mechanization technologies; small processing equipment; 
102 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Link with component 1 
Link with sub-component 1.4 
Investments with high risks of adverse environmental, climate and social 
impacts, not more than 10 % for management and allowance; 
Link with sub-component 1.4 and 2.1; ensure affordability of technologies and 
mechanization services 
Non-eligible 
investments 
Additional benefits 
Access to land 
Access to 
agricultural 
inputs 
Access to 
climate-smart 
technologies 
and 
mechanization 
services 
Access to 
market 
information 
Access to 
market 
infrastructure 
Depending on the focus of the agribusiness, skill-based training will be provided on fattening, 
animal feed, crop and animal production, bee-keeping, packaging, etc. 
Ensure young agripreneurs access and equitably benefit from market platform 
established under sub-component 2.1, guaranteeing young agripreneurs 
access timely market information 
Link with sub-component 2.3 
Top-up:  max. 
limit  of  US$ 
15,000 
Objectives 
Eligibility 
criteria 
Open  to  20  agribusinesses  per  year  financed  under  Subcomponent  2.2  with 
potential to scale-up 
Expand production and up-scale business model in supporting value-chain 
actors, particularly small-holder farmers, to increase production or 
marketability of their produce 
Provide additional resources to purchase machinery 
•  Successfully received and managed seed capital; 
•  Agribusiness provides a proof of concept; 
•  Realistic up-scaling strategy to expand services and production; 
•  Set mechanism for equitable inclusion and benefit sharing of all 
members with emphasis on women, youth and PWDs; 
The investment will take place within one year; 
The proposal was submitted before the submission deadline. 
• 
• 
Eligible 
investment 
Non-eligible 
investment 
processing and packing equipment, sorting and grading machines, processing 
equipment, collection shades, small transport, marketing 
Infrastructure, such as offices, houses; no more than 10 % for management 
and allowance 
Selection process – PACT will apply a transparent, competitive selection process: (i) 
• 
Screening applicants  against basic eligibility criteria; (b) formulation and assessment of 
proposals  and  business  plans  that  must  be  market-oriented  and  contribute  to  climate 
resilience  (application  of  natural  resource  management,  climate-smart  technologies,…) 
and  social  impacts  (improve  food  security  and  nutrition,  increase  gender  equity);  (c) 
implementation  of  business  plans.  The  business  plans  must  link  with  value-chains 
supported under PACT and shall leverage on activities conducted under component 1. 
A  grant  manual  developed  for  cooperatives  will  also  detail  selection  criteria  for 
• 
trainers  and  youth,  the  application  procedures,  eligibility  criteria,  eligible  investments 
aligned  to  young  agripreneurs,  as  well  as  monitoring  and  evaluation  procedures.  The 
agribusiness  specialist  and  the  independent  technical  committee,  comprising  experts  in 
the agricultural sector ranging from the Government to the private sector, will review and 
select business proposals based on a transparent and fair evaluation process. Details, such 
as a scoring sheet, will developed under the manual. 
103 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Agri-business  options  to  be  identified  based  on  selected-value  chains  (not 
• 
exhaustive) 
Input Provision and Agro- 
dealer 
Cleaning, Sorting and 
Grading 
Packaging 
Train youth to become agro dealers and service providers and 
simultaneously tackles the challenges of inputs that farmers are 
facing around program area 
Cleaning, sorting and grading may be required before trading, 
processing and consumption, which opens a window of opportunity 
for youth agribusinesses 
Prior to transportation most of agricultural products require 
packaging probably with jute sacks, crates (boxes or cages), bottles, 
or the outer material of the agricultural commodity itself in case of 
vegetables and fruits. 
Transporting 
Agro-processing 
Storage 
Agribusiness can range from supplying packaging materials to the 
packaging process of agricultural product itself, including nutrition 
labelling. 
(Refrigerated) Transporting of agricultural commodities from place to 
place can be done by trucks or pack animals. 
Simple processing activities (dairy processing, juice extracting, etc.) 
Storage facility is one of the facilities helping to avoid or minimize 
post-harvest losses. The duration of storability of agricultural 
products may differ from product to product. Some products (e.g. 
tomatoes) have very limited storability or shelf life, while certain 
grains can be stored for long time. Facilitating storage facilities, 
including locally made cooling systems could be interesting entry- 
points for agribusiness development. 
Informal biofortified seed 
multiplication and supply 
Even though some governmental and non- governmental companies 
like Ethiopian Seed enterprise, agro-dealers ( Ambasel ) and 
cooperative unions and federations are already engaged in seed 
supply, input shortages remain. 
This gap can be filled by young agripreneurs. PACT can support 
agripreneurs to receive certifications. 
Preparation of organic compost or for biofertilizers 
Improved production of forage and feed for livestock 
Waste management 
Forage 
Within watershed (fattening of sheep, goat and cattle; poultry production; fish production; 
beekeeping; silk production and marketing; forestry and agroforestry; nursery development and 
improved power saving cooking stoves production and supply) 
Animal and Fishery 
production 
Fattening of sheep, goat 
and cattle 
Poultry production 
Cattle dairy production and processing, fattening (cattle, sheep and 
goats) 
Lucrative entry point for job creation, especially in Oromia 
Production of eggs and chicken; production and processing of 
chicken meat 
Production of fish on constructed pond in watersheds 
Production of honey, drinks made of honey, royal jelly, production of 
bee colonies, raising of queen bees 
Fish production 
Beekeeping 
Forestry and Agro 
forestry 
Production and supply of beehives, equipment and packing, wax 
production and commercialization 
Great potential to create green jobs, particularly through activities 
such as reforestation, afforestation, agro-forestry and sustainable 
forest management 
Forestry and agro forestry can provide access to forest raw materials 
(bamboo, gums and incense); medical and industrial plants; fruit 
and trees seedlings, edible wild leaves, fruits, seeds and nuts, roots 
and tubers, mushrooms, honey.Such products can be critical sources 
104 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
of protein, vitamins and nutrient‑rich supplements such as calcium 
and iron, and they add both flavor and nutritional value to diets 
Multipurpose vegetable and fruit tree seedlings nursery development 
activities within the watershed 
Programme can provide materials (modling, sand and cement) to 
produce and sell improved cooking stoves 
Production of vermicompost or compost to supply FBS 
Nursery development 
Improved fuel saving 
cooking stove production 
and supply 
Vermi-compost and 
composting production 
Etc. 
Innovation  and  private  sector:  To  make  agribusinesses  powerful  drivers  of 
• 
employment  and  wealth  creation,  innovation  and  technologies  must  be  introduced  and 
made  accessible  to  the  youth.  Further,  linkages  with  the  private  sector  are  pivotal  to 
maximizing benefits from the market. As such, in collaboration with the Dutch Embassy 
and TRAIDE, entrepreneurship opportunities will be identified based on Dutch companies 
needs  in  targeted  areas.  Dutch  agribusinesses  operating  in  targeted  areas  face  many 
issues such as reliable supply of raw materials, organic waste management and availability 
of  packaging  materials.  These  unmet  needs  provide  great  opportunities  and  a  ready 
market  that  can  be  attacked  by  young  people.  The  Programme  will  provide  public 
investments such as  training and identifying innovative approaches  while the private sector 
is expected to provide private investments such as equity and mentorship[1]PACT will also 
explore linkages with the Orange Corners Initiative, a flagship programme of the Dutch 
Enterprise Support Agency. A mapping exercise conducted by the TRAIDE and the Dutch 
Embassy will profile Dutch companies in targeted areas and highlight unmeet needs to be 
addressed by young agripreneurs. 
Synergy creation – PACT will identify collaboration opportunities with incubation hubs 
• 
supported  by the EU under the BIC  Programme.  Ultimately, young  agripreneurs  will be 
part  of  an  ecosystem,  exchange  with  other  agripreneurs  supported  at  incubation  hubs 
around  agro-industrial  parks,  TVET  institutions,  and  universities,  facilitating  access  to 
knowledge exchange  and  finance  opportunities beyond  PACT.  In  addition,  linkages  with 
UNIDO’s support to the Integrated Agro-Industrial Parks will be explored and pursued, if 
possible. 
II. 4: COMPONENT 3: INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICY STRENGTHENING AND IMPLEMENTATION 
SUPPORT SERVICES 
This will be a cross-cutting component servicing the two technical components and 
• 
facilitating pathways for the effective and inclusive functioning of the target value chains, 
from production to consumption. The objective of the component is twofold to: a) provide 
targeted support to selected policy areas and augment the capacity of selected institutions 
to  facilitate  participatory  planning  and  development  processes  and  oversee  PACT 
Programme  implementation;  and  b)  manage  the  PACT  Programme  in  an  efficient  and 
effective manner by providing overall coordination, including planning and implementation, 
financial  management  and  control,  procurement  support,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation, 
knowledge management,  and  progress  reporting.  It  will  also  ensure liaison  and linkage 
with all other relevant projects/programmes being implemented in the country that seek 
to  address  similar  or  related  constraints.  This  would  be  aimed  at  taking  advantage  of 
existent  synergies  and  avoiding  duplications.  Accordingly,  the  component  has  two 
subcomponents:  a) Subcomponent  3.1:  Institutional Strengthening  and  Policy Support; 
and b) Subcomponent 3.2: Implementation Support Services. 
II.4.1  : Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support 
Institutional  Strengthening  and  Policy  Support  –Institutional  Strengthening  and 
• 
Policy Support is a means to sustain the benefit of the programme. These interventions 
will help to develop or improve existing institutional strengthening systems and processes. 
One  of  the  success  factors  for  PACT  programme  is  implementation  capabilities  of 
institutions to execute the programme as per the design. It comprises two subcomponents. 
105 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Institutional Strengthening – With regard to institutional strengthening, the aim 
• 
is  to  augment  the  capacity  of the institutions  (public  and  private  sector/farmer-owned) 
that  will  be  responsible  for  overseeing  and/or  implementing  the  different  Programme 
activities. Thus, the institutions that will be supported under this subcomponent include 
government institutions that will implement the Programme directly and those supporting 
the smooth implementation of the Programme indirectly (federal, regional, zonal, woreda, 
and kebele, and research institutions). Farmers’ associations (unions, cooperatives, Water 
user associations, watershed associations, etc.) will be key implementing partners for the 
Programme and, hence, they will be supported to address capacity gaps. Private sector 
institutions  are  also  crucial  stakeholders  in  the  successful  implementation  of  the  PACT 
Programme,  including  technology  suppliers,  input  dealers,  off-takers,  after  sale  service 
providers, contractors, and consultants. The Programme will seek to ensure that they are 
enabled to appropriately provide the needed services along the different links of the target 
value chains. 
The PACT Programme will prioritize supporting the programme coordination units to 
• 
enhance  their  coordination  abilities,  financial  management,  procurement,  planning, 
monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge management. 
Guidelines will be prepared and training will be provided on Gender transformative 
• 
approaches to institutionalize the approaches in all implementing agencies. The PCU skills 
in  GTA  will  be  improved  following  a  rigorous  capacity  assessment  that  will  inform  the 
delivery of tailored training package. 
In order to effectively mainstream nutrition across the components, the PCMU will 
• 
be equipped with adequate knowledge and skills  to conduct relevant nutrition analyses, 
identify  entry  points  along  the  food  value  chains,  design  targeted  interventions  for  the 
most nutritionally vulnerable  and  strengthen integration  of  gender,  youth,  environment 
and climate in a food system perspective. 
On top of the above-mentioned activities, PACT Programme will support the following 
• 
activities: b) build the capacity of MoA and relevant institutions to coordinate on agriculture 
and climate risk management (CD4ARM - Support Zonal Risk analysis for development of 
Community Development Plans); c) support digital agriculture services, including support 
to  operationalize  national  irrigation  MIS  and  support  to  digitalize extension  services 
platforms;  and  d)  support  the  newly  established  inter-ministerial  body to  ensure 
coordination  of  the  Ethiopian  Food  System  Transformation  roadmap  implementation, 
including sensitisation and planning workshops at Federal and Regional levels. 
PACT  Programme  will  work  together  with  JICA  to  support  the  MoA  Food  and  Nutrition  
• 
Coordination  Office  to  coordinate  the  different  sectors  to  implement  WASH,  Education, 
Women Empowerment and promotion of health-related nutrition messages. 
PACT  programme  will  also  conduct  institutional  capacity  gap  assessment  through 
• 
intensive  engagement  of  stakeholders,  formulate  a  capacity  development  plan,  and 
support  implementation  of  capacity  development  plan.  PACT  Programme  will  use  the 
standard steps to define the detailed activities related institutional strengthening. 
In  collaboration  with  the  Federal  Extension  Directorate,  and  CD4ARM,  the 
• 
programme build the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture and relevant institutions  on 
climate risk management (CD4ARM). This training should impart extension staff at various 
level to enable them to integrate ARM in their training activities. 
The  programme  will  conduct  an  assessment  to  understand  the  current  status  of 
• 
digital agriculture services and conduct consultation with different institutions prompting 
digital  agriculture  services.  The  PACT  programme  will  provide  technical  and  financial 
support  to  promote  digital  agriculture  services within  the scope  of  the  programme  and 
operationalizing the irrigation MIS. 
106 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Apart  from  support  to  facilitation  of  platforms  to  coordinate  the  Ethiopian  Food 
• 
System Transformation roadmap implementation it also provides  technical and financial 
support  to  conduct  studies  and  analysis  pertinent  to  Ethiopian  Food  System 
Transformation. This support considers compilation of progresses made and lessons in the 
implementation of the road map 
Policy  Support  –  Ethiopia’s  ambition  to  become  a  middle-income  economy  and 
• 
deliver  shared  and  sustained  prosperity  is  driven  by  the  government’s  ‘Ten-Year 
Perspective Development Plan’ (2021 – 2030), which supplements the existing vision for 
a  ‘Home-grown  Economic  Reform’  agenda.  PACT  will  be  focusing  on  policy  /strategies 
prioritized  in  these  plans  and  of  course  the  Ethiopia’s  Food  System  Transformation 
roadmap, The focus of this intervention will be to facilitate the development, review and 
update  of  policies  and  strategies  in  areas  identified  as  game  changing  solutions  for  the 
Ethiopia’s Food System Transformation roadmap, including for gender equality and youth 
to thrive in agriculture. Policy briefs shall be disseminated channels identified under the 
KM plan 
The PACT programme will create alliance with key stakeholders to advocate for the 
• 
development and revision of strategies. The activities foreseen under this intervention: a) 
support  to  development  of  agricultural  water  utilization  and  administration  as  well  as 
irrigation  infrastructure  management  strategies;  b)  support  to  the  revision  of  national 
nutrition sensitive agriculture strategy; c) support to revise current strategies on gender 
to reflect gender transformative approaches. 
Support  to  conduct  analysis  on  the  current  agricultural  water  utilization  and 
• 
administration  as  well  as  irrigation  infrastructure  management.  This  support  will  be 
to  develop  draft  strategies  and  validate  with  key  stakeholders, 
extended 
endorsement/release of the strategies, and familiarization to stakeholder the strategies. 
In collaboration with key stakeholders, PACT programme will provide support for the 
• 
review of the current national nutrition sensitive agriculture strategy, endorsement/release 
of the strategy, and  familiarize the stakeholder with the revised version of the national 
nutrition sensitive agriculture strategy. 
The  programme  will  focus  on  providing  trainings  on  gender  transformative 
• 
approaches  and  for  the  revision  of  the  current  gender  strategy.  It  will  also  assist  the 
familiarization the revised strategies to stakeholders. 
  The programme will use available platforms to advocate for the implementation of 
• 
the  Policies  and  Strategies  developed  to  create  conducive  environment  in  the  sector 
including  the  Rural  Economic  Development  and  Food  Security  Sector  (REDFS)  Working 
Group  platform  where  Government  &  Development  Partners  come  together  to  have  a 
dialogue,  alignment,  coordination,  harmonization  and  resource  mobilization  to  the 
agriculture  sector  and  support  government’s  effort  in  speeding  up  the  agricultural 
transformation agendas. 
• 
In collaboration with FAO, PACT will conduct an ecosystem analysis, which identifies 
• 
gaps  and opportunities  for  agripreneurship in Ethiopia. Findings  will be presented at an 
Agribusiness  conference  led  by  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  supported  by  multi- 
stakeholders,  including  the  EU,  bilateral  partners  and  the  UN.  Sub-working  groups  will 
address  policy  gaps  identified  in  the  ecosystem  analysis  and  take  necessary  steps  to  create 
a conducive environment for agribusinesses. Participation of young agripreneurs in policy 
dialogues will be enabled to ensure youth can voice challenges, needs and priorities in the 
agricultural sector  and co-shape tailored solutions. A separate impact evaluation on the 
agripreneurship  sub-component,  especially  measuring  the  differentiated  impacts  of 
groups, who received matching grants vs. Groups solely supported with training, will feed 
into policy briefs presented to the Ministry of Agriculture. 
107 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
II.4.2  : Subcomponent 3.2: Programme Coordination and Implementation 
Support Services 
• 
For details on this Subcomponent, see Section I.5 of this document. 
II.5: ANNUAL SUPERVISION 
Supervision – The PACT Programme will be jointly supervised by  IFAD and GoE to 
• 
assess  achievements  and  lessons  learned  and,  when  required,  provide  implementation 
support with the objective of ensuring effective Programme implementation and increase 
the likelihood  of  achieving  the  target  objective.  Missions  would  be  fielded  at least  once 
every  twelve  months.  However,  and  depending  on  the  extent  and  quality  of 
implementation progress, implementation support Missions would be fielded as frequently 
as warranted by conditions on the ground so as to address any emergent issues that may 
have  the  potential  to  negatively  impact  Programme  implementation.  However,  and 
depending on the extent and quality of implementation progress, implementation support 
Missions would be fielded as frequently as warranted by conditions on the ground so as to 
address any emergent issues that may have the potential to negatively impact Programme 
implementation. 
The composition of the implementation support mission would be influenced by the 
• 
issues identified as needing redress. As part of the annual missions’ objectives, a review 
of  the  effectiveness  of  implementation  arrangements  will  be  undertaken  to  ascertain 
whether any adjustment/Restructuring is needed to ensure optimum performance. ToRs 
for the supervision missions will be prepared by the IFAD Country Director except those 
for  the  Financial  Management  consultant;  IFAD’s  Financial  Management  Division  (FMD) 
would be responsible for preparing the ToRs and recruitment of the Financial Management 
consultant for the mission. The timing of the  supervision missions  will be influenced by 
factors,  such  as  the  status  of  AWPB implementation coordinated  with the production  of 
interim financial statements in accordance with IFAD interim financial reporting guidelines. 
This will enable Supervision Missions to measure the progress at the specific cut-off dates. 
II. 
6: PACT PROGRAMME MID-TERM REVIEW (MTR) 
A  PACT  Programme  MTR  will  be  undertaken  halfway  through  Programme 
• 
implementation;  it  will  evaluate  whether  the  Programme  is  on  course  to  achieve  the 
objectives. It will identify any prevailing constraints and recommend such re-orientation 
as may be required to help the Programme get back on course to achieve its objectives. 
There will be four outputs of the MTR: a) an Aide Memoire summarizing the findings; 
• 
b)  MTR  report  detailing  the  findings  and  recommendations  on  the  way  forward;  c)  a  revised  
PDR (if the MTR has necessitated a restructuring of the Programme) to reflect the mission’s 
recommendations; and d) a detailed Programme closure plan. This  will be accompanied 
with: a) a revised budget to guide utilization of the remaining funds; and b) an updated 
PIM. 
Undertaking  of 
the  responsibility  of  government/PCU.  The 
• 
government/PCU  may  consult  IFAD  to  facilitate  the  process,  including  identification  of 
consultants, etc. 
the  MTR 
is 
II. 
7: PROGRAMME COMPLETION 
Undertaking of the Programme Completion Review (PCR) exercise at the end of the 
• 
PACT Programme implementation will be led by GoE but in close coordination with IFAD. 
The main purposes of the completion review process are to promote accountability, reflect 
on performance and elicit lessons learned to inform future programme/project design and 
to define an appropriate post-project strategy. The learning dimension of the completion 
process will be used by both IFAD and GoE as the foundation for improvements in future 
programme/project design and implementation. The completion review process will also 
be critical for identifying opportunities for scaling-up best practices. The PCR would need 
to be undertaken after Programme completion but before the Programme closure period. 
108 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
The  PCR  will  be  undertaken  in  two  distinct  steps:  a)  a  Beneficiary  Impact  Assessment 
(BIA); and b) Programme Completion Report preparation. If a detailed project closure plan 
does not get developed at MTR, it should get developed subsequently but, certainly, earlier 
than the last year of implementation. 
Recruiting the Completion Review Team – About six months before  the  planned start of 
• 
the completion review mission, it is recommended that the GoE take the necessary actions 
to identify and recruit the members of the Completion Review Team. By that time, GoE 
and IFAD would have agreed on the composition of the Completion Review Team (number 
of persons and types of expertise required) during the last supervision mission. Given the 
PACT Programme specific domains of intervention, the expertise will be selected to ensure 
coverage of all Programme domains. 
PART III: PROGRAMME PROCEDURES 
III. 
1: PLANNING AND AWPB DEVELOPMENT 
The  planning  cycle  will  follow  the  Federal  Government  of  Ethiopia  planning  and 
• 
budgeting cycle.  The cycle will commence with the AWPB preparation as a key instrument 
for implementation and operational control. The PACT Programme will follow a bottom-up 
participatory planning process for the AWPB. 
The first stage of planning and preparation of the AWPB will be carried out at the 
• 
Kebele level, where the community driven development plans will be developed. The CDPs,  will 
be a framework in which priority interventions identified by respective communities will be 
summarised. The plans will form the basis for planning at the Kebele Level. Annual Activities 
will then be extracted from the CDPs to prepare the Kebele level plans which will then be 
submitted to the Woreda PIUs to consolidate the Woreda Level workplans and Budgets. 
The  project  coordinators  within  the  PIUs  will  then  submit  the  Woreda  level  plans to the 
Regional PCUs, for consolidation and submission to the Federal PCUs. At the regional PCUs, 
care will be taken to ensure harmonisation and alignment of the woreda level plans. The 
M&E  Specialists  at  the  PCUs  will  also  check  the  quality  of  the  plans  and  alignment  to 
available  budgetary  resources.  The  five  regional  reports  will  then  be  submitted  to  the 
Federal PCMU for compilation and consolidation of the overall Project Annual Workplan and 
Budget. 
The  M&E  Units  within  the  PCUs  will  in  consultation  with  the  FMUs  and  Technical 
• 
Component  Heads,  develop  Planning  and  budgeting  guidelines  to  guide  the  lower-level 
units in AWPB preparation. 
At each of the levels, the project steering and technical committees will review the 
• 
plans before they are transmitted to the next level, to ensure alignment with the relevant 
local  government  policies  and  priorities.  The  steering  committees  will  also  approve  the 
plans at their respective levels. The programme wide annual work plan and budget will be 
reviewed and approved by the Federal Steering Committee before submission to IFAD for 
expression  of  a  no  objection.  The  approved  AWPB  will  be the  only  mechanism through 
which  Programme  resources  would  be  spent  and  the  basis  for  progress  monitoring. 
Preparation of the AWPB will be led by the FPCU in liaison with the RPCUs and will follow 
the approved Federal Government of Ethiopia Planning Cycle. 
The  Programme  will  review  the  AWPB  every  six  months  to  assess  progress  in 
• 
reaching annual targets including factors affecting attainment of the targets, and will make 
adjustments accordingly. 
III.2: MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System  –  The Monitoring and evaluation system 
• 
for PACT is based on the logical framework, in which a series of key performance indicators 
(Core  indicators  and  project  specific  indicators)  have  been  defined,  the  project  design 
report and the project implementation manual. 
109 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
The  M&E  system  will  help  to  streamline  monitoring,  evaluation  and  reporting 
• 
procedures, responsibilities and processes essential to track performance and progress of 
the various components and activities of the project in comparison with the set targets in 
the  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets.  The  system  will  work  as  a  useful  tool  to  guide 
management during implementation of the Programme. 
A  detailed  M&E  framework  will  be  developed  to  guide  M&E  processes  within  the 
• 
project. The M&E framework developed at the beginning of implementation will detail the 
scope, organisation and contents of the M&E system; roles and responsibilities; a plan for 
data (sex- and age-disaggregated where appropriate) collection, analysis, reporting, use 
and management; timeline for M&E-related activities; staffing and capacity building plan; 
budget; etc.; The Framework will also include an M & E plan that will set out guidelines for 
progress  monitoring  of  implementation  as  well as  evaluation  of  the  performance  of the 
Programme in relation to the performance indicators in the Programme Logframe. 
• 
The PACT M&E Framework will thus focus on: 
✓  Data collection and reporting formats for the diverse reporting requirements; 
✓  Design  and  implementation  of  beneficiary  assessment  of  program  performance  on 
specific investments; 
✓  Definitions  of  specific  responsibilities  and  roles  of  different  stakeholders  at  Federal, 
Regional,  Woreda  and  Kebele  levels  in  monitoring,  evaluation  and  reporting  of  the 
project implementation progress; 
✓  Integration of the project activities into the AWP&Bs at Federal, Regional and Woreda 
levels; 
✓  Recommendation  of  a  web-based  open  source  DHIS2  Management  Information  System 
for data storage, analysis and reporting for all levels; 
✓  Plans for capacity building for the FPCU and RPCUs  and Woreda staff to ensure that 
the M&E system is operational. 
The  conceptual  thrust  of  the  M&E  Framework  will  be  based  on  the  following 
• 
assumptions: 
✓  Timely project management at Federal and Regional levels, participating Woredas 
as well selected Kebeles; 
✓  Woreda and Kebele Administrations’ commitment to the PACT activities; 
✓  Staff of relevant calibre are available, recruited and motivated; 
✓  Adherence to transparent procurement and fiduciary practices; 
✓  Timely provision of project operational resources to the participating Regions, 
Woredas and Kebeles. 
The  PACT  M&E  system  will  be  participatory,  gender  sensitive  and results-oriented 
• 
while enabling the integration of physical and financial progress reporting. In addition, the 
system will enable the analysis of climate change vulnerability and resilience among the 
beneficiaries using the combined resilience score card. The system will incorporate an in- 
depth  baseline,  COI  surveys  and  completion  surveys,  a  mid-term  review  and  other 
thematic studies as relevant. 
• 
The general principles for participatory monitoring of project activities will include; 
✓  Community  Level  Organisations  (e.g.,  Water  Shed  Management  Associations  and 
Water User Committees, Cooperative Unions etc.) will monitor respective Kebele level 
activities and investigate performance, supported by Kebele Development Agents and 
service providers; 
✓  Woreda Project Implementation Unit Coordinators supported by the Woreda Technical 
Implementation Committees will monitor activities, inputs and output achievements in 
their respective area; 
✓  The  M&E  units  based  within  the  RPCUs  will  monitor  progress  in  implementation  of 
designed activities under their respective regions, compile regional level project reports 
on a quarterly, bi-annual and annual basis for consolidation by the Federal PCU; 
✓  Technical  assistance  to  (1)  upgrade  the  PCMU’s  performance  management  systems 
and  processes  to  produce  relevant  and  well-timed  data  and  (2)  strengthen  staff 
110 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
capabilities  to  analyze  data  on  gender  outcomes  and  integrate  insights  into 
programming in a timely manner. Technical assistance will include: 
✓  Rapid  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  the  existing  M&E  system  and  processes  to 
generate meaningful and timely insights on the project's impact on gender outcomes 
and capabilities of PCMU staff to collect, analyze, and report on qualitative data. The 
assessment would take place over the first six weeks of project implementation. 
✓  The M&E unit based at the Federal PCU, will monitor and evaluate the impact of the 
project, compile and consolidate the project’s quarterly, bi-annual and annual reports 
for dissemination to external stakeholders, Ministry of Agriculture, other line ministries 
and the participating woredas; 
✓  The Ministry of Agriculture will monitor overall operations for planning and facilitation 
purposes in line with its development objectives and those of the Federal Government 
of Ethiopia. 
• 
The PACT M&E system will be a simple but comprehensive tool that will facilitate: 
✓  A  web-based  Management  Information  System,  built  on  a  DHIS2  interface  to 
provide information satisfactory to the needs of management; 
✓  Effective coordination  and  management  of  information  during the  main  phase  of 
Programme implementation; 
✓  Information  gathering  and  effective  communication  amongst  Woredas,  Regions  and 
the Federal Level; 
✓  Preparation of quarterly, bi-annual and Annual reports for presentation to various 
stakeholders; 
✓  Preparation  of  mandatory  evaluations  reports:  Midterm  evaluation  and  Project 
Completion Review. 
Structure and Processes – Under PACT, Woreda level project specific work-plans and 
• 
budgets  will  be  extracted  from  the  broad  Community  Driven  Development  Plans  and 
Kebele level workplans and submitted to the Regional PCUs and later to the Federal PCU 
for  consolidation into  a  project  wide  AWPB, prior  to the  start  of the Ethiopian  Financial 
Year. The Woredas will assess existing resource commitments and other ongoing/planned 
development partner interventions when requesting for resources and this will be strictly 
aligned to work plans and indicators.  The Woredas will also be guided by the programme 
Implementation Manual. 
The  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  PACT  will  cut  across  the  various  levels  of 
• 
administration as per the decentralization structure. 
• 
The levels include: 
✓  Federal Level; 
✓  Regional Level; 
✓  Woreda Level; 
✓  Kebele Level; 
✓  Community  Interest  Groups  (watershed  management  associations,  cooperative 
unions, etc.); 
✓  Activity Implementers and the communities. 
Programme  performance  will  be  measured  annually  with  targets  set  out  in  the 
• 
various AWPBs which will be prepared by the Woredas, and consolidated by Regional PCUs 
and Federal Level PCU. 
• 
The monitoring and evaluation will be centred on: 
✓  Beneficiary  assessment  of  project  performance on  completion  of  a  specific 
investment; 
✓  Annual reviews of the functioning of completed investments; 
✓  Monitoring progress of activity implementation; 
✓  Quarterly and six months reports from various implementing partners. 
111 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Monitoring  Responsibilities  for  Different  Stakeholders  –  The  PACT  monitoring  and 
• 
evaluation  function  will  involve  key  personnel  at  different  levels.  Evaluations  will  be 
undertaken by independent experts hired by the project. Project staff at all levels will work 
together with the experts to learn lessons from the evaluations and apply them to improve 
project management and implementation. The different levels are highlighted hereunder. 
Programme Steering and Technical Committees – The Programme Federal Steering 
• 
and  Technical  Committee  will  be  responsible  for  providing  policy  guidance,  review  and 
approval of the consolidated Annual Workplans and Budgets, Annual Progress Reports as 
well as Audit Reports. Other steering and technical committees at the regional, zonal and 
Woreda levels will review and approval respective level annual workplans and budgets and 
annual reports. 
The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  –  The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  will  monitor  the  overall 
• 
operations  for  planning  and  facilitation  purposes  of  the  interventions  for  attainment  of 
project objectives 
Federal Programme Coordination Unit – The Federal Programme Coordination and 
• 
Management  Unit  as  the  overall  Programme  facilitation  body  will  be  responsible  for 
ensuring that respective departments across the participating Regions and all 90 Woredas 
adopt  and  follow  appropriate  monitoring  mechanisms,  processes  and  procedures.  The 
Federal PCU will support the Regional PCUs and the Woreda units to establish meaningful 
and  measurable  indicators  during  the  start-up  phase  so  that  suitable  means  of  data 
collection can be built into Programme activities. The PCU will also monitor and evaluate 
the overall performance  of the Programme and compile the Programme’s  quarterly and 
annual reports for dissemination to the stakeholders. 
Regional  Programme  Coordination  Units  –  The  RPCUs  will  ensure  that  activities  within 
• 
their  respective  regions  are  monitored  well  in  accordance  with  established  programme 
level M&E mechanisms, procedures and processes. 
The Woreda Programme Implementation Units – The Programme staff at the Woreda 
• 
level,  led  by  Woreda  Programme  Coordinators,  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  that 
implementation is efficiently and effectively carried out according to the Woreda approved 
work  plans  and  budgets.  The  coordinators  will  also  be  responsible  for  the  day-to-day 
monitoring of activities at Woreda and Kebele level including monitoring inputs, activities 
and  achievements,  and  overall coordination  and  development  of monitoring  systems  at 
that level. The coordinators will also be responsible for ensuring harmonisation with other 
Woreda level  monitoring  processes  to improve efficiency  of  information collection  while 
avoiding duplication of monitoring tasks. 
Kebele Level Monitoring – One of the responsibilities of the Kebele Administration is 
• 
to integrate PACT activities into their respective AWPs. The Kebele administrations will be 
responsible  for  monitoring  the  Programme  against  stated  targets.  The  Kebele  Development 
Agents (DAs) will provide backstopping of planning efforts with beneficiaries and will be 
instrumental  in  ensuring  that  monitoring  tools  and  procedures  are  incorporated  into 
activity plans of proposed sub-projects identified in the Community Development Plans. 
The DAs will in addition be responsible for coordinating M&E capacity building efforts for 
the  Kebele.  The  DAs  will  also  ensure  that  data  collection  processes,  procedures  and 
responsibilities are adhered to and reporting undertaken in accordance with the design of 
the respective PACT activities. 
Activity Level Monitoring – Implementation of the PACT activities will involve various 
• 
service providers/stakeholders, for example NGOs, CBOs, contractors, etc. These  will be 
given  clear  monitoring  procedures  and  reporting  formats  for  the  activities  under  their 
authority  for  on-ward  transmission  to  the  Kebeles,  Woredas,  Regional  and  Federal 
monitoring levels. 
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)  –  EPA  will  monitor  outputs  and  activities 
• 
related to environmental monitoring and in particular the ESCMP as defined. On the other 
hand, the NDA will monitor the CC interventions. The respective technical officers at PCU 
112 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
(the  Climate  Change  and  Watershed  Management  Specialist  and  the  Environmental 
Safeguards  Specialist)  will  coordinate  activities  related  to  environmental  and  CC 
monitoring and the use of the Resilience Design Monitoring Tool (RDMT). 
Beneficiary/Community  level  Monitoring  –  Upon  preparation  of  Community 
• 
Development  Plans,  the  beneficiaries  will  coordinate  with  activity  implementers, 
Development Agents and or Community Facilitators on the channels to be used to collect 
information and transmit it to higher levels. 
Information  Needs  Flow  of  PACT  –  In  order  for  different  levels  of  programme 
• 
stakeholders to guide the project’s planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, 
they will require different types of information from various sources. 
Beneficiary/Community  Level  –  Beneficiaries  will  be  the  centre  of  the  decision- 
• 
making process, planning, monitoring and evaluation of activities of the project. In order 
for  them  to  own  the  interventions  and  ensure  ease  of  monitoring  by  the  various 
stakeholders  and  for  the  future  and  sustainability  of  the  project,  each  Community 
Facilitator will prepare detailed planning matrices/community log frames clearly indicating 
the community goal, purpose, outputs, verifiable indicators, assumptions and the action 
plan  showing  the  activities  to  be  undertaken,  costs  involved,  responsible  persons  and 
timing  of  the  activities.  The  work  plans  will  be  prepared  using  simplified  formats  to 
accommodate the changing information/data needs that conform to and feed into formats 
for higher reporting levels. 
In addition, the beneficiaries will maintain record books with important information 
• 
on  the  project’s  implementation.  The  Community  Facilitators  will  consolidate  the 
information  from  the  different  beneficiary/Community  groups  into  Community  reports. 
After the consolidation, the Community reports will be forwarded to the Kebele level. 
Kebele Level – At the Kebele level, all the received community/group level reports 
• 
will be compiled  and  consolidated  into  one  Kebele  report  by  the  development Agent. 
Besides consolidating the report, the DA will ensure that the important aspects in the work 
plans are well articulated in the Community reports. They will also incorporate information 
generated during project implementation monitoring to constitute a comprehensive Kebele 
report. The Kebele report will  be  forwarded  to  the  Woreda level. Sources of information 
at this level include sub-projects monitoring reports, Kebele AWPBs  and other  necessary 
documents. 
Woreda Level – The received Kebele reports will be consolidated into Woreda reports 
• 
by the Woreda  Coordinator  with  support  of  the  Technical  Implementation Committee. 
Sources of information at the Woreda level include but not limited to the project monitoring 
reports,  meetings  and  consultations  among  the  Woreda  staff  involved in  the  PACT 
implementation. 
Regional Level – At Regional Level, all the Woreda level reports will be consolidated 
• 
into one Regional Report by the M&E Staff based within the Regional PCMU. The Regional 
Reports will then be transmitted to the Federal PCMU for consolidation into a project wide 
report to be shared with project stakeholders. 
Federal Level – At Federal Level, all the Regional level Reports will be compiled and 
• 
consolidated into one project wide report by the staff at the PCMU. The consolidated report 
will then be circulated to IFAD, ASAP, EU and other stakeholders. 
Feedback  information  will  follow  the  reverse  order  from  IFAD through the  Federal 
• 
PCU to the Regional PCUs, Woreda PIUs, Kebele Administrations to beneficiaries. Through 
planning and review meetings, feedback will be channelled to the project implementers 
and beneficiaries. 
Logical  Framework  –  The  Programme  logframe  with  pre-defined  Core  and 
• 
Programme  specific  indicators  has  been  developed.  And  to  the  extent  possible  these 
indicators  have  been  quantified.  The  monitoring  indicators,  disaggregated  by  gender 
where applicable will compare project performance each year with the targets set in the 
113 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Annual  Work  plan  and  Budget  for  that  year.  Outcome  level  indicators  will  be  assessed 
through COI surveys to be carried out at baseline, midline and endline. The Programme 
will finance a baseline facilitate future monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes and 
impact. 
Indicators – Relevant indicators have been specified in the PACT Logframe and, to 
• 
the  extent  possible,  quantified.  The  indicators  relate  to  the  different  levels  (output, 
outcome and impact), and include IFAD Core Indicators (CIs) as well as project specific 
indicators.  This  is  based  on  the  theory  of  change,  and  demonstrates  the  logical  links 
between the results at their different levels and thereby enabling the meaningful analysis 
of whether the project is on-track towards its planned results even in the first few years 
of  implementation  when  higher-level  results  are  not  yet  expected.  The  monitoring 
indicators, will compare project performance each year with the targets set in the AWPB 
for that year. 
Data Collection – Data collection for updating the operational M&E framework will be 
• 
supported by a web-based Management Information System which will depend on the use 
of cloud servers for easy administration, electronic tablets for data collection and online 
transmission to the cloud-based servers and collection of GPS coordinates for easy location 
of project beneficiaries and interventions. The serves will be administered at both regional 
and federal levels, for storage and processing. 
Data collection for Physical progress monitoring will be based on two principles: a) 
• 
AWPB-based  progress  monitoring  –  this  will  involve  checking  and  reporting  on 
implementation progress of each activity in the AWPB; and b) registers of physical progress 
– by recording key information on selected activities in specific registers, which will provide 
a  cumulative historical record of practically all activities undertaken by the project. The 
purpose of the registers of physical progress will be to systematically record information 
on certain types of activities and results of Programme implementation, in order to create 
a historical, cumulative overview. They will be integrated with the web-based MIS just like 
the AWPB monitoring. Initially, the following physical progress registers are envisaged: 
✓  Register of contracts – For each contract signed under the project, with suppliers, 
consultants and other service providers, the register of contracts will contain one 
line  of  information,  which  will  include:  description  of  the  contract;  name  of  the 
supplier/service provider; procurement method; contract sum; when the contract 
was  signed,  when the  work started,  when  it  was  expected to  be  completed  and 
when it was actually completed; number of invoices received and payments made; 
✓  Register of training activities  –  The register for training activities is  a very broad 
register that will be used to capture formal training courses, workshops, seminars, 
conferences,  study  tours,  exchange  visits,  field  demonstrations,  key  meetings, 
even  studies  and  surveys.  The  same  register  can  be  used  because  the  key 
information that is important to be recorded is basically the same for all these types 
of  activities,  and  includes:  a  description  of  the  activity;  whether  it  was  for 
beneficiaries or staff; where it took place (venue, destination); when it started and 
ended;  who  was  responsible for  organizing  the  activity  (person/institution);  who 
the  participants  were;  how  many  participants  (men/women);  the  cost;  and  the 
duration; 
✓  Register of infrastructure – In the register of infrastructure, one line of information 
will  summarize  key  facts  about  any  piece  of  infrastructure  that  is  constructed, 
rehabilitated,  expanded,  or  equipped  under  the  project.  The  information  in  this 
register will include: the type of structure; a description of the structure; where it 
is  located;  when  the  contract  for the  work  (if  applicable)  was  signed,  when  the  work  
started, when work was expected to end and when it actually ended; who the main 
contractor or supplier is (if applicable); who supervised the works; the total cost 
and 
of 
people(disaggregated  by  gender,  age  and  vulnerability)  who  benefit  from  the 
structure; 
estimated  number 
contribution; 
community 
and 
the 
the 
114 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
✓  Register of groups and or  farmers organisations  –  In the register of groups, one 
line  of  information  will  summarize  key  facts  about  any  group  that  has  been 
established or is being supported under the project, for example farmers producer 
organisations, cooperatives, and infrastructure management Organizations such as 
the  Watershed  Management  Association,  Water  User  Organisations  for  the 
irrigation schemes or Water for Livestock User Organisations in case of water for 
livestock support infrastructure.  The information in  this  register  will include:  the 
type of group; the name of the group; where it is located; when it was formed; a 
brief  description  of  the  group  purpose  and  main  activities;  a  description  of  the 
project’s 
involvement  with  the  group;  the  number  of  group  members 
(disaggregated as men/women and youth); and 
✓  Register  of  Matching  Grants  and  other  financial  services  –  this  will  summarize 
information  on  beneficiaries  of  the  matching  grants  (especially  the  youth 
Agriprenuers)  and  the  other  financial  services,  type  of  grant/  service  accessed, 
amounts of grants accessed, and activities funded among others. 
These registers shall be kept and updated regularly at the FPCU, RPCUs and WPIUs. 
• 
The Woreda level and partner implementation level registers will be submitted at least on 
a quarterly basis to the RPCUs for review and consolidation and transmission to the FPCU. 
To assist officers at Regional and Woreda levels, formats will be developed by the FPCU 
consistent  with  the  register  structures  maintained  within  the  web-  based  MIS  and 
distributed to the subject matter specialists in charge of monitoring at that level. 
The AWP&B-based progress monitoring in principle will use detailed activities exactly 
• 
as they are presented in tables in the AWPB. The basic task will be to regularly note down, 
activity  by  activity,  how  much  progress  has  been  made,  what  has  been  achieved, 
comments and whether any special action is required. In order to do this, the files used 
during  AWP&B  preparation  will  be  modified  and  distributed  to  the  Regional  PCMUs  and 
Woreda  Project  implementation  units  for  respective  monitoring.  The  modification  will 
consist  of  protecting  the  planning  data  and  adding  a  number  of  columns  for  recording 
progress information. 
To  the  extent  possible,  special  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  the  need  to  integrate 
• 
planning and monitoring as standard responsibilities in the work of project implementers, 
and  ensuring  that  recording  progress  information  is  done  regularly  and consistently. In 
principle,  the  designated  subject  matter  specialists  from  the  Woredas  as  well  as  focal 
persons from each of the implementation partner institutions will be responsible to collect 
and submit data for input into the MIS. 
The  progress information will be  carefully  analysed by staff of  M&E  Units  at the RPCUs  
• 
and  FPCU.  The  analysis  will  seek  to  identify  any  implementation  constraints  to  be 
addressed  by  the  project  management.  The  same  information  will  be  used  to  prepare 
quarterly, half yearly and annual reports, which will contain the full tables with detailed, 
activity by activity progress information. These reports will be produced by the respective 
WPIUs and will be consolidated initially at regional PCUs and later at FPCU into a project- 
wide report for submission to relevant Government offices, IFAD and other PACT funding 
partners. Reports will provide information such as: a) overview of intervention activities 
undertaken in the last quarter and cumulatively over the fiscal year; and b) progress and 
outputs in terms of the agreed M&E indicators, provide lessons learnt, and knowledge gaps 
identified. The reports will also seek to identify any constraints encountered so as to seek 
guidance (where needed) from Project management for addressing the constraints. 
It should be noted that progress information will be from the beginning of the year 
• 
to-date to reflect cumulative progress.  This means that for the third quarter, for example, 
the tables  will  contain the  progress made  and achievements  from the  beginning  of the 
financial year until the end of the third quarter, in addition to the separate results for the 
third quarter. Further, information will be provided on the cumulative progress since the 
beginning  of  the  programme.  This  is  meant  to  assess  the  progress  towards  achieving 
programme  targets  in  line  with  the  IFAD’s  Operational  Results  Management  System 
115 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
(ORMS). Standard reporting formats will be developed during the development of the M&E 
Framework  and  M&E  plan  to  provide  guidance  on  the  various  monitoring  focal 
persons/offices as defined above. 
Regular  project  Implementation  Reviews  will  be  undertaken  every  quarter  as  a 
• 
platform  for  assessment  of  project  implementation  and  performance  as  well  as  share 
experiences in implementation. 
Participation in the reviews will be by all those involved with activity implementation 
• 
as well as selected value chain actors and stakeholders, the hosting of which will follow 
internal rotational arrangements among the RPCUs and WPIUs. 
Progress Reporting – The main source of information for Programme Management 
• 
will be progress reports produced by the Programme’s M&E team.  Standardized formats 
will be developed and used consistently. The M&E teams at different levels will validate the 
information before sending it to the next level. The information will be consolidated in the 
process of producing progress reports; the consolidation will be based not only on figures 
but on detailed analysis, linking the physical with the financial progress and estimating the 
overall achievements towards set targets. 
Quarterly  Progress  Reports  –  All  PACT  activities  integrated  into  plans  of  local 
• 
government administration departments/sections  will be reported upon every 3 months 
by  respective  administrative  units  implementing  them.  Where  the  private  sector 
implementers are involved in PACT activities, the Regional PCUs and Woreda PIUs will be 
responsible for ensuring compliance of the service providers with regard to the monitoring 
and reporting requirements included in the service providers’ contract. 
Bi-annual Progress Reports – Consolidation of quarterly reports will be done by the 
• 
respective administrative units (i.e. Regions and Woredas). The Federal PCU will prepare 
a  consolidated  6-months  progress  report  for  sharing  with  GoE,  IFAD  and  other 
stakeholders/co-financers, as may be required. The progress reports will include an overall 
assessment  of  PACT’s  achievements  against  the  targets  in  the  AWPBs.  Reports  will be 
submitted within six weeks from the end of each reporting period. 
Annual Progress Reports – The annual progress reports will be a consolidation of the 
• 
progress  of  achievements  attained  during  a  financial  year  and  also  assess  the  overall 
performance of the project against set objectives and indicators. This will be done by the 
respective coordination and implementation units and the Federal PCU. 
Back to Office Reports – These will be produced on demand and following field visits 
• 
to the project area. The reports will be submitted within one week of undertaking the field 
activities. The reports will contain feedback on the purpose of the field visits, the people 
met  during the  visits, the  salient findings,  the lessons  learnt  and  recommendations  for 
improvement. 
The  table  below  provides  a  summary  of reports  to  be  generated/produced  by the 
• 
PACT Programme M&E System. 
Type 
Report 
of Responsible Officer 
Frequency 
Deadline 
Federal and 
Regional 
Levels 
Woreda 
Level 
Kebele 
Level 
Quarterly 
Bi-annual 
Progress 
Reports 
Annual 
Reports 
FPCU 
RPCUs 
FPCU 
RPCUs 
FPCU 
RPCUs 
and WPIU 
Coordinator 
and WPIU 
DA 
DA 
Coordinator 
Once every 3 
Months 
Once every 6 
Months 
1st  Week of proceeding month 
of the following quarter 
2nd Week of proceeding month 
of the following quarter 
and WPIU 
DA 
Coordinator 
Once  every 
12 months 
3rd Week of proceeding month 
of the following quarter 
116 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Back  to  Office 
field reports 
FPCU 
RPCUs 
and 
WPIU 
Coordinator 
DA 
On demand  Within 1 week of completing 
the field visit 
Baseline and Impact Evaluation – A baseline study will be undertaken during the 
• 
first  year  of  project  implementation  to  provide  a  benchmark  for  assessment  of  future 
outcomes and project impact. The Project will adopt and adapt the standard COI survey 
guidelines and methodology to undertake the project baseline survey. The FPCUs together 
with the Regional PCMUs will work together to adapt the ToR and the COI questionnaire as 
well  as  the  Request  for  Proposals  (RFP).  The  survey  will  be  undertaken  with  external 
consultant support recruited through a competitive bidding and selection process as per 
established procurement guidelines. where possible, the PCMU will recruit one contractor 
to undertake all the three studies (i.e Baseline, Midline and Endline survey) at once, but 
with clear deliverables and milestones for each of the studies. 
IFAD  will  undertake  periodic  monitoring,  evaluation  and  supervision  Missions  to 
• 
assess the status of Project implementation and evaluate Project direction with respect to 
its objectives, outputs and outcomes. 
The Programme will also carry out outcome and impact assessments with a focus on 
• 
the Programme’s overall goal and specific objectives, as defined in the PACT Programme 
logframe. 
During implementation, the following evaluations will be undertaken by independent 
• 
consultants with the help of the PCUs to establish the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency 
and sustainability of the project: 
✓  The mid-term review which will be undertaken in the 4th quarter of year 4 of the 
project; and 
✓  The project completion review which will be undertaken in year 7. 
• 
The project evaluations will be based on: 
✓  Accumulated and interpreted data from the periodic monitoring 
✓  Analysis of completion reports of the investment from the selected beneficiaries 
✓  Federal level Bi-annual and annual progress reports. 
✓  Regional, Woreda and Kebele level reports 
✓  Specific impact exercises at mid-term and completion 
✓  Responses of beneficiaries, Woredas and Kebeles to PACT procedures. 
The FPCU will engage external consultants to carry out the assessments in line with 
• 
standard  impact  assessment  methodology  and  following  the  approved  COI  survey 
framework for the case of core outcome indicators. Secondary sources of data will be used 
particularly  to  provide  information  on  the  overall  sector  goal  indicators  such  EPHI  for 
nutrition related indicators. 
The table below provides a summary of the basis, responsibility and frequency for 
• 
the planned Programme evaluations: 
Basis for Evaluation 
Accumulated  and  Interpreted  data 
from periodic monitoring 
Analysis  of  investment  completion 
reports from various beneficiaries 
The  FPCU  and  RPCU  consolidated 
bi-monthly  and  annual  progress 
reports 
Woreda project reports 
Responsible Persons 
FPCU and RPCU 
PCMUs and WPIUs, and Kebele 
DAs 
Programme 
(Federal and Regional) 
Coordinators 
WPIU Coordinators 
Specific Impact Exercises at Mid 
Term and Completion 
Programme Coordinator 
Frequency 
Continuous 
Continuous 
Bi-Annual and Annual 
Quarterly,  Bi-annual  and 
annual 
On Demand 
117 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Responses of beneficiaries to PACT 
procedures 
Das 
Facilitators 
and 
Community 
Once every 18 Months 
Management  Information  System  (MIS)  –  A  web-based  management  information 
• 
system  (MIS)  will  be  developed  in the  first  year  of  implementation  and  will  be used  to 
support  day-to  -day monitoring  of  the  project activities  and  outputs.  Data  collection  at 
field level will be carried out by field staff using electronic tablets and uploaded into the 
MIS  from  where  it  will  be  accessed  by  the  MIS/GIS  Specialists  at  RPCUs  and  FPCU  for 
administration and management. The Woreda PIU Coordinators will only have user rights 
while the M&E and MIS/GIS Specialists will have editing rights to ensure data quality and 
consistency. The MIS/GIS Specialists will also be responsible for technical performance of 
the  system.  The  field  staff  will  ensure  that  any  errors  in  data  entry  are  promptly 
communicated to the MIS Specialists at RPCUs and FPCU to enable temporary permission 
to the affected staff for reloading of the data. The MIS based on the DHIS2 interface will 
be designed used external consultancy support who will also build capacity of the field staff 
to use the system well. In addition, a technical manual will also be developed and relevant 
training provided to all field staff, to enhance the use of the MIS. 
III. 
3: KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT, LEARNING AND COMMUNICATION 
The core relevance of the M&E system is in the use of the information it elicits for 
• 
planning and decision-making as well as accountability. Knowledge Management (KM) will 
be an integral part of PACT to ensure that Project implementation is a continuous learning 
process  in  which  quantitative  and  qualitative  data  will  be  compiled,  analysed  and 
disseminated as lessons learned, together with thematic studies and stories from the field 
that  document  successful  approaches,  explain  challenges  encountered  and  results 
achieved. The Project M&E system will form the foundation of KM and learning system and 
will  thus  be  a  primary  instrument  of  information  capture  and  storage,  based  on  the 
indicators  detailed  in  the  results  framework.  Tools,  such  as  case  studies,  stakeholder 
interviews and surveys, will be used to deepen understanding of factors  contributing to 
successes  and  failures,  and  to  enable  full  documentation  of  impact.  The  Knowledge 
management and Communication Specialists within the PCMUs will be responsible for all 
KM activities in liaison with the M & E Specialists and other component heads. Collaboration 
with  relevant  research  and  learning  institutions  to  design  and  undertake  studies  and 
analyses as well as communicate lessons learnt will be encouraged. 
A Knowledge Management strategy will be developed built on three core pillars  of 
• 
KM: people, processes and technology. In addition, a draft knowledge Management and 
Communication  Action  Plan  (see  Annex  3)  that  outlines  specific  activities  on  how 
information is to be obtained, analysed, and disseminated, has been developed and will 
be updated in line with the KM strategy. Plans to support the implementation of the KM 
Action  Plan  will  be  integrated  in  the  Project’s  AWPB.  In  this  regard,  the  KM  & 
Communication Action Plan shall include an outline how knowledge will be disseminated 
using,  but  not  limited  to,  the  communication  channels.  Effective  communication  at  all 
levels will be critical to promotion and awareness raising, learning and adoption innovative 
techniques  and  practices  under the  respective value chains  as  well  as  issues  related  to 
mainstreaming of gender, climate change and nutrition in the selected value chains and 
encourage  youth  participation  in  rural  agricultural  development.  Quarterly  review 
meetings with implementing partners will be organised by project management to discuss 
progress towards results in relation to each quarterly progress report, the format of which 
will explicitly include a focus on lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc. 
Study tours, exchange visits and learning routes will be organized for lateral knowledge 
transfer. In order to facilitate the online dissemination of generated knowledge products 
to  government  and  other  stake  holders,  the  Project  will  ensure  adequate  sharing  of 
information through the Knowledge Management Portal at Ministry of Agriculture as well 
as encourage use of other online knowledge sharing mechanisms such as the use of social 
media, short  messaging services  and  other  digital  communication  services.  The  project 
118 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
will  also  encourage  the  access  to  climate  and  weather  information  as  well  as  market 
information by the various value chain actors. 
Concurrently, a down Ward and upward flow of information about project progress 
• 
to beneficiaries and implementing partners in the field is of utmost relevance in fostering 
ownership and participation. Systems for these information exchanges will be developed 
and used on a regular basis, including stakeholder review meetings, planning workshops, 
and a newsletter to be shared with all Watershed Management Organisations, WUOs, FOs 
and cooperatives involved in project implementation. The project will collaborate with the 
Agricultural Information and Communication directorate within Ministry of Agriculture to 
produce  relevant  knowledge  products  and  communication  materials,  such  as  press 
releases, e-extension materials, IVR and radio spots. 
Social  Environment  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedure  (SECAP  2021) 
Implementation 
The programme has been categorized as Substantial for both  environment and Social as 
• 
well as climate impacts. Accordingly, a number of assessments have been triggered: 
(I)  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Management  Framework  (ESCMF),  (ii)  Social 
Development Plan for the pastoral and agro pastoral communities, including the Free and 
Prior  Inform  Consent  (FPIC),  (iii)  Resettlement  Action  Framework  and  Plan,  (iv)  Labor 
Management  and  Assessment  Procedure,  (v)  Targeted  Adaptation  Assessment  among 
others. The ESCMF and plan for FPIC have been prepared during design and adaptation 
priorities have also been mainstreamed into the programme. Other Assessments will be 
prepared  during  early  phase  of  programme 
implementation.  Generally,  PACT 
implementation will comply with IFAD's requirements and standards in terms of processes, 
study/assessment preparation and implementation. 
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework. 
Environment specialist will be recruited at federal and regions to oversee the overall 
• 
implementation  of  ESCMF  and  SECAP.  Implementation  of  sup  projects  will  follow  the 
national  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  procedure  as  well  as  SECAP  requirements. 
Hence any project will be screened for its environment and social impacts and equivalent 
studies such as Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environment and 
Social  Management  Plans  (ESMPs)  will  be  prepared  by  an  independent  consulting  firm 
using the available procedures such as public consultation, impact identification etc. The 
ESIAs and ESMP will be approved by the regional Environmental Protection Authority. 
Compliance Monitoring and Auditing. 
Periodic  compliance  monitoring  will  be  undertaken  by  the  federal  and  regional 
• 
environmentalist  (PCMU)  and  the  findings  and recommendations  will  be  disclosed  to  all 
stakeholders by organizing a workshop. To this effect, a standardized reporting template 
will  be  prepared  for  reporting.  The  programme  will  put  maximum  effort  to  ensure  paperless  
reporting mechanism through the use of different technologies. 
Environmental and Social Audit 
External Audit is primarily the responsibility of the authority that grans no objection 
• 
for the ESIAs and ESMPs. Therefore, the programme will engage with the Environmental 
Protection Authority (EPA) at federal and region level to make sure that periodic audits are 
undertaken.  However,  in  case  the  EPAs  are  unable  to  undertake  the  audit,  then  the 
Programme  PCMU  will  do  the  Audit  and  findings  will  be  verified  by  an  independent 
organization. 
Grievance  Redress  Mechanism:  A  GRM  system  will  be  established  using  the 
• 
guidance  indicated  in  the  ESCMF.  If  there  is  available  system,  new  GRM  might  not  be 
needed and the programme will strengthen the system so that PACT related complaints 
will  be  addressed fairly  and timely.  The  GRM  system  will  be  established  at  community, 
Kebele,  Woreda  and  Region  levels.  Training  to  the  GRM  committee  on  how  to  resolve 
complaints and awareness creation to communities how to direct any complaints they may 
119 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
have  will  be  delivered  during programme implementation.  The  GRM  committees  will  be 
provided with log book to record all complaints reaching them and will ensure the fair and 
timely resolution. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Grievance Redress Committees: 
GRM committees at different level will be established to ensure timely and effective 
resolution of complaints. GRM point persons will also be assigned at each level to 
facilitate the receipt of compliant and facilitates the overall resolution process. 
IWUA  Kebele (local) administration  Woreda   Zone   Region   Federal PCMU 
Court 
Community  level:  GRM  committees  will  be  established/strengthen  from  the 
landscapes  (LCC,  WUA,  Watershed  committees)  with  the  objective  of  addressing 
site-specific  complaints  in  a  timely  and  fair  manner.  Most  of  the  time  informal 
complaints are addressed at community level. 
Kebele  Administration:  A  GRM  committee  lead  by  Kebele  administrator  are 
established. This committee will address complaints that are not addressed by the 
community level GRM committee. Most of the time, formal compliant starts at this 
stage. 
•  Woreda Level: GRM committee at bureaus of agriculture should be established with 
the responsibility of (i) resolving complaints that are not handled at the Kebele level 
and  (ii)  follow  effectiveness  of  GRM  process  at  Kebele  level.  The  bureaus  of 
Environment  will  also  be  involved  based  on  the  progress/implementation  of  the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) of the sub projects. 
Zone Level: Zonal GRM committee will be stablished in Oromia and SNNPR regions 
Region Level: Regional Bureaus of Agriculture and Environment will be responsible 
to establish GRM committee to resolve any complaints that will not be resolved at 
Woreda and Zone level. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The Grievance Redress Mechanism should follow the following steps: 
Receiving  and  registering:  Any  complaint  should  be  received  by  the  GRM 
committee and register. There is no way to reject complaints from the very beginning. 
The compliant  will then  be  recorded  in  a log  book  with  specific  case  (ID) number. 
Complaints  could  be  submitted  using  different  mediums  appropriate  to  the 
complainant such as written, oral, etc 
Screening/Classifying:  for  ease  of  effective  resolution,  the  complaints  will  be 
classified based on the type and degree of severity. 
Investigation  (Fact-finding):  The  GRM  committee  investigates  the  nature  and 
perspective of the compliant, gather information from various sources. Inhere, key 
facts will be identified and classified 
Resolution: a means where by fair and timely remedial actions are identified and 
agreed among the GRM committee 
Respond to complainant: the GRM committee provides the Complainant with the 
resolution within the agreed timescales. It is important to eestablish clear timetables 
for the complaints-handling process 
Follow Up: The GRM committee follows to be sure if the complainant is satisfied 
Appeal: The process should be open for potential appeals if the complainant is not 
satisfied with the resolution 
Capacity Development: A tailored training on SECAP and ESCMF/ESCMP/ESIA will 
• 
be  given  to  all  responsible  programme  and  government  personnel  to  fill  capacity  gaps 
identified through training need assessment. 
III.4: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
120 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
The purpose of the module is to ensure that the key players in the PACT Programme 
• 
financial management at the different levels fulfil their fiduciary  responsibility to ensure 
that  proceeds  from  the  different  funding  sources  are  used  exclusively  for  intended 
purposes. 
Implementing  and  Participating  Organizations  with  Fiduciary  Responsibilities  – 
• 
Following  hereunder  is  a  summary  of  the  fiduciary  responsibilities  for  different  participating 
institutions: 
✓  MoA is the Lead Implementing Agency of the Programme but will delegate the day- 
to-day  coordination  of  the  PACT  Programme  to  the  Federal  Programme 
Coordination Unit (FPCU). Accordingly, the FPCU will be responsible for the overall 
fiduciary management of the Programme; it will, thus, be the overall accounting 
hub  for  the  Programme.  The  FPCU  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  the 
implementation  of  Programme  activities  and  will  have  the  following  fiduciary 
responsibilities: 
o  preparation  of  the  AWPB  ensuring  a  bottom-up  approach  and  timely 
submissions  for  inclusions  in  the  Government’s  overall  approved  budget 
estimates; 
o  procurement planning, execution and support service; 
o  disbursement of funds to other implementing agencies as per the funds flow 
structure; 
o  management of withdrawal applications from IFAD; 
o 
financial  management  of  the  Programme,  including  supervising  and 
ensuring compliance with government regulations; 
financial reporting and consolidation of financial statements for audits; 
o 
o  any requests for No Objection to IFAD will emanate from the FPCU. 
Planning  and  Budgeting  –  The  Programme  is  funded  by  various  sources  of  funds 
• 
namely IFAD,  GTM, ASAP+,  EU,  GCF,  Government of  Ethiopia  and  shall  therefore be subject 
to  specific  procedures.  Budgeting  of  expenses  and  planning  of  operations  in 
implementation  areas  shall  be  strictly  related. The  programme  design report,  Financing 
Agreements and any amendments thereof shall constitute the general framework of  any 
annual or activity budgeting process during the course of the Programme. 
Annual  budgeting  is  a  contractual  obligation  of  the  Financing  Agreement.  The 
• 
Programme  budgeting  will  be  done in  accordance  with  existing  Government  of Ethiopia 
procedures. The Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) shall be approved by Programme 
Steering Committee and provided with a no-objection by IFAD. The AWPB will be prepared 
and submitted early on time to IFAD, at least two months before the start of financial year 
in  accordance  with  IFAD  requirements.  The  AWPB  will  form  the  basis  for  defining  the 
Programme  activities  and  ensuring  that  sufficient  funds  are  allocated  to  achieve  the  agreed  
results. 
The  purpose  of  the  AWPB  is  to  provide  the  Programme’s  management  team  with 
• 
specific time and activity schedules, as well as detailed budgets for the impending year, 
thus facilitating the mobilisation of staff and resources when they are needed. The Annual 
Work  Plan  of  activities  serves  as  the  instrument  for  emphasising  and  integrating 
management  priorities  for  implementation, forecasting main  procurement  requirements 
and assigning detailed work responsibilities between implementing agencies and staff. 
Cost  estimates  and  budget  allocations  established  during  the  development  of  the 
• 
AWPB provide the basis for cost control and facilitate the release of funds by IFAD. The 
AWPB  is  the  final  document  against  which  Programme  performance  shall  be  measured 
each year and the benchmark for monitoring physical and financial progress made by the 
Programme. The AWPB may be revised after half a year if significant changes occurred. It 
shall be the basis for reporting the Programme financial performance as per the required 
121 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
frequency  (3  months).  Compliance  with  budget/Cost  Category  is  essential  as  wrong 
allocation may lead to cost ineligibility. 
Flows of Funds, Bank and Cash Management – IFAD disbursement procedures and 
• 
forms  are  outlined  in  detail  in  the  Disbursement  Handbook  and  Letter  to  the  Recipient 
(LtR). This part summarises the flows of funds and guides on cash and bank management. 
There would be a designated account for receiving grant funds from IFAD, ASAP+, 
• 
GTM, EU  and GCF  credit.  Carbon  credit  compensation  will  also  be  channeled through  a 
separate bank account to avoid commingling of these funds and for ease of accounting. At 
the  Federal  levels  each  designated  account  will  have  a  corresponding  operational  bank 
account in local currency (Ethiopian Birr). The Programme implementation is in-line with 
Ethiopia administrative system hence funds will be disbursed to participating regions which will 
subsequently further disburse funds to participating Woredas under them. Regional  and 
Woredas  levels  will  maintain  single  Programme  dedicated  accounts  for  receiving 
Programme  funds  from  Federal  and  Regional  levels  respectively.  Federal  and  Regional 
levels will also maintain a separate bank account in local currency for receiving funds from 
Government and processing counterpart costs. Below is a diagram summarising the flow 
of funds: 
Direct payments from IFAD, GCF will be applicable for significant payments as would 
• 
be guided in the Project Financial Management and Financial Control Arrangements Letter 
(FMFCAL).  FPCU  may  also  process  payments  in  foreign  currency  directly  from  the 
designated accounts. 
The Ministry of Agriculture will procure a financial management software which will 
• 
be used for financial transactions recording and reporting in addition to IFMIS system that 
is used for payments approvals as per Government of Ethiopia procedures. IFAD requires 
a financial system capable of: a) reporting expenditure per category and  comparing budget vs 
actual for the  current  year and  cumulatively since the start  of  Programme;  b)  reporting 
expenditure  per  component  and  comparing  budget  vs  actual  for  the  current  year  and 
cumulatively; c) reporting of expenditure per financier; and d) extracting detailed listing 
of expenditure in the required format. An accounting system capable of networking and 
inputting  at  regional  levels  with  multiple  analysis  code  for  reporting  on  component, 
categories, financiers, for reporting quarter, cumulative for the year and cumulative since 
start including in-kind contribution will be acquired at the start of the project. The selection 
of  project  finance  staff  will  also  consider  the  competence  of  the  candidates  to  use 
computerised systems. 
The  Programme  will  receive  funds  from  IFAD  based  on  AWPB  and  cash  flow 
• 
projections  as  per  IFR.  For the  implementing  agencies  under  the  FPCU,  the  earmarked 
122 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
advances for specific activities agreed with the FPCU will be disbursed on quarterly basis, 
by  15th  of  the  month  following  the  quarter  end.  To  manage  risks  of  delays  in  accountability  
from implementing agencies, it is recommended that advances will be made for quarterly 
approved  budgets  and  additional  amounts  for  the  subsequent  quarter  made  only  after 
50% of the previous disbursements has been accounted for, unless special payments are 
expected which require an exception to this. Recording of expenditure to the Programme 
accounting  system  will  be  done  by  the  FPCU  based  on  reports  submitted  by  the 
implementing agencies. 
Programme  financial  statements  and  any  unspent  balance  by  the  end  of  the  reporting  
• 
period shall be consolidated as part of the overall Programme cash and bank balances. All 
bank accounts in the Programme shall follow a double signatory arrangement and have at 
least  three  authorised  signatories,  out  of  whom  two  signatures  shall  be  required  to 
authorise any payment by bank transfer or check. 
IFAD  requires  the  Recipient’s  representative,  as  designated  in  the  Financing 
• 
Agreement,  to  provide  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  authority,  as  well  as  authenticated 
specimen signatures of the individuals assigned to approve a Withdrawal  Application (or 
‘WA’) on behalf of the Recipient. A sample template of WA Form is provided in the LtR. 
Each WA shall be signed by the authorised individuals and IFAD shall be notified of any 
change in the list of signatories authorised to withdraw funds from the grant account. 
IFAD shall also be notified of the designated authorised signatories for operating any 
• 
Programme-related account, including changes thereto, whether or not these authorised 
signatories are included in the Financing Agreement. Such changes, as effected during the 
life of the Programme, shall be communicated promptly to IFAD. The Recipient, guided by 
the sample provided with the LtR, shall provide the names and specimen signatures of the 
newly appointed signatories and include the date when such change is to take effect. The 
original of such changed documentary evidence is to be provided to IFAD. 
It  is  the  Programme  Accountant’s  responsibility  to  make  sure  that  all  WAs  are 
• 
correctly prepared, that the documentation is complete and submitted to IFAD in a timely 
manner. The necessary forms and supporting documentation to be attached to each WA 
are  outlined  in  details  for  each  disbursement  method  in  section  3  of  the  Disbursement 
Handbook. 
Financial Management Organization and Staffing – The following staff positions have 
• 
been  provided  for  to  ensure  adequate  coordination  of  payments  for  Programme 
expenditure, making appropriate accounting entries and financial reporting. 
Implementati 
on level 
FPCU 
Programme  Staff 
position 
and 
numbers 
• 
•  Senior finance 
specialist 
•  Accountant 
Finance manager 
Regional Levels  • 
Financial 
management 
specialist 
•  Accountant 
Other 
Implementing 
•  Designated 
Programme 
Accountant 
Remarks 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The staffing is based on a similar IFAD funded 
Programme which has similar types of activities 
and implementation arrangement. 
These staff will be hired on two years contract, 
renewable based on performance which is 
expected to enhance performance. 
The staff will be hired as part of start-up 
activities. 
The staffing is based on a similar IFAD funded 
Programme which has similar types of activities 
and implementation arrangement. 
These staff will be hired on two years’ contract, 
renewable based on performance which is 
expected to enhance performance. 
The staff will be hired as part of start-up 
activities. 
This will be a staff of the organisation, designated 
to handle financial reporting and coordinating 
processing of transactions. 
123 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Agencies 
(Woredas) 
• 
It will be one of the conditions in the MoU with 
implementing agencies to have a designated 
accountant for the Programme to ensure there is 
a focal person for smooth handling of financial 
transactions. 
• 
The Programme Accounting team duties and responsibilities shall include: 
✓  Contributing to the preparation and update of the Financial Manuals; 
✓  Ensuring  the  Programme’s  financial  procedures  as  detailed  in  the  Programme 
Implementation and Financial Manuals and other guidelines that may be issued are 
strictly followed by all Programme staff and implementing agencies at the national 
and devolved levels; 
✓  Facilitating, as much as possible, the timely disbursement of Programme funds; 
✓  Compiling the Expenditure Returns for the FPCU and other implementing agencies; 
✓  Liaising with the implementing officers from the Programme implementing partners 
to ensure that financial reports are prepared in timely manner; 
✓  Preparing  periodic  and  statutory  financial  reports  and  advising  the  Programme 
Coordinator on the Programme’s financial status and trends; 
✓  To carry out periodic backstopping visits to the implementing agencies, providing 
financial advice and recommendations where necessary; 
✓  Facilitating and ensuring that external auditors are availed all necessary documents 
during the  audit  as  detailed in  the  Loan Agreement,  and  making  a  follow  up  on 
audit recommendations; 
✓  Ensuring  that  the  financial  transactions  are  well  documented,  filed  and  that  the 
Programme financial transactions are entered into the accounting systems; and 
✓  Any other duty (related to the Programme’s activities) as may be assigned by the 
Programme Coordinator. 
Accounting  and  Financial  Reporting  –  The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  will  procure  a 
• 
financial management software which will be used for financial transactions recording and 
reporting  in  addition  to  IFMIS  system  that  is  used  for  payments  approvals  as  per 
Government  of  Ethiopia  procedures.  IFAD  requires  a  financial  system  capable  of:  a) 
reporting expenditure per category and comparing budget vs actual for the current year 
and cumulatively since the start of project; b) reporting expenditure per component and 
comparing  budget  vs  actual  for  the  current  year  and  cumulatively;  c)  reporting  of 
expenditure  per  financier;  and  d)  extracting  detailed  listing  of  expenditure  in  required 
format. An accounting system capable of networking and inputting at regional levels with 
multiple  analysis  code  for  reporting  on  component,  categories,  financiers,  for  reporting 
quarter, cumulative for the year and cumulative since start including in-kind contribution 
will be acquired at the start of the project. The selection of project finance staff will also 
consider the competence of the candidates to use computerised systems. 
The  majority  of  Programme  activities  result  in  the  receipt  (income),  legal 
• 
commitment  and  expenditure  of  funds.  The  accounting  system  shall  record,  process, 
classify and organise essential data in order to produce useful financial information in the 
form of Withdrawal Applications (WAs), financial reports or budget vs. actual analyses that 
are needed by the Programme Financiers (i.e. donors and Government) as well as by the 
Programme  management  itself.  The  accounting  system  shall  reflect  the  Programme’s 
needs and be designed to provide the financial information required by all stakeholders 
(FPCU, IFAD, EU, GCF, GTM, ASAP+ and other parties). It shall also fulfil all the legal and 
regulatory requirements of the Recipient. The accounting system is a critical part of the 
Programme’s financial management system and design. 
Recording transactions in the accounting system shall be governed by the privileged 
• 
metrics defining the levels of access for different users, that is: active use for inputting / 
editing data; read-only access; or no access. This shall allow a separated and controlled 
access to the accounting module (i.e. journal recording, posting to general ledger). Each 
124 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
accounting transaction shall record the user’s ID, thus preventing unauthorised access to 
the system and an adequate level of protection against the input of false data, or even the 
destruction  of  records.  At  the  same  time,  the  data-sharing  nature  of  the  system  shall 
involve strict  coordination  and  active  data  exchange  among  various  users  (primarily  at 
FPCU). In this respect the system shall ensure the reliability in information storage and 
fast data processing. 
The  accounting  software  user’s  manual  shall  be  an  integral  part  of  the  financial 
• 
management  systems  of  the  Programme  and  shall  be  completed  by  more  detailed 
guidelines or instructions if necessary. 
PACT accounting policies shall notably take into consideration the national legislation 
• 
as  well  as  IFAD  minimum  reporting  requirements.  The  Programme’s  main  accounting 
policies shall be as follows: 
✓  Financial  statements  shall  be  drawn  in  accordance  with  IPSAS  cash  basis  of 
accounting as  by the recognition of receipt (income) and payment (expenditure) 
respectively; 
✓  Financial statements shall be prepared under historical cost convention; 
✓  Transactions  in  local  currency  shall  be  converted  into  the  currency  of  the 
Designated Account using a ‘FIFO’ (i.e. ‘First In, First Out’) approach, i.e. the actual 
rate  arising  from  the  latest  transfer  from  the  DA  to  the  Birr  denominated 
Operational Account thus avoiding currency exchange losses or gains; 
✓  The Programme chart of accounts shall: a) be based on the Programme budget and 
Cost Categories; b) capture financial data under the appropriate headings / PACT 
Components and Subcomponents; c) classify and group financial data for various 
financial reports; and d) record the sources of  funding for each expenditure. The 
“cost centre” functionality, which is standard for many accounting software, shall 
also be used if available, so as to draw analytical reports separately. Disbursement 
to  the  partners  will  be  made  as  advances.  Recording  of  expenditure  to  the 
Programme accounting system will be done by FPCU based on expenditure reports 
submitted by the implementing agencies; 
✓  The Programme expenditure initiation, authorization and payments will be in line 
with implementing agencies organisational structure. The Programme Coordinator 
at  FPCU  will  approve  all  payments  requests  before  they  are  forwarded  for 
authorisation. At the other implementing agencies, all payments memos will also 
be  approved  by  responsible  officers  in  accordance  with  their  organisational 
structure. The Financial Officer at the FPCU will be responsible for proper recording 
in  the  accounting  system  and  all  financial  reporting  for  the  Programme  and  will 
produce  a  consolidated  financial  statement  for  all  the  components.  The  Finance 
Officer  will  check  to  ensure  there  are  appropriate  expenditure  supporting 
documents as per IFAD requirements. The Programme will not use external funds 
to pay for taxes within the country and to this effect, The Government will provide 
counterpart funds for payments of local taxes and levies. 
Recording  and  processing  of  transactions  –  Whenever  a  transaction  takes  place 
• 
under the Programme, it shall be recorded and processed using the accounting software 
that  meets  PACT’s  specific  accounting  requirements.  Transaction  recording  under  the 
Programme follows the cash basis of accounting, which requires recognition of cash inflows 
in the period they are received and reporting of expenses in the period those expenditure 
is  paid.  Individual  records  of  transactions  are  treated  as  source  documents.  For  the 
Programme  accounting  purposes,  the  following  source  documents  shall  be  considered: 
signed purchase orders/contracts, invoices and deliverables/delivery notes/goods received 
notes/completion certificates. 
All transactions occurred shall be registered in the accounting software in accordance 
• 
with the date of payment and under the form of journals. Journal shall contain sufficient 
and detailed information about the type of transaction, its amount and a reference to the 
source document. All transactions shall be entered into the accounting software using the 
125 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
principle of double-entry, meaning that each transaction shall be recorded twice: once on 
the  debit  side  and  once  on  its  credit  side.  The  accounting  software  shall  automatically 
process those transactions and post them to the ledger where all transactions of similar 
type are recorded. Timely recording shall allow the production of timely reports. 
The Finance  Manager  shall verify the Programme accounts  on a monthly basis. In 
• 
case significant adjustment of accounting entries has to be made, the Senior Accountant 
shall produce a note for the file in which the reasons and the way in which the adjustment 
has  been  made  is  explained.  This  note  for  the  file  shall  be  cleared  by  the  Programme 
Accountant and communicated to the Programme Coordinator. 
Financial  Reporting  –  The  Finance  Manager  at  FPCU  will  be  responsible  for  all  financial  
• 
reporting for the Programme and will produce a consolidated financial statement for the 
Programme. The financial reporting will comply with International Public-Sector Accounting 
Standards (IPSAS) -Cash basis. 
Finance Manager shall not only be in charge of recording financial transactions on a 
• 
daily  basis  but 
each 
Component/Subcomponent/activity  and  posting  these  totals  on  financial  reports  on  a 
periodic basis during the reporting periods specified in the LtR and the Grant Agreement. 
Periodic progress financial reports, shall include the following: 
expenditure  made  under 
summing  up 
also 
of 
✓  Statement of cash receipts and payments by Cost Category: this report summarizes 
all sources of Programme financing as well as the uses of funds in accordance with the 
disbursement  Cost  Categories  foreseen  in  the  Financing  Agreement  with  IFAD.  This 
report also states the cumulative expenditure from the start of the Programme until 
the date of the report and the cash flow forecast for the following semi-annual period; 
✓  Uses of funds by Programme category: this report details PACT’s expenditure by IFAD 
cost expenditure category/subcategory and by Financier; 
✓  Uses of funds by Programme activity: this report details the Programme expenditure 
for each Component/Subcomponent / activity consistent with those foreseen in the EU 
budget.  The  total  planned,  actual  and  cumulative  expenditure  in  this  report  shall 
correspond  to  those  mentioned  in  the  statement  of  sources  and  uses  of  funds,  as 
presented above; 
✓  Cash flow forecast: this report summarizes cash inflows and outflows for the following 
semi-annual period (see below for more details); 
✓  DA reconciliation statement – please refer to form 104 of the Disbursement Handbook; 
✓  SoEs  and  WA  statements  for  the  period:  this  report  summarizes  the  claimed  and 
received WA amounts from IFAD during the reporting period; and 
✓  Contract expenditure: this report details all contracts signed and amounts paid during 
the quarterly/semi-annual reporting period by Cost Category. 
Cash Flow Forecast –  Preparing periodic  cash flow forecasts  is  essential to ensure 
• 
the  Programme  has  sufficient  funds  to  meet  its  legal  or  contractual  commitments,  i.e. 
planned  expenditure  to  beneficiaries,  lead  implementing  agency,  contractors,  service 
providers, suppliers of goods, salaries, operating costs of offices as they fall due. It is the 
Programme  Accountant’s  responsibility  to  prepare  periodic  cash  flow  forecasts  by 
undertaking the following steps: 
✓  Report the past reporting period’s closing balance as opening balance for the coming 
period; 
✓  Calculate – as accurately as possible – and report all the cash inflows already secured 
from different sources for the coming period and break them down on a monthly basis; 
✓  Determine –  as  accurately  as possible  –  and report all the cash outflows (i.e. payments) 
due in the coming period and break them down on a monthly basis; and 
✓  Based  on  the  above  computations,  determine  the  estimated  cash  needed  for  the 
coming period, in consultation with the Programme Coordinator  and the Component 
Managers. 
126 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
• 
When preparing cash flow analyses, key sources of information shall include the: 
✓  updated AWPB and procurement plan; 
✓  disbursement timetable of all signed contracts; and 
✓  historic expenditure reports of the Programme as these some aspects assumed to stay 
relatively constant over the PACT implementation period. 
Based on estimated cash flow needs, the Programme Accountant shall submit, for 
• 
approval of the Programme Coordinator, the required WAs in a timely manner, so as to 
ensure sufficient liquidity and avoid any delay in Programme implementation. 
In-Kind  Contribution  –  Domestic  contribution  is  the  monetary  and  in-kind 
• 
contribution  (IKC)  provided  by  governments,  beneficiaries,  implementing  partners, 
financial institutions and the private-sector to a project. 
It relates to direct provision of asset/services (benefits) to the project or expenditure 
• 
incurred expenditure by Government, beneficiaries or other implementing partners which 
otherwise  would  need  to  be  paid  for  by  the  project  meet  its  objectives.  In-kind 
contributions are crucial as they will translate the real contribution of Borrower/Recipient 
to the project in addition to the contribution in cash and tax exemptions. 
It  is  critical  to  capture  in-kind  contributions  from  all  sources:  Government, 
• 
beneficiaries and other domestic co-financiers. Process must be regular and systematic. 
Below is a Simplified process for IKC:- 
• 
The IKC should meet the following criteria for recognition: 
✓  IKC should directly be related to achievements of PDO 
✓  IKC framework/tool should highlight IKC activities (per component/Sub- 
component), definition and measurement, monitoring tools, responsibilities and 
frequency and minimum supporting documents 
✓  IKC shall be recognized at the fair market value and must be duly justified by 
supporting documents 
✓  IKC recording, documentation and filing should be adequate to enable 
independent verification/ audit. Recording should be done regularly, at least 
monthly or as may be applicable 
✓  IKC should be reflected in the Financial Statement (as a disclosure note) and be 
audited. It is also an additional schedule/report required for submission to IFAD 
as part of IFR 
Asset  management  –  Fixed  asset  management  aims  at  tracking  any  equipment  / 
• 
furniture  /  material  (or  intangible  assets)  for  safeguarding  –  e.g.  to  ensure  preventive 
maintenance  and  theft  deterrence  –  and  financial  accounting  purposes.  Adequate  fixed 
asset maintenance shall also increase the sustainability of the Programme. There are three 
127 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
elements  in  fixed  asset  management  that  require  the  attention  of  the  Administration 
Officer: 
✓  Purchase of equipment (not detailed here – see the procurement section of the PIM); 
✓  Recording fixed assets through maintaining labelling system and asset register; and 
✓  Physical inventory and disposal  / handover of  assets once the Programme is completed. 
Recording fixed assets – The Programme shall assign a unique, sequential asset tag 
• 
number  to  all  furniture  and  equipment  items  purchased  for  PACT  (excluding 
supplies/inventories, such as stationeries); this shall be clearly labelled on each item. And 
every asset shall be recorded in the asset register. 
The Administration Officer shall maintain a register of all (material) equipment of the 
• 
Programme  –  this  shall  also  be  recorded  on  the  asset  management  module  of  the 
accounting  software,  when  operational.  The  asset  register  shall  record  the  following 
information  for  each  individual  piece  of  asset:  1)  description;  2)  tag  number;  3)  serial 
number; 4) officer responsible (i.e. custodian); 5) source of funding; 6) location; 7) date 
of purchase; 8) estimated life; 9) purchase value and other additional fields that may be 
required.  The  Programme  fixed  assets  shall  also  be  subject  to  proper  visibility  of  the 
primary  contribution  to  PACT  funding:  this  involves  putting  donor  logos  /  stickers  on 
vehicles, laptops and other assets. 
Physical  inventory  –  The  Finance  Manager  shall  ensure  that  an  independent 
• 
verification of all PACT assets is performed at least once a year. Any discrepancy identified 
between the physical inventory (verification exercise) and the fixed asset register to be 
investigated, documented and formally reported on. 
Records  Keeping,  Filing  and  Archiving  –  Financial  records  shall  be  created  and 
• 
maintained for every transaction effected under the Programme. They shall be defined as 
any  financial  information  kept  in  a  writing  (hard  copy)  or  electronic  way  (soft  copy); 
‘external evidences’  such IFAD  Financing  Agreement,  signed  purchase  orders/contracts, 
invoices,  cash  receipts,  delivery  notes  or  bank  statements,  as  well  as  internal  forms, 
journal  vouchers,  computer  data  and  other  form  of  information  storage  shall  all  be  included  
under the ‘financial record’ terminology for the purpose of this PIM. 
The objective of this procedure is to preserve the financial records and files for further 
• 
official use by Programme staff, IFAD reviews during supervision missions, as well as for 
internal / external audit and EU verification mission purposes. The Programme financial 
records are the property of PACT and may not be removed or destroyed during Programme 
implementation and up to 10 years after completion. 
The  Programme  staff,  in  particular  the  Finance  and  Administration  team  (Senior 
• 
Accountant, Accountant, Administration Officer, etc.), shall make sure to keep minimum 
original supporting documentation for stated key processes, as follows: 
✓  Procurement costs: 
o  Purchase  request  /  procurement  requisition:  approved  form  or  workflow 
signature in system; 
o  Tender file or procurement file: bidding documents / technical specifications / 
bill  of  quantities  /  consultants’  ToR;  published  advert  of  call  for  tenders  / 
proposals / invitation to bid / request for quotation form; original (technical and 
financial) bids / offers / quotations; bid register  or  bid analysis schedule; bid 
opening and evaluation report / procurement selection memo; 
o  Contract / purchase order signed with supplier / service provider / consultant / 
contractor; 
o  Proof of existence, i.e. performance (consultant report / deliverable), progress 
(completion certificate), delivery (goods received / delivery note / bill of lading) 
and beneficiary distribution; 
128 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
o 
Invoice(s) and payment evidences (cash receipt, cheque copy or, better, bank 
statement); 
o  Evidence of link to AWPB / procurement plan and PACT use (vehicle logbook / 
mission order); 
o  For  works,  contractual  bank  guarantees  for  advance  payment  and  performance; 
and 
o  Communications from IFAD to evidence no-objection to the contract award (if 
applicable). 
✓  Staff remuneration costs: 
o  Terms of reference / job description with clear link to the Programme; 
o  Recruitment file:  published  advert  of  job  vacancy;  long-list  of  all  candidates; 
CVs,  written  tests  and  interview  forms  /  scoring  sheets  of  short-listed 
candidates and final selection report; 
o  Employment contract and any approved policy mentioning additional benefits; 
o  Approved salary scale (corresponding to the Grade and Step mentioned in the 
contract); 
o  Approved payroll statement (detailing the calculations of total cost, gross and 
net salaries); 
o  Payment evidence (of both net salary and social insurance charge / other tax 
deductions); and 
o  Cost allocation / timesheet / monthly report / staff appraisal form 
✓  Transportation costs: 
o  Formal trip authorisation such as mission order (purpose, duration, destination, 
etc.); 
o  Trip commitment (ticket) and travel evidence (boarding pass / stamped 
passport, etc.); and 
o  Mission / trip / activity report or any other contractual deliverable. 
✓  Workshop / training / seminar costs: 
Annual training plan approved by IFAD and procurement file for the selected 
training centre; 
Formal invitation (letter / email) to all selected staff (duration, destination, costs 
covered, etc.); 
Agenda, handouts, signed list of participants, certificate, back-to-office report, 
photo, etc.; and 
Signed receipts of per diem / daily subsistence allowance. 
✓  Shared or apportioned costs if any: 
Clear evidence of link to the Programme (mission order, ToR, activity report, 
etc.); 
Cost allocation method (timesheet, logbook, square meter, head count, etc.); and 
Detailed calculations of apportionment / allocation percentages to both 
Programmes. 
✓  The  Programme  Accountant  shall  file  original  records  in  a  well  organised  way  and 
maintain them for at least 10 years after Programme completion, in accordance with 
IFAD  general  conditions.  Filing  of  financial  records  shall  be  chronological,  e.g. 
documentation shall be filed on a daily basis in separate folders clearly mentioning the 
concerned month and year (with separators). Records shall have a code / reference 
following a sequential order. 
✓  Appropriate (lockable) filing cabinets shall be used to keep all folders. Besides and in 
order to prevent unnecessary pile-up of files in a limited office space, the Programme 
Accountant shall make sure that the financial records are archived on a regularly basis. 
They  shall  be  kept in  appropriate  storage  areas,  safe  from  water  and  fire,  to  which 
access shall be controlled and limited. The Programme Accountant shall also classify 
certain financial records as "Confidential", while other would be defined as "General". 
129 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Any important correspondence (e.g. with IFAD, Government or even the EU) shall be 
filed. Once a year, the Programme Accountant shall verify that archives allow for easy 
and prompt retrieval of files if required. 
Risks  and  Internal  Control  Systems  –  As  per  EU  terminology  (see  the  Delegation 
• 
Agreement, General Conditions, Part I, Article 1), internal control systems are defined as 
“processes  applicable  at  all  levels  of  management  designed  to  provide  reasonable 
assurance of achieving the following objectives: 
✓  effectiveness, efficiency and economy of operations; 
✓  reliability of reporting; 
✓  safeguarding of assets and information; 
✓  prevention, detection, correction and follow-up of fraud and irregularities; 
✓  adequate  management  of  the  risks  relating  to  the  legality  and  regularity  of  the 
financial  operations,  considering  the  measures  designed to  reduce the  likelihood 
and / or potential impact of pre-identified risks.” 
This  part  exclusively  focuses  on  fiduciary-related  risks,  which  may  arise  at 
• 
Programme design stage or all along the implementation period. Internal controls are not 
the  exclusive  responsibility  of  finance  and  administrative  staff  such  as  the  Programme 
Accountant, but rather a collective / team duty as follows: 
✓  First layer of controls: self-control or “double check” at lower operator level, for 
instance while preparing a purchase requisition / bank reconciliation or while 
counting fixed assets/cash; 
✓  Second layer of controls: direct supervision, such as reviews and validation of first 
layer tasks; 
✓  Third layer of controls: final authorisations approvals (e.g. of expenditure payment); 
and 
✓  Fourth layer of controls: independent checks or post-reviews of the above processes 
– this last layer of controls is described below in part 8 of the present section of the 
PIM. 
Anticorruption  policies  –  The  management  of  the  Programme  funds  shall  be 
• 
sufficiently rigorous to safeguard PACT against the risks of fraud and corruption. Fraud and 
corruption include, but are not limited to: 
✓  Corrupt practice, which may be defined as offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, 
directly  or  indirectly,  anything  of  value  to  influence  improperly  the  actions  of 
another party; 
✓  Fraudulent practice,  i.e. any act or  omission, including a misrepresentation, that 
knowingly  or  recklessly  misleads,  or  attempts  to  mislead,  a  party  to  obtain  a 
financial  or  other  benefit  or  to  avoid  an  obligation  –  such  as  submitting  fair  and 
true financial statements for an action; 
✓  Collusive practice, i.e. an arrangement between two or more parties designed to 
achieve  an  improper  purpose,  including  influencing  improperly  the  actions  of 
another party; and 
✓  Coercive  practice,  i.e.  impairing  or  harming,  or  threatening  to  impair  or  harm, 
directly or indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly 
the actions of a party. 
IFAD  applies  a  zero-tolerance  policy  towards  fraudulent,  corrupt,  collusive  or  coercive  
• 
actions in Programmes financed through its grants. ‘Zero tolerance’ means that IFAD shall 
pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions 
shall be applied where the allegations are substantiated. IFAD takes all possible actions to 
protect individuals who submit allegations of fraudulent or corrupt practices in its activities 
from  reprisal.  The  IFAD  anticorruption  policy  is  available  on  IFAD  website  at 
130 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
https://www.ifad.org/en/anti-corruption:  it  provides  instructions  on  how  to  report  any 
alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and Oversight. 
It is the Programme Coordinator and the Programme Accountant’s responsibilities to 
• 
make sure that all Programme staff, including the finance and administrative teams, are 
IFAD  whistle  blowing  procedures 
these  anticorruption  policy  and 
aware  of 
(https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/39629358). 
General  internal  controls  –  Designing,  implementing  and  maintaining  a  system  of 
• 
financial  internal  controls  is  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  management  function, 
although  not  exclusive  to  it.  In  order  to  achieve  stated  objectives  (such  efficiency  and 
economy  of  operations,  reliability  of  reporting,  safeguarding  of  assets,  prevention  and 
detection  of  fraud  and  irregularities  or  general  risk  management  and  compliance  with 
applicable  laws  and  regulations),  key  features  of  an  adequate  internal  control  system 
usually include: 
✓  Segregation of duties; 
✓  Authorisations; 
✓  Reconciliations and checks; 
✓  Restricted access; and 
✓  Monitoring and review. 
Segregation of duties – An important element in any internal control system is the 
• 
separation of those duties which would, if combined, enable one individual to approve and 
/  or  process  /  record  /  pay  a  complete  transaction.  It  is  the  Programme  Accountant’s 
responsibility to ensure that the following duties  are segregated under the Programme: 
preparation, authorisation, execution, custody, treasury management and bookkeeping. 
Authorisations – Approvals / authorisations require the certification that an activity 
• 
/ event or transaction is acceptable for further processing. Several types of authorisations 
shall be in effect at the Programme, mainly in the procurement, payroll and bank and cash 
management cycles. The Programme Accountant shall verify that authorisations of FPCU 
staff  ensure  efficient  implementation  while  keeping  major  risks  as  low  as  possible. 
Authorisations from Programme staff shall be in line with their respective job descriptions. 
Reconciliations  and  checks  –  Reconciliations  between  independent,  corresponding 
• 
sources of data are a key control for identifying errors or discrepancies. The Programme 
Accountant shall verify the following reconciliations each month: 
✓  Bank reconciliations (between accounting ledgers / Programme expenditure listing 
and  bank  statements):  any  reconciling  or  balancing  amount  shall  be  promptly 
cleared or explained. Unusual / long outstanding reconciling items shall be brought 
to the attention of the Programme Accountant, who shall review and sign all bank 
reconciliations as evidence of review; 
✓  Reconciliations  between  system  and  special  account  receipts  and  payments 
statement; 
✓  Physical checks (both schedule and on the spot) of assets and petty cash held. 
Restricted access – All data, records and assets shall be kept in a physically secure 
• 
environment. This shall cover safe keeping of financial records such as personnel files and 
bank details. In addition, any petty cash shall be kept securely. Financial data and other 
records  shall  also  be  protected  in  the  form  of  back  up  procedures.  All  work  shall  be 
regularly saved and copy records stored securely off site. 
Supervisions  and  Audits  –  IFAD  supervision  missions,  PACT  internal  and  external 
• 
audits  constitute  the  added  layers  of  controls,  which  shall  remain  independent  from 
Programme implementation. 
IFAD  supervision  missions  –  PACT  shall  be  subject  to  extensive  supervision  from 
• 
IFAD  during  the  whole  implementation  period  to  ensure  that  the  FPCU  fiduciary 
requirements are completed on time and to minimise the Programme’s fiduciary risks. If 
131 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
financial  arrangements  of  the  FPCU  are  deemed  acceptable,  IFAD shall rely  on  them to 
provide assurance that the financing proceeds are being used for the intended purposes. 
In the case that IFAD identifies significant weaknesses in financial arrangements in place, 
it  shall  require  the  FPCU  to  take  appropriate  measures  to  mitigate  those  risks  such  as 
changing the design of internal controls – or making sure their frequency or effectiveness 
improves – or modifying the disbursement arrangements. 
IFAD financial management supervision missions shall usually involve the following 
• 
tasks: 
✓  Monitoring the timely submission of audit reports and reviewing them in details; 
✓  Verifying the implementation of audit recommendations made by past supervision 
missions; 
✓  Monitoring  the  submission  of  timely  periodic  financial  reports  and  reviewing  of 
these reports; and 
✓  Monitoring disbursement rates and quality of the received Withdrawal Applications. 
Throughout Programme implementation, IFAD shall conduct annual or semi-annual 
• 
financial management supervision (and implementation support) missions. Such missions 
shall  determine  ratings  on  compliance  with  IFAD  overall  financial  management 
requirements. During supervisory missions, IFAD shall assess and monitor the adequacy 
of  FPCU  /  SIU  financial  management  arrangements  for  the  following  processes: 
accounting, budgeting, internal controls, flows of funds, financial reporting and auditing 
practices. The key findings and recommendations of the mission shall be captured in an 
“aide-mémoire” document. 
When preparing for and during an IFAD financial management supervision mission, 
• 
necessary  supporting  actions  by  the  Programme  Programme  Accountant  and  his  /  her 
team shall include the following: 
✓  Update and make available PACT financial information, i.e. AWPB and reports e.g. 
expenditure incurred by Component / category / Financier as of the last day of the 
preceding month; 
✓  Update and make available reports on the status of Counterpart funding – has the 
Recipient  /  lead  Programme  implementation  agency  made  available  financing 
proceeds to the Programme as planned? 
✓  Provide a walkthrough of the existing accounting system including its main modules 
for  budgeting,  accounting,  financial  reports,  fixed  asset  register  as  well  as  the 
security settings in use; 
✓  Facilitate checking of internal controls by way of system walkthroughs, in order to 
ensure that approved procedures are consistently being followed; 
✓  Make available recent Withdrawal Applications, Statements of Expenditure and all 
supporting  documentation  regarding  expenditure  claimed  under  applicable  SoE 
thresholds to facilitate the verification of the adequacy, completeness and validity 
of claims; 
✓  Make  available  evidence  of  qualifications  and  educational  background  of  the 
financial  staff including  organogram  of  the  FPCU,  CVs,  ToR  of each  position  and 
FPCU training plan; 
✓  Update  and  make  available  the central  fixed  asset register  and  facilitate  sample 
test checks of the physical existence and tagging / labelling of assets; 
✓  Make  available  all  written  procedures  regarding  financial  and  administrative 
operations  such  as  transaction  processing,  accounting  manual,  fixed  asset 
maintenance  and  records  management  as  well  as  the  lead  Programme  agency’s 
anticorruption policy and whistle blowing procedures; 
✓  Avail  the  updated  bank  reconciliation  statements,  accompanied  by  the 
corresponding  accounting  ledgers  and  bank  statements  for  all  designated  and 
Programme accounts; 
132 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
✓  Arrange  meeting  with  auditors  and  any  other  selected  party  requested  by  the 
mission; 
✓  Make available all necessary documentation regarding procurement not subject to 
prior review; 
✓  Provide an update on the actions taken regarding the past audit recommendations 
as well as action points outlined in the past aide-mémoire documents; 
✓  Participate in report writing if necessary. 
FPCU internal audits  –  Internal audits will be conducted to provide assurance that 
• 
the  Programme  is  being  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  PIM,  complies  with 
Government  regulations  and  is  complying  with  Programme  financing  covenants.  The 
Programme  will  utilize the internal  audit  function  at  Ministry  of  Agriculture  to carry  out 
internal  audit.  The  internal  Auditors  will  be  required  to  carry  out  the  audit  of  the 
Programme at least twice annually. 
The Internal Auditor shall plan his work much in advance and transparently. A risk- 
• 
based annual audit plan for the following year shall prepared at least one month before 
the end of the current year – this shall be planned by month / quarter and contain: 
✓  Routine financial tasks to be completed all year long, such as reviewing vouchers 
following a “full audit” approach, or on a sample basis if risks have been assessed 
as low: this may be done in the field or as a “desk review” provided that adequate 
archiving of electronic documents is in place; 
✓  Compliance audits to verify the Programme complies with its commitments towards the 
Financiers: this includes reviewing quarterly financial reports submitted to IFAD and 
annual reports to the EU; 
✓  Geographical  audits  focused  on  given  Programme  areas:  this  may  involve 
interviewing all staff of the concerned office, starting with the State Coordinator – 
ideally, each SIU shall be visited at least twice in a year, however priority may be 
given to somewhere risks are considered higher; 
✓  Process  audits  focused  on  key  processes  at  FPCU:  this  may  include  Programme 
management  (i.e.  internal  controls  and  tools  designed  to  mitigate  various 
operational risks for each Programme Component), as well as procurement, fixed 
asset and stock management, etc. 
The  annual  audit  plan  shall  be  flexible  in  case  new  risks  would  arise  during 
• 
Programme  implementation:  it  may  therefore  be  revised  as  per  the  needs,  but  always 
formally, for instance 6 months after the year start. A sample annual audit plan is provided 
in annex to the present PIM for guidance of the Internal Auditor. 
• 
Missions of the Internal Auditor, shall usually involve the following tasks: 
✓  Reviewing  vouchers,  contracts  and  procurement  files  for  all  or  sampled 
transactions; 
✓  Verifying  that  Programme  activities  were  conducted  as  per  the  plan  and  as 
described in reports; 
✓  Inspecting the policies and documentation prepared to manage specific Component 
activities; 
✓  Meeting a sample of beneficiaries in different localities and villages to obtain their 
feedback; 
✓  Reviewing quarterly financial reports, including Withdrawal Applications and SoEs 
per Financier; 
✓  Reviewing  monthly  trial  balances,  bank  reconciliations,  calculations  of  exchange 
rate,  updated  contract  register,  leave  follow-up,  fixed  asset  register,  fuel 
consumption report; and 
✓  Following-up  imprest  amounts,  reviewing  monthly  cash  counts  and  performing 
surprise counts. 
133 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Internal audit reports for each specific mission, as well as annual (and semi-annual) 
• 
reports summarising all activities conducted against the annual audit plan, shall be made 
available to the FPCU. They shall be available for review during supervision missions and 
external audits. Financial procedures (including procedures required at community level) 
shall be documented in a Financial Implementation Manual, which shall be a condition for 
disbursement.  Training of all staff on financial management and fiduciary controls shall 
be  provided  once  before  implementation  begins;  once  after  implementation  has 
commenced and once two years after implementation. 
External audits – The project will be audited by the Audit Service Corporation (ASC), 
• 
which is the Supreme Audit Institution of Ethiopia. The auditor will prepare a work plan to 
ensure adequate coverage of the various institutions that receive Programme funds and 
cover all the major risk areas. The audit terms of reference will be approved by IFAD in 
advance in line with the guidance provided in the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting 
and Auditing of IFAD-financed projects. The audited financial statements for the project 
will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the period end in accordance with IFAD 
guidelines. 
The  Auditor  in  drawing  up  his  audit  Programmes  incorporates  review  of  the 
• 
implementation  of  the  previous  period’s  recommendations.  If  those  recommendations 
have not been followed this will be stated in the current audit report. The audited financial 
statements will be submitted to IFAD within 6 months after financial end as required by 
IFAD. 
Nature of Programme eligible expenditures - Programme expenditure categories have 
• 
been  allocated  in  accordance  with  the  standard  expenditure  categories.   Detailed  cost tables 
are presented in this document. Transaction-based disbursement procedures will be used. 
The eligibility of expenditure should require: 
✓  The  expenditure  shall  meet  the  reasonable  cost  of  goods,  works  and  services 
required  for  the  Programme  and covered  by the  relevant AWPB  and  procured in 
conformity with the procurement guidelines 
✓  The  expenditure shall be incurred during the Programme implementation period, 
except that expenditures to meet the costs of winding up the Programme that may 
be incurred after the Programme completion date and before the closing date 
✓  The expenditure shall be incurred by a Programme party 
✓  If  the  agreement  allocates  the  amount  of  the  financing  to  categories  of  eligible 
expenditures  and  specifies  the  percentages  of  such  eligible  expenditures  to  be 
financed, the expenditure must relate to a category whose allocation has not been 
depleted,  and  shall  be  eligible  only  up  to  the  percentage  applicable  to  such 
category. 
✓  The  expenditure  shall  be  otherwise  eligible  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the 
financing agreement 
✓  Sub-grantees  –  advances  to  sub-grantees  will  only  be  recognized  as  eligible 
expenditures  once justified. The recipient will be accountable for the use  of sub- 
grant  funds.  Recipient  and  sub-grantees’  expenditure  (if  applicable)  should  be 
consolidated for inclusion in the SOE 
✓  Income  generated  from  advance  withdrawals  (if  any)  should  be  disclosed in  the 
SOE 
✓  Transaction  Lists  should  provide  a  breakdown  of  individual  transactions  by 
expenditure category and should be easily reconcilable to the SOE. 
✓  Transaction Lists should include and integrate detail transaction lists from the Sub- 
Recipients, when applicable. 
✓  SOEs  should be prepared in the same currency as  the denomination currency of 
the GA. If Programmes incur expenditure in currencies other than that of the GA, 
the exchange rate used for reporting expenditure should be the rate applied when 
funds were received, on a first in, first out (FIFO) basis. 
134 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
The IFAD EU handbook will be provided which provide guidelines on the utilisation of 
• 
EU funds. 
• 
All payment vouchers will be examined to ascertain the following requirements: 
✓  That  the  expenditure  has  been  incurred  on  proper  authority  and  is  a  charge  to 
properly voted funds. 
✓  That  payment  vouchers  are  supported  by  original  documents  or  certified 
photocopies  of  the  original  documents  (such  copies  must  be  certified  by  the 
appropriate officer that he has taken all possible steps to ensure that no payment 
has been made on the original document). 
✓  That rates charged are according to regulations/contracts, fair and reasonable. 
✓  That appropriate authority has been obtained and a copy of the minutes attached 
to the payment vouchers for reference purposes. 
✓  That the allocation of account codes is correct. 
✓  That appropriate certificates have been signed by the officer authorized. 
✓  That the vote book control certificate has been duly signed to confirm availability 
of funds. 
✓  That  the  computations  and  costing  have  been  verified  and  are  arithmetically 
correct. 
✓  That the persons named in the payment vouchers are those entitled to receive the 
payment. 
✓  Any alterations of payment voucher should be counter signed by the head in charge 
of the unit. 
✓  That the signatories to the certificates are as per those indicated in the specimen 
signature document 
✓  That payments are supported by duly certified invoices, receipted bills (for direct 
cash payments), LPOs, LSOs, copies of supplier’s delivery note, and the certificate 
at  the  reverse  of  the  payment  voucher  signed  to  confirm  stores  entry  into  the 
relevant inventory ledgers. 
External audits shall be ex-post reviews of PACT financial statements, also looking 
• 
at internal controls  and compliance  with all applicable rules, laws  and regulations;  they 
shall  examine  the  adequacy  of  accounting  systems  and  procedures,  the  capacity  to 
maintain  appropriate  accounts  and  supporting  documentation  of  the  Programme 
expenditure. External audits aim at providing credibility and assurance of accountability to 
Financiers,  Programme  staff  and  other  stakeholders  such  as  the  Government.  Detailed 
instructions  regarding  external  audits  are  outlined  in  IFAD  Handbook  for  Financial 
Reporting  and  Auditing  of  Programmes  available  at  https://www.ifad.org/en/document- 
detail/asset/39641638, which is updated from time to time. Draft ToRs  are attached as 
Annex 4. 
Programme  Completion  and  Closing  –  The  Programme  Closing  Date  shall  be  six 
• 
months after PACT official Completion Date or as would be advised in the grant agreement. 
Both  deadlines  have  direct  financial  implications  on  Programme  management  such  as: 
development  and submission  of  a  recovery  plan,  ensuring  eligibility  of  expenditure  and 
submission of the necessary documents outlined below. Please also refer to section 1.3 of 
the Disbursement Handbook. 
Recovery plan – To ensure that PACT Designated Account is completely and timely 
• 
justified,  the  Programme  Accountant  is  to  develop  a  “recovery  plan”  outlining  the 
percentages per Withdrawal Application that shall be recovered and paid respectively. This 
shall be submitted to IFAD 6 months before the Completion Date or when the outstanding 
balance (amount still undisbursed by IFAD) is less than double of the authorised allocation. 
Grant  completion  –  As  defined  in  the  Financing  Agreement,  by  then  all  the 
• 
Programme activities shall have been finalized. Payments may also be done also after the 
Completion Date provided that commitments / contracts / purchase orders are signed and 
135 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
expenditure incurred (i.e. services rendered or goods delivered) prior to the Completion 
Date. Activities that have continued after the Completion Date are not considered eligible 
types of expenditure and may therefore not be financed by IFAD. Exceptions to the rule: 
after  the  Completion  Date  but no later  than the  Closing  Date, the  FPCU  may  still  incur 
expenditure related to the “winding-up” process, e.g. final audit, Programme completion 
report,  salaries  of  staff  involved  in  winding  up  activities,  FPCU  maintenance  cost  or 
Programme completion workshop. 
Grant closure – IFAD requires the following to be provided by the FPCU in order to 
• 
close the grant: 
✓  Confirmation of last Withdrawal Application; 
✓  Submission of final audit report; and 
✓  Submission of Programme completion report. 
The  final  audit  report  shall  cover  the  final  Programme  year  and  winding-up 
• 
expenditure and may be paid from the grant available balance by using direct payment or 
reimbursement of pre-financed expenditure. 
III.5: PROCUREMENT 
The purpose of this module is to provide the operational basis for undertaking PACT 
• 
programme procurement activities. 
IFAD’s  General  Conditions  place  emphasis  on  using  the  Borrower/Recipient’s 
• 
procurement regulations, provided they are found to be consistent with IFAD’s guidelines. 
This is in line with the commitments of the international donor community to work towards 
increasing the use of national systems where they can be shown to be compatible with the 
requirement of donors. The IFAD procurement guidelines and the procurement handbook 
require an assessment of the national procurement systems as part of programme design. 
PRM Assessment: The assessment was done in two stages: a) overarching country 
• 
assessment; and b) programme specific assessment. 
The  findings  suggest  that  the  country's  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  is 
• 
adequate to address the relevant procurement issues that will arise under PACT program 
and consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and international procurement 
practices. The applicable law and regulations are contained in the: a) Federal Democratic 
Republic of Ethiopia Procurement and Property number 649/2009; b) Public Procurement 
Directive of June 2010; and c) Public Procurement Manual. All these provide an adequate 
operational  environment  for  procurement,  including  procurement  for  goods,  works, 
services.  Standard  Bidding  Documents  (SBDs)  are  available,  developed  by  the  Public 
Procurement & Property Administration Agency (FPPA), and shall be used for procurement 
of  goods,  works,  consultancy  and  non-consultancy  services  required  for  the  PACT  program. 
All procurement documentation issued to bidders will comply with the requirements 
• 
laid out in the: a) IFAD’s Revised Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities 
and  Operations;  b)  Policy  on  preventing  and  responding  to  sexual  harassment,  sexual 
exploitation and abuse; c) IFAD’s Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of 
Terrorism Policy; and d) IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP). 
However, the Programme specific assessment, based on planned PACT operations, 
• 
indicates  a need  for  improvement in the  following  areas:  a)  recruit  Programme-specific 
Procurement Officers at the Federal level and regional levels; b) management of records 
of  procurement  processes;  c)  strengthening  contract  management;  d)  integrate 
procurement planning in the budget formulation process; and e) monitoring and reporting 
of procurement. Overall, the institutional procurement capacity is rated as 'medium' risk. 
Procurement  Governance:  PACT  programme  will  not  set  up  a  specific  procurement 
• 
unit as GOE's  requirement is that Procurement staff in Ministries is managed as  a pool. 
PACT  program  procurement  will  be  managed  by  the  Directorate  of  Procurement  and 
136 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Property  Administration,  drawing  from  the  pool  of  specialists.  In  order  to  enhance 
implementation  efficiency,  provision  should  be  made  for  a  Procurement  Officer  and  an 
Assistant Procurement officer who will handle PACT program procurement at FPCU and will 
provide support to the participating Regions in handling procurements for the Programme. 
A  Procurement  Officer  and  an  Assistant  Procurement  Officer  will  be  recruited 
• 
competitively  and  engaged  on  a  performance-based  contracts  as  a  contribution  of  the 
Programme to the pool of specialists during the PACT program implementation period. The 
Procurement  Officer  will  technically  be  responsible  to  the  Director  of  Procurement  and 
Property Management with a dual reporting line to the Programme Coordinator. He/She 
will be the focal point to handle all procurement aspects of PACT program assisted by an 
Assistant Procurement Officer and regional Procurement Officers. 
A  Procurement  Endorsement  Committee  both  at  the  federal  and  regional  level, 
• 
composed  of  senior  officers  at  Director/Officer  level  respectively,  will  be  the  overall 
approving authority as it will approve; (i) all procurement plans; (ii) draft advertisements 
and  other  bidding  documents;  (iii)  specific  terms  and  conditions  relating  to  contract 
amounts, completion periods, stages and conditions of part payments; (iv) all the contracts 
above US$10,000 (or as shall be specified in the Procurement Arrangement Letter (PAL), 
and (iv) variations/ amendments of contracts that have been cleared by the Committee. 
Procurement  planning:  Procurement  planning  will  follow  the  GOE’s  planning 
• 
calendar.  The  Procurement  plan  for  each  year  will  be  consistent  with  the  Programme's 
AWPB and its target date of implementation including list of procurement of works, goods, 
and services to be procured under the Programme yearly with estimated cost, and method 
of  procurement  shall  be  detailed  in  appropriate  formats  for  each  budget  year.  Items 
procured  outside  the  procurement  plan  and  the  related  AWPB  will  be  declared  mis- 
procurement and the related expenditure will be ineligible for financing from the IFAD loan 
proceeds. 
PACT program procurement will follow the methods provided for in the Procurement 
• 
and  Property  Proclamation  and  IFAD  Procurement  guidelines.  All  PACT  program  ICB 
procurements  will  be  carried  out  and  managed  centrally  at  the  FPCU.  NCB  and  local 
shopping may be carried out at the Regional level in case bulking opportunities may not 
be  feasible  at  the  federal  level.  In  this  regard,  Regions/BoA  will  have  to  submit  their 
procurement  plans  for  inclusion  in  the  consolidated  PACT  program  procurement  plan. 
Efforts  should  be  made  by  the  Procurement  Officer  to  ensure  that  the  best  contract 
packaging possible, including consideration of what lots can be bulked  in a package for 
which it is possible to find a supplier or bulking opportunities. 
The consolidated PACT program Procurement Plan will be submitted together  with 
• 
the AWPB to the National Programme Steering Committee for approval, and Directorate of 
Procurement and Property Administration as appropriate for information/inclusion in the 
MoANR annual Procurement Plan and later to IFAD for a no objection as part of the PACT 
program AWPB. 
Procurement  methods  and  IFAD  prior  review  thresholds:  Under  PACT 
• 
program, and given the medium risk ranking of the GOE procurement systems, the IFAD 
prior review thresholds for goods, services and works revised 2019 will be maintained. 
Prior Review Thresholds 
Category 
Goods and 
goods-related 
Non-Consulting 
Services 
Works and 
works-related 
Non-Consulting 
Services 
Threshold 
> US$ 
150,000.00 
> US$ 
400,0000.00 
Consulting Services 
and related Non- 
Consulting Services 
and/or 
MoU/Agreements 
> US$ 100,000.00 
Individual 
Consultants 
All selection for 
individual 
consultants, 
137 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Procurement Method Thresholds 
CQS 
QBS/LCS/FBS 
QCBS 
ICS 
regardless of 
value 
≤ US$100,000  < US$200,000 
≥ US$200,000 
Shopping 
≤US$150,000 
NCB 
>US$150,000 to 
<US$400,000 
All selection for 
individual 
consultants, 
regardless of 
value 
ICB 
≥ US$400,000 
≤US$400,000 
>US$400,000 to 
<US$1,000,000 
≥ US$1,000,000 
Consulting 
Services and 
related Non- 
Consulting 
Services 
Goods and 
goods-related 
Non- 
Consulting 
Services 
Works and 
works-related 
Non- 
Consulting 
Services 
This  may however  be  reviewed  depending  on the  performance  of  the  programme 
• 
during implementation. Mitigation measures for civil works, including those for irrigation 
infrastructure, would be included in the respective construction contracts. 
Bidding Documents: The conduct of a transparent and successful procurement is 
• 
dependent on the quality of bidding documents. Thus, to guard against mis-procurements, 
it will be essential that bid documents get very well prepared. Under the PACT programme, 
the  GOE  standard  bid  documents  will  be  used  and  adapted  to  suit  each  specific 
procurement item. On-the-job training will be carried-out for PACT program management 
by  MoANR  and/or  IFAD  in  the  preparation  of  these  documents.  The  national  bidding 
documents  do  not  fully  meet  the  IFAD  SECAP  requirements  and  shall  be  amended  as 
necessary to fulfil these requirements. IFAD clearance of the Standard Bidding Documents 
under PACT programme will be a requirement. 
National and local duties  and taxes  for  all procurement financed from proceeds  of 
• 
the  IFAD  grant  will  be  covered  by  GOE.  All  procurement  will  be  executed  only  against 
approved procurement plans and AWPBs, specifying items to be procured, responsibility 
for the procurement and the appropriate procurement methods. IFAD missions and annual 
external  audits  will,  on  a  sample basis  review the procurement  processes including  bid 
documents. 
SECAP Assessment Risks relevant to Procurement 
Procurement under the PACT programme will be undertaken in such manner as to 
• 
reduce the risks identified in the SECAP Guidance to the SPO throughout the procurement 
cycle. These will cover specific actions in procurement process including, but not limited 
to the following: 
Technical  specifications:  Use  of  ethically  sourced  materials  and  avoid use  of large 
• 
quantities  of  natural  materials  such  as  wood  for  construction;  use  of  only  allowable 
chemicals;  make  reference  to  all  approved  chemicals  in  specifications;  WHO-FAO  approved 
pesticide and WHO-FAO codes for safe labelling, packaging, handling, storage, application 
and disposals of pesticide are respected; promote safe fertilizer use by ensuring that the 
correct investments and capacity-building activities for the selection, distribution, storage, 
application and disposal of fertilizers are included. 
Bid  Evaluation  criteria:  Suppliers  of  fertilizer  and  pesticides  will  be  required  to 
• 
operate in accordance with SECAP standard 2 (reference to the exclusion list); To include 
evaluation of proposed Pest Management Plans by the bidders as necessary. 
138 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Contract clauses: Adhere to the relevant labour laws, ensure compliance to national 
• 
and international laws on Labour; compliance to International Labour Law for prohibition 
of child labour by referring to the directives of the ILO on the minimum working age and 
available National Labour Law; Establishment of work place specific Grievance Mechanism; 
Compliance to  occupational  safety  and health  (OSH)  requirements including  Safety  and 
health  training  on  the  proper  use  and  maintenance  of  personal  protective  equipment; 
comply  to  IFAD  Policy  to  Preventing  and  Responding  to  Sexual  Harassment,  Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse, including the assessment of risks of project-related gender-based 
violence, risks of sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, human trafficking and abuse to 
project-affected people and communities.  
Capacity  Building:  Procurement  is  a collaborative  process,  involving  multiple 
• 
stakeholders. As such, procurement knowledge, skills, and capacity are necessary for all 
stakeholders  involved  to  ensure  efficient  implementation  of  the  PACT  program.  On  the 
basis of lessons learned with current IFAD projects in the country, dedicated procurement 
capacity building for all stakeholders (procurement, technical, finance, etc.) at the federal, 
regional and woreda levels will be key in ensuring that program procurement activities are 
carried out efficiently and in accordance with the provisions of the Ethiopia’s and IFAD’s 
procurement  guidelines. IFAD will  organize an  intensive procurement  training during  the 
start-up workshop. 
In addition, all new PACT programme procurement staff will enrolled in the BUILD PROC 
Programme, which is a capacity-building programme in procurement for agricultural and 
rural  development.  The  programme  offers  relevant,  comprehensive,  accessible  and 
sustainable certification programme in procurement to procurement officers working for 
agricultural and rural development. 
139 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Integration of SECAP Risks into Procurement 
This section provides indication to the SPO on the SECAP risks to be incorporated into procurement 
plans. While the general integration of SECAP requirements into procurement documents is described 
into ANNEX 4, Volume 1 of the SECAP, the project specific risks are as identified by the SECAP online 
tool.  The  ES  specialist  has  identified,  through  the  SECAP  environmental  and  social  screening 
checklist, the issues in the table below that need to be mitigated through procurement. 
Biodiversity conservation 
1.8 Could the project involve 
or lead to procurement 
through primary suppliers of 
natural resource materials? 
Risk 
Rating 
Low 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
Resource Efficiency and 
Pollution Prevention 
2.1 Could the project involve 
or lead to the release of 
pollutants to the environment 
due to routine or non-routine 
circumstances with the 
potential for adverse local, 
regional, and/or 
transboundary impacts? 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Construction works will 
require wood products and 
materials such as sand and 
gravel. 
Application of IFAD and 
national procurement 
guidelines for the supply of 
natural materials for the 
construction of irrigation 
schemes/buildings/ 
equipment 
Technical specifications to be 
included in tender documents 
for the purchase of natural 
resource materials, which 
may include ethically sourced 
materials. 
Avoid use of large quantities 
of natural materials such as 
wood for construction 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Minor 
Pollutants may 
possibly be 
released, either 
routinely or by 
accident, but 
treatment 
systems are 
proven and 
verified. 
Receiving 
environment has 
absorptive 
capacity. 
Agricultural production 
activities of the communities 
could result in increased use 
of agrochemicals 
Contractors should only use 
or submit list of allowable 
agro-chemicals 
Suppliers of fertilizer and 
pesticides will be required to 
operate in accordance with 
SECAP standard 2 (reference 
to the exclusion list) 
• Training for farmers on safe 
use, handling and disposal of 
chemical products 
Programme activity may 
require consumption of raw 
materials, energy and water 
• Encourage use of renewable 
energy 
• Use of water should always 
be accompanied with an 
impact assessment on the 
2.4 Could the project involve 
or lead to significant 
consumption of raw 
materials, energy, and/or 
water? 
Substantial  Moderate 
The project will 
require 
consumption of 
raw materias, 
energy, and/or 
water. This will 
be a significant 
component of the 
140 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
2.5 Could the project involve 
or lead to significant 
extraction, diversion or 
containment of surface or 
ground water (e.g. 
construction of dams, 
reservoirs, river basin 
developments, groundwater 
extraction)? 
2.6 Could the project involve 
inputs of fertilizers and other 
modifying agents? 
project, but 
impacts can be 
appropriately 
managed. 
Substantial  Moderate 
The project 
needs a 
considerable 
amount of 
groundwater or 
surface water. 
Ths will require a 
minor extension 
of existing 
sources. It 
includes 
construction of 
large-scale 
irrigation 
schemes 
rehabilitation/dev 
elopment  – 
below 300 ha per 
scheme 
Substantial  Moderate 
The project 
requires use of 
fertilizers, but 
options are 
available to 
replace polluting 
fertilizers with 
alternatives. 
2.7 Could the project involve 
or lead to procurement, 
supply and/or result in the 
use of pesticides on crops, 
livestock, aquaculture or 
forestry? 
Moderate 
Minor 
The project only 
requires minimal 
amounts of 
pesticide. 
sustainable availability/ 
potential of water in the area. 
Procurement of raw 
materials will be carried 
out in an ethical manner 
as the instructions to be 
included in the related 
bidding documents 
Construction of small-scale 
irrigation scheme may lead to 
the consumption/diversion of 
significant amounts of water 
• Use of water should always 
be accompanied with an 
impact assessment on the 
sustainable availability/ 
potential of water in the area. 
Encourage Integrated Water 
Resource Management 
Consultation with downstream 
communities and Free Prior 
and Informed Consent (FPIC) 
Agricultural production 
activities of the communities 
could result in increased use 
of agrochemicals 
List/ refer to all approved 
chemicals in tender 
documents 
Contract documents to 
promote safe fertilizer use by 
ensuring that the correct 
investments and 
capacity-building activities for 
the selection, distribution, 
storage, application and 
disposal of fertilizers are 
included 
Agricultural production 
activities of the communities 
could result in increased use 
of agrochemicals 
Refer to the list of approved 
pesticides in the tender 
documents 
Technical specifications: 
“WHO-FAO approved pesticide 
and that WHO-FAO codes for 
safe labelling, packaging, 
handling, storage, application 
141 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
and disposals of pesticide are 
respected” 
Implementation of Pest 
Management Plan 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
Cultural Heritage 
3.2 Could the project directly 
or indirectly affect indigenous 
peoples’ rights, lands, natural 
resources, territories, 
livelihoods, knowledge, social 
fabric, traditions, governance 
systems, and culture or 
heritage (tangible and 
intangible)? 
Low 
3.3 Could the project involve 
or lead to significant 
excavations, demolitions, 
movement of earth, flooding 
or other environmental 
changes? 
Minor 
Minor impact to 
indigenous 
population. No 
damage  to/or 
loss of access to 
indigenous land, 
assets, 
resources, and/or 
cultural heritage. 
3.4 Could the project involve 
or lead to adverse impacts to 
sites, structures, or objects 
with historical, cultural, 
artistic, traditional or religious 
values or intangible forms of 
culture (e.g. knowledge, 
innovations, practices)? 
(Note: projects intended to 
protect and conserve Cultural 
Heritage may also have 
inadvertent adverse impacts) 
Labour and Working 
Conditions 
5.1 Could the project operate 
in sectors or value chains that 
are characterized by working 
conditions that do not meet 
national labour laws or 
international commitments? 
(Note: this may include 
discriminatory practices, high 
gender inequality and the 
lack of equal opportunities, 
denial of freedom of 
association and collective 
bargaining, labour migrants) 
Low 
Consequence 
Risk 
Rating 
Substantial  Moderate 
The project 
operates in 
sectors or value 
chains that have, 
in the past, not 
met national 
labour laws, or 
international 
commitments, 
but is now 
adequately 
nationally 
regulated. 
However, 
international 
value chains are 
not regularly 
142 
The programme may tinclude 
Pastoral and Agro-pastoral 
communities 
Bid documents should include 
the implementation of FPIC 
Plan and Social Development 
Plan 
Programme activities may 
require excavation/creation of 
quarries for the 
production/use of selected 
materials and sands. 
Bidding documents to ensure: 
• Compliance to IFAD’s SECAP 
and national law 
•Environmental Impact 
Assessment/Management 
• Rehabilitation of quarries by 
contractors/sub-contractors 
Bidding documents to include 
chance finds and relevant 
procedures that may be 
required 
The bidder qualifications must 
include previous experience in 
carrying out works in these 
settings. 
Guidance for SPOs 
The project will include works 
that need to adhere to the 
relevant labour laws 
Contract Clauses: to ensure 
compliance to national and 
international laws on Labour 
Application of The Labour 
Management and Assessment 
Procedure 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
audited for 
environmental or 
social 
performance. 
Moderate 
The project does 
not operate in 
sectors or value 
chains where 
child labour was 
evident in the 
past. The status 
of forced labour 
regulation is 
currently unclear. 
Moderate 
The project 
operates in a 
sector, area, or 
value chain 
where workers 
are occasionally 
exposed to 
significant OSH 
risks, and where 
regulation is 
known to be 
weak or non- 
existent. 
The project will include works 
that need to adhere to the 
relevant labour laws 
Contract Clauses: compliance 
to International Labour Law 
and available National Labour 
Law 
Application of the Labour 
Management and Assessment 
Procedure 
The project will include works 
that need to adhere to the 
relevant labour laws 
Contract Clauses: compliance 
to International Labour Law 
for prohibition of child labour 
by referring to the directives 
of the ILO on the minimum 
working age and available 
National Labour Law 
Application of the Labour 
Management and Assessment 
Procedure 
The project will include works 
that need to adhere to the 
relevant labour laws 
Contract Clauses: 
Establishment of work place 
specific Grievance Mechanism 
Compliance to occupational 
safety and health (OSH) 
requirements including Safety 
and health training on the 
proper use and maintenance 
of personal protective 
equipment 
Low 
5.2 Could the project use or 
operate in a value chain 
where there have been 
reports of forced labour? 
(Note: Risks of forced labour 
may be increased for projects 
located in remote places or 
where the status of migrant 
workers is uncertain) 
Moderate 
5.3 Could the project involve 
children (a) below the 
nationally-defined minimum 
employment age (usually 15 
years old) or (b) above the 
nationally-defined minimum 
employment age but below 
the age of 18 in supported 
activities or in value chains? 
Moderate 
5.4 Could the project: (a) 
operate in a sector, area or 
value chain where producers 
and other agricultural 
workers are typically exposed 
to significant occupational 
and safety risks, and/or (b) 
promote or use technologies 
or practices that pose 
occupational safety and 
health (OSH) risks for 
farmers, other rural workers 
or rural populations in 
general? (Note: OSH risks in 
agriculture might include: 
dangerous machinery and 
tools; hazardous chemicals; 
toxic or allergenic agents; 
carcinogenic substances or 
agents; parasitic diseases; 
transmissible animal 
diseases; confined spaces; 
ergonomic hazards; extreme 
temperatures; and contact 
with dangerous and 
poisonous animals, reptiles 
and insects. Psychosocial 
hazards might include 
violence and harassment.) 
Community Health, Safety 
and Security 
Risk 
Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
143 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
6.3 Is there a possibility of 
harm or losses due to failure 
of structural elements of the 
project (e.g. collapse of 
buildings or infrastructure)? 
Low 
Moderate 
6.7 Could the project lead to 
the potential for gender- 
based violence, including 
sexual harassment, 
exploitation and abuse, as a 
result of labour influx, land 
redistribution, or other 
actions that alter community 
dynamics? 
Risk 
Rating 
Low 
Physical and economic 
resettlement 
7.4 Could the project result in 
impacts on or changes to land 
tenure arrangements and/or 
community-based property 
rights/customary rights to 
land, territories and/or 
resources? 
The programme will include 
construction of irrigation 
schemes, ware houses and 
buildings 
Bid documents to include: 
The borrower/recipient/partne 
r to design, construct, operate 
and decommission the 
structural elements of the 
project in accordance with 
national legal requirements 
and the World Bank Group 
Environmental Health and 
Safety guidelines. 
Structural  elements  of  a 
project  to  be  designed  and 
competent 
constructed  by 
professionals,  and  certified  or 
approved 
competent 
by 
authorities. 
Structural design will consider 
climate change considerations 
Moderate 
Moderate 
changes to 
community 
dynamics may 
result in 
increased 
potential for 
gender-based 
violence or 
sexual 
exploitation. 
Gender-based 
violence 
interventions are 
integrated into 
project design. 
The works to be undertaken 
may result in influx of labour 
Contract clauses to comply 
with IFAD Policy on 
Preventing and Responding to 
Sexual Harassment, Sexual 
Exploitation and 
Abuse, including the 
assessment of risks of 
project-related gender-based 
violence, risks of 
sexual harassment, sexual 
exploitation, human 
trafficking and abuse to 
project-affected people 
and communities 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Programme activities may 
cause changes to land tenure 
Establish Grievance 
Mechanism 
Land leasing from Irrigation 
water users’ associations to 
landless HHs 
Implementation of 
Resettlement Action 
Framework 
144 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
PART IV: ANNEXES 
145 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
ANNEX 1. TERMS OF REFERENCE OF PCU STAFF 
Programme Coordinator 
The Programme Coordinator will have the overall responsibility for the day-to-day activities 
of  the  Programme.  He/she  will  coordinate  implementation  of  activities  with  other 
Programmes engaged in support for similar/related themes. 
Specific Responsibilities: 
a)  Overall responsibility for an efficient implementation of the Programme and in 
accordance with IFAD/government procedures; 
b)  Lead  the  process  of  preparing  PACT  PROGRAMME  AWPBs  and  procurement 
plans for approval by the Programme’s oversight body; 
c)  In liaison with the Procurement Officer, ensure that contractors are meeting 
their obligations and are paid only for agreed deliverables; 
d)  Liaison  with  other  institutions  for  all  aspects  related  to  the  Programme, 
especially  the  development  and  maintenance  of  partnerships  with  related 
Programmes and Programmes; 
e)  final accountability for operation of Programme bank accounts; 
f)  Provide  overall  strategic  guidance  to  other  Programme  staff  related  to  all 
aspects of PACT PROGRAMME implementation; 
g)  Coordinate  and  supervise  functions  and  activities  of  the  Programme  staff, 
ensuring that work disciplines and ethics are adhered to; 
h)  Coordinate  and  follow  up  on  the  activities  of  the  officers  responsible  for 
implementation  of  Programme  technical  components  to  ensure  effective 
delivery of Programme activities; 
i)  Ensure  timely  and  appropriate  reporting  on  progress  and  problems  of 
Programme implementation and submit progress reports to MAFS on agreed 
deadlines; 
j)  Providing leadership, guidance, enthusiasm and catalytic input to all levels of 
Programme participants and activities, whenever appropriate; 
k)  Ensure that the IA staff and all consultants and contractors engaged by comply 
with the Programme’s gender and targeting strategies; 
l)  Approve all procurement and accounting transactions performed by the IA that 
are within the authorised threshold, and facilitate disbursement of Programme 
funds needed for the implementation of PACT PROGRAMME; and 
m)  Undertake  any  other  responsibility  that  will  ensure  smooth  and  effective 
implementation of the Programme. 
Qualifications and experience: 
a)  The  Programme  Coordinator  will  have  at  least  10  years  of  work  experience  in 
planning,  management,  administration  and  implementation  of  rural  livelihood 
improvement, agricultural or rural development Programmes in the public, private 
or  NGO  sectors  and  specific  exposure  to  commercial/private  sector  practice  in 
service contracting, performance monitoring and financing; 
b)  He/she  must  have  a  Master’s  degree  in  Agricultural  Science,  Agricultural 
Economics, Economics, Development Studies, or any equivalent qualification; 
c)  Post qualification in Programme Management will be an added advantage; 
d)  Should have at least 2 years’ experience working in Ethiopia. 
146 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge Management Officer 
The Monitoring and Evaluation and Knowledge Management Officer will be responsible for 
all  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation,  knowledge  management  and  communication. 
He/she will directly report to the Programme Coordinator. 
Specific Responsibilities: 
− Oversee the development of, and manage the M&E system taking into account the 
Government  monitoring  frameworks,  IFAD  Results  and  Impact  Management 
Systems (RIMS) and PACT PROGRAMME objectives; 
−  Develop and implement Knowledge Management and Communication Strategy to 
ensure systematic, continuous learning, improvement and knowledge sharing; 
−  Oversee preparation of and consolidate inputs to  the AWPBs, including arranging 
stakeholder review workshops; 
−  Facilitate  PACT  PROGRAMME’s  annual  review  workshops,  outcome  assessment 
studies,  Mid  Term  Review  and  completion  review.  Establish  the  timings  and 
agendas  for  annual  participatory  monitoring  workshops,  including  arrangements 
for ensuring adequate representation of all participants, the target groups including 
women and youths; 
−  Develop an M&E service pack (reporting formats for data and narrative) for service 
providers, and assess and develop trainings in data collection tools as needed, to 
ensure  that  appropriate  measures  are  established  and  implemented  by  service 
providers  to  provide  sufficient  basis 
for  review  of  PACT  PROGRAMME 
implementation and for monitoring changes seen on the ground; 
−  Coordinate  reports  from service  providers  for  quarterly,  semi-annual  and  annual 
reports; 
−  Manage  special  studies  to  be  undertaken,  including  preparation  of  ToRs  and 
overseeing the work of the consultants; 
−  Liaise with the financial controller to link physical and financial progress data; 
−  Monitor  implementation  processes  and  performance,  and  assess  outputs  and 
outcomes.  He/she  will  ensure  that  all  M&E  indicators  are  gender  and  age 
disaggregated, and that PACT PROGRAMME reports identify separately the number 
of male, female and youth beneficiaries, the nature of their participation and the 
ways in which they have benefited from the Programme; 
−  Preparation and submission of routine and ad-hoc  progress reports  to MAFS and 
IFAD; and 
−  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Programme Coordinator. 
Qualifications and experience: 
−  A  minimum  of  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  Agricultural  economics,  economics  or 
equivalent management qualification and specific training in M&E; 
−  At least eight years of work experience, including at least four years working with 
knowledge  management,  planning,  M&E  and/or  MIS  in  government/donor 
Programmes or large institutions, with knowledge of logical framework Programmes 
and participatory systems; 
−  Ability  to  set  up  and  follow  through  on  a  monitoring  system  in  a  complex 
environment, and capacity to design and carry out relevant field level verification 
and other data validation tools; 
Competencies: 
−  Computer-literate and well-versed in the use of Word, Excel and statistical 
Programmes, such as SPSS, Stata, ETC.; 
−  Excellent oral and written communication skills in English; 
−  Excellent analytical skills; 
−  Self-motivated,  with  demonstrated  ability  to  take  initiatives  and  work  under  a 
minimum of supervision, but also to work effectively as a member of a team; and 
147 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
−  Strong managerial skills and demonstrated capacity to manage people and interact 
with  a  wide  range  of  private  sector  partners,  public  sector  representatives,  and 
development partners. 
Climate Change and Watershed Management Specialist 
Objective/Purpose of the Assignment 
The  consultant’s  objective  is  to  lead  the  development  and  implementation  of  climate- 
resilient  watershed  management  including  the  dissemination  of  climate  adaptation  and 
mitigation measures related to the project. 
Skills Required 
The consultant is expected to have a multidisciplinary environmental or natural resource 
management technical background and a good understanding of the social and economic 
aspects of vulnerability and knowledge of environmental and climate themes. 
Scope of the Work 
Adaptation  is  defined  as  the  adjustment  in  natural  or  human  systems  in  response  to 
actual  or  expected  climatic  stimuli  or  their  effects,  which  moderates  harm  or  exploits 
beneficial  opportunities  (IPCC,  2001a).  Mitigation  is  defined  as  an  anthropogenic 
intervention  to  reduce  the  sources  or  enhance  the  sinks  of  greenhouse  gases  (IPCC, 
2001a).  The  objective  of  the  assessment  is  to  identify  all  potential  adaptation  and 
mitigation  in  target  areas,  identify  their  costs  and  benefits,  and  prioritize  their 
implementation in the context of the project goals. 
The  watershed  management  specialist 
to  oversee 
implementation  of  PACT  programme sub component  1.1,  responsible to  make  sure  the 
identification  of  watershed  level  environment,  climate  and  agriculture  risks  and 
identification  and  prioritization  of  interventions.  He  is  also  responsible  for  the 
implementation of the watershed management plan. 
is  specifically 
responsible 
Detailed Tasks 
Climate Change - In collaboration with the GIS & RS experts, facilitate the delineation of 
watersheds and preparations of LULC map of all watersheds 
− 
Identify barriers and all potential adaptation mitigation solutions, including soft and 
hard measures. 
−  Conduct  multistakeholder  consultations  to  identify  and  confirm  all  options, 
including their costs, benefits, and risks. 
−  Based on previous tasks, evaluate adaptation and mitigation measures and options 
for  the  proposed  climate-smart  interventions  in  conjunction  with  the  executing 
agency,  technical  assistance  team  economist,  technical  specialists,  and  poverty 
reduction  expert  to  provide  an  economic  assessment  of  adaptation/mitigation 
options and to define co-benefits for other aspects of development. 
−  Organize  a  second  consultation  meeting  with  the  project  executing  agency  and 
other  stakeholders  to  seek  agreement  on  prioritized  adaptation  measures  to 
undertake during project implementation. 
Implement  selected  adaptation  mitigation  priorities  into  the  project,  including 
leading institutional arrangements and budget. 
Identify  any  additional  capacity  building required  for  the  project  implementation 
unit. 
− 
− 
148 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
− 
Identify  and  comply  with  indicators  to  monitor  reductions  in  vulnerability  and 
sustainability of adaptation measures in the context of the project implementation. 
−  Ensure that PACT interventions are in line to national climate polices such as the 
Climate  Resilient  Green  Economy  (CRGE)  strategy,  the  National  Adaptation  Plan 
(NAP), the Updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), as well as sector 
specific climate resilient strategies. 
In collaboration with the climate department at MoA, communicate about the GHG 
emission potential/contribution of PACT to the Environmental Protection Authority. 
−  Ensure implementation of the climate component of the Environmental, Social and 
− 
Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) 
−  Support  the  preparation  and  implementation  of  climate  risk  analysis  for 
infrastructures such as small-scale irrigation schemes 
Watershed Management – The specific tasks are: 
−  Capacitate/train  the  regional  and  Woreda  level  experts  on  NRM  by  preparing  a 
training manual 
−  Ensure  the  identification  of  watershed  specific  environmental,  climate  and 
agricultural risks and propose the most appropriate adaptation interventions 
−  Work  with  irrigation  engineer,  climate  and  environment  specialist  to  ensure 
adequate  consideration  of  NRM  and  watershed  management  intervention  in  the 
planning and implementation of projects/sub projects 
−  Facilitate  the  establishment  of  watershed  management  Association.  Specifically, 
the  specialist  will  assist  in  defining  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  watershed 
management  association,  water  users’  association,  cooperatives  and  most 
importantly the interactions among them 
−  Support  regional  and  woreda  experts  and  kebele  level  DAs  to  prepare  and 
implement individual farm plans 
−  Ensure  alignment  of 
the  Proclamation  No.1223/2020  on  Development, 
Management  and  Utilization  of  Community  Watersheds  Proclamation  with  PACT 
design and implementation 
−  Facilitate the establishment nurseries in selected watersheds 
− 
−  Facilitate  experience  sharing  of  watershed  management  association  to  good 
Identify best practices and ensure its designation to other areas 
performing watersheds 
−  Assess adoption of technologies and best practices 
Final Outputs 
−  Progress  implementation  reports  with  the  results  from  the  impact  assessment, 
vulnerability assessment, and economic analysis. Achievements should be included 
in this report. 
−  Adaptation  and  mitigation  delivery  at  federal  and  regional  levels  including  GIS 
mapping,  implementation  arrangements,  implementation  risks,  training  and 
capacity-building  plan,  budget,  and input into  the  project  design  and  monitoring 
framework 
Minimum qualifications and experience: 
−  Advanced  University/college  degree  from  an  accredited institution in  the  field  of 
Environmental Sciences, tropical agriculture, climate or equivalent in a field related 
to food security. 
−  At least 5 years of experience in, and demonstrated understanding of climate smart 
initiatives in Ethiopia. 
−  Experience in training and capacity building is required. 
149 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
−  Knowledge on the nexus between climate, food security, nutrition, gender, youth 
and climate change is strongly desirable. 
−  Experience  of  interacting  with  a  variety  of  internal  and  external  stakeholders  is 
desirable. 
−  Strong project management and coordination skills; and basic knowledge on M&E 
is desirable. 
−  Fluency in English and Amharic. 
Senior Irrigation Engineer 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
The  PACT/FPCU  Senior  Irrigation  Engineer  (FIE)  will  be  reporting  to  the  Programme 
Manager (PM) and will be responsible for the full implementation of Sub-component 1.2.1 
activities  and  will  provide  inputs  into  the  implementation  of  sub-component  1.1  as 
necessary. Specifically, the FIE will be expected to: 
−  Participate  in  the  Annual  Work  Planning  &  Budgeting  of  the  Programme  and  produce  
the water infrastructure sub-component plans & budgets; 
−  Provide  guidance  to  RPCU  Engineers,  Woreda  and  reconnaissance  teams  when 
− 
conducting prefeasibility rapid assessments; 
In  consultation  with  the  RPCU,  Woreda  coordinators,  Kebele  administration  and 
WUAs,  validate  potential interventions’ identification,  screening  and  prioritization 
processes  that  should  be in  line  with  the Programme  Implementation  Manual  (PIM); 
−  Review  and  approve  the  Terms  of  Reference  (ToRs)  for  the  consulting  firms 
(consultants)  to  be  contracted  to  develop  feasibility  studies  and  those  to  be 
contracted  to  develop  detailed  designs  and  supervise  the  water  infrastructure  works 
(Irrigation and Drainage Schemes, Multi-purpose Water Systems, etc.); 
−  Provide  guidance  for  the  establishment  and  strengthening  of  Water  Users 
Associations (WUAs); 
−  Review  the  consultants’  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs’  findings,  quality 
(including  design  assumptions,  calculations,  cost  effectiveness,  etc.),  and 
compliance  with  guidelines  &  standards  and  ensure  that  these  are  technically 
feasible, economically viable and environmentally and socially sustainable. 
−  Ascertain that water availability is insured through appropriate water balance and 
hydrologic analysis, and that proper operation and management plans are included 
in the feasibility reports and these provisions are within the capacity of the WUAs; 
−  Verify and approve consultants’ invoices; 
−  Take part in the bidding process of water infrastructure construction/rehabilitation 
including  reviewing  the  bidding  documents,  tendering  of  works,  providing 
financial  evaluation  of  bids  and 
clarifications  to  bidders,  technical  and 
recommendation for the award of contracts; 
In collaboration with the Procurement Officer, manage the contracting process for 
the water infrastructures construction contracts; 
− 
−  Before infrastructure works begin, verify and approve the project implementation 
plan presented by the contractor; 
−  Follow up with the RPCU Irrigation engineers and monitor the overall construction 
progress  and  compliance  with  the  contract  specifications,  implementation  plans  and  
timeframe  to  ensure  that  planned  time,  cost  and  quality  are  adhered  to.  Ensure 
that  supervising  consultants  are  performing  as  expected,  receive  and  review 
construction  progress  reports,  participate  in  occasional  site  visits,  verify  and 
approve contractors’ payments submittals (Interim Payment Certificates, Variation 
Orders, Completion Certificates, etc.) and manage notifications to the contractors 
150 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
(defects, liquidated damages, etc.) and any other issues as specified in the general 
and special conditions of contracts; 
−  Ensure that schemes tail-enders report adequate water delivery; 
−  Validate the identified Operation and Maintenance (O&M) trainings for the WUAs, 
supervise  the  delivery  of  the  trainings  as  necessary,  and  assess  training 
effectiveness; 
−  Produce periodic progress reports on the implementation of the water infrastructure 
in the targeted regions; 
−  Take part in the preparation and organization of the programme implementation 
support  missions,  supervision  missions  and  mid-term  review  mission,  and 
implement  missions’  recommendations  and  agreed  actions  related  to  sub- 
component 1.2; 
−  Any other functions as the PM may assign. 
Key Qualifications and experience: 
−  A minimum of a Bachelors’ Degree in Irrigation Engineering, Water Infrastructure 
Engineering or an equivalent field; 
−  A minimum of ten (10) years general professional experience relevant to water and 
irrigation engineering, including at least three (3) specific experiences in the design 
and/or  supervision of water related projects in rural context  (Irrigation systems, 
Drainage systems, multi-purpose water systems, etc.); 
−  Proven  experience  and  familiarity  with  field  work  related  to  rural  communities' 
development; 
−  Experience with projects funded by an international funding agency would be an 
advantage; 
−  Proven ability to interact competently with Federal/Regional authorities on issues 
relating to rural infrastructure development; 
−  Excellent oral and written communication skills in English; 
Senior Civil/Infrastructure Engineer 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
The PACT Senior Civil Engineer (CE) will be reporting to the Programme Manager (PM) and 
will be responsible for the full implementation of Sub-component 1.2.2 activities and will 
provide inputs  into the implementation of sub-components  1.1 and 1.2.1 as necessary. 
Specifically, the CE will be expected to: 
−  Participate  in  the  Annual  Work  Planning  &  Budgeting  of  the  Programme  and  produce  
the market related infrastructure sub-component plans & budgets; 
−  Contribute to potential interventions identification, screening and prioritization; 
−  Develop the Terms of Reference (ToRs) for the consulting firms (consultants) to be 
contracted  to  design  and  supervise  the  market  related  infrastructure  works 
(Warehouses and storage facilities, town and road side market sheds, feeder road 
spot rehabilitation, etc.); 
−  Manage the contracting and supervision of the consultants; 
−  Review the consultants design reports, including drawings, technical specifications, 
Bill  of  Quantities  (BoQs)  and  cost  estimates,  to  ensure  completeness  and 
compliance with policies, guidelines & standards; 
−  Verify and approve consultants’ invoices; 
−  Take  part 
in 
the  bidding  process  of  market 
infrastructure 
construction/rehabilitation  by:  contributing  to  the  preparation  of  bidding 
documents,  tendering  of  works,  providing  clarifications  to  bidders, technical  and 
financial evaluation of bids and recommendation for the award of contracts; 
related 
151 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
− 
In collaboration with the Procurement Officer, manage the contracting process for 
the market related infrastructures construction contracts; 
−  Before infrastructure works begin, verify and approve the project implementation 
plan presented by the contractor; 
−  Monitor the construction progress and compliance with the contract specifications, 
implementation plans and timeframe to ensure that planned time, cost and quality 
are adhered to. Additionally, ensure the supervising consultants are performing as 
expected, receive and review construction progress reports, participate in periodic 
site  meetings,  verify  and  approve  contractors’  payments  submittals  (Interim 
Payment Certificates, Variation Orders, Completion Certificates, etc.) and manage 
notifications to the contractors (defects, liquidated damages, etc.) and any other 
issues as specified in the general and special conditions of contracts; 
Identify the required Operation and Maintenance (O&M) trainings for the different 
categories  of  market  related  infrastructure  implemented,  and  supervise  the 
delivery of the trainings as necessary; 
− 
−  Participate  in  stakeholder  meetings  &  workshops  that  are  of  interest  to  the 
implementation of market related infrastructure; 
−  Provide assistance to the FPCU and RPCUs to support the implementation of other 
PACT  activities  (mainly  under  sub-components  1.1  and  1.2.1)  requiring  civil 
engineering advice and expertise; 
−  Produce scheduled progress reports on the implementation of the market related 
infrastructure; 
−  Assist  the  FPCU  in  the  preparation  and  organization  of  the  programme 
implementation  support  missions,  supervision  missions  and  mid-term  review 
mission, and implement missions' recommendations and agreed actions related to 
sub-component 1.2.2; 
−  Any other functions as the PM may assign. 
Key Qualifications and experience: 
−  A minimum of a Bachelors’ Degree in Civil Engineering, Infrastructure Engineering 
or an equivalent field; 
−  A  minimum  of  eight  (8)  years  general  professional  experience  in  rural  infrastructure  
management,  including  at  least  three  (3)  relevant  specific  experiences  in  the  design  
and/or supervision of civil works (buildings, feeder roads, small bridges, etc.); 
−  Proven  experience  and  familiarity  with  field  work  related  to  rural  communities' 
development; 
−  Experience with projects funded by an international funding agency would be an 
advantage; 
−  Proven ability to interact competently with Federal/Regional authorities on issues 
relating to rural infrastructure development; 
−  Excellent oral and written communication skills in English; 
Senior Agronomist 
The Agronomist will provide leadership and technical guidance to support the production 
enhancement activities under Sub-component 1.3. S/he will coordinate and build strong 
working relationships between the relevant technical directorates to provide training for 
DAs/FTs and farmers. 
The  agronomist  will  be  based  in  Addis  Ababa  and  reporting  directly  to  the  Programme 
Coordinator.  Specific duties of the Agronomist include, but are not limited to the following: 
Project Implementation: 
152 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
−  Provide  overall  strategic  guidance  on  agronomic,  farming  systems, input  access, 
seed  systems,  demonstration  practices  to  achieve the  productivity  enhancement 
objectives 
−  Assist in the preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
−  Support  technical  training  activities  for  DA/FT-  research  linkages,  forage,  small 
stock 
−  Coordinate  support  from  relevant  technical  departments,  regional  bureaus  to 
provide training and extension services 
−  Participate in the coordination workshops and meetings 
−  Work  closely  with  relevant  staff  and  support  nutrition  (IHF),  gender,  and 
environment mainstreaming in extension approaches 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning: 
− 
In  coordination  with  the  PMU  Monitoring,  Evaluation  and  Learning  specialist, 
provide  guidance  to  PACT  and  partners  in  the  design  and/or  enhancement  of 
participatory M&E tools  and protocols to strengthen data collection, analysis  and 
reporting and Knowledge management. 
−  Assist in the design and implementation of baseline, mid-term and final evaluations 
and ensure follow-up of findings/recommendations to improve program quality 
−  Prepare  contributions  to  progress  reports  focusing  on  production  and  extension 
related aspects; 
Qualifications and experience: She/he should hold at least a Master’s degree in agricultural 
sciences  with  particular  emphasis  on  extension,  agronomy  and/or  soil  science.  Other 
attributes / experience should include: 
− 
Innovative,  energetic  individual  with  demonstrated  contributions  to  the  field  of 
agriculture and committed to seeing measurable impacts at farm level. 
−  5  to  10  years  of  working  experience  with  participatory  extension  approaches  in 
technology transfer in the Ethiopian context. 
−  Demonstrated  capacity  to  take  on  a  leadership  position  with  strong  managerial 
skills and capacity to manage people and interact with a wide range of public sector 
representatives,  as  well  as  managers  and  implementers  of  large-scale  rural  / 
community / SME development programmes. 
−  Competency in field data collection, monitoring, analysis and reporting. 
−  Excellent communication skills - including fluency in English 
Nutrition Officer 
PACT PMU will ensure adequate human and financial resources are allocated to drive the 
successful implementation of the nutrition-sensitive activities of the programme. In this 
regard, PACT will recruit a Nutrition officer at Federal and Regional level, as well as appoint 
a Nutrition focal point at Zonal and/or Woreda level. 
The  Federal  and  Regional  Nutrition  officers  will  be  100%  dedicated  to  PACT  roles  and 
responsibilities on nutrition, as follows. 
Main responsibility 
The nutrition officers will be responsible to coordinate and facilitate the implementation of 
the  nutrition  interventions  defined  in  programme  at  national,  regional  and  landscape 
levels. She/He will work closely with the IFAD nutrition specialists (Country and regional) 
to ensure the operationalization of nutrition mainstreaming in the project investments. 
Specific duties 
153 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Conduct the analysis of food security and nutrition situation in the project locations, 
tailor the project ́s nutrition  strategy and develop the action plan in coordination 
with the other PMU experts; 
In close liaison with other PMU staff, ensure adequate integration of nutrition in the 
Project  documents  such  as  Project  Implementation  Manual  during  the  start-up 
phase, M&E and MIS system, Annual Work Plan and Budget and Progress reports; 
In collaboration with the project M&E specialist, ensure adequate data collection on 
nutrition indicators and entry in the Project’s M&E database (e.g. develop terms of 
reference for baseline/endline studies, design additional studies including food and 
nutrition survey or food Knowledge Attitudes and Practice survey); 
Leveraging the relevant technical support required, develop PACT Nutrition Social 
Behaviour  Change  Communication  strategy  and  coordinate  its  operationalization 
(including but not limited to development of materials, contracting of production 
and radio broadcast companies); 
In close liaison with the IFAD staff, support the documentation of best practices 
and lessons learned for in-country and global dissemination; 
Establish and maintain working relationships with the Ministry of Agriculture Food 
and  Nutrition  Coordination  Office,  as  well  as  key  line  ministries  (such  as  health, 
gender, education) and forum (e.g., Scale-Up Nutrition, RED-FS) to build synergy 
interventions  and  establish 
in  nutrition-sensitive 
coordination mechanisms; 
Support  the  coordinator  to  establish  local  partnerships  on  nutrition  (UN,  NGOs, 
Research  centres,  Private  sector,  CSO)  to  support  implementation  and  technical 
assistance; 
Facilitate  the  implementation  of  nutrition  activities  in  close  collaboration  with 
relevant stakeholders (e.g., regional, zonal and woreda experts, NGO and research 
partners, any other service providers); 
Coordinate  capacity  building  and  training  sessions  on  nutrition-sensitive 
interventions for project staff, implementers and extension workers; 
Track and document substantive data and information on food security and nutrition 
indicators  and  maintain  regular  progress  reporting  especially  at  supervision, 
midterm and completion; 
Work collaboratively with the PMU experts in charge of gender, youth and climate 
to  ensure  an  integrated  approach  in  the  programme  interventions  design  and 
implementation; 
Perform other duties as required in the overall operations of the project. 
interventions 
in  project 
Minimum qualifications and experience: 
−  Advanced  University/college  degree  from  an  accredited  institution  in  the  field  of 
Human Nutrition, food science, public health, environmental health or equivalent 
in a field related to food security. 
−  At  least  2  years  of  experience  in,  and  demonstrated  understanding  of  food  and 
nutrition initiatives in Ethiopia. 
−  Experience in training and capacity building is required. 
−  Knowledge  on  the  interactions  between  nutrition,  gender,  youth  and  climate 
change is strongly desirable. 
−  Experience  of  interacting  with  a  variety  of  internal  and  external  stakeholders  is 
desirable. 
−  Strong project management and coordination skills; and basic knowledge on M&E 
is desirable. 
−  Fluency in English and Amharic. 
154 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Environmental Safeguard Specialist 
Objective/Purpose of the Assignment 
The environment specialist objective is to lead the implementation of Environmental, Social 
and  Climate  Management  Framework  and  the  preparation  and  implementation  of  sub 
project  specific  Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessments  (ESIA)  as  well  as 
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plans (ESCMP). 
Skills Required 
The specialist is expected to have a multidisciplinary environmental management technical 
background, good understanding and knowledge. 
Specific tasks: 
The environment specialist is responsible to make sure compliance of PACT implementation 
to IFAD’s SECAP 2021a as well as environmental proclamations and regulations issued by 
the government of Ethiopia. The specific tasks are: 
−  Support regions and other implementing organs in the screening, categorizations 
of projects/sub projects 
−  Training of staffs and other implementer such as regional PMU on Environmental 
safeguard  practices  by  developing  training  manuals.  The  training  should  be 
cascaded up to Watershed management associations. 
−  Prepare a generic reporting template and conduct periodic compliance monitoring 
against the ESCMP and prepare report 
−  Conduct internal environmental audit and facilitate external audit of project by EPA 
or other independent organization 
−  Recommend possible mitigation and corrective measures when needed 
−  Ensure implementation of the Integrated Pest Management Plan 
−  Support the establishment and strengthening of GRM system at all level 
−  Work  closely  with  other  PMU staff  such  as irrigation  engineer,  climate  specialist, 
procurement, watershed expert to ensure adequate consideration of environmental 
issues into project development and implementation 
−  Ensure that PACT interventions are in compliance with GOE environmental, social 
and  climate-related  policies,  proclamations  and  directives  as  well  as  IFAD’s 
safeguards requirements 
−  Develop thematic specific management plans which can be easily adapted for each 
watershed, as appropriate. These include: Pesticide Management Plan, Dam Safety 
Plan, Emergency Response Plan, Waste Management Plan, Biodiversity Action Plan, 
Integrated Soil Conservation and Nutrient Management Plan; Cultural Heritage Plan 
or Chance Find Procedure, Traffic Management Plan (for construction phase); 
−  Disclose the ESCMF, ESCMP, ESIA 
−  Performs other duties as assigned by the project coordinator 
Minimum qualifications and experience: 
−  Advanced  University  degree  from  an  accredited  institution  in  the  field  of 
Environmental Sciences, Engineering, Environment and Development, Agriculture, 
Applied Science or equivalent in a field related environment. 
−  At least 8/10 years of experience in environment management, ESIA, ESMP, 
−  Experience in effective stakeholder engagement and grievance redress systems; 
−  Practical  experience  in  application  of  environmental  management  approaches  in 
the agricultural sector 
−  Experience in training and capacity building is required. 
155 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
−  Experience  of  interacting  with  a  variety  of  internal  and  external  stakeholders  is 
desirable. 
−  Strong project management and coordination skills; and basic knowledge on M&E 
is desirable. 
−  Fluency in English and Amharic. 
Financial Management Officer 
a)  Job  Purpose:  The  Programme  Finance  Manager  will  be  required  to  design  and 
implement the necessary accounting and financial management systems to address the 
Programme’s needs in responding to the objectives. The systems to be designed, 
should focus on but should not be limited to budgeting, accounting, internal control, 
reporting and external auditing. 
b)  Key responsibilities: 
−  Develop,  implement,  modify,  and  document  record-keeping  and  accounting 
systems,  making  use  of  the  accounting  software  -  implement  the  accounting 
software; 
−  Prepare, examine, and analyze accounting records; 
−  Perform  or  ensure  regular  reconciliations  are  prepared  for  relevant  account 
balances for review and endorsement by the Programme Coordinator; 
−  Prepare  examine,  and  analyze  monthly,  quarterly  (Quarterly  Interim  Financial 
Reports) and annual financial reports; 
−  Analyze  operations,  trends,  costs, 
financial  commitments,  and 
obligations,  so  as  to  prepare  Programme  and  provide  advice  to  the  Programme 
Coordinator accordingly; 
incomes, 
−  Develop, maintain, and analyze budgets comparing budgeted costs to actual costs 
on periodic basis; 
−  Prepare  or  update  existing  forms  and  manuals  for  accounting  and  bookkeeping 
personnel, and direct their work activities; 
−  Ensure and maintain a proper filing system for Programme accounting records; 
−  Ensure compliance with relevant financial procedures, guidelines and standards; 
− 
−  Supervise the work of Accountants or any  other accounting staff assigned to the 
Initiate or conduct inventories and other relevant controls on assets; 
Programme; 
−  Compile and consolidate SOEs for the PCU and review SOEs for the IA for approval; 
−  Liaising  with  the  Accountants  and  Procurement  officers  at  PCU  and  IA  to  ensure 
that SOEs withdrawal applications are prepared on time; 
−  Survey operations to ascertain accounting needs and to recommend, develop, and 
provide solutions to financial problems; 
−  Advise Programme  management  about  issues  such  as  resource  utilization  and  other 
matters pertaining to financial management; 
−  Prepare the Programme for external audits within the stipulated time-frames; 
−  Help build PACT PROGRAMME’s capacity in accounting and financial management. 
c)  Reporting: 
The Programme Finance Manager shall be a member of the Programme coordination team 
and shall report to the Programme Coordinator. 
d)  Qualification and Experience: 
−  A Bachelor’s Degree in Accounting from a recognized university; 
−  Additional professional qualification such as CPA, ACCA, etc are a requirement; 
−  Must  possess  at  least  7  years  of  experience  in  accounting  and  financial 
management  of  which  at  least 5  years must be  working  experience  with  donor- 
funded Programmes/Programmes; 
156 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
−  Must  be  computer  literate  with  demonstrable  proficiency  in  Microsoft  Word  and 
Excel and any other relevant application including accounting software; 
−  Must  have  excellent  writing,  presentation  and  interpersonal  skills,  excellent 
analytical  skills  and  ability  to  effectively  communicate  with  a  broad  range  of 
audiences 
Capacity Building and Gender Specialist 
PACT PMU will ensure adequate human and financial resources are allocated 
to drive the successful implementation of the gender and social inclusion (with 
particular  emphasis  on  youth  and  person  with  disabilities)  activities  of  the 
programme.  In  this  regard,  PACT  will  recruit  a  Gender  and  Social  Inclusion 
officer at Federal and Regional level, as well as appoint a Gender and Social 
Inclusion  focal  point  at  Zonal  and/or  Woreda  level.  The  Gender  and  Social 
Inclusion Officer will be responsible for ensuring the programme targeting is 
fully inclusive regardless of gender, age, disability and all other social issues. 
He/she  will  ensure  that  the  programme  has  a  clear  strategy  for  social 
inclusiveness  and  that  the  strategy  has  a  clear  mechanism  for  measuring 
inclusiveness. 
The Federal and Regional GSI officers will be 100% dedicated to PACT roles 
and responsibilities on gender and social inclusion, as follows. 
Roles and responsibilities 
the  gender 
The  GSI  officers  will  be  responsible  to  coordinate  and  facilitate  the 
implementation  of 
transformative  programming,  youth, 
pastoralists  inclusion,  disability  inclusion  interventions  defined  in  the 
programme at national, regional and landscape levels. She/he will work closely 
with the IFAD Gender and Social Inclusion specialists (country and regional) 
to ensure the operationalization of gender transformative programming, youth 
and persons with disability mainstreaming in the project investments. 
Under the general supervision of the project director, the project GSI officer 
will  perform  activities  in  five  main  areas  to  mainstream  gender  and  social 
inclusion: 
Project Implementation: 
−  Advise  and support the project manager, other members of the PMU 
and  field  officers  in the  effective mainstreaming  of targeting,  gender 
and social inclusion in project activities; 
−  Ensure  that  the  IFAD  gender  and  social  inclusiveness  policy  is 
incorporated in the implementation of the programme at PMU level as 
well within the projects supported by PACT 
−  Work closely with M&E Specialist to ensure that reporting formats and 
planning  tools  are  sensitive  social  inclusiveness  and  facilitates  reporting  
that  clearly  demonstrate  participation  in  terms  of  gender, youth  and 
other marginalized groups; 
−  Conduct  the  analysis  of  gender  and  social  inclusion  situation  in  the 
project locations, develop a comprehensive gender and social inclusion 
strategy  and  develop  the  action  plan  (that  needs  to  be  updated 
regularly) in coordination with the other PMU experts; 
−  Ensure  assessments  conducted  under  PACT  will  apply  a  gender  and 
youth  and  disability-inclusive  lens  to  identify  bottlenecks  hampering 
their successful participation in project activities; 
157 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
−  Provide technical oversight through training, coaching, and mentoring 
of programme staff on social inclusion; 
−  Facilitate 
the 
implementation  of 
transformative 
programming,  youth  and  disability  inclusion  activities  in  close 
collaboration  with  relevant  stakeholders  (e.g.,  regional,  zonal  and 
woreda  experts,  NGO  and  research  partners,  any  other  service 
providers) 
the  gender 
−  Facilitate value-chain relevant and gender-sensitive, disability sensitive 
and youth-friendly trainings, including agripreneurship training under 
component 2.2; 
−  Work with other PMU experts to critically review project design to see 
how each component and subcomponent addresses gender and social 
inclusion 
for  strengthening 
implementation for a gender and social inclusion perspective 
identify  opportunities 
issues,  and 
−  Ensure  planning  and  implementation  of  project  activities  particularly 
activities  that  require  acquisition  of  land  pass  through  genuine 
pastoralists participation and the consent of people living on and around 
the land are sought prior to doing anything on their land 
−  Facilitate  and  give  training  on  regional  and  woreda  project 
implementing  experts  on  free  prior  and  informed  consent  (FPIC) 
processes in line with requirements of IFAD and other partners such as 
GCF for projects implemented at the lowlands where pastoralism and 
other traditional livelihood strategies are followed 
−  Review  basic  project  implementation  processes  to  provide  feedback 
and suggestions on how to achieve the best possible project outcomes 
with respect to targeting, gender equality and women’s empowerment, 
and social inclusion; 
− 
Identify  best  financing  model  under  sub-component  2.2  and  ensure 
implementation is inclusive to rural youth, thereby reviewing manual 
under gender and social inclusion lens; 
−  Under  the  guidance  of IFAD HQs  relevant  department  (IP)  and IFAD 
Ethiopia’s  country  team  and  in  consultation  with  PACT  national  and 
regional  PMUs,  s/he  ensures  FPIC  plans  and  budgets  are  made  an 
integral part of PACT's woredas implementation plans 
− 
In consultation with national PMU and regions technically supports FPIC 
process  planning  and  implementation  in  the  woredas  where  FPIC 
process will be undertaken 
−  The specialist regularly collects data, analysis it and shares updates on 
the status of FPIC process rollout, documents key learnings from the 
process and shares the lessons with relevant stakeholders 
−  Ensure  that  activities  of  the  gender,  targeting  and  social  inclusion 
strategy are reflected in the following: 
−  Preparation of the AWP/B 
−  Design and implementation of the project M&E system 
−  Project progress reports 
−  Project supervision 
−  Participate in the development of detailed ToRs and tender documents 
of national and local service providers to various project components 
158 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
to ensure that target groups will be able to participate effectively in all 
components and meet the project’s targets 
M&E and Knowledge Management: 
−  Together with the M&E and knowledge management staff, establish an 
M&E  system  that  captures  disaggregated  data  on  gender  and  social 
inclusion (age, disability, etc); 
−  Work with the knowledge management and communication  officer to 
ensure  that  knowledge  management  products  of  PACT  programme 
apply social inclusiveness sensitivity; 
−  Document and share M&E, learning and communication products 
−  Document  lessons  learned,  good  practices  on  gender  and  social 
inclusion including pastoralists; 
−  Analyse  data  to  ensure  that  there  are  no  adverse  impacts  on  target 
groups  as  a  result  of  project  implementation  and  suggest  remedial 
measures if necessary. 
Capacity Building: 
−  Undertake regular capacity assessment on gender and social inclusion 
issues  and  provide  capacity-building for  staff  at  the  field  level,  PMU, 
implementing partners and service providers 
−  Provide technical oversight through training, coaching, and mentoring 
of programme staff on social inclusion 
−  Coordinate 
the  capacity  needs  assessment, 
training  manual 
including  training  modules,  courses  and  curricula 
preparation 
development, training materials development, etc.; 
−  Identify stakeholders’ capacity gaps and propose possible solutions 
−  Coordinate training of trainers; 
−  Coordinate the finalization of annual training plans and calendar before 
the commencement of the year and consolidation; 
−  Coordinate  the  periodical  review  of  the  annual  training  plan 
implementation and follow-up in collaboration with regional PCMUs; 
−  Coordinate  the  reviewing,  updating  and  fine-tuning  of  the  training 
modules  based  on  feedback  and  inputs  from  trainees  and  regional 
PCMUs; 
−  Identify  training  institutions,  training  providers  or  resource  persons 
that  are  critical  for  the  Programme  and  facilitate  the  plan 
implementation accordingly including the training to women’s groups, 
women IWUA members, etc.; 
−  Develop criteria for selection of participants for international study visits 
and overseas courses; 
−  Prepare  periodical  and  annual  reports  on  the  progress  and 
implementation  status  of  Capacity  Building  activities  for  the  entire 
programme; and 
−  Coordinate the training activities for the IWUAs, women’s groups and 
conduct special reviews with regard to their quality and output result 
and make changes or modifications in consultation with the respective 
Regions. 
−  Ensure  that  gender  is  mainstreamed  across  the  program,  including 
training  materials, monitoring,  operations,  and design  activities that 
target women and girls within the scope of the programme; 
−  Facilitate gender trainings with program staff and program stakeholders; 
−  Conduct  project  gender  analysis  with  key  findings  and  actionable 
recommendations,  and  integrate  analysis  results  into  a  comprehensive  
gender integration plan; 
−  under  the  guidance  of  IFAD  HQ  department  and  in  consultation  with 
159 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
− 
IFAD MCO in Addis Ababa and programme implementing partners, the 
specialist plans for FPIC ToT training for National and Regional PMUs 
In consultation with the IFAD country team and with the guidance of 
IFAD  HQ,  the  specialist  supports  the  planning  and  rollout  of  FPIC 
training by PACT Regional PMUs to their project woredas 
−  Review  and  provide  input  to  project  work  plans,  with  attention  to 
gender dimensions of technical activities and operations, and discuss 
gender  issues  and  priorities  with  project  senior  management  and  other 
technical specialists; 
−  Assist in the collection and analysis of sex-disaggregated data 
Communication: 
−  Liaise with the IFAD country office and gender and social inclusion team 
on  questions  regarding  gender  transformative programing  and  social 
inclusion in implementation, knowledge sharing and other aspects 
−  Serve as a channel of communication between the project and others 
working  on  gender  and  social  inclusion  issues  in  government, 
implementing agencies, other development partners and IFAD 
−  Help  project  colleagues  access  the  information  they  may  need  on 
gender and social inclusion issues and share good practices 
Advocacy and networking: 
−  Be familiar with gender and social inclusion policies of the institutions 
linked to the project, including national policies and those of ministries, 
implementing institutions and financing agencies, including IFAD 
−  Establish  linkages  with  other  gender,  women’s  or  social  inclusion 
and 
by 
implemented 
international 
national, 
programmes 
intergovernmental agencies 
−  Develop  strategic  partnership  with  relevant  agencies  from  the 
government,  CSOs,  OPDs  and  other  service  providers  engaged  in 
gender, women’s and social inclusion programmes 
−  Present  evidence-based  information  on  good  practices in  gender 
transformative programming and social inclusion in national forums 
Qualifications and Experience: 
−  Masters  degree  in  social  sciences,  rural  development  or  related 
discipline 
−  At least five years working experience on gender and social inclusion 
issues 
−  Experience in agriculture and rural development projects 
−  Experience in designing and delivering inclusive training modules 
−  Highly motivated and committed to gender equality and social inclusion 
−  Working knowledge of spoken and written English and Amharic 
160 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Procurement Officer 
The Procurement Officer will be responsible for all procurement under the Programme and 
for maintaining all procurement documentation in good order. 
Specific responsibilities: 
a)  Installation of appropriate procurement systems and procedures for effective planning 
and monitoring of procurements under the Programme; 
b)  Communicate to all implementing entities and service providers their responsibilities 
and requirements with respect to procurement in keeping with IFAD requirements and 
the prevailing government practices that are acceptable to IFAD; 
c)  Preparation and consolidation of the annual Procurement Plan; 
d)  Monitor implementation of contracts: report status and problems to the Programme 
Coordinator,  and  intervene  to  address  problem  upon  request  by  the  Programme 
Coordinator; 
e)  Maintain all procurement records in a form appropriate for regular auditing; 
f)  Ensure that goods and services financed have been procured in accordance with the 
grant/loan agreement; 
g)  Coordinate preparation of ToRs for consultancy services and technical specifications 
for all procurement, in conjunction with the relevant technical government personnel; 
h)  Undertake  local  shopping  for  goods  and  services  where  this  falls  within  the 
procurement guidelines; 
i)  Prepare tender documents in the required format and advertising or inviting bids from 
qualified (or pre-qualified) suppliers; 
j)  Convene and support bid evaluation committees to undertake technical evaluation of 
bids  or  proposals  for  supply  of  goods  and  services.  Ensure  that  Evaluation  Committees  
have people with appropriate expertise; 
k)  Approve  progressive  payments  to  contractors  against  the  agreed  milestones  or 
outputs; 
l)  Maintain a register of approved suppliers for smaller items procured locally; 
m)  Prepare  quarterly  and  annual  reports  of  progress  with  implementation  of  the 
Procurement Plan, and regularly inform the Programme Coordinator of problems and 
make proposals to overcome bottlenecks; and 
n)  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Programme Coordinator. 
Qualifications and experience: 
a)  A Master’s degree in purchasing and supply, economics, finance or law; or equivalent 
management  qualification  with  significant  training  and  practical  experience  in 
procurement  within  government  Programmes  supported  by  international  financial 
institutions; 
b)  He/she  will  have  a  sound  understanding  of  procurement  withing  the  Ethiopia's 
environment  and  the  protocols  and  procedures  applying  to  internationally  financed 
Programmes and Programmes in the country; 
c)  He/she would have at least 8 years of work experience in procurement and contracting 
preferably; and 
d)  The job holder must possess advanced working knowledge and skills of MS Office (MS 
Word, MS Excel and MS Access). 
Competencies: 
a)  Ability to work well in teams and to interact with a wide range of private sector partners 
and government representatives; 
b)  Knowledge of work planning and reporting; 
c)  Excellent analytical skills; 
d)  Honesty and Integrity; 
e)  Strong written and oral communication skills in English; and 
f)  Able to work independently, with limited supervision. 
161 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Regional PCMU Staff 
Job Title: Regional Programme Coordinator 
Duty Station: Respective Regions 
Reports to: BoA 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
−  Guide, supervise and coordinate the activities and functions of the core team of the 
RPCU; 
−  Coordinate the training programme at the regional level; 
−  Coordinate  all  activities  relating  to  the  Participatory  Small-scale  Irrigation 
Development Programme in the Region; 
−  Provide  support  and  facilities  to  IFAD  supervision  and  implementation  support 
missions; 
−  Flag the policy gaps  and identifying critical issues  in programme implementation 
and  submit  them  to  the  Regional  Steering  Committee  for  its  consideration,  and 
take actions to address the constraints at appropriate level; 
−  Ensure programme expenditures are incurred in accordance with the provisions of 
IFAD Finance Agreement; 
−  Ensure that the Finance Agreement covenants are completed before the specified 
dates; 
−  Ensure  that  the  annual work  plans  and  budgets  (AWPBs)  are  prepared  and 
submitted in accordance with the IFAD Finance Agreement to the RSC for approval; 
−  Ensure that the required details for the preparation of Withdrawal Applications are 
submitted to FPCU in time and in accordance with expenditure categories; 
−  Ensure that the programme financial and physical progress reports are submitted 
in compliance with the programme documentation and requirements of IFAD and 
the government; 
−  Undertake  field  visits  for  coordination,  meetings  with  the  Woreda  coordinators, 
programme clients, donors, etc. 
−  Prepare regular quarterly reports for the RSC and FPCU, and facilitate convening 
the meetings of the RSC and keep records of all minutes and provide compliance 
reports 
The  Regional  Programme  Coordinator  will  be  a  person  with  a  post-graduate  degree  in 
agricultural  economics  or  agronomy,  or  irrigation/agricultural  engineer,  or  agricultural 
extension,  or  natural  resources  management,  having  related  experience  of  about  10  years, 
with a proven track record of effective management, integrity, and a deep understanding 
of agriculture and related areas. 
The Bo-ANR will recruit regional programme coordinator. He/she would hold full time office 
without any additional responsibilities within BoANR. His/her continuation in the position 
will depend on satisfactory annual assessment of his  or  her  work. The suitability of the 
identified  candidate  for  the  post  of  Programme  Coordinator  will  be  subject  to  prior 
concurrence of IFAD. 
Job Title: Regional Irrigation Engineer 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
The PACT/RPCU Regional Irrigation Engineer (RIE) will be expected to: 
−  Participate  in  the  Annual  Work  Planning  &  Budgeting  of  the  Programme  and  produce 
the  water infrastructure sub-component  plans  &  budgets  relevant  to  the  specific 
region; 
162 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
−  Work  with  Woreda  and  reconnaissance  teams  to  elaborate  prefeasibility  rapid 
− 
assessment reports; 
In  consultation  with  the  FPCU,  Woreda  coordinators,  Kebele  administration  and 
WUAs, identify, screen and prioritize potential interventions as per the Programme 
Implementation Manual (PIM); 
−  Develop the Terms of Reference (ToRs) for the consulting firms (consultants) to be 
contracted  to  develop  feasibility  studies  and  those  to  be  contracted  to  develop 
detailed  designs  and  supervise  the  water  infrastructure  works  (Irrigation  and 
Drainage Schemes, Multi-purpose Water Systems, etc.); 
−  Manage the contracting and supervision of the consultants; 
−  Support the establishment and strengthening of Water Users Associations (WUAs); 
−  Review  the  consultants'  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs  findings,  quality, 
and compliance with guidelines & standards and ensure that these are technically 
feasible, economically viable and environmentally and socially sustainable. 
−  Take part in the bidding process of water infrastructure construction/rehabilitation 
including  reviewing  the  bidding  documents,  tendering  of  works,  providing 
clarifications  to  bidders,  technical  and 
financial  evaluation  of  bids  and 
recommendation for the award of contracts; 
−  Before infrastructure works begin, verify and approve the project implementation 
plan presented by the contractor; 
−  Monitor  the  overall  construction  progress  and  compliance  with  the  contract 
specifications, implementation plans  and timeframe to ensure that planned time, 
cost and quality are adhered to. 
−  Ensure  that  supervising  consultants  are  performing  as  expected,  receive  and  review  
construction progress reports, conduct site visits, verify and approve contractors’ 
payments  submittals  and  manage  notifications  to  the  contractors  (defects, 
liquidated  damages,  etc.)  and  any  other  issues  as  specified  in  the  general  and 
special conditions of contracts; 
−  Ensure that schemes tail-enders report adequate water delivery; 
− 
Identify the required Operation and Maintenance (O&M) training for the WUAs, and 
supervise the delivery of the training as necessary; 
−  Produce  scheduled  progress  reports  on  the  implementation  of  the  water 
infrastructure in the specific region; 
−  Assist  the  FPCU/RPCU  in  the  preparation  and  organization  of  the  programme 
implementation  support  missions,  supervision  missions  and  mid-term  review 
mission, and implement missions’ recommendations and agreed actions related to 
sub-component 1.2; 
−  Any other functions the PM may assign. 
Key Qualifications and experience: 
−  A minimum of a Bachelors’ Degree in Irrigation Engineering, Water Infrastructure 
Engineering or an equivalent field; 
−  A  minimum  of  eight (8) years  general  professional  experience  relevant to  water 
and irrigation engineering, including at least three (2) specific experiences in the 
design  and/or  supervision  of  water  related  projects  in  rural  context  (Irrigation 
systems, Drainage systems, multi-purpose water systems, etc.); 
−  Proven  experience  and  familiarity  with  field  work  related  to  rural  communities’ 
development; 
−  Experience with projects funded by an international funding agency would be an 
advantage; 
−  Proven ability to interact competently with Federal/Regional authorities on  issues 
relating to rural infrastructure development; 
−  Excellent oral and written communication skills in English. 
163 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Job Title: Regional Capacity Building and Gender Specialist 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
−  Facilitate  the  capacity  needs  assessment,  training  manual  preparation  including 
training  modules,  courses  and  curricula  development,  training  materials 
development, etc.; 
−  Coordinate training of trainers; 
−  Prepare the annual training plans and calendar before the commencement of the 
year and consolidation; 
−  Review  periodically  the  annual  training  plan  implementation  and  follow-up  in 
collaboration with the Woreda Focal person; 
−  Facilitate the Reviewing, updating and fine-tuning the training modules based on 
− 
feedback and inputs from trainees and Woreda Focal person; 
Identify training institutions, training providers or resource persons that are critical 
to the Programme and facilitate their implementation including for the women; 
−  Develop criteria for selection of participants for experience sharing and study tour 
inter and intra Region 
−  Prepare periodical and annual reports on the progress and implementation status 
of training activities for the regional programme; 
−  Coordinate the training activities for the IWUAs members and women’s groups and 
conduct reviews with regard to their quality and output result and make changes 
or modifications in consultation with the respective Zone/Woreda. 
−  Ensure  that  gender  is  mainstreamed  across  the  Regional  program  activities  through  
training materials  preparation,  monitoring,  operations,  and  design  activities  that 
target women and girls within the scope of the programme; 
−  Facilitate gender trainings with program staff and program stakeholders; 
−  Conduct  project  gender  analysis  with  key 
findings  and  actionable 
recommendations,  and  integrate  analysis  results  into  a  comprehensive  gender 
integration plan; 
−  Review  and  provide  input  to  project  work  plans,  with  attention  to  gender 
dimensions  of  technical  activities  and  operations,  and  discuss  gender issues  and 
priorities with project senior management and other technical specialists; 
−  Under the guidance of IFAD Ethiopia’s country team and in consultation with PACT 
national  and  regional  PMUs,  s/he  ensures  FPIC  plans  and  budgets  are  made  an 
integral part of PACT's woredas implementation plans 
− 
−  Under  the  guidance  of  IFAD  MCO  in  Addis  Ababa  and  programme  implementing 
partners, the specialist plans for FPIC ToT training for National and Regional PMUs 
In consultation with the IFAD country team and with the guidance of IFAD HQ, the 
specialist supports the planning and rollout of FPIC training by PACT Regional PMUs 
to their project woredas 
In consultation  with  national  PMU  and  regions  technically  supports  FPIC  process 
planning and implementation in the woredas where FPIC process will be undertaken 
−  The specialist regularly collects data, analysis it and shares updates on the status 
of FPIC process rollout, documents key learnings from the process and shares the 
lessons with relevant stakeholders 
− 
−  Assist in the collection and analysis of sex-disaggregated data; 
−  Any other tasks as assigned by the Regional Programme Coordinator. 
Qualification and Experience 
The  Specialist  will  be  a  person  with  a post  graduate university  degree in  management, 
economics,  Gender  and  Development  Studies  or  related  fields  with  about  8  years' 
experience, preferably in planning training programmes. 
Job Title: M & E, Knowledge Management and Learning (ME and KML) 
Specialist 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
Ensure the  establishment  and  operation  of  the  overall  programme  M&E  system  and 
compliance with the overall requirements; 
164 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Ensure that the M&E of the participating institutions  are adequate to provide the 
required information for timely preparation and submission of progress reports; 
Ensure the operation of the programme M&E and knowledge management systems 
at  the  regional  level  and  their  vertical  integration  with  the  Federal  PCU  and  the 
project Woredas; 
Participate actively  in revising the programme objective hierarchy  and log-frame 
matrix in line with the changing implementation context; 
Respond  to  information  needs  of  programme  management,  implementing  partners, 
primary stakeholders, the cooperating institution and funding agencies; 
Provide data and information to performance questions, key indicators and targets 
for each programme component and for each level of the objective hierarchy in the 
required formats; 
Review existing social and economic  data for  the programme area to assess if it 
can provide good baseline data for impact evaluation and identify gaps to be filled; 
Assist in drawing up the TOR, designing and costing out programme surveys and 
studies; 
Ensure  the  application  of  the  required  formats  and  procedures  for  operational 
monitoring; 
Review  existing  M&E  and  knowledge  management  systems  of  implementing 
partners and identifying where support is needed; 
Collect,  compile  and  analyze  reports  prepared  by  implementing  partners  and 
prepare consolidated progress reports at regional level to timely submit to the PCU 
in accordance with approved reporting formats; 
Review monitoring reports to assess interim impacts and identify causes of potential 
bottlenecks in implementation; 
Collaborate  with  implementing  partners  and  primary  stakeholders  to  develop 
feasible  and  effective  discussion  events  where  M&E  data  are  analyzed  and 
corrective actions can be agreed upon; 
Guide  and  supervise  organizations  that  are  sub-contracted  to  implement  special 
surveys or studies required for evaluating programme effects and impacts; 
Conduct training and facilitate ME and KML design and implementation processes 
with implementing partners and primary stakeholders at regional levels; 
Undertake  and  facilitate  stakeholders  to  implement  the  M&E  plan,  regularly  revising 
and updating performance questions, indicators, methods, formats and analytical 
processes. 
Ensure the programme measures and interventions are well monitored and 
evaluated as an integrated part of the M&E system. 
Ensure  systematic  capture  of  knowledge,  good  practices  and  innovation  are 
documented  and  disseminated/shared  to  improve  programme  implementation, 
including in the development of the AWPB and progress and performance reporting 
system; are well; 
Support  advocacy  efforts  through  providing  evidence  of  programme  impact 
gathered through the M&E system; 
Monitor  and evaluate the implementation of capacity building  activities  for  RPCU 
staff,  woredas  and  others  implementing  partners,  including  coaching  and 
mentoring; 
Provide assistance/guidance in implementing the Programme Learning System; 
Conduct  surveys  and  case  studies  to  assess  achievements  and  outcomes  and 
impacts of the regional program; 
Facilitate multi-stakeholder communication along the seasonal performance of the 
programme including web-based feedback of beneficiaries, private sector partners 
and zonal/woreda administrations; 
Foster partnerships for broader knowledge-sharing and learning; 
Lead the process of preparing the AWPB and progress reports; 
Undertake any other duty as may be revised in the TOR and assigned by the PC. 
Qualification and Experience 
The essential qualifications for the position include a post graduate university degree in 
agricultural  economics,  economics,  statistics,  development  studies  or  related  fields  and 
165 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
about  8-year  experience  in  M&E  functions.  The  BoANR  will  recruit  from  the  market  an 
appropriately qualified experienced person. 
Job Title: Senior Irrigation Agronomist 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
−  Coordinate to the preparation of the programme implementation and agronomic 
manuals 
−  Prepare agricultural development plan for each PACT and PACT scheme with 
detailed cost estimates and facilitate their implementation; 
−  Prepare annual work plan and budget and their implementation for agronomic 
activities 
−  collecting basic agronomic data from each scheme 
−  Review and evaluate agronomy feasibility study of each scheme 
−  Prepare annual AD report 
−  Facilitate training and orientation to Woreda experts DAs, WUAs and kebele 
administration on irrigation agronomy; 
−  Technical advice and follow up for all AD activities (FRGE, Demonstration, Seed 
system development, home garden and nursery management, post-harvest 
handling and nutrition, etc); at each scheme 
−  Facilitate and support for woredas and kebele for the implementation of each AD 
components 
−  Other tasks as may be required by the Regional Programme Coordinator. 
Qualification and Experience: 
The Senior Irrigation Agronomist will be a person with a post-graduate degree in irrigation 
agronomy, Horticulture, plant sciences /Agronomy  having related experience of 8 years, 
preferably  in  agronomic  and  irrigation  water  management  or  a  deep  understanding  of 
irrigated agriculture and related areas. 
Job Title: Financial controller/accountant 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
The  Financial  Controller  or  Accountant  will  be  responsible  for  all  financial  transactions 
under PACT and will work closely with the Regional Programme Coordinator. He/she would 
report to the Regional Programme Coordinator. His/her functions and responsibilities will 
essentially include: 
−  Contributing  to  the  preparation  of  the  programme  implementation  and  financial 
manuals 
−  Facilitating  timely  disbursal  of  programme 
funds  to  the  Woreda  and  other 
stakeholders and compiling SOEs for submitting them to the FPCU; 
−  Ensure that all expenditure is in accordance with IFAD Finance Agreement; 
−  Maintain and monitoring the Special Account and Programme Accounts; 
−  Coordinate  with  the Woreda  Coordinators  to  ensure that  the  SOEs  are  prepared 
and sent to the FPCU on time; 
−  Prepare guidelines for procurement and facilitate procurement of goods and 
services in accordance with IFAD Finance Agreement; 
−  Ensure that the programme accounts are audited in time and audit reports are sent 
to IFAD; 
Such  other  duties  as  may  be  assigned  by the Regional  Programme  Coordinator  include 
attending all RPSC meeting and assisting the PC in compiling his/her reports. 
166 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Qualification and Experience: 
The  essential  qualifications  include  a  postgraduate  degree  in  accounting,  finance  or 
comparable  postgraduate  professional  qualification  and  a  minimum  of  8  to  10  years 
professional experience in financial management, preferably in a managerial position. It 
will be a full-time position exclusive for the PACT. 
Job Title: Agri-business Experts 
Key Duties and Responsibilities: 
The Expert at the RPCU will work under the overall supervision of the RPC and in close 
collaboration with relevant Regional Government and regional program technical staff, and 
key partners such Micro Finance institutions and cooperatives. 
He/she is  responsible  for  initiating  and supporting  efforts  to  get smallholder  farmers  in 
PACT to produce for the market and ensure that all agricultural development supported by 
the  program  is  commercially  sustainable.  The  expert  is  expected  to  have  adequate 
experience in agricultural marketing, business finance and cooperative management. In 
particular, the following are key responsibilities and activities to be performed: 
General issues: 
1.  Ensure  that  the  component  activities  are  properly  implemented,  and  then  the 
expected Results (outputs, outcomes and impacts) are efficiently achieved in line 
with the program objectives in the respective regions. 
2.  Facilitate  regional  forums  and  consultative  meeting  for  agricultural  market  and 
value  chain  entities,  private  sector,  to  build  public-private  partnership  through 
MAAs; 
3.  Ensure adequate inclusion and meaningful participation of young agripreneurs to 
equally benefit from public-private partnerships; 
4.  Prepare annual working program and timely provide progress reports. 
5.  Closely  work  with  program  team  members  at  federal  and  regional  levels, 
implementing  partners,  and  strategic  partners  (such  as  financial  institutions, 
cooperatives, private sectors-value chain actors, etc.) 
6.  Identify  problems  and  challenges  at  the  grassroots  level  regarding  the  product 
value  chains,  financing  and  market  linkages  and  suggest  mitigation  measure  in 
consultation with the program team members and concerned stakeholders. 
7.  Identify the needs for capacity-building of key stakeholder (value chain actors) to 
enable  them  to  overcome constraints  and  realize  the  opportunities  they  face, in 
particular young women and men agripreneurs. 
8.  Provide  technical  support  to  the  agripreneurship  training,  including  ToT  and  training 
to young agripreneurs; 
9.  Present lessons learned and best practices in support of evidence-based decision- 
making processes 
10. Facilitate  and  closely  work  with  consultants  providing  technical  assistances  and 
conducting gender- and youth-sensitive studies connected to the program. 
11. Undertake regular monitoring of activities on the ground. 
12. Perform  other  duties  as  may  be  assigned  by  the  Federal/Regional  Program 
Coordinators. 
Ensure Market Access and Linkages: 
1.  Facilitate the establishment of Market Access Alliances (MAAs) at regional and local 
levels  to  create  strong  collaboration  among  value  chain  actors  and  build  public- 
private  partnerships  (PPP)  to  support  the  commercialization  of  the  programme 
products. 
167 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
2.  Support in  establishing  Regional  and  Zonal/Woreda  market linkages  and  sharing 
best practices; 
3.  Identify, work closely with and gain the trust of stakeholders associated with the 
product value chain, including service providers, local government, and business 
associations in the region. 
4.  Encourage these stakeholders to take progressively greater responsibility for the 
identification and undertaking of joint activities 
5.  Identify  opportunities  for  cooperation  among  value  chain  actors  and  support 
services that will be of collective and mutual benefits, 
6.  Identify  service  providers  that  may  be  able  to  provide  appropriate  capacity- 
building to farmers and other market and value chain actors 
7.  Provide  technical  advice  and  support  to  the  program  team,  implementers  and 
strategic partners in order establish national and regional linkages and sharing best 
practices 
8.  Based  on  gender-  and  youth-sensitive  value-chain  assessments,  identify  core 
constraints  faced  by  women  and  youth  and  identify  entry  points  for  increased 
engagement of women and youth producers and agripreneurs 
9.  Support and facilitate value chain actors to involve in or enhance their capacity to 
add values and reduce post-harvest losses through agro-processing opportunities 
at the farm/household level. 
10. Advice  the  Extension  and  Advisory  Services,  particularly  with  regard  to  the 
participation of extension providers to enhance farm productivity, agribusiness and 
meeting market demands. 
11. Collect market information, Analyse, forecast and prepare a summarized report to 
guide market-oriented production and provide price information 
Ensure access with financial institutions: 
1.  Facilitate collaboration  and  linkages  with  MFIs,  RuSACCOs  and  Banks  to  provide 
loans to farmers and other value chain actors for inputs and medium-scale capital 
assets, and assist in developing means of viable commercial financing 
2.  Facilitate increased access to existing financial services to rural youth and women 
3.  Closely  work  with  the  financial  institutions  on  loan  management  and  ensure  farmers  
operate irrigation farming as a business 
4.  Closely  work  with  the  independent  technical  committee  to  review  business 
proposals and select grant awards 
5.  Prepare  a  detailed  grant  manual,  detailing  application  procedures,  eligibility 
criteria, eligibility investments relevant for young agripreneurs, and monitoring and 
evaluation procedures; 
6.  Facilitate the introduction and utilization of warehouse receipt systems (WRS) by 
smallholder irrigation farmers. 
Minimum Requirements 
Education:  Advanced  Degree  in  Agricultural  Marketing  and  Value  chain, 
Economics,  Cooperative  marketing/ 
Agricultural 
management, Business Administration or comparable professional qualification; 
Economics,  Business 
Technical  and  Functional  Expenses:  Extensive  experiences  in  agribusiness 
development  with  particular  emphasis  on  Market  Access  and  value  chain 
development.  Familiarities  with  government  rural  development  strategies  and 
agricultural marketing and processing are  advantages. Demonstrated experience 
in  agribusiness  development  and  support  with  focus  on  young  agripreneurs.  A 
minimum of eight (8) years professional experience in related areas. 
168 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Job Title: MIS/GIS Specialist 
Duties and Responsibilities: 
−  Assist regional, Zonal/Woreda program staff to collect all field data (survey 
and GIS data, etc.) and ensure its entry into MIS, 
−  Ensure  the  quality  of  data  entry  into  the  M&E,  mapping,  and  reporting 
systems. 
−  Provide  technical  assistance,  including  the  design  and  integration  of  the 
spatial database. 
−  Establish  databases  and  determine  how  best  the  information  can  be 
displayed using GIS. 
−  Liaise  with  implementing  partners  to  collect  their  GIS  data  in  a  usable 
format. 
−  Meet  with  technical  staffs  as  needed  to  define  data  needs  and  project 
requirements and perform spatial analysis using data from the project and 
data  obtained  from  project  woredas’  demographic  and  socio-economic 
survey, 
−  Support  communication,  and  monitoring/evaluation  initiatives  with  GIS 
− 
information, 
Integrate  GIS,  performance  management,  field  monitors  reporting  and 
projects operational databases to generate tabular and cartographic output 
for analysis, 
−  Prepare  the  MIS/GIS  training  materials,  and  design  training  programs  to 
support program functions, 
−  Support  the  capacity  of  M&E  system  in  designing, managing, maintaining 
and  upgrading  the  program  database  as  well  as  develop Web  based  data 
management system 
−  Support  the  program  M&E system in  developing  a  checklist  and  guideline 
for MIS/GIS implementation follow-up. 
−  Provide technical support to ensure system security and control services of 
the program at all levels; 
−  Work in  close collaboration with ME and KML Specialist, specially assist in 
the area of data and information management. 
−  Providing other MIS/GIS related technical supports based on the need of the 
program. 
−  Other duties as may be assigned by the Regional Programme Coordinator. 
Education & Experience: 
Master’s  degree  in  MIS/GIS,  Information  and  Communication  Technology;  6  years  working  
experience  in  the  field;  proven  experience  and  understanding  of  MIS/GIS;  Strong 
computer and communications skills (oral, written, presentation). 
Job Title: Social and Environmental safeguard Specialist 
Duties and Responsibilities: 
−  Ensuring that guidelines for responsible treatment of land-related issues as 
defined  by  IFAD  and  the  Government  of  Ethiopia  are  respected  and  diligently  
followed in all programme activities that involve land acquisition and related 
issues. 
−  Evolve  a  strategy  for  provision  of  effective  training  and  sensitization  on 
social  and  environmental  issues  such  as  empowerment,  Environmental 
protection, 
inclusion,  participation  and  effective  functioning  as  an 
institutional collective such as Water User Associations and other relevant 
user groups and how to effectively integrate the process of addressing these 
issues as part of activities under the programme; 
−  Facilitate the provision of effective training and capacity building in social 
and  environmental  issues  in  the  project  area  through  experienced 
169 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
organizations and practitioners with expertise in this area in a manner that 
this results in the development of a manual of practical do's and don'ts of 
direct relevance to the planning and implementation of the Program. 
−  Use  all  available  data  on  social  and  environmental  issues  (including  the 
ESMF,  social  and  environmental  assessment  and  analysis,  and  studies 
undertaken  as  part  of  project  preparation) to facilitate  social  mobilization 
and community organization that is based on actual demonstration of what 
is possible in the different parts of the project area. 
−  Coordinate  the  process  of  social  and  environmental  assessment  through 
participatory  rural  appraisal  and  joint  walk  to  develop  plan  of  action  for 
institutional strengthening with inclusion of women and men farmers on the 
projects as well as conducts social and environmental impact assessment 
−  Support in IWUA formation as per the proposed Federal IWUA regulations 
and  ensuring  that  all  stakeholders'  voices  and  concerns  are  effectively 
included. 
−  Sensitize  stakeholders  and  private  sector  entities  to  work  in  partnership  with  
farmers  and  to  understand  farmers'  perspective  for  ensuring  win-win 
agreements that help achieve program objectives. 
Identify a suitable agency to undertake community organization and social 
mobilization processes under the program, outputs of which can be used as 
effective training material for learning from experience of implementing the 
program. 
− 
−  Facilitate important exposure visits of farmers, IWUA representatives, and 
other stakeholder teams to best practice examples of social mobilization and 
community organizing inter and intra region. 
−  Mainstream  social  and  environmental  related  issues  in  the  program 
activities, in key program decisions and processes. 
−  Supervise  the  implementation  of  all  PACT  ESMF  and  environmental  and 
social impact management requirements in all the woredas in the region. 
−  Carry out roll out training in ESMF procedures and environmental and social 
management  to  zonal,  woreda  and  kebele  focal  persons,  development 
agents and other relevant PACT implementers. 
−  Provide support to woredas and kebeles in carrying out ESMF procedures, 
as  well  as  for  any  environmental  and  social  issues  where  they  require 
assistance. 
−  Review Tier 1 and Tier 2 screening checklists for the proposed schemes for 
accuracy, and to confirm level of environmental and social analysis required 
(whether ESIA or Partial ESIA/ESMP) 
−  Where possible, prepare ESIAs for projects having significant environmental 
and social concerns. 
−  Participate  in  selection  of  consultants  hired  to  carry  out  ESIAs,  RAPs  or 
related  environmental  and  social  studies,  and  supervise  them  during  the 
studies. 
−  Review ESIAs and ESMPs prepared by consultants 
−  Review of RAPs 
−  Ensure agreements for land acquisition and compensation of affected assets, 
structures, crops  or  trees, etc., to be used where land is  acquired  and/or 
assets  affected, are agreed by the affected persons/parties  and  approved 
by  the  kebele  and  woreda  administrations.  Retain  this documentation  to 
verify  that  proper  procedures  are  followed  for  addressing physical  and 
economic displacement. 
−  Ensure  implementation  of  resettlement  action  plans  and  all  measures  to 
address  any  physical  and  economic  displacement  resulting  from  the 
construction  of  the  schemes  and  their  ancillary  infrastructure,  as  well  as 
market centers, and watershed management activities if applicable. 
−  Closely monitor  all grievances reported from kebele to regional level, and 
receive  notification  of,  and  documentation  relating  to  the  verification, 
investigation, resolution and communication with complainant. 
−  Ensure  implementation  of  Pesticide  Management  Plan,  Dam  Safety  Plan, 
Emergency  Response  Plan,  Waste  Management  Plan,  Biodiversity  Action 
170 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Plan, Integrated Soil Conservation and Nutrient Management Plan; Cultural 
Heritage  Plan  or  Chance  Find  Procedure,  Traffic  Management  Plan  (for 
construction phase), as applicable to the schemes; 
−  Ensure implementation of recommendations for climate resilience and 
adaptation. 
−  Disclose safeguards documents at regional level, and ensure dissemination 
to zones, woredas and kebeles for disclosure purposes. 
−  Monitor performance of environmental, social and climate-related activities 
of PACT in woredas 
−  Contribute to programme level social and environmental performance 
monitoring. 
−  Contribute to programme level social and environmental results monitoring. 
−  Participate in the Annual internal review to assess the overall performance, 
outcomes, and impacts of the programme in respect of environmental, social 
and climate aspects of PACT, 
−  Other duties as may be assigned by the Regional Programme Coordinator. 
Education and Experience: 
−  Master's degree in Sociology, Anthropology, Development studies or related 
field, with 8 years of relevant experience of which at least 3 years should 
have been for projects funded. 
−  Thorough knowledge of Government of Ethiopia and donors funded project 
guidelines  and  procedures  in  social  safeguards,  social  assessment,  social 
analysis, effective stakeholder engagement and grievance redress systems. 
−  Fluency  in  spoken  and  written  English is  essential,  excellent  presentation 
and group moderation skills. 
Job Title: Watershed Management Specialist 
Main Duties and Responsibilities: 
−  The  specialist  will  be  responsible  in  operational  planning,  conceptualization  and 
standardization  of  regional  watershed  agenda  in  light  of  emerging  challenges  of 
climate change. 
−  The specialist will be responsible for developing project proposals and implement 
integrated watershed management and ecosystem services with partners. 
−  The  incumbent  will  evolve  innovative  methodologies  and  approaches  for 
participatory  soil  and  water  conservation  measures  aimed  to  strengthen  both 
sustenance of production systems and conservation of watershed resources. 
−  The  specialist  will  develop  climate  change  adaptation  programmes  using 
watersheds  as  functional  units  within  the  wider  landscape  and  river  basin 
approaches of the programme. 
−  The specialist will carry out research and knowledge compilation on topics related 
to  integrated  watershed  management  and  good  practices  will  be  packaged  and 
disseminated. 
−  Facilitate rural job opportunities  within the watershed in collaboration with other 
relevant stakeholders; 
−  The specialist will support the design and implementation of capacity building and 
networking  programmes  on  integrated  watershed  management  for  various 
stakeholders from the region. 
−  Other duties as may be assigned by the Regional Programme Coordinator. 
Education and Experience: 
Master  degree  in  Soil  and  water  conservation  engineering,  watershed  management, 
natural resource management, land and water management, forestry and other related 
fields  with  8  years  of  experience,  of  which  at  least  3  years  working  experience  on 
watershed management 
171 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Cluster Coordinator 
The Cluster Coordinator has the overall responsibility for coordinating  PACT Programme 
activities in the cluster of woredas and will ensure that the proposed project is executed 
in accordance with the plan. The Coordinator, through the respective woreda agriculture 
and natural resource offices, will be responsible for overall PACT coordination, supervision, 
backstopping and advising all actors and stakeholders in the cluster woredas. 
Duties and Responsibilities: 
− 
Identify  training  needs  and  arrange  training  program  to  Woreda  experts  and 
stakeholders, kebele and DAs who are associated with PACT implementation; 
−  Report to the Regional Programme coordination unit and prepare annual work plan 
− 
and budget and follow its implementation; 
Identify schemes in consultation with communities, kebele administration and DAs, 
and facilitate with concerned partners to conduct survey, preliminary and feasibility 
studies; 
−  Assist  the  Woreda  Environmental  Expert  to  carry  out  Tier  2  Screening  for 
Environmental and Social Concerns as required by the ESMF, 
−  Prepare  agricultural development plan for  each PACT schemes  with detailed cost 
estimates and facilitate their implementation; 
−  Establish linkage with respective agricultural research institute and facilitate setting 
up of the FRGs for each PACT scheme; 
−  Provide and supply materials and inputs for conducting action-oriented agricultural 
activities in all scheme areas and evaluate their impacts; 
−  Facilitate community mobilization and organize irrigation water user associations 
for each scheme and facilitate training; 
−  Facilitate IWUA scheme agreement and securing them water use certificates; 
−  Facilitate  the  project  beneficiaries  get  first/second  level  land  use  certificates  in 
collaboration with land administration and environmental protection office; 
−  Facilitate the study and design as well as scheme construction and access roads of 
irrigation schemes and ensure IWUAs active participation and organize members 
for effective O&M; 
−  Responsible  to  provide relevant  data  and  information  from  grass  root level,  and 
prepare regular and periodic progress reports to RPCU; 
−  And any other tasks as may be required by the Regional Programme Coordinator. 
Responsibilities of Kebele Administration 
−  Participate  in  scheme  identification  and  selection  according  to  PACT 
selection criteria; 
−  Approve scheme site based on water use assessment; 
−  Community mobilization and organization of water use groups; 
−  Facilitate, land allocations if any, with the consent and support of the 
community; 
−  Facilitate the implementation of resettlement action plans, and 
resettlement and compensation processes. 
−  Facilitate demarcation of scheme area and identification of direct 
beneficiaries and facilitate the preparation of beneficiaries’ list for each 
scheme; 
Identify scheme access road for improvement and facilitate community 
involvement in road construction; 
− 
−  Select sites for construction of IWUA office-building cum storage; 
−  Support in scheme design, survey, construction and implementation 
supervision; 
−  Organise water users in to IWUA and provide them with required support 
and encouragements; 
−  Ensure that each approved scheme has agricultural development plan; 
−  Facilitate the IWUAs in scheme operations and maintenance. 
172 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Responsibilities of Development Assistants or Agent (DA) 
The Development Assistant (DA) at the respective scheme area has a very crucial role to 
play. They are the key and essential links between the Woreda and the farmers. Under 
PACT, one DA is assigned exclusively for the PACT scheme, be it a new, improved scheme. 
Major responsibilities of a DA are to, 
− 
Identification  and  selection  of  scheme  sites  for  development  and  improvement 
using the PACT selection and identification criteria; 
−  Carry out Tier 1 Screening for Eligibility of Schemes as per ESMF procedures; 
− 
Implementation  of  environmental  and  social  management  plan  and  pesticide 
management plans 
Implementation of resettlement action plans 
− 
−  Collection  of  baseline  data  for  the  scheme  and  beneficiaries  and  organization  of 
farmers  into  water  user  groups,  their  sensitization  and  later  forming  water  user 
associations; 
−  Providing  training  to  IWUAs  on  the  organization,  management,  O&M  and 
participatory  approaches  and  ensuring  that  the  beneficiaries  agree  to  PACT 
approaches; 
−  Facilitate scheme agreement, participatory agreement and turn over  agreements 
etc  and  ensuring  that  the  completed  schemes  are  under  the  effective  O&M 
responsibilities of the IWUA; 
−  Facilitating the preparation of agricultural development plan for each scheme under 
the programme including cost estimates and ensuring that these ADPs  are prepared at 
scheme design stage; 
−  Facilitating  setting  up  of  FRGs  for  each  scheme  are  and  developing  appropriate 
− 
− 
plans and action- oriented research programme with the PACT support; 
Identification and selection of sites for conducting agricultural demonstrations and 
facilitating supply of agri-inputs and advising farmers on market access; 
Imparting training on scheme O&M and assisting the IWUAs in undertaking special 
repairs, if needed; 
−  Participating  in  the  watershed  development  programmes  and  sensitizing  the 
communities with the importance of watershed treatment; 
−  Facilitating the issue of land use certificates to the beneficiary farmers; 
−  Paying special attention to women and FHHs in scheme access and also reaching 
the scheme benefits to them equitably; 
−  Assisting  the  M&E  staff  in  the  collection  and  compilation  of  data  relating  to 
monitoring. 
173 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
ANNEX 2:  GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGET AND 
PROGRESS REPORTS 
This Annex is Attached as a separate document. 
174 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
ANNEX 3: PACT KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
This  knowledge management plan outlines  specific  activities  on how information will be 
obtained, analysed, and disseminated within PACT. It outlines the main objectives of KM, 
the  broad  approaches  that  will  be  used,  the  activities  that  will  be  undertaken,  the 
knowledge products expected to be generated and disseminated, the resources required 
and an evaluation plan to inform the project management on the performance of KM within  the 
project. This plan will be updated from time to time to align with emerging knowledge needs 
of the project during implementation. 
Current 
1. 
situation / 
background 
2. 
Overall 
programme / 
project 
objectives 
3. 
Purpose, 
objectives and 
Knowledge Management in PACT will be an integral element of project 
management in which innovations and lessons learnt will be captured 
and used to improve programme performance and enhance impact. 
The KM and Communication system will be integrated and aligned with 
the result  based  M  & E  system to  ensure  evidence  based knowledge 
generation. Since PACT is a new programme, KM will be implemented 
through  out  the  programme  period  but  with  a  phased  focus  and 
targeted approach commensurate with the stage of implementation. 
That is to say, the early phases of its implementation will focus primarily 
on  promoting  the  programme  and  creating  awareness  and  later 
phases  focused  on  creating  visibility  of  project  results,  supporting 
policy  engagement  and  scaling  up  of  successful 
and innovative approaches. 
PACT is a new programme and will be implemented over a period of 
seven (7) years, with a goal ‘to contribute to poverty reduction and 
improved resilience of the target rural households in selected Woredas 
and  Kebeles’.  The  Programme  Development  Objective  (PDO)  is  to 
‘enable  150,000  vulnerable  rural  households  (men,  women,  youth  and 
PWDs) in selected kebeles to sustainably improve incomes, food and 
nutrition  security  and  build  resilience  to  climate  shocks’.  The 
Programme will be implemented in 90 Woredas located in five regional 
states  of  Amhara;  Oromia;  Southern  Nations,  Nationalities  Peoples 
Region  (SNNPR);  Sidama;  and  Somali.  PACT  will  reach  150,000 
households and an estimated 750,000 people in all the five regional 
states.  The  project  will  have  an  environment  restoration,  climate 
adaptation, gender transformative and nutrition sensitive focus, and 
will also target among others vulnerable  members  of  the community 
such  as  youth,  people  with  disabilities  and  pastoralists  and agro-
pastoralists. 
PACT objectives will be achieved through the implementation of two 
field  technical  components  and  a  project  management  component. 
The expected outcomes from PACT implementation will be: 
Improved integrated landscape management  driven  by climate- 
resilient  land  restoration,  soil  health  improvement  and  water 
infrastructure development; 
Increased  productivity  and  access  to  remunerative  markets  of 
targeted food commodities achieved by improving access to climate 
smart production technologies and linking beneficiaries to marketing 
inclusive  pastoralists  groups  and 
channels  via  strong  and 
cooperatives; 
Job  creation  for  young  women  and  men,  including  persons  with 
disabilities 
Enabling environment for effective Programme implementation 
KM within  PACT will  particularly be important in  creating awareness 
among stakeholders about the programme, creating visibility of 
175 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
expected 
results 
4. 
Activities, 
approaches and 
tools 
project results and impact, supporting policy engagement and scaling 
up successful and innovative approaches. The objectives of the PACT 
KM plan thus will be to: 
i.  Develop a Knowledge Management and Communication Strategy 
to  guide  the  systematized  documentation  and  dissemination  of 
knowledge generated from programme implementation 
ii.  Develop  key  messages,  appropriate  multimedia  platforms, 
tools  and  channels  for  effective  knowledge  sharing  and 
communication with various target audiences. 
iii.  Build Knowledge Management and Communications capacity 
for Programme Implementation. 
iv.  Define  priority  areas  for  knowledge  products  to  serve  the 
policy engagement objectives of PACT. 
The main messages that PACT knowledge products will convey 
will  be  defined  at  inception  stage.  However,  emphasis  should 
be put on water access and agricultural productivity, nutrition- 
sensitive  irrigation  development  and  market  access,  private 
sector engagement in wheat and vegetable value chains, 
marketable  pathways  for  biofortified  crops,  and  the  overall 
PACT contribution to the food system transformation, 
PY1 
PY1 
Review report 
Review report 
Means of verification  Due date 
The following activities, approaches and tools are envisaged within 
PACT KM Implementation 
Main 
Intervention/activity 
Carry  out  a  Stakeholder 
analysis  and  KM  needs 
assessment for supporting 
the  development  of  the 
KM strategy 
Undertake an assessment 
of the ICT 
infrastructure and 
environment in Ethiopia 
for enabling KM and 
communication in PACT 
Develop the 
Communication & KM 
Strategy building on 
findings of the preliminary 
assessment and the 
lessons learnt from 
ongoing IFAD supported 
projects. 
Validate the KMC strategy 
with key project 
stakeholders 
Develop an annual 
implementation plan and 
budget for the strategy. 
Develop 
and operationalise 
communication channels 
KMC strategy developed 
and validated 
Website 
Social media 
• 
• 
handles 
AWPBs 
PY1 
PY2 
PY1, PY2….up to 
PY7 
176 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
e.t.c 
Tools 
Case study 
TV and Radio 
ngagement meetings 
Policy Briefs 
Policy 
lessons learnt, 
Success stories 
• 
Talk show agreements 
including a project 
website, leverage social 
media platforms and 
other multimedia 
platforms 
• 
Develop  and  implement 
developed, 
and 
IEC 
materials 
Materials 
knowledge products 
• 
developed-Brochures, 
Newsletters, Policy 
briefs, Documentaries, 
posters, fliers, leaflets, 
manuals, e.t.c 
conduct 
Systematically   
• 
    to 
reports , 
case 
  studies  
• 
understand     in    detail 
• 
emerging     results    and 
impact  of    programme 
implementation, 
document  lessons  learnt 
and success stories for the 
identified themes included 
in the PDR 
Carry out detailed policy 
review of PACT results to 
generate evidence for 
policy engagement and 
advocacy in line with 
PACT policy engagement 
objectives 
Engage the mass media 
at Federal, Regional, 
Cluster, Woreda and 
Kebele levels to 
communicate and share 
knowledge on PACT focus 
areas 
Promote brand visibility of 
the Programme and its 
funding partners (IFAD, 
ASAP+, GTM, IGREENFin 
e.t.c) 
the 
Build  capacity  of 
and 
programme 
partners 
ensure 
to 
systematic  learning  and 
knowledge  sharing  are 
fully embedded in 
Programme  management 
and implementation 
Design  and  implement  a 
training  programme 
for 
PACT  staff  at  all  levels, 
government 
relevant 
partners       and       other 
Stakeholders  as  required 
Staff trained 
staff 
Promotional items such 
as Sign boards, Branded 
materials e.t.c 
Contracts signed and 
implemented with media 
houses 
177 
PY1, PY2….up to 
PY7 
PY2, PY3…upto 
PY7 
PY3, PY4, PY5, 
PY6 and PY7 
PY1….up to PY7 
PY1….up to PY7 
PY1….up to PY7 
KM Monitoring Reports  PY1….up to PY7 
PY1….up to PY7 
Target 
Audience 
Project 
implementers 
(staff and 
Implementing 
partners), 
Government 
departments and 
external 
stakeholders 
Primary project 
beneficiaries and 
potential projects 
enthusiasts 
External 
stakeholders 
External 
stakeholders and 
project 
beneficiaries 
Government 
departments and 
ministries, 
development 
partners 
Project 
beneficiaries, 
External 
stakeholders and 
project 
financiers 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
on  KM  and  Communication 
approaches,  methods  and 
tools. 
Develop annual plans  and 
budgets  that  ensure  the 
Programme 
and 
Communication  strategy is 
continuously  monitored 
and improved. 
Knowledge Products  Dissemination 
AWPBs 
KM 
Case study reports 
Channels 
Workshops, mass 
media, social media 
platforms, project 
website, print media 
Knowledge 
5. 
sharing & 
knowledge 
products 
Brochures, Fliers 
Newsletters 
Documentaries 
Policy briefs 
Branded Items 
Distribution during 
workshops, Fairs and 
field visits and any other 
gatherings 
Project Website 
Project website, mass 
media (radio and TV) 
Policy advocacy 
meetings, agriculture 
and food system policy 
platforms (e.g., RED-FS, 
NDPF), website 
Public 
events/exhibitions/fairs/ 
Value chain 
platforms and public 
places 
KM in 
6. 
project 
management 
Knowledge  Management  (KM)  will  be  an  integral  part  of  PACT  to 
ensure that Project implementation is a continuous learning process 
in which quantitative and qualitative data will be compiled, analysed 
and disseminated as lessons learned, together with thematic studies 
and  stories  from  the  field  that  document  successful  approaches, 
explain challenges encountered and results achieved. The Project M&E 
system will form the foundation of KM and learning system and  will 
thus  be  a  primary  instrument  of  information  capture  and  storage, 
based on the indicators detailed in the results framework. This means 
that knowledge management activities will build on the M & E findings 
and results of project implementation. 
Every member in PACT PCMU will have a role in the implementation 
of  the  knowledge  management  and  communication  strategy. 
However,  the  Knowledge  management  and  Communication 
178 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Specialists within the PCMUs at the Federal and Regional Levels, will 
be responsible for all KM activities in liaison with the respective M & E 
Specialists  and  other  component  heads.  The  KM  specialists  will  be 
directly responsible for developing the KMC strategy, drawing annual 
plans and budgets in line with the strategy and ensuring that identified 
activities  are  implemented  as  planned.  The  staff  will  also  be 
responsible  for  reporting  on  the  performance  of  the  KM  function  within 
the  project.  The  KMC  Specialists  will  coordinate  KMC  activities, 
ensuring that all required inputs are solicited and knowledge products 
developed  and  disseminated  accordingly.  They  will  liaise  with 
respective  technical  component  heads  to  carry  out  the  KM 
assignments. 
A  web-based  project  management  information  system  will  be 
prepared to generate support day to day management of monitoring 
data.  The  MIS,  managed  by  MIS/GIS  Specialists  at  Federal  and 
Regional levels, will have dashboards through which updates on the 
performance of the programme will be provided and onto which KM 
interventions will be built. The MIS will also be linked to the project 
website, administered by MIS/GIS specialists but maintained by the 
KM  Specialists.  Through  the  M  &  E  system,  outcome  and  thematic 
surveys will be undertaken to generate results on the performance of 
the project. The results from such surveys will inform the conduct of 
detailed case studies on particular themes as may be identified from 
time to time. 
KMC  Specialists  will  also  be  responsible  for  developing  other 
knowledge products in consultation with technical component teams, 
harvesting  best  practices  and 
from  PACT 
implementation.  Priority  focus  will  be  aligned  with  PACT  policy 
engagement  objectives  (e.g.,  agriculture  water  policies,  nutrition 
sensitive agriculture strategy). 
learned 
lessons 
179 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
ANNEX 4. TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR ANNUAL EXTERNAL AUDIT (EXTERNAL) 
1. 
BACKGROUND 
Programme Goal and Objective – The Programme’s goal is ‘to to poverty reduction and 
improved  resilience  in  selected  landscapes/woredas.’  The  Programme  Development 
Objective (PDO) is to ‘enable 150,000 rural households (men, women, youth and PWDs) 
in selected kebeles to sustainably improve incomes, food and nutrition security and build 
resilience to shocks. The Programme will be implemented over a seven-year period. The 
program includes three components as briefly described below: 
a)  Component  1:  Community-Led  Climate-Smart  Productive  Landscapes  –  The 
Component  will  support:  a) community-led  equitable  access  and sustainable  use  of 
natural  resources;  b)  market-led  and  climate  adapted  smallholder  production  and 
productivity  enhancement  of  target  crop  commodities;  c)  development  of  inclusive 
and equitable water infrastructure; and d) improved dietary diversity. The outcome of 
this  component  will  be  sustainable  access  and  utilisation  of  natural  resources  and 
increased  agricultural  productivity.  The  component  will  be  implemented  under  four 
subcomponents. 
b)  Component 2: Agribusiness Development – The outcome of this component will 
be strengthened capacities of farmer organizations to improve access to finance and 
remunerative  markets  for  small-scale  women,  men  and  young  farmers  and 
pastoralists, including those living with a disability in the Programme areas. 
c)  Component  3:  Institutional  and  Policy  Strengthening  and  Implementation 
Support Services  –  This  will  be  a cross-cutting  component  servicing  the  technical 
components and facilitating pathways for the effective and inclusive functioning of the 
target value chains, from production to consumption. 
2.  SIZE AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
The scope of the Programme is defined in terms of the geographical coverage and targeted 
beneficiaries.  The  Programme  will,  be  implemented  in  5  regional  states  of  Amhara, 
Oromia,  Southern  Nations,  Nationalities  Peoples  Region  (SNNPR),  Sidama,  and  Somali. 
The regions have been selected based on the following criteria (i) high rural population, 
(ii) high  poverty  prevalence,  (iii)  high  rate  of  food  and nutrition insecurity, 
(iv) presence of economic opportunities relevant to the project, impacts of climate change 
and, natural resources degradation; and in consultation with the government of Ethiopia. 
Three additional Regions (Afar, Tigray, and South West Ethiopia) will be included subject 
to: a) availability of additional funds; and b)  improved  security situation in some of the 
target Regions as applicable. 
In the selected regions, a total of 90 food insecure woredas have been prioritized based 
on: a) high poverty prevalence based on inclusion in the Productive Safety Net Program 
(PSNP) (ii) no overlap with LLRP supported woredas in Somali (9), SNNPR (14) and Oromia 
(35),  b)  highly  vulnerable  (hotspot)  based  on  composite  indicators  (Food  security, 
poverty, gender  inequality, water,  education, agriculture)  c) the level  of  degradation of 
the productive NR base (particularly soil, water and trees) d) avoid overlap with kebeles 
under  PASDIP  II  and  e)  Synergies  with  AGP,  WFP  Fresh  Food  Voucher  Programme  in 
Amhara. Below is a mapping of the regions and Woredas:- 
180 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
Woredas 
Region 
Amhara  Dessie Zuria, Kobo, Tehulederie, Gubalafto, Ambassel, Meket, 
Gidan, Lay Gayint, Bati, Janamora, Kalu, Tach Gayint, Argoba, 
Menz GeraMider, Worebabo, Habru, Gondar Zuria, Assagert, 
Artuma, Fursi, Sokota, Misrak Belesa, Mahal sayint, Dehana 
Total 
23 
Oromia 
Amigna, Chole, Dodota Gololcha (ARsi), Jeju, Merti, Seru, Sire, 
Berbere,  Delo  Mena,  Goro  (Bale),  Guradamole,  Harena  Buluq, 
Meda Melabu, Dilo, Dire, Dubuluk, Moyale, Yabelo, Dawe Kachen, 
Gololcha,  Legehida,  Babile,  Bedeno,  Chinakson,  Deder,  Fedis, 
Girawa,  Goro  Gutu,  Gursum,  Haro,  Maya,  Kurfa  Chele,  Melka 
Belo, Meta, Adama 
SNNPR  Mareko, Kemba, M/Badwacho, Kacha Bira, Ofa, Silte, Misrak 
Meskan, Hadaro Tunito, Deramalo, Gerese, Amaro, Sankura, 
Garda Martha, Denba Gofa 
Sidama 
Loka Abaya, Bona Zuriya, Bensa, Bilate Zuria 
Somali 
Qalafo, mustati, Hdhat, Qarsadulla, Gursum, Tulli, Raso, Babile, 
Limay Galbeed 
South West Disa, Gena, Loma, Tercha Zuriya, Zaba Gezo 
35 
14 
4 
9 
5 
181 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
In addition, IGREENFIN will be implemented by DBE. 
The Federal Programme Coordination Unit (FPCU) will be responsible for overall fiduciary 
management  of  the  Programme.  It  will  be  responsible  to  release  funds  against  agreed 
plans, drawn out of the approved AWPBs, disburse funds to implementing agencies and 
co-ordinate  monitoring  and  financial  reporting  for  the  Programme  as  a  whole.  The  Regiona l 
Programme  Coordination Units  (RPCUs)  will  be  responsible  for  supporting,  coordinating 
and  overseeing  the  financial  functions  of  the  woreda  offices  as  well  as  the  Regional 
Bureaus, in their respective regions. The fiscal year of the Program is from 8 July 2021 to 
7 July 2022. 
3.  OBJECTIVE OF THE PROGRAMME AUDIT 
The objective of the audit of the Programme Financial Statements (PFSs) is to enable the 
auditor to express a professional opinion on the financial position of the Programme at the 
end of each fiscal year, and on funds received and expenditures incurred for the relevant 
accounting period. 
The Programme books  of accounts provide the basis for  preparation of the PFSs by the 
FPCU and are established to reflect the financial transactions in respect of the Programme. 
The FPCU along with all the implementing agencies  maintain adequate internal controls 
and supporting documentation for transactions. 
4.  PREPARATION OF ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
The  responsibility  for  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  including  adequate 
disclosures is that of the Programme. The Programme is also responsible for the selection 
and  application  of  accounting  policies.  The  Programme  shall  prepare  the  PFSs  in 
accordance  with  the  accounting  policies  and  procedures  of  the  federal  government  of 
Ethiopia. 
The auditor is responsible for forming and expressing opinions on the financial statements. 
The  auditor  shall  carry  out  the  audit  of the  Programme  in  accordance  with  the  International  
Standards  on  Auditing  (ISA),  as  promulgated  by  the  International  Federation  of 
Accountants (IFAC). As part of the audit process, the auditor may request from the lead 
implementing agency (and other implementing agencies) written confirmation concerning 
representations made in connection with the audit. 
182 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
5.  INTERIM AUDIT 
Given the large  number  of institutions  and to meet the timetable  for  completion  of  the 
annual audit, the auditor will carry out interim audits on semi - annual basis following the 
audit  plan  that  is  designed  at  planning  stage  of  the  audit.  The  auditor  would  select 
representative  samples  of  implementing  agencies  in  different  geographical  regions  to 
conduct the interim audit. 
The interim audits are not a separate exercise and thus are not an end on their own, but 
are intended to facilitate the process of the annual financial audit, and also provide early 
information to Programme management to enable them to timely take corrective actions. 
PACT is  required to prepare  and submit interim financial reports, these  should facilitate 
the interim audits. 
When the PFS are submitted to the auditor, the auditor in addition to other audit activities 
would draw on the results of the interim audit to form an opinion on the PFS. 
Since the interim audit is part and parcel of the final year-end audit, the overall scope of 
the  work  of  the  interim  audit  is  within  the  “Scope  of  the  audit”  described  in  2  above. 
However,  the  following  are  some  of  the  items  that  the  auditors  should  pay  particular 
attention to in the interim audit” 
•  Review  of sample  transactions to ensure that  Programme  expenditures  are  incurred 
for the purposes intended, 
•  Ensure that the accounting and internal control policies and regulations described in 
the program FM manual are adhered with 
•  Ensure the adequate documentation, records, and accounts have been maintained in 
respect of all Programme activities 
•  Ensure compliance with national laws and regulation 
•  Visit selected sub projects and ensure the proper flow of funds as well as accountability 
•  Report all findings together with recommendations 
6.  SCOPE OF THE AUDIT 
The auditor will prepare a work plan to ensure adequate coverage of the various institutions 
that receive Programme funds and cover all the major risk areas. The accounting period 
to be covered is July 8, to July 7, of the following calendar year. 
The Accounting Centres /implementers of the Programme are as follows: - 
1.  The Federal Programme Co-ordination Unit (FPCU) Ministry of Agriculture (MoA); 
2.  Amhara Regional Programme Co-ordination Unit and 24 programme Woredas 
3.  Oromiya Regional Programme Co-ordination Unit and 24 programme Woredas 
4.  SNNPR Regional Programme Co-ordination Unit and 23 programme Woredas 
5.  Sidama Regional Programme Co-ordination Unit and 4 programme Woredas 
6.  Somali Regional Programme Co-ordination Unit and 15 programme Woredas 
7.  Development Bank of Ethiopia for Igreen Financing 
It  is  the  mandate  of  the  auditor  to  select  the  audited  entities  from  the  lists  of  the 
implementers  for  the  respective  audit  period.  The  auditor  will  be  expected to  audit  the 
FPCU,  all  RPCU,  DBE  and  adequate  proportions  of  Woredas  under  each  RPCU,  at  least 
33%,  which  will  be  alternating  to  ensure  regular  reviews  throughout  the  programme 
implementation. The auditor will prepare a work plan each year, aligned to this coverage 
guideline and cover all the major risk areas. 
As stated above, the audit of the Programme audit will be carried out in accordance with 
International Standards on Auditing (ISA) promulgated by the International Federation of 
Accountants (IFAC), and will include such tests and auditing procedures as the auditor will 
183 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
consider  necessary  under  the  circumstances.  Special  attention  should  be  paid  by  the 
auditor as to whether the: 
(a)  The  IFAD  financing  and  co-financing  of  the  Programme  has  been  used  in  accordance 
with the conditions of the relevant financing agreement, with due attention to economy 
and efficiency, and only for the purposes for which the financing was provided; 
(b)  Counterpart funds have been provided and used in accordance with the relevant 
financing agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for the 
purposes for which they were provided; 
(c)  Goods,  works  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in  accordance  with  the 
relevant financing agreements including specific provisions of the financing agreement; 
(d)  All necessary supporting documents, records, and accounts have been maintained 
in respect of all Programme activities, including expenditures reported using Interim 
Unaudited Financial Reports (IFRs) method of reporting. The auditor is expected to 
verify that respective reports issued during the period were in agreement with the 
underlying books of account; 
(e) Designated  Accounts  have  been  maintained  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
relevant financing agreements and funds disbursed out of the Accounts were used only 
for the purpose intended in the financing agreement; 
(f)  National  laws  and  regulations  have  been  complied  with,  and  that  the  financial  and 
accounting procedures approved for the Programme (e.g. operational manual, financial 
procedures manual, etc.) were followed and used; 
(g) Financial performance of the Programme is satisfactory; 
(h) Assets procured from Programme funds exist and there is verifiable ownership by the 
implementing agency or beneficiaries in line with the financing agreement; 
(i)  Ineligible expenditures included in withdrawal applications are identified and reimbursed 
to the Designated Accounts. These should be separately noted in the audit report; 
(j)  The auditor should perform on a sample basis a test on uses of funds by communities 
with  respect to  the  sub  Programmes  which  are  implemented  by the  Programme.  The 
auditor should give an opinion as to the fund management by the communities is for the 
intended purpose only and that there is reasonable control over the funds. 
In complying with International Standards on Auditing, the auditor is expected to pay 
particular attention to the following matters: 
a)  Fraud and Corruption: Consider the risks of material misstatements in the financial 
statements  due  to  fraud  as  required  by  ISA  240:  The  Auditor’s  Responsibility  to 
Consider Fraud in an Audit of Financial Statements. The auditor is required to identify 
and assess these risks (of material misstatement of the financial statements) due to 
fraud,  obtain  sufficient  appropriate  audit  evidence  about  the  assessed  risks;  and 
respond appropriately to identified or suspected fraud; 
b)  Laws and Regulations: In designing and performing audit procedures, evaluating 
and reporting the results, consider that noncompliance by the implementing agency 
with laws and regulations may materially affect the financial statements as required 
by  ISA  250:  Consideration  of  Laws  and  Regulations  in  an  Audit  of  Financial 
Statements; 
184 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
c)  Governance:  Communicate  audit  matters  of  governance  interest  arising  from  the 
audit  of  financial  statements  with  those  charged  with  governance  of  an  entity  as 
required by International Standards on Auditing 260: Communication of Audit Matters 
with those Charged with Governance. 
d)  Risks: In order to reduce audit risk to an acceptable low level, determine the overall 
responses to assessed risks at the financial statement level, and design and perform 
further audit procedures to respond to assessed risks at the assertion level as required 
by  Internal  Standard  on  Auditing  330:  the  Auditor’s  Procedures  in  Response  to 
Assessed Risks. 
7.  PROGRAMME FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (PFSs) 
The auditor should verify that the Programme PFSs have been prepared in accordance with 
the agreed accounting standards and give a true and fair view of the financial position of the 
Programme at the relevant date and of resources and expenditures for the financial year 
ended on that date 
The Programme Financial Statements (PFSs) should include: 
a)  A  statement  of  funds  received,  showing  funds  from  IFAD,  donor  co-financiers  and 
counterpart funds separately, and of expenditures incurred; 
b)  A summary of the activity in the Designated Account; 
c)  In addition, the following specific disclosures will be included in the financial 
statements: 
i.  Withdrawal application summary – appendix 1 to the IFAD Handbook on Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects; 
ii.  Sources  and  uses  of  funds  statement  –  appendix  2  to  the  IFAD  Handbook  on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects; 
iii.  Designated Account statement and reconciliation – appendix 3 to the IFAD 
Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects; 
iv.  Statement  of  Expenditure  –  appendix  5  to  the  IFAD  Handbook  on  Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects – application to grants; 
v.   Expenditure  transaction  list  -  appendix  6  to  the  IFAD  Handbook  on  Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects – applicable to grants. 
8.  UNAUDITED INTERIM FINANCIAL REPORTS (IFRs) 
In addition to the audit of the PFSs, the auditor is required to verify all IFRs submitted to 
IFAD. The auditor will apply such tests and auditing procedures as considered necessary 
under the circumstances. Annexed to the PFSs should be a schedule listing individual IFRs 
submitted to IFAD. 
9.  DESIGNATED ACCOUNT 
In conjunction with the audit of the Programme PFSs, the auditor is also required to review 
the activities of the Designated Account associated with the Programme.  The Designated 
Account usually comprises: 
i.  Advance deposits received from IFAD; 
ii.  Replenishments substantiated by withdrawal applications; 
185 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
iii. 
Interest that may have been earned on the accounts, and which belong to 
the borrower; and 
iv. 
Withdrawals related to Programme expenditures 
The auditor should pay particular attention as to the compliance with IFAD's procedures 
and the balances of the Designated Accounts at the end of the fiscal year (or period). The 
auditor  should  examine  the  eligibility  of  financial  transactions  during  the  period  under 
examination and fund balances at the end of such a period, the operation and use of the 
DAs in accordance with the relevant general conditions, relevant financing agreements and 
the Letter to the Borrower, and the adequacy of internal controls over project resources. 
•  Financial transactions during the period under review; 
•  Account balances at the end of such a period; 
•  The  operation  and use  of the  Designated  Account  in  accordance  with  the  financing 
agreement; and 
•  The adequacy of internal controls for the type of disbursement mechanism. 
10.  AUDIT REPORT 
The  auditor  will  issue  an  opinion  on  the  Programme  financial  statements  (PFSs).  The 
annual  audit  report  of  the  Programme  accounts  should  include  a  separate  paragraph 
highlighting  key  internal  control  weaknesses  and  non-compliance  with  the  financing 
agreement terms. 
The Auditor is required to deliver an audit package that includes: 
a)  The audited financial statements, including additional disclosures as outlined in 6 
above; and 
b)  An audit opinion on the financial statements, within the scope as outlined in paragraph 
6. 
The  audit  report  should  provide  sufficient  detail  as  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 
procedures performed by the auditor. The auditor is required to provide the audit package 
by no later than (December 15 for each financial year. Reports are to be delivered in 
English. 
11.  MANAGEMENT LETTER 
In addition to the audit report, the auditor will prepare a management letter, in which the 
auditor will: 
(a)  Give  comments  and  observations  on  the  accounting  records,  systems  and 
controls that were examined during the course of the audit; 
(b)  Identify specific deficiencies or areas of weakness in systems and controls, and 
make recommendations for their improvement; 
(c)  Report on the degree of compliance of each of the financial covenants in the 
financing  agreement  and  give  comments,  if  any,  on  internal  and  external 
matters affecting such compliance; 
186 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
(c)  Communicate  matters  that  have  come  to  his/her  attention  during  the  audit 
which  might  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  implementation  of  the 
Programme; 
(d) Give comments on the extent to which outstanding issues/qualifications issues 
have been addressed; 
(e) Give  comments  on  previous  audits’  recommendations  that  have  not  been 
satisfactorily implemented; and 
Bring to the recipient’s attention any other matters that the auditor considers pertinent, 
including ineligible expenditures. 
The management letter should also include responses from the implementing agency to 
the issues highlighted by the auditor. 
12.  AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
The auditor should have access to all legal documents, correspondences, and any other 
information  associated  with the  Programme  and  deemed necessary  by  the  auditor.  The 
auditor will also obtain confirmation of amounts disbursed and outstanding at IFAD for the 
loan and grants. Available information should include copies of the relevant: Programme 
design  document;  financing  agreement;  Letter  to  the  Borrower;  supervision  and 
implementation support mission reports; Interim Financial reports; Programme financial 
management manual and Programme Implementation Manual. 
13.  TRANSPORTATION 
Transportation will be facilitated by the Programme during field visit to Regions and 
Woredas. 
14.  PUBLIC DISCLOSURE 
IFAD promotes  public disclosure of project financial information to enhance the level of 
transparency and accountability. IFAD will disclose project audit reports, as appropriate, 
in line with the Fund’s disclosure policy. Management Letters issued by auditors are not 
subject to public  disclosure by IFAD. In agreeing to the terms  of reference, the auditor 
explicitly  acknowledges  IFAD’s  right  to  publicly  disclose  audit  reports  (audited  financial 
statements and audit opinion) and will issue reports without a limitation of use clause. 
To facilitate the public disclosure process, the auditor is requested to submit two separate 
files as follows: 
a)  Audited financial statements and audit opinion; and 
b)  Management Letter. 
187 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
ANNEX 5: GUIDANCE ON INTERIM FINANCIAL REPORTING 
Principles of IFRs 
The guiding principles can be summarized as follows: 
1.  The first objective is to provide regular, timely financial information, 
offering fiduciary assurance to IFAD that the funds are being used for the 
purposes intended and in the most efficient way. IFRs should also provide 
comparative figures with respect to the approved AWP/B. 
2.  A second objective of IFRs is to support disbursements / justifications of 
eligible expenditures incurred at projects. 
3.  At the minimum, IFRs should include only sources and uses of funds from 
IFAD Financing and other Project financing sources administered by IFAD. 
Any additional financing sources (such as counterpart financing or 
beneficiary contribution) may be included as supplementary information, if 
considered necessary by the Finance Officer to monitor financial progress. 
Annual financial statements, on the other hand, include all project financial 
sources and uses. 
4.  IFRs should be read together with related documents such as the AWP/B, 
the Project Design Report, WAs, annual project financial statements and 
audit reports – as well as implementation, supervision aide memoires, 
mid-term reviews and completion reports – to get a complete picture of 
the financial progress of a project. As far as possible, the B/R should not 
be required to provide IFAD with information already available to the 
Fund. 
5.  The format of IFRs should provide the minimum information indicated in 
the reporting template provided. However, some customisation may be 
necessary based on specific project features. During the design phase, the 
FO/FMS consultants should consider other-donor reporting requirements to 
harmonize reporting formats and reduce project workload. Common 
reporting and monitoring arrangements should be agreed with other 
donors where feasible. 
6.  Projects should prepare IFRs using the same accounting basis/standard 
and currency that they use for annual financial statements. Otherwise, the 
financial data of the IFR will not reconcile with the data of the audited 
annual financial statements. 
7.  The reporting currency of IFRs can be either the functional currency (the 
currency in which transactions are recorded in the accounting system – 
usually the local currency) or the currency of the DA (e.g., US$). Selection 
of a presentation currency other than the functional currency should be 
agreed with IFAD/FMD during preparation and should be consistently 
followed throughout the project period. 
8.  The DA Activity Statement (Report III in the template) will always be in 
the currency of the Designated Account. When the report on Sources and 
Uses of Funds (Report II) is prepared in the functional currency, the 
equivalent amounts for the DA Activity statement (Report III) should be 
calculated using the forex rates on a FIFO basis. The FIFO method will also 
apply to determine the amounts to be justified. Projects may need some 
188 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
guidance on the exchange rates to be used for conversion of transactions 
and balances in the PIM/FM manual. 
9.  Cash forecasts (Report I) should be backed up by working papers that link 
expenditure forecasts to procurement plans and progress reports, updated 
every quarter. Forecast figures should be converted to DA currency based 
on period-ending forex rates. Forex rates used for conversion should be 
disclosed in the IFR. 
10. The financial information presented in IFRs should ideally be generated 
using an accounting software. Excel spreadsheet should only be used to 
edit and combine data derived from accounting software to fit the agreed 
format. 
11. We should not request B/R to repeat information that is already available 
at IFAD in other reports or systems. Although IFRs focus mainly on 
financial data, some additional management information reports (fixed 
asset register, signed contract listing) and physical progress indicators 
may also be requested as an option. 
12. To support fiduciary assurance, Finance Officers may obtain certification 
on reliability of IFRs from project auditors (or internal auditors where 
these are available), after considering project financial management risks. 
This could be specified in auditor TORs. 
Content of the IFR and report template 
1.  The aim of IFRs is to answer the following questions regarding a reporting 
period: what expenditures were incurred, paid for by which financing 
source, at what time and purpose. The financing sources will normally 
include IFAD Financing / instrument and other sources that are 
administered by IFAD. 
2.  These reports should be accompanied with a set of brief explanatory notes 
on the financial variances and some supplementary information to 
facilitate monitoring. 
3.  Mandatory reports: 
1. 
Cash flow forecast (his should cover next 2 quarters on a 
rolling basis); 
2. 
Sources and uses of funds (IFAD financing and financing 
administered by IFAD 
3. 
Summary of expenditures by loan/grant categories and by 
component 
4. 
DA activity statement. 
4.  Supplementary reports are to be customized to fit a project’s activity and 
risk profiles, and may include the following: 
Procurement progress report 
Rural finance/credit line report 
Project management cost report 
Fixed asset register 
Progress report on resolving audit findings / 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
recommendations 
6. 
List of Withdrawal Applications (WAs) submitted to IFAD to 
date, to help reconcile with IFAD’s Loan Account. 
5.  The need and capacity for such reports should be based on FM risk ratings 
and capacity assessments and should be jointly discussed by FOs and CDs 
during the project design process. 
189 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
6.  Some documents will normally not be required for disbursement purposes, 
but may be requested prior to or during supervision missions, especially 
for High / Substantial Risk projects. These include: 
i.  Transaction lists/Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) for specific 
expenditure categories 
ii.  Copies of bank statements (of DA and project bank statements) or 
a summary of closing balances in each bank account 
Submission & Recording IFRs in FMDB 
1.  IFRs should be submitted on a quarterly basis no later than 45 days of the 
quarter-end. When Report based disbursements are introduced, IFRs should be 
submitted along with the WAs. Only in exceptional circumstances will WAs for 
disbursements be accepted without an IFR being attached. 
2.  Submission of IFRs is due by projects even though no cash disbursement to the 
DA is being sought from IFAD, so four are mandatory each year, except of Year 1 
or the final year, where the reporting period can be shorter than one full year. In 
cases when project becomes effective in the middle of the calendar quarter, the 
first quarterly submission should be for a period less than a quarter. 
3.  Non-submission or irregular submission of IFRs should be seen as a red flag and 
should be followed up by the FMS/FO to understand reasons and provide required 
support. 
4.  The FO will need to upload IFRs for insertion into FMDB however the future 
systems plan is that these will be uploaded directly into FMDB from ICP. In view 
of the above a date insertion and inclusion of authorized signatories on IFRs form 
would be needed, however this may change later when these are uploaded into 
ICP by relevant approver in project. 
IFR Templates 
Always obtain most updated version of Interim Financial Reporting template from 
your IFAD Finance Officer 
190 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
191 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
192 
Ethiopia – PACT Programme 2022 
Annex 8 – Programme Implementation Manual 
193 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
1/11
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
High
High
Moderate
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Low
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
High
Substantial
Substantial
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Substantial
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Moderate
High
High
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Stakeholders
2/11
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
The current political instability expected to remain high for some time in 2022,
given the ongoing civil conflict in Tigray, Amhara and Afar regions. There is also
localized conflict between unidentified armed groups and federal government in
Oromia and Benshangul Gumuz regions. This will lead to inaccessibility of these
regions and stoppage of project design and implementation.
Mitigations:
The African Union is forging ahead with mediation talks in Ethiopia to resolve the
issues. There is also initiative from the GoE side to have a national dialogue which
is believed to maintain peace, justice, democracy, national unity, consensus and
reconciliation among the Ethiopian peoples. PACT will take a phased and gradual
approach to implementation, and will assess risks before expanding to conflict-
affected areas.
Governance
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Governance structures of government, community stakeholders, private sector and
other stakeholders engaged in project activities may not equally benefit all
segments of the community, resulting in elite capture.
Mitigations:
The project will foster collaboration between government institutions, private sector
players and farmers; supporting the development of mutually beneficial
partnerships. Adequate planning, implementation and monitoring of activities will
ensure stakeholders’ engagement in the development of financially viable irrigation
schemes and to promote farming as a business. 
Adherence to the PIM (a tool for transparency that provides, inter alia, the criteria
and procedures for selecting the beneficiaries of the Project activities) through on-
going implementation support and supervision, will ensure full inclusivity and good
governance.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
High
High
High
High
Unstable macro-economic fundamentals. According to African Economic Outlook
(AOE) 2021, Ethiopia’s economy grew by 6.1 percent in 2020. The fiscal deficit,
including grants, increased slightly during 2020, financed mainly by treasury bills.
In 2021, the average inflation rate in Ethiopia was 26.78 percent as compared to
the previous year. 
The official exchange rate is under pressure and devaluing steadily. Service sector
exports declined by about 6 percent, mostly because of lower revenue from
Ethiopian Airlines. Foreign direct investment (FDI) fell 20 percent to 2.2 percent of
GDP, and personal remittances declined by 10 percent to 5.3 percent of GDP. The
current conflict in country and the war in Ukraine, will worsen the situation.
Mitigations:
The Monetary policy is expected to remain flexible in response to the government’s
financing requirements. The government is expected to do further reforms in public
finance and investment management to improve the efficiency of public
expenditures and managing inflation. IFAD will set price contingencies at higher
levels to mitigate potential price increases due to higher inflation.
3/11
Fragility and Security
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
The conflict in North Ethiopia is not yet been resolved. There are internal conflicts
in some areas in Oromia, Benshangul Gumuz. Furthermore, there were clashes
between government and Al-Shabaab in Somali regions. The country is also
vulnerable to recurrent drought and flooding with devastating impacts.
Mitigations:
There is a hope that the current effort by African Union to mediate talks between
the federal government and TPLF will end the conflict. Moreover, the initiative from
the GoE to have a national dialogue which is believed to maintain peace, justice,
democracy, national unity, consensus and reconciliation among the Ethiopian
peoples will address localized conflict. PACT will be implemented in regions that
are not highly impacted by the internal war. Climate screening was undertaken and
climate resilience measures are included in the programme to reduce, if not avoid,
climate impacts.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Primarily, there is the Ten-Year perspective plan of Ethiopia (2021-2030)) guiding
the overall country’s plan for five years. Specifically, there is also Agriculture &
Rural Development Policies & Strategies to guide efforts and investments in
smallholder focused investment. There is a regulatory framework to promote
private sector engagement. However, the actual implementation of these policies is
lagging behind in some regions because of the current situation in the country.
Mitigations:
In order to address the risk associated with implementation of the policies, the
project will assist the Government in setting up a vibrant monitoring tool to see how
effective the polices are implemented
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The Ten Years Agriculture & Rural Development Policies & Strategies are not well
familiarised and getting implemented because resource constraints and lack of
focus as there was competing priorities in the past one year (security issues)
Mitigations:
The project will support the Rural Economic Development and Food Security
Sector working Group platform to frequently assess the progress of the
implementation of the policies. The project will also implement some of the
interventions defined in the policies and strategies. The World Bank will be
supporting the government in developing new policies following the approval of a
new policy framework.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Land degradation is increasing at an alarming rate. The most important forms of
land degradation are soil erosion, nutrient depletion, soil compaction, and
increased salinization and acidity. The annual net erosion is 940 million tons a year,
or 18 tons/ha/year and it may be increased by 7-10 percent per year.
Approximately 11 million ha of land are salt affected soils. The current rate of
deforestation is estimated at 150,000 to 200,000 hectares per year
4/11
Mitigations:
Integrated Natural Resource Management activities will be implemented by the
project as well as through the finance from IGREENFIN and ASAP+. The most
important and appropriate mitigation actions will be physical and biological soil and
water conservation activities, climate smart agriculture, landscape management
including forestation and afforestation activities. Good lessons from PASIDP II
(ASAP) will be scaled up.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Ethiopia is the most vulnerable country to the impact of climate change. According
to World Vulnerability Index and ND-GAIN Matrix, Ethiopia is the 19th most
vulnerable and 34th least ready country to the impact of climate change in the world
Climate variabilities, in the form of flood and drought, have long been affecting crop,
livestock and forestry productivity, infrastructures, livelihood, water availability.
Mitigations:
Climate resilient infrastructure development, crop and livestock productivity
enhancement through the application of climate smart agriculture such as
conservation agriculture, landscape management activities, awareness and
capacity development will enhance resilience of the community and ecosystem.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
The project is designed based on the available national policies and strategies on
agriculture, climate change and water and energy. It has also adequately aligned to
the recently approved ten-year strategic plan.
Mitigations:
Further alignment with the national adaptation plan (NAP), Nationally Determined
contributions (NDCs), Climate Resilient Green Economy Strategy (CRGE) is
needed.
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The project design will include new technical elements in carbon trading, private
irrigation scheme management and potential joint ventures and contract farming,
and ICT4D in mechanisation.
Mitigations:
Stronger partnership with expert organisations such as Vita and hello tractor will be
developed, for knowledge exchange and expertise.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Institutions are available but there might be a lack of adequate capacity in terms of
manpower, skill, infrastructure as well as systems particularly at Region and
Woreda level
5/11
Mitigations:
Capacity need assessment and tailored capacity development program, experience
sharing, lessons from similar projects such as PASIDP II
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Low
Low
The inclusion of new elements may stretch the capacity of the M&E for the MoA.
Mitigations:
PASIDPII has had strong performance in M&E over the years. They have also
included GIS and data dashboards as part of their M&E framework. To assist with
new elements, the project will include capacity for ICT4D and carbon trading in the
project staff. These will be supported by expert partnerships.
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There are three administrative levels of implementation of the programme which
will have fiduciary responsibilities namely federal level that will have Federal
Programme Coordination and Unit (FPCU), regional levels for each participating
regional government that will have Regional Programme Coordination Units
(RPCUs) and Woredas (districts) at lower levels where ground activities are
actually carried out. Previous IFAD funded projects implemented through similar
structures have had issues with timeliness and quality of financial reports from
Woreda to the regions which has consistently led to delays in financial reports to
RPCMUs and subsequent delays also to FPCMU. Another risk is that PACT also is
a complex programme due to multiple financiers. While PMU shall be made up of
relevantly qualified personnel with appropriate expertise in their chosen fields,
there may be lack of staff familiarity with IFAD, EU and GCF procedures.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate the risk of quality and timeliness of financial reporting from
Woreda, there are Woreda accountants proposed who will ensure accuracy,
completeness and timelines of financial reports from Woreda and ensuring the
programme bank account at Woreda is well reconciled. There will be MoUs
between Federal Government and participating Regional Governments and also
between the participating Regional Governments and their participating Woredas
which will stipulate 
requirement on financial reporting. Any non-compliance RPCUs/Woredas may
have their disbursements suspended as a penalty for non-compliance.
Regarding familiarity with IFAD, EU and GCF procedures, FMD will provide
capacity building training to the Finance Staff who will be selected competitively.
The capacity building will include familiarization with procedures on financial
reporting, expenditures categorizations across components, categories, financial
reporting timelines and other financial management related to the Programme.
Project Budgeting
High
Substantial
Risk:
High
Substantial
6/11
The programme has multiple financiers namely IFAD, ASAP+, GTM, EU; IGreenfin
(GCF), FAO, Dutch Embassy, Government Contribution, Beneficiaries contribution
and potential carbon credit finances. There is a risk of mix-up in budgeting and
expenditure allocations to these multiple financiers. There may also be a risk that
annual work plans and budgets are not prepared or revised on a timely basis, and
not executed in a coherent manner, resulting in funds not being available when
needed, ineligible costs and reallocation of Programme funds and slow
implementation progress.
Mitigations:
The Costables, PDR and PIM have adequate details on key activities to be
implemented and sources of finances for these costs. Subsequently, the AWPB will
be prepared with adequate details on financing for key activities to ensure
adequate guidance to the accounting team in booking of the expenditure. The Ms-
Excel AWPB will have a column to show financiers and proportion of financing
should the activity be financed from several sources.
The FPCU will coordinate the budget preparation processes with close
coordination with RPCU and Woredas. Budget monitoring will be carried out
periodically, at least on quarterly basis and any significant deviations discussed
within the project for remedial actions. Approved budget will be mapped in the
accounting system for ease of monitoring and aligning expenditure when posting.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There is a risk of commingling of funds at the entity which will be provided with
advances for implementation of programme activities. These includes Ministry of
Finance which will receive advances from IFAD and Ministry of Agriculture through
FPCU, RPCU and Woredas. Also, in addition to external development partners
financing, there are Counterpart finances expected to be received from the
Government of Ethiopia.
Mitigations:
To mitigate on risks of commingled funds and ease of accounting of any advance
provided, funds will be held in Programme dedicated accounts for which there will
be monthly bank accounts reconciliation and financial reports. All partnering
institutions that will receive project funds will have sub- programme accounts for
segregating the funds received. There will be monthly financial reports to FPCU for
monitoring operations of sub-accounts and consolidation. All partnering institutions
will sign MoUs clearly highlighting the requirements for a separate bank account
and financial reporting requirements.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The FPCU will be responsible for overall financial management of the Programme.
It will be responsible to release funds against agreed plans, drawn out of the
approved AWPBs, disburse funds to implementing agencies and coordinate
monitoring and financial reporting for the Programme as a whole. There may be a
risk that appropriate controls over Programme funds are not in place, leading to the
inefficient or inappropriate use of Programme resources.
Mitigations:
Internal controls have been instituted in the whole framework of financial and
administrative procedures. The identified controls range from; proper record
keeping and posting, authorization of accounting, procurement and administrative
documents, balancing and checking, physical security of assets, double signing
(approval) arrangements, to financial reporting and monitoring. There will be
internal audit function to check overall compliance to internal controls and provide
support towards improving systems, procedures and processes.
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Risk:
7/11
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
There is a risk of delays in consolidation of programme financial reports at FPCMU
which will be preparing consolidated financial reports for the program and
inaccurate financial reporting due to the complex nature of the programme which
has multiple financiers, categories and components. There are also possibility of
delays and inaccuracies in financial reporting due to multiple administrative levels
of project implementation that have fiduciary responsibilities ie FPCU, RPCU and
Woredas (districts) at lower levels
Mitigations:
To mitigate on risks on financial reporting an appropriate accounting system will be
acquired capable of networking and inputting at regional levels with multiple
analysis code for reporting on component, categories, financiers, for reporting
quarter, cumulative for the year and cumulative since start of the programme
including recording of memorandum data on in kind contribution (IKC). The system
will be networked for direct entry at regional levels to ease reporting at FPCU.
There will be harmonised financial reporting template for all financiers to ease
financial reporting.
Project External Audit
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The project will be audited by the Audit Service Corporation (ASC), the Supreme
Audit Institution of Ethiopia. There is a risks of inadequate audit coverage of the
programme audit considering there are multiple regions and many Woredas which
will be implementing the programme.
Mitigations:
A comprehensive audit coverage plan has been prepared which will ensure
adequate audit coverage. The plan provides for adequate annual audits at FPCU,
RPCUs and adequate proportions of Woredas under each RPCU which will be
alternating to ensure regular reviews throughout the programme implementation of
the project. The project will be audited by the Audit Service Corporation (ASC),
which is the Supreme Audit Institution of Ethiopia. The auditor will prepare a work
plan to ensure adequate coverage of the various institutions that receive
Programme funds and cover all the major risk areas and adequate coverage as per
coverage plan.
The audit terms of reference will be approved by IFAD in advance in line with the
guidance provided in the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of
IFAD-financed projects.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
(i) Most of the central government institutions do not maintain databases or records
for contracts including data on what has been procured, the value of procurement,
and who has been awarded contracts. They prepare the performance report
directly from the source document at the end. In addition, all central government
institutions do not submit their procurement performance reports on time to the
FPPA. 
(ii) Out of six key procurement information (1. Legal and regulatory framework for
procurement, 2. Government procurement plan, 3. Bidding opportunities, 4.
Contract awards, 5. Data on resolution of procurement complaints, 6. Annual
procurement statistics) only legal and regulatory framework for procurement and
bidding opportunities are made available to the public through appropriate means.
Mitigations:
8/11
IFAD can strongly encourage government through policy dialogue to accelerate the
creation of a reliable record/database for monitoring procurement management,
ensuring that central government institutions prepare accurate reports and submit
them to the FPPA, so that the latter can populate the database. It is also important
to ensure that accuracy and completeness of reports are verified by the FPPA or by
an external auditor. At project level, the systematic use of the CMT should be
ensured so as to improve procurement monitoring. 
In addition, policy dialogue between IFAD and the Government should encourage
the latter to improve the completeness of procurement information available to the
general public. For example, the FPPA website could be used to ensure access to
such information, as it is already the case for the legal and regulatory framework
and bidding opportunities.
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
(i) Complaints are not reviewed by a body which is not involved in any capacity in
procurement transactions or in the process leading to contract award decisions.
Indeed, out of 5 members, only one is seen as independent, while the others are
directly involved in procurement activities. 
(ii) Ethiopia has a score of 38/100 in 2020 in the Corruption Perception Index and
ranked 96/198.
Mitigations:
The Government should be encouraged to ensure that national provisions on
complaint system are applied, according to which and independent and functional
system should be available. Members of the Complaint Review Board should be
selected accordingly. 
(ii) Programme and the Lead executing agency to ensure that any individuals, firms
and Government stakeholders involved in the implementation of PACT are well
informed of the Revised IFAD's Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its
activities and operations.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Within the Lead Implementing Agency, there is 1 Senior Procurement Officer at
federal level and 5 Procurement Officers at regional level – one in each of the 5
target regions, handling IFAD project (PASIDP II) and World Bank project (LLRP in
Somali region).
Mitigations:
Recruitment of additional procurement officers for the PACT programme and
ensure sharing of knowledge and experience between new and existing
procurement staff. IFAD will also provide training on Project procurement policies
for the new staff.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
(i) The PP for the current IFAD project (PASIDP II) was significantly delayed by
late preparation of the AWPB. 
(ii) In the current IFAD project (PASIDP II), there are pseudo packaging as lotted
activities are conducted separately in different implementing regions and there are
instances where the planned procurement method has not been put to use.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: (i) The Lead executing agency to ensure that procurement planning
and AWPB are joint activities between the procurement, finance and technical
officers to ensure consistence and alignment of activities, guided by programme
technical delivery to inform procurement plan and financial flow projections.
9/11
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Climate change, use of agrochemicals as well as use of forest clearance may
cause loss of biodiversity
Mitigations:
Budgeted Climate adaptation and mitigation measures are adequately integrated
into project components. As part of the ESCMF, Integrated Pest Management Plan
is prepared to ensure environmentally friendly applications of agrochemicals.
screening and implementation of mitigation measures, integrated pest
management system and compliance to SECAP and national law on environment
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Wasteful/in-efficient use of water for irrigation and drinking. Construction of
infrastructures such as irrigation schemes, storage facilities, market and application
of pesticides and fertilizers will lead to pollution of environmental media such as
water, soil and air.
Mitigations:
Capacity building and awareness creation will be organized for the Landscape
Committees, IWUAs and farmers to ensure efficient use of water. Furthermore,
water use regulations and bylaws will be prepared and implemented. Compliance
to SECAP and national law on pollution prevention and precautionary approaches
and increase use of organic fertilizer
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Some construction activities may impact historical, religious or cultural resources.
Mitigations:
Appropriate screening of project/sub project, consultation with responsible
government representatives and communities as well as SECAP compliance.
Indigenous People
Risk:
All people in Ethiopia are considered indigenous. Pastoralist, vulnerable, and
disadvantaged people may be impacted by project activities.
Mitigations:
Strictly follow IFAD’s guidelines on targeting. The PASIDP II targeting strategy will
ensure adequate number of vulnerable and disadvantage people have access to
irrigation water. Geographical targeting, self and direct targeting will be applied in
the project intervention areas. FPIC Plan was prepared and will be implemented to
avoid or reduce adverse physical, social, or economic impacts on pastoralists.
Furthermore, pastoral and agro-pastoral communities will be consulted during the
LDIPs preparation.
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
10/11
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Project activities may cause forced or child labour, gender-based violence,
discriminatory and unsafe/unhealthy working conditions
Mitigations:
Awareness creation and capacity development to ensure project activities are
conducted in a safe working environment. Contractor contracts will include clauses
to ensure adequate working conditions. Furthermore, GRM system will be
established/strengthened so that affected people have access to address and
resolve their complaints. Sensitisation will also be done in collaboration with
relevant authorities to prevent GBV. As part of the ESCMF, Labour Management
Plan is prepared and will be implemented to ensure presence of conducive working
environment and avoid/reduce exploitative labour practices
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
construction activities and use of agrochemicals, may have a negative impact on
community health and safety. Furthermore, some project activities such as water
ponds/diversions may cause water-borne or other vector-borne diseases (e.g.,
temporary breeding habitats), and/or communicable and non-communicable
disease. COVID-19 is still potential health threat
Mitigations:
Provision of PPE, Integrated Pest management practises and also deploying of
COVID-19 preventing measures as well as SECAP compliance
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The proposed infrastructure development such as irrigation schemes, warehouses,
rural roads may cause physical, economic and involuntary resettlement and limit
access to natural resources.
Mitigations:
Adherence to SECAP and national laws entails screening of project activities and
elaborating ESCMPs for the infrastructure development. FPIC plan is drafted.
Resettlement Action Framework (RAF) will be prepared to guide the identification
and consultations of Project Affected People (PAP), quantification of physical and
economic resettlements as well as estimate compensations. Depending on the
number of PAPs, RAF will also guide the preparation of RAP. Furthermore, PMUs
will work hand in hand with Woreda and Kebele administrations to ensure that
PAPs are adequately consulted and compensations effected prior to
commencement of any physical activities. GRM should be strengthened to ensure
timely and satisfactory responses to complaints.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
use of chemical fertiliser and livestock fattening may cause emission of small
amounts of GHGs. Generally, the project's contribution to GHG emission is minor
Mitigations:
The programme will not cause deforestation to increase arable land for crop
production. Rather, it will create mitigation potential of 11.9 Mt CO2 eq. over the
project lifetime (EX-ACT Carbon Balance tool). These potentials are because o fthe
intensive INRM, CSA, Improvded cookstoves and biogas. Furthermore, as per
Etjhiopia's climate policy, much focus will be given to low emitting animals such as
poultry, sheep and goats.
11/11
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Programme interventions may increase exposure of communities, ecosystems and
infrastructure to climate shock
Mitigations:
PACT will support interventions that will enhance resilience of communities,
infrastructure and ecosystem to the impact of climate change. Sub projects will be
screened against climate impacts and appropriate mitigation/adaptation measures
will be adequately integrated into project design.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Substantial
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
All stakeholders may not be adequately identified and engaged during project and
implementation. Lack of budget and COVID related restrictions may affect
stakeholder participation as needed
Mitigations:
Budgeted stakeholder engagement plan will be prepared to ensure (i) adequate
mapping of stakeholder and beneficiaries, (ii) their demands are incorporated in the
design, (iii) compliments are resolved in fair and timely manners and (iv) required
capacity and awareness are in place.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Targeting of landscapes and beneficiaries, construction activities, water and
distributions, poor quality service are potential sources of grievances. GRM system
may be non-existent or not functioning well and the GRM committees may not have
the required capacity to resolve complaints in fair and timely manner. .
Mitigations:
Proper implementation of the targeting strategy/criteria, provision of quality services
and establishment/strengthening of GRM system, awareness creation to
complainants, capacity development/training to GRM committee
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
ANNEX 10 
EXIT STRATEGY 
ANNEX 10: PACT EXIT STRATEGY 
Elaboration  of  the  exit  and  sustainability  strategy  has  been  done  at  the  following  levels:  a) 
sustainability in the farming systems; b) profitability of the market led approach; c) gender 
and nutrition focus; and d) capacity building at all intervention levels.    
Sustainability in the Farming Systems – Community-led environmental protection will be a key 
feature  of  THE  Programme  that  ensures  ownership  and  sustenance  of  sustainable  land 
management  practices.  The  landscape  approach  including  NBs  and  water  shed 
management activities as well as climate resilient infrastructure development will ensure 
environmental sustainability of project interventions. The rules and procedures that will be 
developed for management of natural resources will contribute to sustainability. 
Profitability  of  the  Market-led  Approach  –  Market-led  production  and  B2B  linkages  to  be 
implemented by the Programme and the benefits that accrue for the relationships created 
between farmers and off-takers will be a basis for sustainability and exit of the Programme. 
Supporting and mentoring agripreneurs both technically and financially will also be a key 
sustainability measure of the Programme. 
Community  Empowerment  and  Strengthening  of  Institutions  –  THE  Programme  will  empower 
communities and strengthen institutions for sustainable management of investments under 
the  Programme.  This  will  include  innovative  processes  and  systems  for  management  of 
infrastructure, farmer level institutions, such as cooperatives/unions and IWUAs. Building 
capacities  on  governance,  business  skill  and  financial  management  at  all  levels  will 
contribute to sustainability of investments. 
Investments  in  Human  Social  Capital  –  Interventions,  such  as  gender  transformative 
approaches, nutrition social behaviour change and youth empowerment mechanisms will be key 
to  redress  social  imbalances  and  to  build  individuals,  households  and  communities  on  their 
livelihoods and quality of life. In addition, the policy reforms supported in Component 3 will drive 
the gender equality agenda beyond the Programme’s life. The institutional capacity building that 
will be undertaken will ensure that skills exist to continue supporting THE Programme-initiated 
activities  after  completion.  The  capacity  building  will  cover  government  institutions  at  the 
federal, regional and woreda levels and the target group’s producer institutions. 
Details of exit strategy per component are highlighted below  
Component/Activity 
Component 1 Community-
Led Climate-Smart 
Productive Landscapes 
Community-led Participatory 
Agricultural Development Planning 
Integrated Natural Resources 
Management 
Sustainability and Exit Strategy 
institutions  within 
Community  empowerment  will  be  an  entry  point  for  PACT  to 
empower farmers to develop their plans for the development. The 
Empowerment comes through capacity support to understand the 
risks  and  tools  to  address,  capacity  to  be  inclusive  and  ensuring 
the needs of men and women are met and there is equal access to 
resources  and  technologies  to  all.  Through  ownership  of  the 
interventions,  and  development  of 
the 
watershed will sustain the activities  
Community  
Community  led  watershed  management  planning  as  well  as 
farmers contributions will enhance ownership which eventually will 
ensure  continuous  engagement  in  NRM  in  the  post  completion 
period.  The  capacity  development  programmes  to  farmers,  DA, 
Kebele  administration  as  well  as  Watershed  Management 
Association  will  also  help  continuous  engagement  on  the 
implementation  of  the  watershed  management  plan.  The 
engagement  of  Woreda  and  regional  bureaus  of  agriculture, 
energy, irrigation, women affair etc will have role in sustaining the 
NRM activities through supervision and post completion follow up 
of  watershed  management  associations  as  well  as  interventions. 
Equaly important is the implementation of various carbon farming 
activities and carbon market opportunities and the green loan from 
Climate Resilient Water 
Development for Households, 
Crops and Livestock Use 
Market-Oriented and Nutrition-
sensitive Climate-Resilient Food 
Production and Productivity 
IGREENFIN that requires continues and sustainable management 
of  NRM.  Last  but  not  least,  NRM  will  ensure  social  inclusion  of 
women, youth, Pastoral communities, people with disability in the 
Watershed  Management  Association,  Committees  which  will 
eventually  lead  to  sustainable  management  watersheds  through 
inclusive benefits to the communities.  
the  Programme  will  adopt  a  participatory  approach  when 
developing the subcomponent activities, from the identification of 
intervention sites, through the conducting of feasibility studies and 
detailed  designs,  until  reaching  the  construction  or  rehabilitation 
phase of water infrastructure to ensure ownership. 
All infrastructure works will gradually be carried out starting from 
the second year of the programme and will be achieved, the latest, 
one year before the programme end (year 6) in order to ensure a 
smooth asset management transfer/handing over to beneficiaries. 
The  PACT  will  empower  communities  and  strengthen  institutions 
for  sustainable  management,  operation  and  maintenance  of 
investments  under  the  programme.  This  will  include  innovative 
processes and systems for management of infrastructure, farmer 
level  institutions  such  as  cooperatives/unions  and  Water  Users’ 
Associations. 
Research  services  will  be  capacitated  to  provide  seed  sector 
support and sustained through a revolving fund mechanism where 
seed  multipliers  pay  for  the  services  provided  by  researchers, 
including  inspection  and  quality  check.  FTC  will  be  sustained 
through  capacity  building  of  DAs,  and  demonstrations  in  the 
centres  will  receive  full  support  from  PACT  in  the  first  year,  and 
proceeds from the demo will fund the demos in subsequent years 
through  a  revolving  fund  mechanism.  This  way  farmers  will 
continue to access extension service from the demos and this has 
been a MoA procedure for sustaining FTCs. 
To  promote  production  of  nutrition  rich  foods,  PACT  will  support 
vulnerable households with starter packs and will be expected to 
pass  on  seeds  and 
livestock  to  other  beneficiaries.  The 
sustainability of  the  exercise  will be  ensured through  community 
identification  of  subsequent  beneficiaries  from  the  pass  on.  This 
way, beneficiaries ensure that management of crops and livestock 
by  their  predecessors  is  up  to  standard.  PACT  clear  pass  on 
guidelines  will  be  enforced  by  the  communities  themselves  with 
support  from  DAs.  Additionally,  within  the  framework  of  the 
Nutrition SBCC strategy, key community influencers (depending on 
each context) will be trained and empowered to convey messages 
and conduct dialogues on barriers to positive nutrition behaviours.  
Component 2: Business development   
Market Access Linkage Support 
All PACT activities in the promotion of improved production are on 
a sustainable market led-approach which would create business 
relationships between producers and buyers, develop local 
business in the watershed to provide services/ inputs, 
mechanization to producers supported by the program. 
Strengthening of cooperatives/ and unions ensures that support 
to producers continues beyond the life of the project 
Market Platform, digital support in 
FTC 
Digital  interventions  under  PACT  supporting  Market  oriented 
Production  and  Productivity  are  intended  to  enhance  adoption  of 
digital  extension  services  by  improving  access  to  information, 
sector, 
knowledge, and market information through Research Institutions 
and Department of Extension Services. The activities under PACT 
will also promote institutional strengthening from the standpoints 
of  innovation,  scaling  uptake  of  ICT4D  solutions,  supporting  the 
knowledge platform to be developed under PACT will act as a long-
term repository of knowledge products supporting extension, ARM, 
market information. Ensuring direct ownership of the solutions by 
the  government  through  collaboration  with  the  Agriculture 
Transformation  Institute  (ATI)  will  promote  their  sustainability.  
PACT  will  also  serve  as  a  conduit  for  IFAD's  contribution  and 
support of the Digital Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services 
(DAEAS) 2030 Roadmap to promote the digital transformation of 
the  agriculture 
thereby  promoting  policy-related 
engagement and institution capacity. 
As  skilled,  reliable  and  empowered  value-chain  actors  leading 
profitable  agribusinesses,  young  agripreneurs  supported  under 
sub-component  2.2  will  demonstrate  viable  business  cases  and 
gain  trust  and  credibility  to  access  finance  from  MFIs  to  expand 
their  businesses  and  create  more  sustainable  employment 
opportunities for youth. Trainers capacitated under 2.2, including 
extension officers, OPD staff, business coaches and incubation hub 
operators, will continue to apply learning in their line of work and 
provide  agripreneurship  and  business  skill  training  to  farmers, 
especially youth, at their respective facilities 
Community  involvement  in  the  identification  and  selection  of 
appropriate infrastructure will ensure full ownership of the market 
infrastructure.  Building  capacities  on  governance,  business  skill 
and  financial  management  of  cooperatives  will  contribute  to 
sustainability of investments.  
Investments in Human Social Capital – Interventions, such 
as  gender  transformative  approaches,  nutrition  social 
behaviour  changes  and  youth  empowerment  mechanisms 
will  be  key  to  redress  social  imbalances  and  to  build 
individuals,  households  and  communities’  agency  on  their 
livelihoods  and  quality  of  life.    The  institutional  capacity 
building that will be undertaken for government institutions, 
farmers  organizations  and  agriprenuers  will  ensure  that 
skills exist to continue supporting PACT Programme-initiated 
activities after completion.  
Tailored Business and Finance 
Linkage to Young Agripreneurs 
Local Market-Related 
Infrastructure 
Human social capital 
investment 
Planning for Exit 
To ensure sustainability of the activities and gains achieved by the programme, the following 
preliminary exit plan has been developed and will be updated during programme 
implementation. Since PACT is implemented by government departments, and invests in 
developing capacities of key government departments to implement PACT activities, the 
expectation is that most activities will be integrated into the day to day activities of the 
relevant ministries. Below is a summary of the process for exit. 
Activity to 
continue 
IFAD support 
end date 
Who will take up the 
activity 
Hand over/exit process 
Who will continue 
financing 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural 
resources will continue to support 
EPA 
Year 7  
Integrated 
NRM and 
carbon 
finance 
Demos at 
FTC 
Year 4 
INRM: Ministry of 
Agriculture and its 
structures at Region and 
Woreda level 
Carbon Finance: 
Ethiopian Environmental 
Protection Authority 
(EPA) 
Bureau of Agriculture 
Seed 
multiplicati
on 
Inspection 
Market 
linkages 
Year 4 
Research departments 
3-year support 
 Cooperatives with 
support from the 
Bureau of Agriculture,  
Digital 
support 
Year 6 
ATI 
Potential for 
scaling 
Govt of Ethiopia has a 
very keen interest to 
address land 
degradation is promoting 
wide scale uptake of 
vermi-compost  and will 
likely expand carbon 
markets  
Climate Finance: Rabo bank and Vita will 
prepare climate finance models. The models will 
include activities on agroforestry and improved 
cookstoves, amount of money beneficiaries will 
gain. Purpose of the money etc 
Phased support to FTC demos. The Programme 
will finance 100% in year 1 and will reduce 
support to ensure co-financing by the Bureau of 
Agriculture in such a way that by year 5, demos 
are completely supported by the Bureaus 
through regular programming  
Phased support through gradual withdrawal of 
financial support and ensuring gradual 
government contribution  
The market linkage initiatives start with capacity 
development and building relationships between 
cooperatives  and  businesses.  The  deal-making 
arrangements  in  PACT  provide  a  cost  sharing 
facility  to  facilitate  these  meetings,  which  will 
contribute to business growth and direct contact 
with potential business partners such off-takers, 
input suppliers and enhanced capacity. Once the 
business relationship is built for three years the 
private sector will have enough incentive to keep 
the  business 
the  producer 
linkage  with 
organizations.    With  the  professionalization  of 
the producer organizations, they will be expected 
to  maintain  existing  business  relationship  and 
respond to other opportunities emerge. PACT will 
continue  to  monitor  these  relationships  without 
any  financing  incentives  for  the  deals  after  3 
years of support. 
PACT aims to scale already existing digital 
platforms under ATI in conjunction with the 
Bureau of agriculture. PACT will support to add 
more content on weather, climate and inputs as 
well as markets by including other commodities 
under PACT and assist in scaling to other 
Regions. PACT would also create opportunities 
Revolving fund by the 
government 
Revolving fund to conduct 
seed inspection 
Building on the relationships 
created by the programme, 
future deal rooms will be co-
financed by PS and 
cooperatives with technical 
backstopping of cooperatives 
by the Bureau of agriculture 
and cooperatives 
ATI and Bureau of agriculture 
will finance 
 GOE has keen interest 
in digitizing agriculture 
and extension services 
and will likely expand to 
other areas. The DAEAS 
roadmap is key driver 
for continued GOE 
Year 6 
Water Users’ 
Associations (WUAs) 
and BWI 
Water 
Infrastructu
re 
Operation 
and 
Maintenanc
e (O&M) 
investment on digital 
services. 
WUA’s members 
contributions/payment of 
water services’ fees 
to build a self-sustaining model for the market 
platform to ensure off takers, agrobusinesses 
and input suppliers are using the digital 
platform to engage with farmers. 
ATI and Bureau of agriculture will continue 
supporting the platform and collaborating with 
department of extension services to ensure 
farmers continue to access information on 
production and markets post-PACT. Through 
Capacity building of DAs, FTCs and cooperatives 
the government institutions will have the 
capacity needed to provide needed support to 
farmers post PACT. 
WUAs  strengthening  and  capacity  building  (in 
asset  Management,  O&M,  water  services’  fees 
policy,  admin.  and 
financial  management, 
conflict  resolution,  etc.)  and  signature  of  asset 
management  transfer  agreement.  Before  the 
WUA  can  take  over  the  responsibility  for  the 
Operation  and  Maintenance  (O&M)  of  the 
irrigation  scheme,  the  BoWI  will  prepare  an 
Irrigation  Management  Transfer  Agreement 
(IMT)  to  be  signed  by  the  WUA  and  the  BoWI. 
The following topics should be covered in the IMT 
Agreement: 
  Detailed  inventory  of  all  irrigation  and 
drainage (I&D) infrastructure for which 
the  WUA  will  take  over  the  O&M 
responsibility; 
Functions of the WUA with regard to the 
O&M  of  the  I&D  within  the  command 
area; 
 
to  enhance 
  Responsibilities  of  the  BoWI  and  BoA 
with respect to the provision of regular 
training  and  support  to  the  WUA  in 
technical, 
order 
organizational, 
and 
financial management skills required for 
the  management  of  the  WUA  in  an 
effective,  accountable  and  transparent 
manner; 
  Minimum 
its 
administrative 
standards 
maintenance of all I&D infrastructure; 
the 
for 
  Communication 
procedures; 
and 
reporting 
  Procedures for settlement of disputes. 
Warehouse 
manageme
nt 
Year 6 
Cooperatives 
At the completion of construction works, each 
warehouse will be put under a liability period of 
at least six months after which, it will be 
handed over to PACT (by contractors) and on a 
second level to the respective Cooperative (by 
the programme). Management of the 
warehouses and its facilities will be handed over 
to the beneficiary cooperatives who can opt for 
different management options including: i) 
forming a committee for the day-to-day 
management; or ii) hiring a manager, etc.  
The direct beneficiaries, 
members of the cooperatives 
will in any case be paying a 
user fee to sustainably 
manage the facilities. 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender Transformative
 Youth Sensitive
1/2
 Nutrition Sensitive
 Persons with Disabilities
 Indigenous Peoples
 Climate Finance
 Adaptive Capacity
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies,
 National youth policies,
strategies and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems
and opportunities, by gender
strategies and actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and
opportunities by youth
group
 National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
 Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
 National policies,
strategies and actors
 Main groupings among
PwDs
 Context-based barriers
and opportunities for PwDs
 International standards,
national policies, strategies
and key IPs' organizations
 Main IPs communities,
demographic, social, cultural
and political characteristics
 Important livelihoods
constraints and opportunities
for IPs and their cultural
heritage
Theory of
change
Logframe
indicators
 Gender policy objectives
 Pathways to youth
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Gender transformative
 Youth employment
pathways
 Policy engagement on
included in project
objectives/activities
GEWE
 Outreach disaggregated
 Outreach
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Women are > 40% of
outreach beneficiaries
 IFAD empowerment index
(IE.2.1)
disaggregated by sex,
youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Persons with new
jobs/employment
opportunities (CI 2.2.1)
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth
activities
 Funds for IFAD
empowerment index in M&E
budget
activities
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
 Pathways to PwDs’
 Pathways to IPs'
socioeconomic empowerment
using a twin-track approach
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Targeted support to
improve nutrition (CI 1.1.8)
Outcome level CIs
 CI 1.2.8 MDDW
 CI 1.2.9 KAP
 Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition
activities
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth, disability and
IPs (if appropriate)
 Outreach indicator
disaggregated by sex, youth
and IPs
 IPs are > 30% of target
beneficiaries
 Staff with disability
inclusion-specific TORs
 Funds for disability
inclusion-related activities
(including accessibility)
 Staff with IPs-specific
TORs
 Funds for IPs related
activities, including FPIC
$33,834,000
$1,114,000
$34,948,000
IFAD
Adaptation
Finance
IFAD
Mitigation
Finance
Total IFAD
Climate-
focused
Finance
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
Persons with Disabilities
Indigenous Peoples
☐ No social inclusion themes
2/2
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: 05 Annex 5 Appendix 5 Pest Managment Plan
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
PARTICIPATORY AGRICULTURE AND CLIMATE TRANSFORMATION 
PROGRAMME 
Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework 
GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION OF   PEST MANAGEMENT PLAN (PMP) 
At the present stage of the PACT Project,  it is not yet defined in detail the subprojects to be 
developed  to  support  livelihoods.  It  could  comprise  a  wide  range  of  types  as  agriculture, 
livestock, forests  and several type of crops/species. 
In  case  of  selection  of  subproject  with  potential  to  pest  development,  a  specific  Pest 
Management Plan shall  be prepared, based on the principles defined in  this PMP.  The Pest 
Management Plan of agricultural sub projects shall include the following topics. 
Description  of  the  Subproject  –  identification  its  location,  area,  cropping  system,  the 
climate, the agro-ecological conditions, technologies to be used, water source, the potential 
pest problems (key pests for each target crop). 
     Legal and Institutional Framework  related to pest management 
Identification  of  alternatives  for  pest  management  –  Identification  of  current 
management  of  the  identified  key  pests  in  the  region  and  existent  IPM  experiences–  in 
consultation with agricultural authorities, NGOs, extensionists and farmers, including the 
identification of farmers’ indigenous IPM tactics. Identification of the pesticides authorized 
in  Ethiopia  for  the  identified  key  species.  Identification  of  alternatives  techniques  on 
consultation with research institutions  such as Institute of Agricultural research of Ethiopia  
even international institutions that usually supports the agricultural sector. 
Definition of a strategy to  manage the pest  – identifying measures to  be implemented 
along the crop cycle since the  project  preparation stage, to  site preparation and planting, 
including cultural practices that can help prevent build-up of pests and select an appropriate 
blend of IPM tools. 
Awareness and training to promote IPM and the safe use of pesticide – for extension 
workers,  farmers  and  local  communities;  it  shall  include  strategies  to  communicate  with 
local  communities,  farmers,  including  the  preparation  of  specific  materials  with 
photos/figures or even videos. 
Monitoring and Evaluation  – define a monitoring plan to ensure regular fields monitor 
and the preparation of quarterly evaluation reports. 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT 
Ministry of Agriculture  is the principal implementing institution for the PACT  Project.   
The Project Management Unit (PMU) that will be established in the Zonal and Woreda offices  
will be responsible for securing compliance with  IFAD safeguards  on Pest Management in 
collaboration with other entities implementing project activities.   
National  Administration  of  Conservation  Areas  (ANAC),  the  parastatal  agency  recently 
created to manage more efficiently the Conservation Areas system of Mozambique, is expected 
to play a key role in implementing MozBio.  
The  environmental  and  social  specialists  to  be  recruited  for  the  project    will  be  directly 
responsible to ensure proper pest management of  the  projects . The various  agriculture service 
providers  in the regions such as  NGOs and private sector would also play an important role 
in the definition of pest management plans.  
The  social specialist  in the woredas  will coordinate and supervise the engagement of local 
communities in the PMP, supervise the awareness campaigns for local communities regarding 
to human health and environmental impacts of pesticide and training of pesticide users. 
The  environmental specialist would also be responsible to supervise the preparation of specific 
pest management plans, articulate with the agriculture and environmental authorities and be 
responsible for the monitoring.  
The development  Community Agents operating in the project areas would be directly engaged 
in all the PMP activities in the field, acting as a liaison point with the  environmental and social 
specialists 
CAPACITY BUILDING, TRAINING AND AWARENESS-RAISING CAMPAIGNS  
IPM  is  a  knowledge  intensive  and  interactive  approach.  Thus,  the  success  of  IPM  depends 
largely on developing and sustaining institutional and human capacity to facilitate experiential 
learning for making informed decisions in integrating scientific and indigenous knowledge to 
solve  specific  problems.  Poor  communication  between  farmers,  extension  has  often  led  to 
poorly-targeted research or to poor adoption of promising options generated by research.  
The  need  to  accurately  identify  and  diagnose  pests  and  pest  problems  and  understand 
ecosystem  interactions  could  enable  farmers  with  biological  and  ecological  control 
opportunities and in making pragmatic pest control decisions. Therefore it is required a strong 
linkage  between  researchers,  governmental  authorities  and  the  implementers  of  IPM 
techniques. 
In Ethiopia  general farmers are aware that pesticides are poisonous but their responses still 
create  a  major  occupational  health  and  environmental  risk.  There  is  a  need  to  implement 
awareness  campaigns  to  raise  the  understanding  of  the  potential  environmental  and  human 
health impacts related with inadequate use of pesticide as well as the benefits of the integrated 
pest management practices.  
On other hand more training is required for farmers on the implementation of integrated pest 
management and for pesticides users.  
Training on IPM shall include:  
Learning-by-doing/discovery training programs – experiences indicate that farmers are 
most  apt  to  adopt  new  techniques  when  they  acquire  knowledge  and  skills  through 
personal  experience,  observation,  analysis,  experimentation,  decision-making  and 
practice. This allows to identify farmers’ own knowledge and for farmers to understand 
how IPM applies to their own farms. 
Recovering  collective  memory  -  Pest  problems  often  emerge  because  traditional 
agricultural methods were changed in one way or another, or lost. These changes can 
sometimes be reversed. This approach uses group discussions to try to identify what 
changes might have prompted the current pest problem. 
Smallholder  support  and  discussion  groups  -Weekly  meetings  of  smallholders,  held 
during  the  cropping  season,  to  discuss  pests  and  related  problems  can  be  useful  for 
sharing  the  success  of  various  control  methods. However,  maintaining  attendance  is 
difficult except when there is a clear financial incentive . 
Demonstration  projects  -  Subsidized  experiments  and  field  trials  at  selected  farms 
(farmer-field  school)  can  be  very  effective  at  promoting  IPM  within  the  local 
community. These pilots demonstrate IPM in action and allow farmers to compare IPM 
with ongoing cultivation supported by synthetic pesticides. 
Educational material - Basic written and photographic/figures guides or even videos to 
pest identification and crop-specific management techniques are essential for training 
and could be an important factor in motivating farmers to adopt IPM. 
Youth education - Promoting and improving the quality of programs on IPM and the 
risks of synthetic pesticides has been effective at technical schools for rural youth. In 
addition  to  becoming better farmers in  the future, these students  can bring informed 
views back to their communities now. 
Training on use of pesticides shall include the following: 
Pesticide  selection  –  Indicating  the  list  of  authorized  pesticides  per  target  pests, 
indicating  its  level  of  toxicity  and  hazardous,  possible  harmful  effects  and  past 
experience using those pesticides for the pest and the crop. 
Understanding the Pesticide Label – Explain all the information included in the label. 
Pesticide Transport – Give indications on how to transport pesticides in order to avoid 
any leakages and avoiding the contact with persons or animals. 
Mixing and Loading Pesticide – Explain the importance of ensure the proper dilution 
of the concentrated pesticide and the need to use protective clothing. 
Pesticide Storage – Give indications on how to storage pesticides – site location (not 
allowed  in  flood  areas),  security  (against  illegal  entries,  as  well  as  children  and 
livestock),  isolated  from  other  houses,  be  well  ventilated,  waterproof  roof,  have  a 
current inventory list of pesticide stock. 
Container Disposal – Give indications on how to destroy used pesticide containers  
Obsolete  pesticides  –  Explain  the  risks  associated  with  obsolete  pesticides  and 
procedures to be followed. 
Calibration, Product Quantity and Pesticide Application – Explain the importance of 
application equipment calibration and how to do it.  
Determining the Amount of Chemical to Use – Give explanations on methods to find 
out the amount of chemical to apply per hectare and its level of dilution 
Important  Cautions  related  to  the  Application  of  Pesticides  –  Give  indications  on 
important cautions for safe use of pesticide  
Toxicity, Human Protection and First Aid – Explain the possible effects of pesticide on 
human  health,  ways  of  pesticides  entering  in  the  body,  importance  of  protective 
clothing & other protective equipment, basic first aid for pesticide exposure. 
      The DO’T  DOs: 
-  Buy more pesticide than you’ll need for a single season. 
-  Mix more pesticide than you’ll need to treat the desired area. 
-  Apply sprays or dusts when leaves and small plants are continually moving because 
of the wind (this means a wind speed of 4 m/second). 
-  Apply pesticides during the hottest part of the day. 
-  Apply pesticides if you think it will rain within 12 hours. 
-  Eat, drink, smoke, or chew tobacco while applying pesticide. 
-  Carry tobacco, food or drinks with you while spraying. 
-  Get into the path of any spray drift, or let others get in its path. 
-  Try to blow out a plugged nozzle with your mouth. 
-  Keep working if anyone shows signs of pesticide poisoning (start first aid 
immediately). 
-  Wash contaminated clothes with any other clothing. 
-  Let water from washing contaminated clothes or equipment get into streams, ponds or 
wells. 
Awareness-raising programs and training on IPM techniques and safe use of pesticides shall 
be inclusive for women and vulnerable groups, since experience show that these are the most 
impacted persons by pest and pesticides use and storage. 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 13 Startup Activities
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 13: Start-up Activities  
Action  
a.  Sign the financing agreement (following IFAD board 
approval)  
b.  Establishment of the Federal Project Coordination 
Unit and the Regional Project Coordination Units.  
c.  Open Designated Accounts and identify signatories 
(ID and signature specimen).  
GoE/IFAD  
Who  
GoE in consultation with IFAD  
GoE  
MoF/MoA/participating Regions  
d.  Sign MoUs/Memoranda of Cooperation between the 
Federal Government and the participating Regions and 
between MoA and the other participating line Ministries, 
specifying the expected responsibilities and outcomes.  
e.  Review and finalise the first year AWPB and 
Procurement Plan  
f.  Review and finalise draft PIM  
g.  Establish the Federal Programme Steering Committee 
and introduce the PACT Programme to it. Agree on how 
to proceed with the provision of the oversight function 
(frequency and modality of meetings)  
h.  Establish the Programme Steering Committees in the 
Regions and Woredas  
i.  Procurement and installation of an off the shelf 
accounting software at the FPCU and RPCUs and the 
chart of accounts coded to the detail possible  
j.  Hold the official PACT Programme start-up workshop. 
This would be used to orient the 
FPCU/RPCUs/FPSC/RPSCs/WPSCs/other stakeholders.   
k.  Initiate the undertaking of the PACT Programme 
baseline survey  
l. 
system’s needs assessment to elaborate capacity building 
plan   
m.  Conduct awareness creation on Programme 
objectives and implementation arrangements  
n.  Review and finalise the targeting strategy for the 
selection of Kebeles, landscapes and specific beneficiary 
communities. Initiate the process of selecting the 
Kebeles, landscapes and specific beneficiary 
communities.  
Initiate the process of undertake a capacity and 
FPCU/RPCUs  
FPCU/RPCUs  
MoA  
MoA/BoAs  
FPCU/RPCUs  
MoA/BoAs  
FPCU/RPCUs  
FPCU/Consultant  
FPCU/RPCUs  
PCU/Regions/Woredas  
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 14 Pact Asap Technical Annex
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
MEMO ASAP+ supplementary funds 
Approval of project design document for standalone 
ASAP+ investment project 
Annex 14: Requirements reflected in Project Design Reports for projects 
receiving ASAP+ financing 
Requirement 
A detailed analysis of historical trends and 
future climate change projections, 
vulnerability analysis, identification of 
associated impacts and a compelling 
rationale for the selected adaptation 
strategies based on the additionality 
(financial and nonfinancial) of the ASAP+ 
funding.  
Summary/PDR references 
demonstrating compliance 
Annex 5:  SECAP review note (which 
includes the full climate rationale 
description):  
According to World Vulnerability Index and 
ND-GAIN Matrix, Ethiopia is the 20th most 
vulnerable and 47th least ready country to 
the impact of climate change in the world.  
Projected climate changes: Mean annual 
temperature is projected to increase by 
1.6°C until 2030, by 1.8°C until 2050 and by 
1.9 until 2090 under RCP2.6, and by 1.8°C 
until 2030, by 2.6°C until 2050 and by 4.6°C 
until 2090 under RCP8.5, compared to pre-
industrial levels. Projected precipitation 
changes are uncertain, but models agree on 
a precipitation increase during the second 
half of the century under RCP8.5. Extreme 
precipitation events are projected to increase 
slightly, with a maximum of four heavy 
precipitation events per period under RCP8.5 
by 2090 and two additional very heavy 
precipitation events for the same period and 
scenario1.  
Ethiopia is highly vulnerable to the impact of 
climate change because of its high 
dependence on rain-fed agriculture, 
increased ecosystem degradation and weak 
management of natural resources and low 
adaptive capacity2. 
Climate related shocks affect productivity, 
together with high levels of poverty and low 
levels of technology, leave people with 
limited choices or resources to adapt. These 
changes also hamper economic progress and 
exacerbate existing social and economic 
problems3.  
1 Climate Risk Analysis for Identifying and Weighing Adaptation Strategies in Ethiopia’s 
Agricultural Sector, GIZ (2020) 
2 Updated National Determined Contributions (NDCs), 2021 
3 State and Outlook of the Environment, 2017 
Prepared by: Gianluca Gondolini – ECG 
cc: 
For mitigation activities, projects must 
quantify the expected reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions using an 
internationally recognised assessment 
methodology.  
The frequency and intensity of droughts has 
increased in recent years, severely affecting 
the livelihoods of millions of people. At the 
same time, increases in floods have placed 
additional stress on social institutions and 
intensified the vulnerability of households. 
The agriculture sector, which employs a 
significant portion of the country’s labour 
force, heavily relies on rainfall, which is 
subjected to high inter-annual and intra-
annual variabilities and yearly variation 
around mean rainfall level is 25%, which can 
increase to 50% in some regions4. Water 
scarcity and drought conditions are expected 
to increase risks of food insecurity and may 
exacerbate conflict situations over scarce 
resources and population movements. Heavy 
rains, flooding, and soil erosion puts both 
urban and rural infrastructure at risk, 
particularly for poor and vulnerable groups. 
Annex 6 Appendix 6: The estimated 
mitigation potential of PACT is of 11.9 Mt CO2 
eq. over the project lifetime (EX-ACT Carbon 
Balance tool developed by FAO).  
The GHG mitigation potential of PACT is 
conveyed through the planned 
implementation of the following practices and 
technologies: 
- 
Integrated landscape and natural 
resources management: climate-resilient 
land restoration with tree planting and 
conservation of forested areas. Enhanced 
soil sequestration capacity with cover 
crops, windbreaks, stone bunds and 
check dams. 
Implementation of climate-smart 
practices and technologies at farm and 
cooperative levels: Dissemination of 
conservation agriculture, minimum or 
zero tillage, mulching and composting to 
improve soil carbon sequestration and 
increase above ground carbon stocks. 
-  Distribution of improved cookstoves for 
- 
household and group cooking: that would 
decrease the rate of deforestation for 
firewood collection and charcoal 
production. 
Installation of biogas plants: that 
technologies would decrease the amount 
- 
4 Ethiopia’s updated Nationally Determined Contributions (2021) 
2 
of residue burnt and consequently CO2 
emissions released in the atmosphere 
PDR Project Description:  
  Section C. Project objectives, geographic 
area of intervention and target groups  
  Section E. Theory of Change 
Annex 2: PACT ToC diagram 
The transformative impact of the project 
consists in promoting a community-tailored  
inclusive resilient and sustainable value chain 
model that reduces climate vulnerabilities 
and enhances the adaptive capacity of 
smallholder farmers. PACT will promote the 
integration of climate risk management 
through the adoption of climate resilient 
practices and technologies for sustainable 
crop and fodder production, improve post-
harvest handling, enhance access to climate 
and market information and insurance 
products. 
An estimated 112,500 smallholder farmer 
households (corresponding to 75% of direct 
beneficiaries) and 150,000 farmer groups will 
be trained and supported by using the 
resources provided by ASAP+. The grant will 
also support the implementation of 
community-led landscape management 
(subcomponent 1.2, through climate-smart 
land restoration and integrated natural 
resource management), climate resilient 
water infrastructure (subcomponent 1.3 
through drip irrigation and improved water 
management scheme) and small-scale CSA 
practices (subcomponent 1.4, through 
compost and bio-pesticides production, 
agroforestry techniques, use of climate 
information for improved planning and 
decision making, use of improved seeds and 
seedlings varieties, irrigate fodder and 
vegetable/fruit tree production, etc.) 
Annex 1: Logical Framework 
Smallholder farmers HH targeted: 150,000 
Relevant ASAP+ outcomes indicators: 
ADAPTATION/RESILIENCE:  
Targeted HH by ASAP +: 112,500 (50% 
women, 20% youth and 5% people with 
disabilities)  
Outcome 1 indicator a: Number of 
persons/households reporting adoption of 
environmentally sustainable and climate-
resilient technologies and practices [CI 
3.2.2.] 
Theory of change and core objectives must 
introduce climate change as a central driver 
of food insecurity and show how the ASAP+ 
climate finance will have an added value to 
the projects ability to increase climate 
resilience of beneficiaries.  
The logframe must show clear results logic 
and impact projections, including at a 
minimum, the ASAP+ outreach indicator 
(Number of persons receiving services 
promoted or supported by the project), at 
least one outcome level indicator and at 
least two output level indicators relevant to 
the project’s activities. All persons-based 
indicators must be disaggregated by sex 
and youth, and IPs, where relevant. The 
quality of a project’s results logic will be a 
key eligibility criterion for project selection.  
3 
Sub-outcome 1.1: Improved access to 
nutritious food and products from 
agrobiodiverse farming systems 
Sub-outcome 1.2: Enhanced human capacity 
to manage climate risk 
Type of services provided in the package: 
training and uptake of CSA practices and 
technologies, climate and/or market 
information, use of insurance products, 
financial services, 
Sub-outcome 1.3: Scaled up climate-resilient 
land and natural resources management  
Land brought under climate-resilient 
management: 100,000 ha. The following 
categories are eligible: 
- 
Integrated watershed management: 
number of sub/micro-watershed targeted 
with NRM and FMNR practices.  
-  Farm and pasture lands under climate-
resilient management 
PACT will promote implementation of 
NRM/Ecosystem-based activities and Nature-
based solutions within the integrated 
landscape management approach 
Sub-outcome 1.4: Climate-proofed services 
and infrastructure 
Eligible activities (subcomponents 1.2 and 
1.3) include installation of multipurpose 
water wells and boreholes, drip irrigation and 
other water-efficient systems, rainwater 
harvesting equipment. Under subcomponent 
2.3, activities include processing and storage 
facilities and rehabilitation of feeder roads  
Sub-outcome 1.5: Strengthened policy 
frameworks on climate resilient smallholder 
agriculture: 
PACT will promote implementation of 
adaptation and mitigation measures planned 
in the national policy frameworks and 
strategies, particularly under the NDC and 
NAP for the agricultural sector in Ethiopia. 
They will revolve around improved soil and 
water management, agroforestry, resilient 
value chains and climate-proofed rural 
infrastructure. 
MITIGATION 
Outcome 2 Indicator : Number of tons of 
greenhouse gas emissions (CO2e) avoided 
and/or sequestered [CI 3.2.1] 
4 
Sub-outcome 2.1: Increased availability of 
low-emissions development opportunities 
Implementation of agroforestry techniques, 
reduced deforestation and land degradation 
due to increased use of improved 
cookstoves, installation of biogas plants, 
conservation agriculture practices. 
PDR Project Implementation 
  Section L. Planning, M&E, Learning, 
KM and Communication (a. Planning, 
M&E, Learning, Knowledge 
Management, and Communication - 
Monitoring) 
The Resilience Design and Monitoring Tool 
has been embedded in the PDR underpinning 
the design of the project interventions aimed 
at enhancing resilience. The RDMT questions 
have been included in the MRV system to 
collect resilience data at the household’s 
level. Data collection and analysis have been 
budgeted under the outcome surveys 
assessment to implement baseline, mid-term 
and completion surveys, monitor progress 
towards strengthening the household 
resilience, and guiding the investment 
targeting on resilience with a data-driven 
approach.  
The project includes potential support or 
synergies with the Platform on Agricultural 
Risk Management (PARM), specifically the 
Capacity Development for Agriculture Risk 
Management (CD4ARM) project to spearhead 
the use of climate risk analysis tools, related 
methodologies and strengthen the climate 
risk management capacity. 
PDR Project Implementation 
  Section L. Planning, M&E, Learning, 
KM and Communication (a. Planning, 
M&E, Learning, Knowledge 
Management, and Communication - 
Monitoring) 
By default, the PDR includes provision for 
GIS-tailored M&E, which also considers 
climate vulnerability criteria of households 
and productive lands. Different layers of 
information will be defined at the project 
inception phase to ensure a comprehensive 
climate risk analysis by intersecting 
environmental, social, economic datasets. A 
periodical crossed analysis of the datasets 
will provide operational information about 
progress and achievements on resilience-
Commit to the use of the IFAD resilience 
scorecard, which will help to develop and 
monitor project specific resilience indices.  
Participate in the ASAP+ GIS data pilot, 
which will collect geo-locations serving to 
monitor results on the ground, using 
satellite imagery and other geospatial 
datasets for enhanced analysis over time.  
5 
Undertake, as requested, an impact 
assessment to be funded and carried out by 
the Research and Impact Assessment 
Division (RIA).  
Clear demonstration of ownership by the 
recipients.  
strengthening and improvement of adaptive 
capacity of smallholders’ livelihoods and food 
systems. 
PDR Project Implementation 
  Section L. Planning, M&E, Learning, 
KM and Communication (a. Planning, 
M&E, Learning, Knowledge 
Management, and Communication - 
Impact Assessment) 
Impact Assessment is integrated with M&E  
system and the findings from the RDMT. 
PACT will be used as case study for RIA. 
PDR Project Implementation 
  Section M. Project Target Group 
Engagement and Feedback, and 
Grievance Redress 
The Government of Ethiopia and IFAD 
designed PACT jointly with strong 
commitment to transfer the ownership of the 
interventions to the smallholder farmer 
communities and organized farmer groups 
such as cooperatives and unions. Ownership 
and empowerment will be ensured through 
establishment of farmer business schools, 
water user association and watershed/NRM 
committees (sub-components 1.2 and 1.3) 
as well as support to women-led farmer 
groups and work across the value chains 
(added-value processing included under 
subcomponent 2.2). 
Degree of leverage, and co-financing ratio.   PDR Project Implementation 
  Section G. Costs, benefits and 
financing (b. Project financing/ co-
financing strategy and plan) 
The total budget of PACT is of 171 M USD. 
This includes blended finance sources from 
IFAD (grant), Government of Ethiopia (in-
kind and cash), direct beneficiaries (in-kind), 
EU (grant) GCF (IGREENFIN- Grant) GTM 
(Grant) and ASAP+ (grant including 
resources for the establishment of a carbon 
credits scheme). The latter includes a recent 
contribution of 4.6 M USD made available 
from the Government of Germany through a 
mechanism called CompensACTION to 
promote carbon farming. The total amount 
provided by ASAP+ is of 11.6 M USD 
corresponding to a co-financing ratio of 
6.7%.  The investment will be mainly 
allocated to subcomponents 1.2 (integrated 
landscape management with contribution to 
implementation of nurseries/tree planting 
6 
and monitoring in the frame of land 
restoration activities, carbon farming, 
improved cookstoves, biogas plants, soil and 
water conservation measures, etc.)   and 1.4 
(capacity development on CSA, exchange 
visits, development of training materials, 
farmer field schools and demonstration plots, 
provision of conservation agriculture booster 
kits, support to extension services and 
research centres, provision for climate 
information services). In addition, ASAP+ will 
contribute to the development of watershed 
plans, use of GIS mapping and geospatial 
tools, implementation of the RDMT (see 
above) and elaboration of knowledge 
management products  
PDR Project Description:  
  Section C. Project objectives, 
geographic area of intervention and 
target groups 
PACT provides a special attention to the 
participation of women, youth, persons with 
disabilities and indigenous peoples 
(pastoralists) in the project interventions. 
Targets includes climate vulnerability, food 
insecurity and rural poverty criteria among 
others. The interventions include special 
provisions for participation of women through 
gender-transformative mechanisms as cross-
cutting themes through the project activities. 
Similarly, young entrepreneurs will be 
involved in strengthening B2B linkages under 
subcomponent 2.2. Nutrition-sensitive crop 
production has been included under the 
subcomponents 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4 whereby 
nutritious food production is envisaged for 
market-oriented farms and homestead 
gardening. This will include the use of 
adapted indigenous crop varieties and 
dissemination of traditional knowledge and 
modern practices for their cooking 
preparation and utilization. Rainwater 
harvesting systems will support homestead 
and group production of healthy and 
nutritious produces whereas improved 
cookstoves will facilitate their preparation. 
PDR Project Implementation 
  Section G. Costs, benefits and 
financing (e. Exit Strategy and 
Sustainability) 
  Section L. Planning, M&E, Learning, 
KM and Communication (b. 
Innovation and scaling up) 
Integration of mainstreaming themes and 
effective targeting.  
Sustainability, scaling up and exit strategy. 
7 
PACT interventions have been designed to be 
continued after the project is completed. The 
EFA demonstrates the viability of the 
improved climate-smart food systems 
(promoted under sub-component 1.4) and 
sustainable sourcing supported by 
component 2 activities. Carbon farming will 
support access to carbon markets, providing 
incentives to smallholders for conservation 
and improved management of natural 
resources and their food systems. Beside its 
viability, the sustainability features of PACT 
consider environmental and social benefits 
such as equitable access to water resources 
for upstream and downstream users, 
improved soil fertility and land productivity, 
job creation from access to digital green 
technologies, livelihoods diversification from 
expanded value chain participation. Proven 
climate-resilient practices, technologies, and 
lessons learned from previous ASAP 
investments (as well as other climate-
resilient initiatives) have been incorporated 
in project design. They includes the climate-
smart watershed/landscape management 
approach, the climate-resilient water 
infrastructure and the dissemination, 
systematization and institutionalization of 
good adaptive practices.  
8 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 15 Pact Nutrition Strategy Action Plan
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 15: PACT Food and Nutrition Strategy and Action Plan 
I. 
CONTEXT OF THE NUTRITION STRATEGY AND ACTION PLAN 
I-1 Purpose of the strategy and action plan  
In the context of the Ethiopia Food System transformation, the Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation 
(PACT) programme will apply a nutrition lens to its intervention throughout the project cycle. To do so, a clear nutrition 
strategy and action plan needs to be defined, which will guide the programme implementers in ensuring the nutrition 
sensitivity of PACT.  
The purpose of this document is therefore to frame the provide a framework for PACT nutrition-sensitive activities, 
including  defining  the  problem,  the  impact  pathways  and  causal  linkages  between  interventions  and  outcomes, 
outreach targets, implementation arrangements and resources needed for the nutrition-sensitive activities.  
I-2 Nutrition and food security situation in Ethiopia 
In Ethiopia, malnutrition affects most rural households. Less than 6% of children under five have a minimum acceptable 
diet1; a diet of adequate diversity and frequency that meets their needs for physical and mental growth. Poor dietary 
diversity is the main driving factor of malnutrition since 77% of households' energy intake derives from starchy staples 
only, with little inclusion of animal source foods, vegetables and fruits2. The lack of access to clean water, sanitation 
and health services affects nutrient absorption. As a consequence, 28% of child deaths in Ethiopia are attributable to 
malnutrition. Among children in rural areas, 40.6% are stunted and will not be able to reach their full potential3. At 
society level, this nutrition gap represents 16% of GDP in terms of productivity loss, overburden on health facilities 
and social protection mechanisms4.  
The burden of malnutrition varies across regions. Even zones with high agricultural productivity face significant chronic 
malnutrition  issues.  Malnutrition  has  two  direct  causes:  inadequate  dietary  intake  and  disease.  This  assessment 
focuses on dietary intake gaps, driven by four main issues:  
(i) Availability - 72% of agricultural production in Ethiopia focuses on staples5. Current levels of domestic production 
are not able to meet the nutrient requirements of the population, especially in Somali and Afar6. Agricultural food 
production can be improved by scaling up climate-smart irrigation solutions, diversifying production and facilitating 
farmers’ access to high-quality and biofortified inputs.  
(ii) Affordability – The average cost of an ‘energy only’ diet for a household is $0.9 compared to $3.9 for a nutritious 
diet7. Only 26% of Ethiopian households can afford the latter and the trend is worsening. Over the past decade, prices 
of nutrient-rich foods have increased (90% increase for dark leafy vegetables between 2007 and 2016) while those of 
staple grains have decreased.  
1 EPHI Ministry of Health (2016). Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey – Minimum acceptable diet among children 6-23 months in rural 
areas = 5.7% 
2 Ethiopian Public Health Institute and World Food Programme (2021). Fill the Nutrient Gap, Ethiopia. Addis Ababa: Ethiopia 
3 EPHI Ministry of Health (2019). Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey (Issue 
July). https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/PR120/PR120.pdf 
4 Ethiopian Public Health Institute, Ministry of Finance. The Cost of Hunger in Africa Implications for Growth and Transformation of Ethiopia. 
2013. 
5 FAO STAT (2017) 
6 Hirvonen, K., & Wolle, A. (2019). Consumption, production, market access and affordability of nutritious foods series. Addis Ababa: 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and Alive & Thrive/FHI360. 
7 Ethiopian Public Health Institute and World Food Programme (2021). Fill the Nutrient Gap, Ethiopia. Addis Ababa: Ethiopia. 
1 
(iii) Accessibility - Rural households mostly depend on markets to access fresh, nutrient-rich foods such as vegetables, 
fruits  and  meat.  There  is  potential  for  interventions  to  increase  homestead  production,  invest  in  road  networks, 
transport and market functionality, as well as strengthening markets' ability to supply these foods at more affordable 
prices.   
(iv) Consumption - Even when diverse foods are available and affordable, households would rather invest money and 
time  in other competing priorities (e.g. school fees, construction, farm tools) because of limited awareness of the 
benefits  of  optimal  diet,  cultural  beliefs  (e.g.  religious  fasting8)  and  misconceptions.  Social  and  behaviour  change 
communication  is  essential  to  improve  consumption  of  affordable  sources  of  micronutrients  such  as  green  leafy 
vegetables  (spinach,  kale),  eggs  and  dairy  (milk  and  yoghurt),  especially  among  household  members  with  high 
nutritional needs: pregnant and lactating women, young children and adolescent girls.   
Additionally, investing in nutrition sensitive agriculture has significant co-benefits for climate change mitigation. Data 
modelling performed by EPHI and WFP showed that improving access to nutritious diets and improved consumption 
patterns can reduce the greenhouse gas emissions below the 2030 target set by the Ethiopian government for the 
agriculture sector.  
I-3 Policy environment and coordination mechanisms  
In Ethiopia, agriculture is the  major source of domestic food consumption and economic development. In the last 
decades, attention was given to improve production and productivity of the sector. However, if this approach seemed 
to be effective to reduce food insecurity, ensuring availability of affordable, nutritious and safe foods to meet dietary 
requirements of children and women remain a major challenge. The Government of Ethiopia. (GoE) has taken strong 
commitments  to  eliminate  child  stunting  by  2030  and  presented  the  national  pathways  to  transform  the  country  food 
system  during  the  2021  Food  Systems  Summit,  calling  for  a  paradigm  shift  thinking  away  from  “feeding  people”  to 
“nourishing people”.  
I-3-a Existing food and nutrition security policies relevant to the project 
Over the last decade, the GoE has developed rich policy tools that promote multisectoral food system approaches to 
ensure  long-term  prosperity  of  the  country.  The  Ten-Year  Development  plan  (2021-2030),  backbone  of  Ethiopia 
development agenda, emphasises the transformational role of the agriculture sector to satisfy the food and nutrition 
needs of the nation and setting clear targets of food production across seasons. Additionally, two years before joining 
the  Scale-Up  Nutrition  (SUN)  movement  in  2010,  Ethiopia  launched  a  National  Nutrition  Strategy  (NNS) 
operationalised through the National Nutrition Programme (NNP) led by the Ministry of Health then the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MoA) in collaboration with ten other ministries involved at different stages of the food value chains (e.g., 
Education, Industry, Trade). In 2016, the MoA developed a Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture Strategic Plan to mainstream 
nutrition in programmes of the agricultural sector, with a dedicated Coordination Office under the State Minister. The 
Sekota declaration in 2016 confirms Ethiopia’s commitment to end child malnutrition by 2030 with sustainable food 
systems as one of its eight pillars9. The initiative aims to foster multisectoral action in targeted woredas and scale a 
cost-effective  package  of  interventions  to  the  entire  country.  The  National  Food  and  Nutrition  Policy  (2018)  and 
Strategy (2020) intend to enhance the food aspect and the multisectoral effectiveness of the sector. Consecutively, 
Food based Dietary Guidelines (2022) are have been developed to inform the most relevant (effective, sustainable) 
diets to promote per region. In 2021, Ethiopia was the first African country to organise national dialogues to prepare 
a position paper for the Global Food Systems Summit convened by the United Nations Secretary General. During this 
process,  the  GoE,  building  on  contribution  from  multiple  stakeholders  (e.g.,  civil  society,  farmers  organisations, 
research institutions, UN, private sector, NGOs), identified 22 game changing solutions to transform the Ethiopian Food 
System. These game changing solutions include support to diversified nutrient-dense foods production by promoting garden 
level  production,  technologies  and  mechanisation,  agricultural  commercialisation  for  nutrient-dense  commodities  and 
8 ~180 days/year in the Orthodox Christian communities (44% of the population) 
9   The eight pillars are zero stunting in children under two years; universal access to adequate food year-round; social protection; 
sustainable  food  systems;  transformation  of  smallholder  productivity  and  income;  zero  loss  of  food;  education;  and  water, 
sanitation, and hygiene (IFPRI 2018, GoE 2016) 
2 
water access for all. The GoE developed and refined a roadmap to drive the Food System Transformation and coordinate 
the operationalization of the game changing solutions together with development partners. Currently led by the Agricultural 
Transformation Institute (ATI), the coordination process will be handed to an inter-ministerial coordination body that will 
be in charge of the coordination of the FST agenda. 
I-3-b Multisectoral coordination  
There  are  multiple  food  and  nutrition  multisectoral  coordination  structures  that  exist  in  Ethiopia.  Wageningen 
University & Research (WUR) recently conducted an analysis of food systems actors in Ethiopia10. It shows that Ethiopia 
counts fifteen platforms at national level for preventing undernutrition. Most initiatives are policy driven and relate 
to the implementation of the National Nutrition Programme (NNPII). The United Nations are leading two platforms 
(REACH Ethiopia and the Nutrition Development Partners Forum). The NGOs, civil societies, humanitarian actors and 
the private sector have their own platform.  
The Ministry of Agriculture is a key actor of the nutrition space, being part of seven platforms. The most important 
platforms include the MoA flagship Agriculture Growth Programme (AGP 2) nutrition task force, the UN-led Nutrition 
Development Partners Forum and the donor-driven Feed the Future Working Group. They include a large range of 
stakeholders who meet regularly to discuss multisectoral aspects of malnutrition prevention. 
I-4 PACT overview 
The  Participatory  Agriculture  and  Climate  Transformation  (PACT)  Programme  is  a  7-year  programme  led  by  the 
Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture, starting in 2023. Adopting a community-driven development approach, the PACT 
programme  will  focus  on  addressing  the  identified  factors  limiting  the  effective  inclusive  functioning  of  key  value 
chains and enable climate adaptation and mitigation within targeted landscapes.  
The PACT programme’s goal is to “contribute to inclusive and equitable poverty reduction and improved resilience of 
the targeted households”. The Programme Development Objective is “smallholder men, women and youth increase 
income  and  nutritional  intake  from  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  agricultural  production  and  water  resources 
development, enhanced participation in markets and community-led decision making”.  
With an initial investment of USD  178 million, PACT will be implemented  in four regional states in the first phase, 
before expanding to seven regional states in a second phase, pending additional financing. The programme will reach 
an estimated population of 152,250 households, corresponding to 761,250 persons.  PACT’s primary target groups will 
be the poorest households (landless or holding not more than 1 ha of cultivable land),  or poor households, (holding 
less than 2 ha of cultivable land with limited livestock) and vulnerable people within the poor rural population who 
have  little  access  to  assets  and  economic  opportunities  due  to  social  exclusion,  marginalization  and  the  negative 
impact of climate change, including women (50%), unemployed female and male youth between 18‑34 years (40%) 
and persons with disability who are economically active (5%). 
Strategic outcomes are as follows:  
 
 
Integrated landscape management - An integrated landscape management approach that includes landscape 
rehabilitation and water infrastructure development will be used to achieve the outcome;  
Increased  productivity  and  access  to  remunerative  markets  of  targeted  food  commodities  -  the  PACT 
Programme  interventions  will  link  the  target  beneficiaries  to  different  marketing  channels  via  strong  and 
inclusive farmers' organisations.  The interventions are expected to result in increased income, improved diets 
and resilient livelihoods; and  
  Enabling environment for effective programme implementation achieved - the PACT Programme is expected 
to  contribute  to  community  empowerment,  institutional  strengthening  of  public  institutions  for  effective 
service delivery to the rural poor in the selected areas. 
10  Bakker,  S  et  al.  (2019).  Identifying  Platforms  for  Healthier  Diets  in  Ethiopia  and  Vietnam;  Annex  to  the  Discussion  Paper 
Identifying Platforms for Healthier Diets; A4NH Flagship Programme 1 Food systems for healthier Diets. Wageningen Centre for 
Development Innovation, Wageningen University & Research. 
3 
The PACT objectives will be achieved through the effective implementation of two technical components and a third 
component that will focus on augmenting the capacity of communities, institutions, and contributing to a conducive 
policy environment towards programme implementation: 
1.  Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes 
1.1.  Community-led Participatory Agricultural Development Planning 
1.2.  Integrated Natural Resource Management 
1.3.  Climate Resilient Water Development for Households, Crops and Livestock Use 
1.4.  Market-Oriented and Nutrition-sensitive Climate-Resilient Food Production and Productivity 
2.  Component 2: Inclusive and Equitable Market Access  
2.1.  Market Access Linkage Support  
2.2.  Tailored Business and Finance Linkage to Agribusiness 
2.3.  Local Market-Related Infrastructure 
3.  Component 3: Institutional and Policy Strengthening and Implementation Support Services 
3.1.  Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support 
3.2.  Programme Coordination and Implementation Support Services 
The institutional and implementation arrangements for the PACT Programme will build on the existing structures and 
mechanisms of PASIDP II, facilitating a quick and smooth start-up. 
I-5 Lessons learned from PASIDP II on Nutrition  
PACT  has  been  designed  as  the  next  phase  of  the  Participatory  Small  scale  Irrigation  Development  Programme  II 
(PASIDP II) implemented from 2016 to 2024. A number of lessons have been drawn from PASIDP II to information PACT 
Nutrition-sensitive interventions:  
  On the overall impact of small-scale irrigation on food production and diets: PASIDP II has certainly contributed 
to increase production of diverse food production. Adoption a food system approach, an in-depth assessment 
should  be  conducted  by  the  completion  of  PASIDP  II  to  understand  the  following  questions:  What  food 
commodities  had  been  produced?  Where  and  when  those  food  commodities  were  produced?  In  which 
quantities? Who had bought these food items? Who consumed these food items?  
 
  PASIDP  II  initiated  an  instrumental  support  with  ICRISAT  to  support  seed  multiplication  and  adoption  of 
nutrient-rich  crops  such  as  Orange-Flesh  Sweet  Potatoes  (OFSP)  from  production  to  consumption,  with 
farmers’ sensitisation, skill training and cooking demonstrations on how to grow, process and consume OFSP.  
In  PASIDP  II,  female-headed  households  had  received  targeted  support  to  grow  a  home  garden,  including 
vegetable seeds and small tools. The programme tested a successful approach using model households who 
adopted the model practice and shared with their neighbours. This approach will be leveraged in PACT, with 
a larger scope of home garden beneficiaries (including male-headed households with pregnant and lactating 
women, children under two years old and adolescent girls) and small livestock provided as part of the package. 
  PASIDP II had piloted a household methodology called “Gender Model Family” in three regions, an impact 
assessment will be conducted to understand the effect and the areas of improvement of the intervention. The 
GMF focuses on the workload  share within households. In PACT, an updated version of the  GMF could be 
tested, including additional tools such as visioning and joint decision making that could cover key food-related 
issues. 
  Other lessons will be drawn from PASIDP II impact evaluation and should be described here.  
4 
II. 
NUTRITION IN PACT  
II-1 Objectives of the strategy  
The objective of PACT  Nutrition strategy is to improve  dietary diversity of targeted rural households by increasing 
availability, affordability and accessibility of diverse, safe and nutritious foods all year long and improving maternal 
and child feeding practices.  
II-2 Outcomes and Theory of change 
In  order  to  improve  the  quality  of  diets  of  project’s  beneficiary  households,  PACT  will  increase  availability  and 
accessibility  to  diversified  and  nutritious  food  all-year  long  by  following  four  pathways  aligned  with  the  overall 
programme Theory of Change: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Increased  availability  of  diversified,  safe  and  nutritious  foods  by  strengthening  diverse  food  value  chains, 
promoting adoption of integrated home gardening and small livestock production, as well as reducing post-
harvest losses and improving preservation practices. These nutrition-sensitive interventions, mostly embedded 
in sub-component 1.4 will lead to increased diverse food supply for markets but also at household level.  
Enhanced livelihoods by increasing households’ market-oriented production, access to markets and resilience 
to shocks. Through this pathway, beneficiary households will increase their purchasing power and their ability 
to afford diverse and nutritious diets.  
Increased knowledge, awareness and readiness to change of men and women to improve quality and diversity 
of diets. Increased knowledge is essential but not sufficient to effectively and sustainability change behaviors. 
Through this pathway, targeted households will be informed, skilled and empowered to make healthy choices 
regarding  their  diets,  including  increasing  demand  for  and  allocating  budget  towards  nutrient-rich 
commodities.  
Improved  women  empowerment  and  time  use  by  implementing  household  methodologies  and  promoting 
energy-saving  technologies.  Household  methodologies  such  as  Gender  Model  Family  (GMF)  or  the  Gender 
Action  Learning  System  (GALS)  are  key  to  challenge  gender  norms  which  limit  women’s  decision  making 
regarding farm production, food purchases and budget allocation. 
Table 1. Schematic representation of PACT Nutrition impact pathways 
Problem 
assumption 
Aim 
Insufficient supply of nutrient-rich foods; Food production focused on staples with limited yield, high vulnerability to climate shocks and high 
post-harvest losses; Limited access to market and lack of profitability of nutrient-rich crops; Low affordability of nutritious diets; Low knowledge 
and awareness on healthy diets; Cultural barriers and taboos; Low access to water. 
To improve dietary diversity of targeted rural households, especially women, by increasing availability, affordability and accessibility of diverse, 
safe and nutritious foods and improving child feeding practices 
Outreach 
Beneficiaries of nutrition sensitive interventions:  
 
 
 
 
120,000 HHs through NSA training via DAs (HHs from irrigation schemes and watersheds) 
18,000 HHs practicing home gardening (vulnerable HHs with PLW, children under 2, adolescent girls and persons with disabilities, 
who have access to water) 
120,000 HHs reached by SBCC campaign 
120,000 HHs with post-harvest handling capacity building (HHs from irrigation schemes and watersheds) 
Outcomes 
Increased availability, 
accessibility of diverse, safe and 
nutritious foods all year-long 
Activities 
  Prioritise production of 
nutritious foods (nutrient-rich 
vegetables, fruits, animal-
source foods, biofortified 
OFSP, yellow maize) 
Enhanced livelihood of HHs to 
increase purchasing power 
  Increase access to profitable 
markets to increase income, 
including for nutrient-rich 
crops 
  Increase access to inputs and 
Increased knowledge, awareness 
and readiness to change 
regarding dietary diversification 
  Social Behaviour Change 
Communication on healthy 
diets including NSA extension, 
food demonstration, social 
media campaign  
  Encourage crop diversification 
financial services 
  Create Demand for nutrient-
  Increase access to carbon 
markets 
  Improve resilience to shocks 
rich commodities 
  Provision of nutrition 
education to value chain 
actors to encourage healthy 
purchasing choices. 
in irrigation schemes and 
watersheds 
  Improve productivity of food 
production (improved seeds, 
bio-fertilizer, technology, 
mechanisation) 
  Support home gardening and 
small livestock production for 
vulnerable HHs 
5 
Improve women empowerment 
and time use 
  Gender transformative 
household methodology to 
increase joint decision making 
on food production, purchase, 
preparation and distribution 
  Improve women’s time use 
(energy- and time- saving 
technologies, gender-
responsive services, balanced 
workload, small-scale 
processing technologies) 
  Nutrition-sensitive agricultural 
extension services (improve 
quality of training and 
monitoring) 
  Post-harvest handling 
support, including small-scale 
food processing to increase 
shelf life, training on food 
safety 
  Leverage indigenous 
knowledge on traditional 
practices to conserve and 
transform foods.  
  Build capacities among MoA staff at all levels to be champions of nutrition-sensitive agriculture. 
  Leverage expertise and experience of partners on nutrition-sensitive agriculture and SBCC. 
  Ensure adequate human and financial resources are dedicated to nutrition-sensitive interventions.  
  Nutrition gap assessment to be conducted at start-up to inform intervention design and measure impact. In addition to the nutrition gap 
M&E 
analysis, include Nutrition Knowledge, Attitude, Practices studies.  
  Nutrition core output and outcome indicators included in the result framework. 
II-3 Beneficiaries of the nutrition interventions/Target populations 
Within  the  PACT’s  overall  targeting  approach,  special  attention  will  be  given  to  nutritionally  vulnerable  groups, 
including households with pregnant and lactating women, children under two years old, adolescent girls, or female 
household head. These beneficiary groups will be identified with the local administration, based on the data used for 
the Productive Safety Net Programme. These vulnerable targeted populations should be targeted for the home garden 
promotion, as well as the nutrition SBCC campaign. While behaviours are linked to knowledge and intrinsic motivators, 
key influencers in households and communities  should be  also targeted by the SBCC campaign. These can include 
other household members, religious leaders or local celebrities.  
Other nutrition-sensitive interventions such as training on nutrition-sensitive agriculture or post-harvest handling at 
household level should target all PACT beneficiaries, if budget allows.  
II-4 Key nutrition-sensitive interventions 
A nutrition lens has been applied to the design of all PACT sub-components as described in the table below. Delivery 
mechanisms will be validated at the inception stage of the programme and the SBCC campaign operationalisation will 
be informed by the barrier analysis.  
To  ensure  implementation  quality,  PMU  staff  will  receive  a  training  on  the  food  system  and  nutrition-sensitive 
agriculture approaches. Dedicated nutrition officers at Federal and Regional levels will be recruited and capacitated 
to collect and use nutrition-related data to inform programme decision-making. Additional attention should be given 
at  woreda  level,  with  the  appointment  of  a  social  inclusion  of  focal  point  to  oversee  the  implementation  of  the 
targeting, social inclusion and nutrition action plans.  
Sub-component 
Nutrition mainstreaming 
Component 1 – Community-led climate-smart productive landscape management 
community 
Integrated  Natural  Resources 
1.1 
Participatory 
development planning 
1.2 
Management 
1.3 
water 
development for households, crops and 
livestock 
1.4  Market  oriented  Production  and 
Productivity  Improvement  of  selected 
food commodities 
Climate-resilient 
  Nutrition-sensitive mobilisation and sensitisation  
  Nutrition criteria in decision matrix 
  Promotion  of  intercropping  and  crop  diversification  with  climate-smart  nutrient-rich  crops 
such as indigenous dark leafy greens or pumpkin.  
  Water for home consumption and home gardening coupled with messaging on hygiene and 
water practices as part of the NSA training 
  Water ponds used for fish 
 
Leverage  FAO  analysis  of  marketable  pathways  of  nutrient-rich  commodities  to  identify 
opportunities for agro-industry, including OFSP and iron-zinc beans. 
Promotion  of  OFSP  and  iron-zinc  beans  (seed  development,  farmers’  support,  cooking 
demonstrations) with the support of ICRISAT 
 
  NSA training through DAs 
 
Construction of 5 and rehabilitation of 10 demonstration centres for food demonstrations 
6 
 
Training  with  demonstration  kits  on  post-harvest  handling  and  preservation  techniques  at 
household level. Storage kits will include PICS bags for grains and locally made cooling system 
for vegetables. Women/youth-led groups established to produce energy-saving stoves could 
also  produce  those  locally  made  cooling  systems.  Nutrient-preserving  and  processing 
techniques  include  germination,  drying,  pickling,  dehydration,  fermentation  such  as  tomato 
paste, pickled vegetables, drying onions. The MoA FNCO can facilitate the ToT based on already 
developed training materials.  
  Nutrition Social and Behaviour Change Communication campaign (see PIM for more details) 
 
  Nutrition sensitive model villages in collaboration with JICA. 
Promotion of integrated home gardening among the most vulnerable households. 
Component 2 – Inclusive and Equitable Market Access 
2.1 Market access linkage support 
 
Cooperative capacity strengthening on post-harvest handling and food safety (leverage FAO 
initiative harmonising food safety regulatory framework and training materials).   
  Market  linkages  with  SUN  business  network  for  nutrient-rich  commodities  and  wheat 
2.2 Support to young women and men 
agripreneurs 
 
2.3 Local Market related infrastructure 
development and management 
Component 3 – Institutional and organisational strengthening 
3.1 
Policy Support 
Institutional  Strengthening  and 
 
processors for fortification. 
Support  to  agribusiness  opportunities  along  the  nutrient-rich  value  chains  (e.g.,  biofortified 
seed multiplication, poultry business, vegetable and fruit tree seedlings nurseries, locally made 
cooling systems fabrication, refrigerated transport, packaging and nutrition labelling) 
Safe storage and transport for food commodities. 
 
  Market outlets with shades for fresh and perishable commodities. 
Support to Ethiopia Food System Transformation agenda: support set up of the inter-ministerial 
body  coordinating  the  EFST,  support  NSA  development  tools,  policy  development  and 
sensitisation on ETF roadmap to regions. 
Capacity building on nutrition-sensitive agriculture, improve capacities of PMU to collect and 
use nutrition-related data to inform project decision-making  
Recruitment of dedicated Nutrition officer at Federal and regional levels 
Appointment of Social inclusion focal point at woreda level 
3.2  Programme  Coordination  and 
Implementation Support Services 
 
 
 
 [TO UPDATE AT INCEPTION STAGE] 
For each activity, specify what should be the  delivery mechanism (for example use of extension agents or existing 
community platforms, community leaders/head of household, use of capacity building platforms for farmers such as 
farmer field school for training on agriculture production and SBCC).  
Propose the best arrangements for the implementation of the nutrition interventions (focusing on the processes and 
the  stakeholders  involved).  Provide  guidance  on  how  the  interventions  of  IADP  should  be  integrated  during 
implementation (or areas of improvement).  
II-5 PACT Nutrition Action Plan 
[TO UPDATE AT INCEPTION STAGE] 
Activity 
Indicators 
Target 
Timeframe 
Responsible 
Budget 
Component 1 – Community-led climate-smart productive landscape management 
Sub-component 1.1 - Community-led Participatory Agricultural Development Planning 
Sensitisation  on  nutrition  of  Watershed 
associations  before  they  develop  their 
plan 
%  Watershed  Management 
Plans  that  take  into  account 
nutrition-related 
considerations 
100 
2023-2025 
PCMU 
Sub-component 1.2 - Integrated Natural Resources Management 
Sub-component 1.3 - Climate Resilient Water Development for Households, Crops and Livestock Use 
Sub-component 1.4 - Market-Oriented and Nutrition-sensitive Climate-Resilient Food Production and Productivity 
Component 2 – Inclusive and Equitable Market Access 
Sub-component 2.1 – Market Access Linkage Support 
Sub-component 2.2 – Tailored Business and Finance Linkage to Agribusiness 
7 
Sub-component 2.3 - Local Market-Related Infrastructure 
Component 3 – Institutional and organisational strengthening 
Sub-component 3.1- Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support 
Sub-component 3.2 - Programme Coordination and Implementation Support Services 
II-6 Coordination and partnerships  
PACT PMU will collaborate with the Ministry of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Coordination Office (FNCO) to benefit 
from their expertise on Nutrition-sensitive  agriculture. In fact,  the  FNCO  has been driving the development of the 
Nutrition-sensitive  agriculture  (NSA)  guidelines  and  training  materials  for  extension  agents.  They  have  recently 
developed an NSA training manual for pastoralist areas as well as Social and Behaviour Change guidelines to provide 
a framework for the development and operationalisation of SBCC strategies within the different rural development 
programmes of the Ministry. 
Additionally, key partners such as Alive and Thrive and Save the Children International are ready to provide technical 
support to the PACT PMU in the development of the PACT SBCC Nutrition strategy and action plan, as well as content 
creation. These organisations have gained significant experience in SBCC over the last years in Ethiopia and will be able 
to bring valuable insights.   
Regarding the food availability pathway, ICRISAT has shown to provide instrumental support to extension agents and 
farmers  in  PASIDP  II.  Their  experience  in  the  previous  phase  conducting  the  nutrition  gap  analysis,  testing  OFSP 
varieties in different areas and creating demand with cooking demonstrations will be  extremely useful to scale up 
these interventions in PACT areas. On the other hand, the World Vegetable Centre will support the sub-component 
1.4 in strengthening the vegetable seed system and production, for both markets and home consumption.  
Synergies have also been identified with JICA NSA model villages programme. The respective programme teams will 
ensure  that  PACT  and  JICA  NSA  programmes  overlap  so  food  production  and  market  access  initiatives  can  be 
leveraged. 
II-7 Monitoring and Evaluation  
In line  with  the  project logframe and M&E  system, PACT will measure nutrition indicators at output  and outcome 
levels.  
Indicator 
Multipliers 
Baseline 
Mid-
term 
End target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsiblity 
Progress 
reports/MIS 
Annually 
PCMU 
CI 1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition 
0 
person 
Total 
participating 
Males - Number  
Females- Number 
Number of young 
Number  of  indigenous 
peoples 
Number  of  persons 
with disabilities 
Households 
Household- %  
Household  members 
benefitted 
Female  Headed  HH-
Number  
152,250  
 76,125  
 76,125  
 60,900.0  
7613 
7613 
152,250  
100 
715,575  
 30,450  
CI 1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDD-W) 
8% 
10% 
25% 
Women (%) 
Women (number) 
Households (%) 
Households (number) 
8 
COI Survey and 
Ethiopian Food 
and  Nutrition 
Strategy 
Baseline 
Midline 
Endline 
PCMU and EPHI 
Household members 
CI 1.2.9 Households with improved Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices (KAP) 
Household- Number  
Household- %  
Household  members-
Number  
Female  Headed  HH-
Number  
152,250  
 100  
 715,575  
 30,450  
Monitoring 
Reports 
Nutrition 
assessments 
and 
Surveys 
COI 
PCMU 
Baseline and 
endline of 
Nutrition SBCC 
interventions 
II-8 Knowledge Management 
[TO UPDATE AT INCEPTION STAGE] 
In  line  with  PACT  knowledge  management  and  communication  strategy,  the  project  will  identify  key  knowledge 
products (policy brief, case studies, blogposts) to develop and strategic dissemination platform to leverage over the 
6-year  implementation  in  order  to  inform  policy  engagement  and  share  experience  with  external  stakeholders. 
Additionally, internal communication platforms (such as Telegram groups) will be used to showcase the achievements 
and reflect on areas of improvements related to nutrition-sensitive interventions. 
II-9 Sustainability 
[TO UPDATE AT INCEPTION STAGE] 
Ensuring the sustainability of PACT nutrition-sensitive results after the project completion is critical. PACT addresses 
three pathways for (I) availability, (ii) affordability and (iv) consumption of safe, diverse and nutritious foods for target 
beneficiary households. In this perspective, the construction of high-quality irrigation infrastructure, the development 
of maintenance institutions within the communities and the promotion of home gardens with indigenous crops should 
ensure  the  sustainable  production  of  diverse  and  nutritious  foods  along  the  year.  Secondly,  the  capacity  building 
activities coupled with agribusiness support for smallholder farmers will provide sustainable economic empowerment 
opportunities to increase household’s purchasing power. Finally, the increased availability and affordability of diverse 
foods,  coupled  with  high-touch  social  behaviour  change  communication  (SBCC)  interventions  will  translate  into 
improved nutrition practices, in particular for vulnerable groups such as pregnant, lactating women and children under 
two years old. The SBCC interventions will be designed according to the Ministry of Agriculture Nutrition SBC guidelines 
(2021) and therefore the SBCC materials developed will be used by other programmes and stakeholders, sustaining 
the impact of PACT programme.  Other elements of sustainability  will be identified at inception stage and refined 
during the programme implementation.  
III. 
ANNEXES OF THE NUTRITION STRATEGY 
 
 [TO UPDATE AT INCEPTION STAGE] 
[TO UPDATE AT INCEPTION STAGE] 
9 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 16 Pact Vita Finance Model
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Partnership between IFAD and Vita on the production and 
dissemination of improved cookstove and linkage with Carbon 
market 
Introduction 
Vita is an Irish based NGO with a mission to fight climate change and improve livelihoods for rural 
households in Ethiopia and Eritrea. Vita has been working in Ethiopia since 2005 in both SNNPR and 
Amhara  region.  Vita’s  work  focuses  on  poor  rural  households  with  a  focus  on  women.  It  has  very 
successfully completed projects on improved crop production, irrigation, improved cook stoves, water 
point repairs and enhancing livestock production and productivity.  
Biomass is the major source of energy in Ethiopia, contributing to more than 90% of the total energy 
consumed at the national level, particularly in rural areas (ESMAD, 2012). 99% of rural and 80% of 
urban households (HHs) use biomass fuels for cooking (CSA, 2012). About 90% of the biomass energy 
for cooking and baking comes from woody biomass, 5% from animal dung and 2% from crop residues 
(CSA 2011). Unsustainable use of biomass ends in deforestation and consequently in land degradation. 
Growing demand for biomass together with increased demand for agricultural output (land for crop 
production and livestock feed) has resulted in reduced access to wood fuels (BEST, 2013) 
In Ethiopia, agriculture sector, mainly the livestock sub sector is the top contributor to GHG emissions 
followed by the Land Use Change and Forestry (LUCF) sector. LUCF contributes 35% (140 Mt CO2e) of 
the total emission in 2030 in the business as usual scenario and emission from biomass use such as 
cooking and baking is the single largest driver of LUCF related emissions. However, the LUCF sector 
has huge mitigation potential which is estimated to 240 Mt CO2e by 20301. Therefore, replacing or 
improving  household  biomass  energy  use  for  cooking  and  baking  leads  to  substantively  reduced 
pressure on forestry resources and this has been identified as a policy intervention by the government.   
Community Led Total Cookstoves and Carbon Finance - PACT Sub-Programme 
This activity, as part of the Integrated Natural Resource Management Component of the IFAD 
PACT  Programme,  will  combine  market-led  and  community-led  approaches  to  support 
communities in targeted watersheds to eliminate traditional cooking, through community-
led  adoption  of  improved  cookstoves.    Widespread  adoption  of  efficient  cookstoves  will 
reduce  biomass  consumption,  reverse  deforestation  across  watersheds  and  contribute  to 
climate transformation through carbon emission savings.  By registering the activity with Gold 
Standard, the resulting carbon emission savings can be leveraged to generate carbon finance, 
as  an  innovative  financing  mechanism  to  fund  climate  adaption  and  further  mitigation 
activities in beneficiary communities.   
The  carbon  credits  are  sold  on  the  voluntary  market,  which  enables  companies  and 
organisations with a commitment to reducing their carbon footprint to do so by purchasing 
carbon credits from socially responsible projects that have achieved actual results in emission 
reduction. This is fundamentally different to the compliance market which is primarily used 
to trade credits earned through emissions reductions achieved by commercial organisations. 
1 Updated Nationally Determined Contributions, 2021: The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. 
The  proposed  activity  has  significant  gender  empowerment  and  employment  dimensions, 
with  women  leading  on  project  delivery,  community  engagement  and  production  of 
cookstoves.  The community led total model for cookstoves can provide learning to enrich 
community participation within the wider PACT programme.  Local micro-finance institutions 
will  provide  payment  and  credit  services  to  participating  households  and  cookstoves 
producers.    Close  collaboration  with  government  on  climate  finance  adds  a  key  strategic 
dimension at regional and national level.      
The target beneficiaries are 45,600 households in either Amhara, SNNP and Sidama Regions. 
The  two  regions  are  selected  because  Vita  has  offices  in  the  two  regions  only.  Further 
discussion between IFAD and Vita  is needed to explore options to expand to Oromia.  
Project Timeframe, Cost and Financing  
  Total up-front cost of the activity is €3.2m, with implementation over two years and follow 
on carbon accreditation and trading activities for a further eight years 
  IFAD and Vita will provide co-financing – IFAD will fund project development costs at circa. 
€2m  and  Vita  will  fund  carbon  accreditation  and  marketing  costs  which  have  a  total 
estimated cost of €1.2m 
Main Activities 
1.  Project Development - Community Led Total Cookstoves  
  Community-led triggering for cookstove adoption  
  Engagement of women’s cooperatives for local production  
  Delivery, storage and hand over of improved cookstoves 
  Payment and credit facility management with micro-finance providers 
  Homestead and watershed tree planting and protection of community woodlots 
  Learning programme with the Community Led Total Learning Centre  
2.  Climate Finance -  Climate Mitigation and Carbon Finance 
  Gold Standard Project Accreditation  
  Engagement with Ethiopian EPA and Designated National Authority 
  Generation of Voluntary Emission Reductions (VERs) 
  Issuance and trading in VERs  
  Revenue  generation  from  sale  of  carbon  offsets  to  provide  new  funding  for  climate 
adaptation and mitigation activities   
Main Assumptions underpinning Activity 
  IFAD will finance the project development activities through the PACT programme and Vita 
will  finance  the  carbon  registry,  accreditation,  issuance  and  trading  activities  from  the 
Green Impact Fund  
  Vita  will  act  as  lead  project  developer,  working  in  partnership  on  carbon  registry, 
accreditation  and  approvals  with  the  Ethiopian  Environment  Protection  Authority/EPA  
and the Designated National Authority 
  Vita  will  work  with  communities  and  local  government  to  register  the  project  on  Gold 
Standard  and  ensure  compliance  with  Gold  Standard  carbon  protocols  to  ensure  that 
carbon emission savings can be issued for trade on voluntary carbon markets   
  Vita and  Ministry of Agriculture regional and local offices will partner in implementation 
of community led total cookstove model for 45,600 households 
  The  community  led  total  cookstoves  model  will  be  applied  to  trigger  communities  for 
universal participation and adoption of both Mirt and Tikikil cookstoves, eliminating three-
stone cooking and protecting community forests and woodlots across watersheds   
  46,600  households  adopting  improved  cookstoves  will  generate  a  total  annual  carbon 
emission saving of over 150,000 tons annually  
  Trading in the carbon credits issued by Gold Standard will generate a total income of circa. 
€9,386,000, assuming current carbon pricing in voluntary carbon markets (€6.50 to €8.00) 
  Vita will receive 25% of the carbon finance generated to cover carbon accreditation costs 
and fees, while the IFAD PACT project will receive 75% 
  Project implementation will take place over the first two years of the project while carbon 
finance activities will commence late in year two and continue for a further eight years 
  Carbon sales income will cover maintenance and replacement of cookstoves for the ten 
year life of the project 
  Carbon sales income, net of maintenance and replacement costs and net of Vita share, 
amounting  to  75%  of  net  carbon  income,  will  be  channelled  back  through  PACT  to 
beneficiary communities to fund climate adaptation and mitigation activities 
In Vita pilot phases and agreement made with regional government, the stoves not allowed 
to  provide  free  of  charge,  this  is  due  to  the  stand  of  the  regional  government  to  avoid 
dependency and reaching wider community of the region as well. With this understanding 
the community covered 50% and this will be continued. And their contribution also linked 
with  loan  facility  with  Omo  Microfinance  to  solve  the  problem  of  liquid  cash.  The  cost  of 
community led total stove adoption is 8 euro per household in addition to around 17 euro of 
stove costs based on the current market price i.e MIRT a baking stove 400 Birr AND Tikikil 
Boiling stove 1,200 Birr and the total cost for two stove per household is 1600 Birr and this is 
led  total  adoption  approach 
only  the  product  cost  and  not 
implementation,  capital,  administration  and  other  related  costs.  For  detail  please  refer  the 
financial model 
included,  Community 
Outline Budget for Sub-Programme 
The table below shows a high-level ten-year forecast of total financing, project expenditure 
and carbon revenue: 
NB: the costing based on the current prices of Mirt and Tikikil stove  
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 17 Fragility Assessment Note
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation 
Annex 17: Fragility assessment note 
A.  Introduction 
1.  Ethiopia  is  on  the  World  Bank’s  list  of  countries  in  Fragile  and  Conflict-Affected 
Situations, due to violent conflicts in the country. In 2022 Ethiopia was ranked 13th 
out of 179 states in the Fund for Peace (FFP) Fragile States index, from a rank of 
11th in 20211. 
2.  This assessment note seeks to a) identify the key drivers of fragility in Ethiopia, b) 
their impact on the implementation and achieving of the development objectives 
of  the  IFAD  investment  portfolio  and  c)  identify  mitigation  measures  that  have 
implemented and included in the operation under preparation. 
B.  Country Context 
3.  The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia’s (henceforth “Ethiopia”) economy has 
faced multiple challenges in the past three years, which include the global impacts 
of Ukraine conflict, drought, global supply shocks of key commodities and domestic 
conflict in the northern parts of the country. The covid-19 pandemic exacerbated 
the negative impacts of these challenges. The official estimate for real GDP growth 
in 2022 is 6.6%, while the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) project 3.0% and 3.8% respectively3 with 
a rebound growth of 4.8% estimate by UNDP, led by the services sector but with 
slower growth in agriculture and manufacturing for 2023. Inflation has increased 
up  to  37.2%  by  May  2022  (double  from  same  period  last  year),  driven  by  food 
inflation (43.9%), while June inflation data indicates a slight reduction to 34%. The 
high  levels  of  inflation  are  having  increasing  poverty  trends  and  reducing  the 
purchasing power of incomes in the country. 
4.  Ethiopia has been impacted on by the four Cs – conflict – internal and external, 
cereals shortage and high prices, covid-19 pandemic that disrupted supply chains, 
and  climate  change  induced  droughts  and  floods,  that  exacerbate  the  drivers  of 
fragility. 
5.  Geopolitical factors:  Ethiopia is a land locked county in the Horn of Africa and  
borders Djibouti, Eritrea, South Sudan, Sudan, Somalia and Kenya and is close to 
one  of  the  world’s  main  shipping  routes,  the  Red  Sea.  Its  neighbours,  Somalia, 
South  Sudan,  Eritrea  and  Sudan  are  listed  on  the  World  Bank  list  of  Fragile  and 
Conflict Situations FY23. 
6.  Since 1993, Ethiopia relies on Djibouti as its principal seaport, after fighting a bitter 
war  with  Eritrea.    Ethiopia  signed  a  peace  treaty  with  Eritrea,  and  there  is  good 
prospect for Ethiopia to use the seaports in that country. However, for the Eritrea 
seaports to be of significance, the northern parts of Ethiopia have to be stable and 
the cross-boundary infrastructure repaired after being damaged during the Eritrea-
Ethiopia war. 
7.  Ethiopia is the location source of the mighty Nile River that goes all the way to the 
Mediterranean Sea via Sudan and Egypt. The construction of the Great Dam of the 
Ethiopian  Renaissance  (GERD),  for  which  Ethiopia  claims  is  for  electricity 
production, has caused tensions with Sudan and Egypt who see the rapid filling of 
the  dam  as  a  big  risk  factor  for  their  water  supply.  “Egypt  relies  on  the  Nile  for 
more than 90% of its water”. Over the last few years, Sudan, Egypt and Ethiopia 
have  not  been  able  to  reach  an  agreement,  but  the  dam  is  in  its  third  phase  of 
filling and has started to produce electricity. For Ethiopia, the  the dam is a source 
of national pride and a key factor in driving economic development. 
1 FPI (2022). Fragile States Index: Ethiopia Accessed at: https://fragilestatesindex.org/country-data/ 
8.  Boundary dispute with Sudan: There have been tensions and build-up of security 
forces  on  both  sides  of  the  Sudanese-Ethiopian  border,  resulting  in  armed 
skirmishes.  Bilateral  talks  are  ongoing  between  the  two  countries  aimed  at 
resuming negotiations to solve the border dispute. 
C.  Key Fragility Drivers 
9.   Security/political:  The  armed  conflict  in  the  northern  parts  of  Ethiopia  that 
include Tigray, parts of Afar and Amhara Regions has subsided since the declaration 
of  humanitarian  truce  by  the  government  in  December  2021,  but  the  political 
conflict  remains.  There  is  no  active  war,  with  most  parts  of  Afar  and  Amhara 
regions, that were previously inaccessible now accessible. The Tigray region is still 
only accessible for humanitarian assistance, with development work being restarted 
after  an  agreement  between  the  World  Bank  and  the  government  to  finance 
rehabilitation of infrastructure through UNOPS. “Conflict and displacement in the 
north has left more than 9 million people in need in Afar, Amhara and Tigray, and 
severe drought is affecting millions more in the south” OCHA, 2022.  
10. There  have  been  reports  from  both  the  Ethiopian  government  and  the  Tigray 
People's Liberation Front (TPLF) that indicate a possibility for peace talks between 
the  two  warring  factions.  (theafricareport_15June2022)  This  is  a  stabilising 
development  in  possible  scenarios  for  the  country.  Insecurity  is  not  only  in  the 
northern parts of the country, but there are security issues in some woredas across 
the country. There continues to be armed clashes and attacks against civilians and 
armed clashes between Oromo Liberation Front (OLF)-Shane and Ethiopia National 
Defense  Force  (ENDF)  in  Oromia  region.    In  July  2022,  Al-Shabaab  continued 
attacks into Ethiopia, from Somalia, with clashes that left scores of civilians dead. 
The attacks were repelled by the Somali Special Forces and ENDF. These clashes 
make some woredas inaccessible for development or humanitarian work. 
Figure 1: UNOCHA Access map 
11. A  recent  UN  Ethiopia  Scenario  and  Risk  Analysis  workshop  summarised  the  key 
security/political risks as: 
a. 
Instability of the country political dynamics as political dialogue begins, over local and 
national disputes and other constitutional issues that are complex with deep-rooted 
historical aspects. For example, Article 39- on the regional autonomy and on the right 
of secession.  
b.  The increase in conflict intensity in western Oromia;  
c.  Volatility persists in many parts of the country due to localised situations ranging from 
fight of natural resources and regional border disputes;  
12. Demography:  The  population  of  Ethiopia  estimates  vary  from    to  120.8  million  
(UNFPA).  Ethiopia  is  a  federal  government  since  1991,  with  11  regional  states. 
Oromia and Amhara comprise about 60% of the population.  
13. The  population  has  a  wide  diversity  of  religious  (with  Christians  and  Muslims  as 
most  dominant)  and  ethnolinguistic  groupings.  Ethnicity  is  the  main  factor  that 
drives divisions in the country, with over 80 ethnically diverse groups.  
14. Youth, aged between 15 – 29 years, population is estimated to be about 30%, with 
many primary secondary school dropouts. Demography with a projected increasing 
population, ethnic diversity, youth bulge, a high rural population may contribute to 
conflict.   PACT  will  be  focusing  on  the  youth  for  employment  and  Entreprenurial 
skills. 
15. Human development: The human development index (HDI) in Ethiopia is given 
as 0.485, and it is ranked number 173 in the world. The human development index 
has been steadily increasing over the last 15 years, from a very low base. The MPI 
for the country is 0.367 (UNDP, 2019). High inflation, high unemployment and low 
incomes  will  exacerbate  poverty  and  inequality,  and  may  lead  to  causes  for 
instability.  Nearly  23.7  percent  of  the  population  live  below  the  national  poverty 
line. Poverty is concentrated in the rural areas, where 70 percent of the population 
are  classified  as  poor.  PACT's  focus  will  be  the  rural  poor  and  will  create 
opportunities for their participation in project interventions  
16. The high economic growth has propelled the increase in human development over 
the last 15 years. 
Table 1Selected Human Development Indicators for Ethiopia (source: various UNDP HDR and as indicated) 
Indicator 
HDI (from UNDP Human Development 
reports) 
Value and overall trend 
2010 
0.412 
2015 
0.453 
Population with at least some secondary 
education (% of ages 25 and older) 
Proportion of population using at least 
basic drinking water services (%) 
Prevalence of undernourishment (% of 
population) 
Source: World Development Indicators 
(2006-2019) 
2010 
M: 16.1% 
F: 7.0% 
2007 
Rural: 19% 
Urban: 78% 
2008 
33.9% 
2015 
M: 20.7% 
F: 10.8% 
2012 
Rural: 26% 
Urban: 79% 
2013 
27.5% 
2019 
0.485 
2018 
M: 22% 
F: 11.5% 
2017 
Rural: 31% 
Urban: 80% 
2018 
19.7% 
17. The  human  development  status  has  significant  ethnic,  gender  and  rural-urban 
inequalities that may fuel fragility.  
18. The young population seems to have been an asset during the covid-19 outbreak 
as there were relatively reduced number of deaths and the economy was affected 
modestly, as there were no hard lockdowns. 
19. Economic  development:  Ethiopia’s  economy  is  projected  at  +3.8%  for  2022, 
helped  by  the  effective  containment  of  COVID-19  without  a  lockdown,  and 
favourable rains for the agriculture sector. In 2021, inflation reached 35.1%, due 
to  pandemic-induced  supply  chain  disruptions,  conflict,  and  higher  fuel  prices. 
Agriculture  accounts  for  about  45%  of  GDP,  90%  of  exports  and  80%  of 
employment. 
20. In the medium term, the Government's ambitious reform agenda has large upside 
potential,  but  Ethiopia  remains  at  high  risk  of  debt  distress.  The  World  Bank’s 
lending commitment to Ethiopia has declined with just US$244 million committed 
so  far  in  2022,  and the  IMF  has  only  disbursed  around  US$0.5  billion  out  of  the 
US$2.9  billion  agreed  to  in  2019  to  support  the  Home-Grown  Economic  Reform 
Program and its Ten-year Development Plan (2020/21–2029/30).  
21. Ethiopia has been reducing poverty levels over the years, but there are still large 
numbers of people in poverty. (UNDP HDR, 2021)  Economic growth which had been 
in progressive increase was reduced by the four Cs, which led to a  Economic growth which 
had been in progressive increase was reduced by the four Cs, which led to a -6% 
percent decline in GDP per capita in 20202 . Low growth rate is expected in 2022. 
Ethiopia’s Gini coefficient 0.35 in 2015. Population living below the poverty line has 
increased over the last 2 years, due to the impact of the 4Cs shocks. 6% percent 
decline in GDP per capita in 20203 . Low growth rate is expected in 2022. Ethiopia’s 
Gini coefficient 0.35 in 2015. Population living below the poverty line has increased 
over the last 2 years, due to the impact of the 4Cs shocks.  
22. In  the  context  of  the  Ukraine-Russia  crisis,  food  price  inflation  is  due  to  the 
import  dependency  for  wheat,  maize  and  sunflower  oil,  as  well  as  fertilisers  for 
agricultural production. There have been sharp increases in the price of fertiliser 
on the global market as Russia is a major source of Urea (16%) and DAP (12%). 
The government has started to reduce the fuel subsidy progressively through 2022 
and promoting other fertilizer sources including organic fertilizer use in the country.  
23. The key downside risks to the economic outlook include low investor confidence, in 
part  due  to  the  continuing  domestic  conflicts,  weakness  in  global  growth,  and 
climate change (CC). The Ukraine  conflict provides an  opportunity investment in 
the  local  production  of  wheat  and  oilseeds,  and  other  value  chains  with  market 
potential such as horticulture to reduce dependency on imports.  
24. Human development is low in some regions. PACT will be investing in the regions 
that have very low human development capacity and investing in some basic water 
supply services and focusing on nutrition. 
25. Sanctions  by  USA  and  EU  will  impact  the  Ethiopian  economic  development.  In 
response to the conflict in the northern part of the country, the USA and EU imposed 
economic  sanctions  on  Ethiopia  and  visa  restrictions  on  some  Ethiopian  officials. 
USA  terminated  Ethiopia  from  the  AGOA  trade  preference  program.  The  EU  also 
suspended its direct support to the Government. 
26. A  recent  UN  Ethiopia  Scenario  and  Risk  Analysis  workshop  summarised  the  key 
economic risks as: 
a.  In the short-midterm outlook, both unemployment & informality will 
remain high or over increase further; 
b.  There will be increased government expenditure due to conflict and import 
subsides, resulting in high budget deficits; 
3 World Bank (2021). Ibid.   
c.  There may be significant decline in ODA and widening external financing 
gap due to restrictions and lack of business confidence; 
27. For improved adaptive capacity the country may need external donor financing and 
economic and political reforms that incentivises the private sector. 
28.  Environment, natural resources and climate change4: - improving access to 
efficient  natural  resource  utilisation,  especially  water,  soil  and  forests  and 
enhancing resilience to natural and man-made disasters. In Ethiopia, livelihoods are 
closely  linked  to  natural  resources.  However,  because  of  population  pressure, 
unsustainable  use,  inappropriate  management,  expansion  of  planned  development 
(commercial 
in  enforcing 
environmental  policies  and  regulations,  there  is  considerable  depletion  of  natural 
resources  and  environmental  degradation.  The  major  environmental  issues  that 
increase  the  vulnerability  of  Ethiopians,  include:  a)  land  degradation  including  soil 
erosion and biodiversity loss; b) CC; c) deforestation; d) water scarcity due to droughts; 
and e) loss of biodiversity and these may contribute to conflict. 
infrastructure  development),  weakness 
farms  and 
29. A  recent  UN  Ethiopia  Scenario  and  Risk  Analysis  workshop  summarised  the  key 
environmental risks as: 
a.  Ethiopia is experiencing one of the most severe La Niña-induced droughts 
in the last forty years following four consecutive failed rainy seasons since 
late 2020; 
b.  The prolonged drought continues to compromise fragile livelihoods heavily 
reliant on livestock and deepening food insecurity and malnutrition; 
c.  2022 Belg production is likely to be below average, reducing further 
domestic availability of grains; 
d.  More than 8 million pastoralists and agro-pastoralists affected in Oromia, 
Somali, SNNPR and Southwest regions, have been affected by the 
prevailing drought 
30.  
31. The compounded effect of poverty, unemployment and economic decline is driving 
citizen opposition to the absolute monarchy and to patriarchal practices which limit 
access to land and other productive resources (especially for women and youth). 
Official responses to the protests have led to increasingly conflictual interactions 
between the state and segments of society. Lack of constructive dialogue and trust 
could threaten the viability of interventions aimed at promoting greater social and 
economic  inclusion  of  the  poor  (women  and  youth  in  particular),  and  in  building 
back in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
32. Humanitarian  crisis  due  to  conflict  and  drought:  The  population  in  the  north 
continues  to  face  dire  humanitarian  crisis  because  of  the  prolonged  conflict 
compounded by drought.  It is estimated that 22.3 million Ethiopians will require 
humanitarian assistance in 2022 with a US$2.75 billion funding requirement. 
33. Opportunities  exist:  The  ongoing  financial  transition,  economic  reform,  national 
dialogues, the negotiation between government and TPLF, and the country’s role 
in the region present upside factors that are cause for optimism. 
34. Potential scenarios that influenced the PACT design, in the next 5 years. 
Table 2: Scenario analysys for the country context (adapted from UN workshop proceedings) 
Economic 
Optimistic Scenario  Middle of the road Scenario 
GDP to grow at around 5.6%. 
GDP continues to grow 
Economic and financial reforms 
not less than 8% 
continue 
Pessimistic Scenario 
GDP to slow down to 
around 3-4% 
4 Details in the SECAP Review Note, Annex 5 
Security/Politi
cs 
Human 
Development 
(SDGs) 
Regional 
Employment 
Tension at all levels 
decrease and the 
country able to move 
forward with cohesion 
Progress towards the 
SDGs continues 
Youth employment increases 
but not enough to absorb 
unemployed youth. 
General political and security 
stability achieved but pockets 
of conflict and inter-ethnic 
tensions continue in some 
hotspots. 
Basic services improved but 
progress dampened with the 
effect of population growth 
The HoA region 
experience relatively 
peace and stability 
Agreement is achieved on the 
GERD and border dispute with 
Sudan 
Government economic reforms 
will be expected to create 
substantial employment 
through the agro-industrial 
parks and special economic 
zone, but this will not be 
enough to absorb the growing 
number   
Unemployment continues to 
rise, widening inequalities 
and fuelling conflict and 
social unrest. 
Rising inter-ethnic conflict 
leading to widespread 
political instability 
Basic services delivery 
deteriorates, increasing 
inequalities and fuelling 
conflict and social unrest. 
The situation in the HoA will 
also continue to deteriorate, 
causing movements of 
migration and refuges into 
Ethiopia  
Youth unemployment 
continue to rise further 
leading to conflict and social 
unrest 
35.  
D.  Impact of the fragile situation on the IFAD portfolio 
36. IFAD employs a cautious and highly consultative approach to mitigating the risks 
that  may  emerge  from  the  evolving  country  context.  In  consultation  with  key 
development  partners,  including  the  UN  system,  IFAD  in  Ethiopia,  will  closely 
monitor the changing political situation to ensure that support provided by IFAD is 
aligned with priorities and policies that helps improves the wellbeing of the target 
communities, to make them more resilient to shocks from the drivers of fragility.  
37. In  implementing  IFAD  projects,  it  is  important  to  adhere  to  the  “do  no  harm” 
principle, and to the extent possible, attempt to ease the political tensions through 
programme  activities  through  the  promotion  of  inclusive  rural  livelihoods  and 
wellbeing improvement in the country. 
38. Project level impacts and mitigations for on-going projects are listed in table 3. 
Table 3: Impact of the fragile context on the IFAD portfolio 
Project 
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation 
Development Programme  
Impacts 
The conflict in Tigray is still not 
resolved. Tigray region is not 
accessible and this led to 
stoppage of project 
implementation activities.  
There are reports of destruction 
and/or loss of project equipment 
and subsequent delayed service 
delivery to farmers.  
Localized ethic conflict is 
affecting the implementation of 
the programme in Oromia and 
SNNP regions. 
Mitigation measures taken 
Continuous and close follow up 
with the onsite project teams 
where possible.  
IFAD to work with FAO in 
delivering inputs to farmers to 
try and sustain food production 
specifically in Tigray region. 
Project encouraged to take stock 
of project assets at risk and 
where possible withdraw the 
same to safer places. 
Continuous follow up on the 
security situation before any 
travel is approved particularly in 
Oromia and SNNP regions. 
A mission is to be organised 
with FAO, in Tigray Region, 
to assess the state of project 
activities and assets. 
Continuous communications 
between IFAD and GOE, 
particularly Ministry of Finance 
whose support to IFAD financed 
programmes is unwavering, will 
ensure adaptive measures and 
planning to overcome these 
challenges.  
RUFIPIII  restructuring is an 
option being considered by ICO 
and government.   
Discussion is going on with the 
Federal and Regional 
Governments agreed to replace 
conflict affected woredas in 
Metekel zone with others from a 
more peaceful zone. Regional 
government is to make decision 
on the remaining woredas that 
are not accessible.  
IFAD is working with WB and 
government to restructure the 
project 
New COSOP now planned for 
delivery in September 2023. 
Start of activities rescheduled 
to 2022 from 2021. 
The operation of RUFIP III in 
Tigray is suspended since Nov 
2020 because of the war.   
Risk of delay in EIB EB approval 
of EIB co-financing because of 
the political situation in the 
country. 
The conflict in Benishangul-
Gumuza and Oromia regions is 
affecting implementation of LLRP 
in four woreda. Currently, these 
woredas are not accessible and 
the project is working on to 
quantify assets lost in these 
woredas. 
Following a request from the 
Government of Ethiopia, the WB 
cancelled US$125 million of the 
World Bank (IDA) resources for 
use under a covid-19 response 
initiative,  
The intention was to replenish 
the loan in FY24, but this 
replenishment will no longer 
happen.  
COSOP was ending in 2021 
but development was delayed 
due to the overlap with the 
general elections and 
conflict. 
Delayed implementation of 
the 50x2030 Initiative 
Rural Financial Inclusion Programme III 
Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project 
Non-lending activities 
39.  
40.  
41. Designing  PACT  under  a  Fragile  Situation  Context:  The  design  of  PACT 
assumes the optimistic middle of the road scenario presented in Table 2 above and 
the identified potential impacts are listed in Table 4 
Table 4Potential Impact of Fragile Situation on PACT programme and mitigation measures 
Potential Impact PACT programme  
Target areas 
Security 
inaccessible due conflict 
and social unrest 
Delays in the 
implementation of 
projects due to 
disruption of field 
activities 
Environment 
degradation and CC 
Over use of natural 
resources, climate 
change impacts on 
access to water, crop 
and livestock production  
Mitigation measure 
Adaptive management to be able to continue 
implementation in accessible and secure areas. 
Continued support from UNDSS and 
government security forces to continue 
implementation areas partially accessible. 
Take a rolling out approach where the 
programme progressively moves to new areas 
as they become secure. 
Learn how to effectively implement under 
insecure situations through use of community-
based implementation modalities such as 
community based procurement. 
Adaptive rolling out approach that facilitates 
adjustments and restructuring projects to 
address disruption in the face of volatility in 
programme implementation areas. 
Continue use of participatory and community-
driven planning and development in all 
programme areas. This will begin with the 
development of landscape plans to foster 
ownership of project interventions. 
Mainstream conflict resolution and negotiation 
skills in project activities, ensuring a ‘do-no-
harm’ approach. 
Continued transparency in procurement, 
competitive recruitments and beneficiary 
selection.  
Maximum engagement of youth through 
innovative strategies such as the agribusiness 
training and agripreneur support programme.  
Investing in community-led Multiple Water use 
systems- including irrigation, investing in 
natural resource management and carbon 
finance/ benefits from NRM activities 
Economic developments 
High programme costs 
due to inflation.  
Programme costs include a 25% price 
contingency to cover potential costs increases. 
Competitive procurement of goods and works 
packages strongly encouraged. 
Opportunity to expand 
the use of organic 
fertilisers such as 
composting 
With fertiliser costs increasing significantly, 
production and distribution of composting, e.g 
vermi compost, is increasing in popularity. PACT 
will invest in production compost for crop 
production. 
Potential Impact PACT programme  
Opportunity to expand 
the growing of cereals 
that are in short supply 
due to disruption of 
global supply lines. 
Provision of basic water 
supply services 
disruption due to 
droughts 
Human development 
Mitigation measure 
PACT will support the local production of wheat, 
maize and other cereals that are in short 
supply. 
PACT has a provision to invest in water supply 
for animals and households in the most 
drought-stricken areas. 
The selection of woredas targets areas that do 
not have adequate basic water services or the 
water services are vulnerable to key risk drivers 
such as droughts and conflict. 
Loss of confidence in 
programme 
implementers 
Development of protocols for engagement with 
communities that empowers them to make 
decisions. Community empowerment is central 
to PACT. 
Implementation of grievance redress and 
beneficiary feedback mechanisms to address 
perceptions of negative impacts of project 
interventions and to keep them in control of 
programme progress. 
Strengthen community driven development of 
the landscape development and investment in 
the planning process. 
Strengthened local knowledge sharing at local, 
woreda and regional levels on programme 
objectives, results and lessons, with regular 
events for reporting. 
Transparency in targeting and selection of 
beneficiaries, especially for the matching grants.   
Capacity development, Access to market/ 
finance drawing from lesson from RIA which 
indicate that such interventions result in 
reduced conflict    
Perceptions of elite 
capture resulting in 
discontent and poor 
participation  
High poverty levels, low 
incomes etc 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: 05 Annex Secap Review Note Appendix 2 Final Escmf Report Pact
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation 
Programme 
Environmental Social and Climate Management 
Framework 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
 Final Report  
October 2022 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
ACC 
AfDB 
ADLI 
AGRA 
ASAP+ 
AEZ 
ATI 
AWPB 
B2B 
BMGF 
BOA 
BOQ 
BRAM 
CC 
CLA 
COSOP 
COVID-19 
CRGE 
CSA 
CSA 
DA 
DP 
EIAR 
EFA 
EFS 
EIB 
EPA 
ENRM 
ESIA 
ESCMF 
ESCMP 
FAO 
FBS 
FCA 
FFS 
FFV 
FNCO 
FPCMU 
FTC 
FRG 
Agricultural Commercialization Clusters 
African Development Bank 
Agricultural Development-Led Industrialisation 
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa 
Enhanced Adaptation for the Smallholder Agriculture Programme 
Agro-Ecological Zone 
Agricultural Transformation Institute 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Business to Business 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
Bureau of Agriculture 
Bill of Quantity 
Borrowed Resources Access Mechanism 
Climate Change 
Collaborative Learning and Adaptation 
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
Corona Virus Disease-2019 
Climate Resilient Green Economy 
Central Statistics Agency 
Climate-Smart Agriculture 
Development Agent 
Development Partner 
Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research  
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Ethiopia Food System 
European Investment Bank 
Environment Protection Authority 
Environment and Natural Resources Mapping 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework  
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 
Farmer Business School 
Federal Cooperative Agency 
Farmer Field School 
Fresh Food Voucher 
Food and Nutrition Coordination Office 
Federal Programme Coordination and Management Unit 
Farmer Training Centre 
Farmer Research Group 
i 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Gender Action Learning Systems 
Good Agricultural Practices 
Gender Based Violence 
Green Climate Fund 
Gross Domestic Product 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Gender Inequality Index 
Geographic Information System 
Gender Model Family 
Government of Ethiopia 
Gender Transformative Mechanism 
Growth and Transformation Plan 
Hectares 
Household 
Integrated Agro-Industrial Park 
International Competitive Bidding 
Inclusive Green Finance 
International Financing Corporation 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
IFAD Country Office 
International Centre for Research in Agroforestry 
Information Communication and Technology 
Integrated Agro Industrial Parks 
Integrated Natural Resources Management 
Integrated Pest Management 
Interactive Voice Response 
Irrigation Water Users’ Association 
Knowledge Management 
Land Degradation Surveillance Framework 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development  
Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
MidTerm Review 
National Agricultural Investment Plan 
Ethiopia’s National Adaptation Plan 
Nature-based Solutions 
National Competitive Bidding 
Non-Government Organisation 
National Management Information System 
No-Objection Tracking Utility System 
National Programme Steering Committee 
Orange-Flesh Sweet Potatoes 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme 
GALS 
GAPs 
GBV 
GCF 
GDP 
GHG 
GII 
GIS 
GMF 
GoE 
GTM 
GTP 
Ha 
HH 
IAIP 
ICB 
IGREENFIN 
IFC 
IFAD 
ICO 
ICRAF 
ICT 
IGIP 
INRM 
IPM 
IVR 
IWUA 
KM 
LDSF 
MoA 
M&E 
MoFED 
MRE 
MTR 
NAIP 
NAP-ETH 
NbS 
NCB 
NGO 
NMIS 
NOTUS 
NPSC 
OFSP 
PACT 
ii 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Participatory Small-Scale Irrigation Development Programme 
Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty 
Programme Development Objective 
Programme Design Report 
Project Delivery Team 
Post-Harvest Loss 
Programme Implementation Manual 
Regional Programme Coordination and Management Unit 
Regional Project Steering Committee 
Rural Poor Stimulus Fund 
Rural Financial Intermediation Programme  
Social Behaviour Change Communication 
Standard Bidding Document 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region 
Strategic Objective 
Statement of Expenditure 
Scale-Up Nutrition 
Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
United Nations Forum for Sustainability Standards 
United States Dollar 
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data 
Watershed Committee 
Water Sanitation and Hygiene  
World Bank 
World Food Programme 
Water Users’ Association 
PASIDP 
PASDEP 
PDO 
PDR 
PDT 
PHL 
PIM 
RPCMU 
RPSC 
RPSF 
RUFIP 
SBCC 
SBD 
SECAP 
SDGs 
SNNPR 
SO 
SoE 
SUN 
TVET 
UNFSS 
USD 
USSD 
WC 
WASH 
WB 
WFP 
WUA 
iii 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Table of Contents 
Abbreviations and Acronyms ______________________________________________________________  i 
List of tables _______________________________________________________________________________  vii 
List of Figures  _____________________________________________________________________________  vii 
Executive Summary ___________________________________________________________________  viii 
1. 
Introduction and Background _________________________________________________________ 1 
1.1. 
Introduction __________________________________________________________________________  1 
1.2.  Objectives of the ESCMF _______________________________________________________________  3 
2.  Study Methodology __________________________________________________________________ 4 
3.  Description of PACT Project __________________________________________________________ 5 
4.  Rationale for the Landscape Approach __________________________________________________ 9 
5.  Relevant Environmental Policy, Legal and Institutional  Framework  ________________________ 10 
5.1.  National Level Framework _____________________________________________________________  10 
The Constitution _____________________________________________________________________________ 10 
Relevant Environmental Policies ________________________________________________________________ 11 
National proclamations and régulations  __________________________________________________________ 17 
Environmental Management Guidelines __________________________________________________________ 22 
Relevant and applicable International Conventions and protocols ratified by Ethiopia  _____________________ 23 
5.1.1. 
5.1.2. 
5.1.3. 
5.1.4. 
5.1.5. 
5.2.  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP, updated in 2021)   ___  34 
6.  Socio-economic and Environmental Baseline ____________________________________________ 41 
6.1.  National Context  _____________________________________________________________________  41 
6.2. 
Socio-economic and Environmental Baseline at the Regional levels ____________________________  42 
Amhara National Regional State ________________________________________________________________ 42 
6.2.1. 
6.2.2. 
Oromia National Regional State  ________________________________________________________________ 45 
6.2.3.  Southern Nations and Nationalities and Peoples Regional State (SNNPRS)  ________________________________ 49 
Somali Region  ______________________________________________________________________________ 51 
6.2.4. 
Sidama Regional State ________________________________________________________________________ 53 
6.2.5. 
6.3.  Ethiopian National Parks  ______________________________________________________________  57 
6.4.  Wildlife Reserves and Sanctuaries _______________________________________________________  63 
6.5. 
International designated Areas__________________________________________________________  64 
6.6.  Vulnerable Groups and Underserved Peoples in the program areas ___________________________  64 
iv 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
6.7.  Women  _____________________________________________________________________________  65 
6.8. 
Pastoral and Agro-Pastoral Groups ______________________________________________________  66 
6.9.  Unemployment and Underemployed Rural Youths _________________________________________  67 
7.  Potential Environmental, Social and Climate Impacts, Risks, & Proposed Mitigation Measures ___ 69 
7.1. 
Positive Impacts ______________________________________________________________________  69 
7.2. 
Positive Role of PACT Project in the Adaption and Mitigation of Climate Change _______________  73 
7.3.  Adverse Impacts on Social, Environmental and Climate and Proposed Mitigation measures  ______  75 
Social, Environment and Climate and Risks and Proposed Mitigation Measures __________________________ 75 
7.3.1. 
8.  Social, Environmental and Climate management Plan (ESCMP) ____________________________ 99 
9.  Performances Monitoring/auditing ___________________________________________________ 111 
10.  Consultation with the Communities and Major Stakeholders  ____________________________ 116 
11.  ESCMF Implementation Process and Information Disclosure  ___________________________ 120 
11.1  ESCMF Implementation process _______________________________________________________  120 
11.2 
Information Disclosure _______________________________________________________________  127 
12.  Grievance Redressing Mechanisms (GRMs) __________________________________________ 129 
13.  ESCMF Implementation Arrangement ______________________________________________ 133 
14.  Capacity Building _______________________________________________________________ 138 
15.  Budget Estimated for the implementation of ESCMF  __________________________________ 143 
(a) 
Budget Estimate for Capacity Building __________________________________________________  143 
Appendix _________________________________________________________________________________  145 
Annex 1: Environmental and Social Safeguards Screening Checklist (Online SECAP tool used to screen and categorize 
PACT)  ____________________________________________________________________________________________ 145 
Annex 2: Climate Risk Screening following IFAD SECAP 2021 ______________________________________________ 153 
Climate Risk Classification: Substantial __________________________________________________________________ 153 
Annex 3: Project Screening and Environmental Social Safeguard Classification __________________________________ 157 
ANNEX 4 IFAD environmental and social exclusion list ____________________________________________________ 166 
Annex 5: Suggested Environmental and Social Field Appraisal Form  __________________________________________ 169 
Annex 6: Guideline for the preparation of site specific ESCMP _______________________________________________ 171 
Annex 7: Suggested Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESCMP) Template for the proposed project activities _ 173 
Annex 8: Procedures for Chance Find of Physical Cultural Resources __________________________________________ 175 
Annex 9: Guidelines for Annual Reviews _________________________________________________________________ 176 
Annex 10: Suggested Forms for ESCMF Reporting, Training and Follow-up ____________________________________ 178 
Annex 11: Sample Terms of Reference (ToR) for ESIA Preparation  ___________________________________________ 179 
v 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 12: Grievance Redress Mechanism ________________________________________________________________ 182 
Annex 13:  Stakeholder’s Database ____________________________________________________________________ 183 
Annex 14: 
Issue and Response Table __________________________________________________________________ 184 
Annex 15: Grievance Resolution Form ___________________________________________________________________ 185 
vi 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
List of tables 
Table5. 1 Environmental Guidelines prepared by EPA 
Table5. 2 Summery IFAD’s Environmental and Social Standard 
Table 6. 1 Name, size and the corresponding coordinates of the national park within the regions 
Table 7. 1 Positive Impacts 
Table 7. 2 The positive role of PACT Program in   Mitigation and adaption of Climate change 
Table 7. 3 Level of environment related project Risks 
Table 7. 4 PACT Project Related impacts, proposed mitigation measures, institution responsible for the 
implementation s and budget estimate for the mitigation measures 
Table 8. 1 Environmental Social and Climate Management Plan 
22 
34 
58 
70 
74 
75 
86 
100 
Table 9. 1 Environmental and Social Monitoring Plan 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Table 15.1 Summary of institutions responsible for the implementation ESCMF 
Table 15.2 Type and duration of trainings 
Table 16. 1 Budget Estimated for capacity building in US Dollars 
List of Figures 
Figure 6. 1 Map Showing Project Regions 
 Figure 6. 2 Location map of National Parks of Ethiopia 
Figure 14. 1 Institutional arrangement for the implementation of PACT Project 
135 
140 
143 
42 
58 
133 
vii 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Executive Summary 
Environmental and Climate management include a range of resilience-related measures, including increased 
soil  moisture,  carbon  sequestration  and  soil  fertility  important  for  higher  and  less  variable  crop  yields, 
improved  water  availability,  and  increased  carbon  sequestration  all  of  which  are  high  priorities  for  the 
Ethiopian government. Much progress has been made by the government and thousands of local communities 
are  mobilized  to  address  these  challenges  through  proven  investment  packages  financed  by  the  IFAD. 
However, this work requires more innovation, more financing, more coordination, and much greater scale if 
the country is to meet its food deficit and resilience to climate change while achieving middle income status 
in less than 10 years as planned. 
IFAD, together with other Development Partners (DPs) has been financing Ethiopia’s Federal Ministry of 
Agriculture and Livestock Resource (MoALR) to implement Sustainable Land Management Program in  five  
regional  states  of  the  Ethiopian  highlands  to  transform  the  way  landscapes  are  managed  by    providing 
resources to the  project partners  to invest in a holistic and coordinated fashion. This way water and food 
security is boosted. Degraded lands are brought back into production for local farmers. Dry season base flow 
of streams and depth to water table are improving and protective vegetation cover was either maintained or 
expanded, as verified by remote sensing. Similarly, IFAD financed and implemented the Plan for Accelerated 
and Sustained Development to End Poverty (PASDEP) Project I and II in Ethiopia.  PASDEP, I have already 
been completed and PASDEP II is about to be completed in the next one year. The purpose of these projects 
is to Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty in Ethiopia. 
The Proposed PACT Program would build upon the implementation structure and enhance capacity.  Both at 
national  and  regional  level  environmental,  climate  and  social  safeguard  specialists  will  be  recruited;  the 
institutions  and  their  staff  at  all  levels  of  the  government  existing  implementation  structure,  i.e.,  federal, 
regional,  zone,  woreda  and  kebele  (sub-district)  level  will  be  capacitated  ready  to  implement  the  PACT 
Project. Grievance redress mechanism (GRM) will be introduced at all levels of the project implementation. 
PACT Project is planned to be implemented in the time span of seven years. It will  build on the previous 
projects  and  introduces  measures  to  address  climate  change/variability  and  to  maximize  Greenhouse  Gas 
(GHG) emission reductions and improve the livelihoods of the vulnerable small holder farmers so as to meet 
the  Growth  and  Transformation  Plan  (GTP),  the  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (NDC),  National 
Adaptation  Plan  (NAP)  and  the  Climate  Resilient  Green  Economy  (CRGE)  goals  while  reducing  land 
degradation  and  improving  land  productivity  of  small  holder  farmers.  The  project  is  planned  to  be 
implemented in 90 woredas in   Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR, Somali and Sidama regions in the first phase and 
Tigray and Afar will be implemented in the second phase of the project. This framework is prepared for the 
second phase of the PACT Project. 
The  environmental  and  socioeconomic  milieu  of  the  intervention  areas  are  characterized  with  significant 
limitations of land productivity due to severe land and forest degradation, high agro-ecological variability 
viii 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
and diverse farming systems, sedimentation to rivers, high population density and land fragmentation. This 
ESCMF Report is prepared to enhance the positive impacts; avoid and mitigate the negative environmental 
and social impacts that may arise from the implementation of sub-projects to be financed under PACT Project. 
This  ESCMF  is  prepared  by  collecting  primary  and  secondary  data  as  well  as  information  compiled 
t h r o u g h  extensive review of relevant project documents, proclamations and guidelines at the Federal and 
Regional levels, environmental policies, laws, regulations and by undertaking consultative discussions with 
project team members of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and other flagship programs and/or projects in 
the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  including  those  supported  by  IFAD.  Consultations  have  also  been  made  with 
experts at the federal Environmental Protection Authority and environmental and social regulatory experts of 
the regional environmental offices. IFAD safeguards policies were also reviewed when preparing this ESCMF 
PACT  Project  is  structured  under  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Community-Led  Climate-
Smart  Productive  Landscapes;  Component  2:  Inclusive  Market  Access  and  Component  3:  Community, 
Institutional and Policy Strengthening. 
Components 1 and 2 have range of activities including community access road rehabilitation, water harvesting 
structures, market facilities, irrigation schemes, restoration of degraded lands and gullies, most of which may 
involve manipulation of landscapes  and resources, and or affect the use rights (tenure rights) of people and/or 
their  access  rights  to  resources.  These  activities  may  cause  some  unforeseen  negative  environmental  and 
social impacts. These impacts may include biodiversity loss, natural habitat and cultural resources destruction, 
soil  erosion  and  sedimentation,  restriction  of  access  to  resources,  flooding,  involuntary  loss  of  land  and 
displacement  of  people,  pollution,  and  prevalence  of  diseases.  Project  activities,  particularly  those  in 
agriculture (introduction of high value crops and use of pesticides, introduction of new varieties of crops, new 
fruit tree species and varieties, high yielding varieties) may increase the use of agrochemicals (insecticides, 
herbicides, fertilizers). Detailed mitigation measures outlined in chapter 7 includes, inter alia, integrated crop 
pest  management  (following  the  WBG  EHS  guidelines),  dissemination  of  climate-smart  agro-ecological 
practices  and  technologies,  including  reduced  and  zero  tillage  as  well  as  direct  seeding  and  planting,  to 
minimize  damage  to  soil  structure,  conserve  soil  organic  matter,  and  reduce  soil  erosion.  Infringing  on 
protected  natural  sites  and  critical  habitats  or  areas  with  significant biodiversity will be avoided. As much 
as possible variety of multipurpose  and  fast-growing  indigenous  tree  species will be used to  avoid 
monoculture  in  afforestation /reforestation  activities. Mitigation measures  of the PACT  Project  include 
locating  irrigation  schemes  where  water  supplies  are  adequate  so  that  the  scheme  will  not  conflict  with 
existing human, livestock, wildlife or aquatic water uses; preventing mosquito breeding in the project area, 
and employ suitable prevention and mitigation measures, such as for example selecting sites and orienting 
water works to ensure adequate natural drainage of surface water body.  
Component 3 is focused on market linkages and capacity building and knowledge management, monitoring 
and evaluation, implementation of safeguard instruments and may not have any adverse environmental and 
social risks. The ESCMF is therefore prepared to manage and mitigate the negative impacts that will arise 
ix 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
from the first and second project components. 
The ESCMF outlines procedures to  be followed during the screening of sub-projects  against any potential 
environmental and social impacts. The PACT is a category B project, and the activities may have positive or 
negative effects on biophysical and social environment. The positive impacts will contribute in creating climate 
resilience on the landscape by rehabilitating degraded areas and increasing productivity thereby improving the 
livelihoods  of the rural  community and/or the vulnerable  groups. At this stage of ESCMF preparation, the 
specific sites have not been known and it is  not time to accurately define the scope and magnitude of impacts 
but is broadly discussed in the ESCMF. However, site specific and less sensitive localized environmental and 
social impacts (e.g., pollution from agrochemicals, erosion, biodiversity loss, salinity, habitat destruction) may 
occur in the project implementation areas.  
PACT Project is anticipated to trigger eight of the of IFAD social safeguard policies namely Standard 1: 
Biodiversity conservation; Standard 2: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention; Standard 3: 
Cultural  heritage;  Standard  4:  Indigenous  peoples;  Standard  5:  Labor  and  working  conditions; 
Standard 6: Community health and safety; Standard 7: Physical and economic resettlement and 
Standard  9:  Climate  change.  However,  Standard  8  on  financial  intermediaries  and  direct 
investments will not be triggered by the PACT Project. These standards require adhering to appropriate 
environmental assessment procedures and steps to address all possible negative impacts. 
In  PACT  Project  the  environmental,  climate  and  social  management  process  starts  with  the  sub-project 
planning  process  during  the  identification  of  sub-projects  by  local  communities  based  on  their  needs  and 
priorities through a participatory watershed planning process guided by the Community Based Participatory 
Watershed  Development  Guidelines  (CBPWDG),  technical  support  from  Development  Agents  (DAs)  and 
Worde  experts.  The  Development  Agents  (DAs)  will  screen/design/plan  subprojects  applying  a  simple 
checklist  for  fast-track  eligibility  checking of  identified sub-projects.  This  is done  in consultation  with the 
communities and kebele development committee at the early stages of subproject selection and prioritization 
phase. Once the checklist is approved at the kebele level, the project design/plan will then be sent to the Woreda 
Agriculture  Office  and/or  the  Woreda  Technical  Committee.  The  Technical  Committee,  depending  on  the 
scale, nature and type of subproject, will further screen the sub-projects. The Woreda Focal Person (WFP), 
woreda implementing office, and regional project support unit will ensure and document such procedures are 
properly followed and a team led by experts from the Woreda Environmental regulatory body will review the 
screened subproject and the mitigation measures planned.  If  any  design  modifications  are  required,  the 
environmental 
regulatory  body  passes  recommendations  and  gives  clearance  and/or  certificate  of 
subprojects. The Woreda council will then approve plans based on the recommendations of the team. After 
approval, the plan document is referred to the regional Bureau of Agriculture (BoA) with all the accompanying 
environmental and social screening documents/files. 
If sub-projects of any significant environmental  concerns having high and unknown impacts are identified, 
then the plan document will be directed to the attention of the Zonal or Regional Environmental regulatory 
x 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
body.  The  Zonal  or  regional  environmental  regulatory  body  will  make  decisions  if  an  Environmental  and 
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) is required for those subprojects or not. Based on ESIA outcomes, Zonal or 
Regional environmental regulatory body will recommend modifying the design, preparing environmental and 
social management plan to mitigate negative impacts OR reject/disapprove the project. 
The  PACT  Woreda  Focal  Persons  will  submit  quarterly  and  annual  performance  reports  to  Bureau  of 
Agriculture, regional project coordination Unit and the regional M&E specialist. The environmental and social 
safeguard  specialists  will  consolidate  the  woreda  reports  and  submit  the  quarter  and  annual  performance 
reports  to  the  National  Project  Management  and  Coordination  Unit.  Based  on  the  regions  report,  the 
environmental and social  safeguard  specialists of the National  Project  Coordination  and Management  Unit 
will compile and prepare a report and submit to the development partners on  quarterly and annual basis. 
Monitoring of  environmental and social  safeguard performance of the project  will be conducted  regularly. 
Performance  monitoring  will  ensure  that  safeguards  instruments  such  as  ESCMP  and  RFP  are  properly 
implemented.  .  While  the  implementation  of  ESCMP  is  done  by  the  community  at  kebele  level  with  the 
responsibility of the woreda implementing offices, performance monitoring will be done by the environmental 
and  social  safeguard  specialists  at  national  and  regional  level.  The  results  of  the  monitoring  involve  the 
monitoring compliance and effectiveness of the safeguards instruments, and the overall environmental, socio-
economic,  and  climate-related  assessment  of  the  Program’s  interventions.  Monitoring  will  be  done  on  an 
annual  and  quarter  basis  by  the  Regional  Project  Coordination  Unit  (RPCU)  Specialists  with  support  of 
Environmental  and  Social  Safeguards  Specialists,  M&E  Specialist  and  IFAD’s  Environmental  Safeguards, 
Social Safeguards and Social Development team. 
Quarterly and annual reviews workshops will be held at regional and national level with a view to enhance the 
positive  performances  and  identify  bottlenecks  and  gaps  when  implementing  the  ESCMF  and  proposing 
solutions  in  addressing  the  gaps.  Environmental  and  social  auditing  will  be  done  by  carrying  out  field 
verification by independent consultants. Auditing will be conducted twice in the program life, i.e., during Mid 
Term Review (MTR and during completion period of the project. 
The  PACT  Program  will  conduct  a  number  of  training  and  awareness  creation  at  federal,  regional,  zonal, 
woreda,  kebele  and  community  level  on  ESCMF  and  other  safeguard  instruments.  For  successful 
implementation of the ESCMF, SA and RPF capacity building activities should be done in a systematic manner 
to  have  an  environmentally  sound  and  socially  acceptable  subproject  that  will  address  all  the  program 
beneficiaries. The capacity building activities will give due emphasis to woreda and kebele level experts, DAs 
and community members focusing on the different safeguard instruments and the IFAD safeguard policies. 
Besides, awareness creation using   different platforms will be provided to the communities at woreda and 
zonal level whereas technical assistance and backstopping support will be strengthened by federal, regional 
program coordination unit staffs and other stakeholders. 
The  budget  for      capacity  building  and  trainings  at  federal  and  regional  level,  performance  monitoring, 
xi 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
environmental and social safeguard auditing, quarter review workshops and experience sharing, and technical 
backstopping and support is estimated to be 1,410,000 US$ for the coming seven years. Similarly, budget   for 
the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is estimated to be $ USD 2,702,000 USD. The overall 
budget estimate for the implementation of the ESCMF is $ USD 4,112,000. It is important to note that most 
of budget required to implement mitigation measure are embedded in the budget allocated for components, 
particularly component one.  
xii 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
1. 
Introduction and Background 
1.1.  Introduction 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) Program is a flagship program of the Ethiopian 
Ministry  of  Agriculture  built  on  the  first  phases  of  the  Participatory  Small-Scale  Irrigation  Development 
Program.  PACT will directly contribute to the objectives of Ethiopia 10-Year plan, Climate Resilient Green 
Economy  (CRGE)  strategy  (CRGE  2011),  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (NDC  2021)  and  National 
Adaptation Plan (NAP 2021) by enhancing agricultural productivity, climate  adaptive capacity and market 
linkages and leveraging climate change mitigation mechanisms to build a more resilient and inclusive food 
system.  
Climate  Finance  from  the  Green  Climate  Fund  (GCF)  for  the  Inclusive  Green  Financing  Initiative 
(IGREENFIN) and from the Enhanced Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP+) will be 
used to co-finance PACT. IGREENFIN will avail loans and grants to MFIs, Cooperatives etc. for them to 
engage in climate adaptation and resilience interventions.  Thus, PACT/IGREENFIN alignment will assist to 
bring about a transformational impact on the target communities and ecosystems. 
PACT will target the most vulnerable households and socio-economic groups in five regional states of the 
country.  Based on key indicators of vulnerability  such as food insecurity,  climate sensitivity,  poverty  rate, 
unemployment,  approximately  90  woreda  are  identified  taking  into  consideration  the  vulnerability  of  the 
community  and  opportunities  for  irrigation,  integration  of  value  chains  and  administrative  absorption 
capacities. 
The PACT Program is said to enhance the agricultural food production systems in poor and underprivileged 
communities. Targeted woredas in the regions are identified. However, the specific beneficiary households 
and communities are not yet known at this stage. The activities of the PACT Program are expected to have 
number of sub-projects, hence an Environmental, Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF) has 
been  prepared  to  identify  the  potential  risks  and  document  mitigation  measures  for  any  potential  adverse 
impact on the sub projects and propose ways and means to avoid, minimize or mitigate them. The ESCMF 
also  makes provisions  for  screening  of  sub-projects  and  guidance  for  further  environmental  assessment 
that will be required at a later stage during the formulation of the sub projects.  
The ESCMF seeks to manage the environmental, climate and social risks of the PACT program and proposed 
mitigation measures. For the development of this framework, each of the components and activities included 
in the PACT program was analyzed considering measures, and practices that the program   will use to improve 
resilience to climate change through the reduction of GHG emission potential or carbon balance and the water 
and carbon footprint of the prioritized agricultural activities. The existing environmental, social, and economic 
conditions  in  the  area  where  the  program  will  be  implemented  will  be  assessed.  In  addition  to  the 
1 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
environmental, social, and institutional context elements, the document lays out an environmental and social 
management  plan  that  defines  the  guidelines,  procedures,  and  obligations  for  the  responsible  parties  and 
strategic partners, which comply with the environmental, social, and gender standards, safeguards and policies 
of IFAD   as well as with Ethiopian regulations and public policy.  
For  the  development  of  this  framework,  each  of  the  components  and  activities  included  in  the PACT 
Project   were analyzed considering, on the one hand, the measures, and practices that the project will use to 
improve resilience to climate change and reduce the water and carbon footprint of the prioritized agricultural 
activities, and, on the other hand, the existing environmental, social, and economic conditions in the territories 
where  the project  will be  implemented.  The  incorporation  and  enforcement  of  these  arrangements  will 
minimize  the  potential  adverse  impacts  of  the  project  the  environment,  communities,  and  project 
beneficiaries. Furthermore, the ESCMF opts for an approach that also seeks to maximize the positive impacts 
and outcomes of the P AC T proj ect . Similarly, the project's information disclosure strategy and grievance 
redress mechanism seek to promote transparency and accountability among stakeholders. 
The PACT program according to the Ethiopian EIS guideline is classified as a Category B and as substantial 
according IFAD risk rating.  
The incorporation and enforcement of these arrangements will minimize the potential adverse impacts on the 
environment, communities, and project beneficiaries. Furthermore, the ESCMF opts for an approach that also 
seeks  to  maximize  the  positive  impacts  and  outcomes  of  the  PACT  Program.  Similarly,  the  program’s 
information  disclosure  strategy  and  grievance  redress  mechanism  seek  to  promote  transparency  and 
accountability among stakeholders. 
The ESCMF document is organized in the following way: 
•  A description in the context of   environmental, social and gender context of the program area. 
•  An  evaluation  of  the  environmental,  social  and  climate  management  capacities  of  the  communities 
proposed  to  participate  in  the  program.  This  includes  an  analysis  of  i)  the  existence  of  rules  and 
regulations,  ii)  inter-institutional  relations,  iii)  internal  coordination,  iv)  financial  capacity,  and  v) 
monitoring mechanisms.  
•  The description of the environmental and social management plan, which sets out the Assumptions on 
which  the  ESCMF  was  developed,  as  well  as  the  Framework's  objectives.  It  also  establishes  the 
procedures  for  implementing  the  ESCMF,  the  institutional  arrangements  that  will  facilitate  its 
administration, as well as s review and audit the performance of the Program. 
•  A definition of the mechanisms for disseminating information about the Program, its implementation 
and progress in meeting the goals, and its budget execution. It also includes guidelines for recording, 
reporting, and resolving incidents, requests, complaints, claims, suggestions that may arise during the 
Program implementation. 
•  A presentation of the indicators associated with the environmental, social, climate, and gender risks 
identified, as well as the monitoring mechanism for the proposed mitigation measures. 
2 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
•  The  budget  estimated  for  the  implementation  of  the  ESCMF,  both  for  the  execution  of  plans  and 
strategies, as well as for the financing of the work team that will support  the implementation of the 
program. 
1.2.  Objectives of the ESCMF 
The ESCMF has the following objectives. 
  To  establish  clear  procedures  and  methodologies  for  the  environmental,  climate  and  social 
assessment, review, approval, and implementation of mitigating the potential environmental and 
social impacts of investments to be financed under the project. 
  To specify appropriate roles and responsibilities of the different implementers and stakeholders 
and outline the necessary reporting procedures for managing and monitoring environmental and 
social concerns related to project investments. 
  To determine the training and capacity building needs of the implementing institutions, 
  To establish the budget required to implement the ESCMF requirement. 
  To ensure that the implementation of the PACT of which the subproject sites are unknown at this stage, will be 
carried out in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner. 
3 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
2. 
Study Methodology 
The  ESCMF  has  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  applicable  National  safeguard  policies  and 
procedures and IFAD SECAP (2021). The information required to prepare the ESCMF used both 
primary  and  secondary  sources.  The  methodologies  adopted  for  the  preparation  of  this  ESCMF 
include literature review. Information obtained from Consultations with stakeholder institutions and 
the  communities  engaged  and  benefiting  from  the  implementation  of  similar  projects  in  these 
regions is also used in the development of the ESCMF. 
Literature Review 
Review on the existing baseline information and relevant literatures were undertaken to have better 
in sight of the PACT Program areas. Similarly, the national policies and legal framework and IFAD 
environmental, climate and social climate Assessment procedure (SECAP) were also reviewed. 
Field visit 
The  PACT  Program  Design  mission  was  fielded  to  the  project  regions  to  carry  out  consultation  with  the 
stakeholders and with the beneficiary communities of PASIDP II currently under implementation. The design 
mission met the relevant institutions and communities   including woman and youth at the regional level. The 
design team during field visit was also able to understand the environmental and social settings of the proposed 
project  area  and  identified  opportunities  and  challenges  that  are  expected  to  be  encountered  during  PACT 
program implementation 
Stakeholder Consultations 
A  series  of  stakeholder  consultations  have  been  carried  out  with  key  resource  persons,  beneficiaries, 
institutions at the national, regional, and community levels. During consultations the objectives of the PACT 
Program was explained by  the design team  for the stakeholders to understand the nature and scope of the 
program. 
Consultation with the stakeholders and communities were facilitated by the IFAD Country Office 
staff and the experts from PASIDP II Office of the Ministry of Agriculture.  
4 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
3.  Description of PACT Project   
The PACT Project’s Development Objective will be achieved through the effective implementation of two 
technical  components  and  a  third  component  that  will  focus  on  augmenting  the  capacity  of  communities, 
institutions,  and  contributing  to  a  conducive  policy  environment  towards  programme  implementation.  Job 
creation for young women and men including persons with disabilities will be a main focus of all investments 
in the project. 
The PACT Project has three components and has also sub components under each of the components.   
Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes:- Component 1 will support: a) 
community  led  equitable  access  and  sustainable  use  of  natural  resources;  b)  participatory  promotion  of 
technological change for smallholder production systems for improved production and productivity of target 
crop and livestock commodities; c) improve inclusive and equitable adaptation to CC to  reduce vulnerability 
to  shocks;  and  d)  improve  nutrition.  The  outcome  of  this  component  will  be  enhanced  conservation, 
productivity  and  sustainable  utilization  of  water  and  other  natural  resources.  The  component  will  be 
implemented under three subcomponents.  
Subcomponent 1.1: Integrated Natural Resources Management: Led by inclusive and empowered watershed 
committees, this subcomponent will invest in: a) rehabilitation of degraded lands; b) reforestation, Farmer-
Managed Natural Regeneration (FMNR) and agro-forestry; c) adoption of improved cook stoves combining 
market led and community led approach and the promotion of solar-powered lighting in partnership with the 
Vita  and    support  of    Green  Impact  Fund  for  leveraging  carbon  finance  and  selling  carbon  credits  will  be 
explored.  The  Land  Degradation  Surveillance  Framework  (LDSF)  data  from  the  International  Centre  for 
Research in Agro-forestry (ICRAF) will be among sources used to identify intervention areas. 
The sub-component will leverage the climate-gender-nutrition nexus (e.g., promotion of indigenous nutritious 
crops,  fruit  trees,  and  bee-keeping)  and  ensure  women  and  youth  will  adequately  benefit  from  enhanced 
landscape restoration and management by exploring gendered specific activities, including skill enhancement 
and promoting income-generating activities. Farmer field schools, inclusive of business curricula, will be used 
for forestry and agro-forestry activities. The component will also create green job to youth and women and 
empower women for leadership. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Climate Resilient Water Development for Households, Crops and Livestock Use: Taking 
a landscape approach in Sub-component 1.1, this subcomponent will invest in: a) Solar-small-scale farmer-led 
irrigation-related infrastructure; b) multipurpose water infrastructure and protection; and c) rehabilitation of 
irrigation schemes damaged due to the conflict and natural disaster. Renewable energy sources for powering 
water acquisition will be promoted, especially conversion from diesel pumps. Irrigation enables smallholder 
farmers to produce crops all-year long, increasing availability and affordability of diverse foods on markets. 
The sub-component will apply a  gender and  youth  lens to  the development  of water-related infrastructure, 
ensuring that gender and youth-specific challenges are addressed.  
5 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Under this sub component irrigation-related interventions will focus on: a) identification, studying, designing 
and construction of new or for rehabilitation small-scale irrigation, including in the lowlands; and b) improving 
the management of irrigation infrastructure and instalment of water saving technologies by introducing new 
management models that will include private sector to complement the activities of the Irrigation Water Users 
Associations (IWUAs), where feasible. The involvement of private sector in irrigation scheme management 
will  be  piloted,  learning  from  the  work  by  the  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC)  in  Dollo  Woreda, 
Somali Region for refugees and host communities. Potential partnership with the IFC and IFAD’s own PSFP 
on developing and implementing private sector irrigation scheme management models will be explored during 
design to strengthen the sustainability of irrigation schemes. The Programme will support the development of 
about 25,000ha of climate resilient small-scale irrigation and farmer-led irrigation. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Production and Productivity Improvement of Selected Food Commodities: Interventions 
under this subcomponent will address production-related constraints of target crops and livestock selected by 
women and men farmers. These may include fruits and vegetables (avocado, tomatoes, cabbage, onion, and 
bananas), wheat, potatoes, forage shoats and poultry. The proposed interventions, to be selected by region, are 
summarised as follows: a) access to improved seed; b) soil fertility/health management including up-scaling 
soil fertility technologies promoted through the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) grant; c) 
improved crop protection system including integrated pest management practices; d) improved irrigation water 
use management; e) improved household level production of sheep and goats (Shoats) and poultry for home 
consumption and marketing;  f) improved production of forage and feed for livestock; g) strengthened research 
and extension linkages including community-led (e.g., Farmers Research and Extension Groups, Farmers Field 
Schools) and e-extension services for innovation dissemination; and h) improved mechanisation technologies 
- explore potential linkages with Hello tractor, a digital platform for accessing mechanisation services and (I) 
improved post-harvest management to reduce food loss and waste. 
Under  this  sub  component  gender,  youth  and  nutrition  will  be  considered  to  make  sure  women  and  youth 
benefit from capacity building opportunities. Small-scale mechanisation will enable women to save time and 
be able to participate in more productive, economic and self-development activities and digital technologies 
will be promoted for smallholder farmers’ production and marketing systems. 
Component  2:  Inclusive  Market Access:    The  outcome  of  interventions  under  this  component  will  be 
enhanced access to remunerative markets for small-scale women and men farmers in the project areas. Focus 
will be on linking smallholder women and men farmers to the private sector on a business-to-business linkage, 
which  will  strengthen  the  capacity  of  producer  organisations  and  improve  access  to  reliable  remunerative 
markets. A market based and private sector led approach will be promoted for improved provision of services, 
increased private sector investments and building capacities for smallholder farmers and their organisations.  
Subcomponent  2.1:  Support  to  Agri-business  Development:  This  subcomponent  will  seek  to  promote 
commercialisation where (young) women and men farmers will largely respond to/be guided by market signals 
in crop production planning. Further, facilitating access to digital technologies shall attract young farmers to 
actively engage in agri-preneurship. 
6 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Sub-component 2.2: Inclusive Market Access Business to Business Linkages: Participation of the private 
sector,  through  partnerships  or  joint  ventures,  contract  farming/out-grower  scheme  arrangements  will  be 
promoted. The supply of produce to existing integrated agro-industrial parks may be prioritised during the 
selection of small-scale  enterprises to  be supported, following  a market  assessment with  the private sector 
entity.  The  project  will  develop  a  digital  based  market  information  system/platform  using  a  value  chain 
approach for the selected commodities that will help inform women and men farmers and buyers of market 
information. The digital market platform will ensure inclusivity and literacy levels are accounted for through 
backward  and  forward  compatibility  of  smart  phone  and  feature  phone  enabled  SMS/USSD  and  IVR 
(Interactive  Voice  Response)  based  services.  The  design  will  explore  opportunities  to  support  and  build 
capacities of producer cooperatives/unions in coordinated production and foster market access alliances to link 
with off-takers, to reduce transaction costs and supply risks based on lessons from PASIDP II. Farmers will be 
assisted to prepare business plans to enable these partnerships.  Special attention will be given to nutrient-
dense foods as a pull approach to increase food production for markets and farmers’ homes. 
Subcomponent 2.3: Local Climate resilient, Market-Related Infrastructure: The emphasis of interventions 
under  this  subcomponent  will  be  on  addressing  market  infrastructure-related  constraints  faced  by  relevant 
actors operating within target value chains, that were largely absent in PASIDPII.  Planned interventions will 
also  include  supporting  rural  infrastructure  investments  that  can  add  market  and  nutritional  value  at  the 
location, guarantee food safety, extend shelf life, upgrade performance of enterprises and support associated 
agricultural  producers,  including  women,  to  become  competitive,  sustainable  commercial  businesses  in  an 
environmentally friendly manner. Infrastructure will be prioritized according to business plans, linkages along 
the value chain and social impact potential.  Infrastructure may include market sheds, storage facilities for 
farmer’s  organizations,  renovation/improvement  of  last  mile  rural  access  roads,  among  others.  Farmers’ 
organisations capacities will be strengthened to manage and maintain infrastructure. A nutrition lens will be 
applied, leveraging post-harvest practices and infrastructure to preserve and enhance nutritional quality of the 
foods  produced.  Further,  the  component  will  prioritise  investments  that  foster  job  creation  for  youth  and 
women.  
Component 3: Community, Institutional and Policy Strengthening: This will be a cross-cutting component 
servicing the technical components and facilitating pathways for the effective and inclusive functioning of the 
target value chains, from production to consumption. The component comprises three subcomponents. 
Subcomponent  3.1:  Social  and  Community  Empowerment:  Interventions  under  this  subcomponent  will 
largely  focus  on  coordination  and  focused  awareness  creation  across  all  levels,  of  gender  transformative 
approaches, youth and nutrition interventions in a manner that ensures effectiveness and sustainability.  
Gender transformative approaches, focussing on young women, will:  (i ) address the underlying social norms, 
attitudes  and  behaviours  that  perpetuate  gender  inequalities,  (ii)  use  participatory  approaches  to  facilitate 
dialogue, trust, ownership, visioning and behaviour change at various levels , (iii) promote critical reflection 
on deep-rooted social and gender norms and attitudes in order to challenge power dynamics and bring about a 
paradigm shift at all levels, (iv) explicitly engage with men and boys to address the concepts of masculinity 
7 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
and gender, (v) engage with influential smallholders. This sub component  will also address the following areas 
of gender inequality: (i) gender-balanced staffing at institutional and project levels, (ii) up skilling staff and 
implementing partners on  gender and social inclusion issues at all levels, (iii) Gender responsive budgeting, 
(iv) unequal workloads between women and men, especially regarding unpaid care and domestic work, (v) 
women’s  lack  of  voice  in  household  decision-making,  (vi)  women’s  unequal  access  to,  and  ownership  of, 
resources, (vii) gender-based violence (GBV) and other aspects of well-being;  and (viii) women’s unequal 
participation in organizations, both as members and leaders. 
The project under this subcomponent will identify suitable employment opportunities and income generating 
activities for youth across the project components. 
Subcomponent  3.2:  Institutional  Strengthening and  Policy  Support: The  subcomponent  will  have  a  dual 
focus: institutional strengthening and policy support. 
Institutional Strengthening – With regard to institutional strengthening, the aim is to augment the capacity of 
the  institutions  (public  and  private  sector/farmer-owned)  that  will  be  responsible  for  overseeing  and/or 
implementing  the  different  Programme  activities.  However,  to  ensure  relevance,  capacity  building 
interventions will be premised on a capacity and systems needs assessment, which will detail specific capacity 
and systems gaps at the national, regional and woreda levels of government.  
Policy  Support: The  focus  of  this  intervention  will  be  to  facilitate  the  development,  review  and  update  of 
policies  and  strategies  in  areas  identified  as  game  changing  solutions  for  the  Ethiopia’s  Food  System 
Transformation roadmap, including for gender equality and youth to thrive in agriculture.  
Subcomponent 3.3: Programme Coordination and Implementation Support Services: This sub-component’s 
objective  will  be  to  manage  the  Programme  in  an  efficient  and  effective  manner  by  providing  overall 
coordination,  including  planning  and  implementation,  financial  management  and  control,  procurement 
support,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation,  knowledge  management,  and  progress  reporting.  It  will  also  ensure 
liaison and linkage with all other relevant projects/programmes being implemented in the country that seek to 
address  similar  or  related  constraints;  this  would  be  aimed  at  taking  advantage  of  existent  synergies  and 
avoiding duplications. 
8 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
4.  Rationale for the Landscape Approach  
Climate-smart  agriculture provides opportunities, but  also  presents  considerable  challenges. To seize these 
opportunities and meet these challenges, it is necessary to adopt a holistic, integrated approach to capacity 
development in which all stakeholders participate actively and gain a sense of ownership over the activities.  
An  integrated  approach,  which  encompasses  the  socio-economic,  agro-ecological  and  policy  dimensions, 
ensures greater efficiency in the use of resources and more sustainable management of natural processes and 
human activities in the landscape. Production systems need to capitalize on natural biological processes and 
recycle waste and residues. It is also important to create integrated and diversified farming systems that can 
generate a range of goods and services at the landscape level.  
Reversing trends in environmental degradation involves the use of landscape approaches to address climate 
change.  It  has  often  been  demonstrated  that  the  best  approach  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  climate-smart 
agriculture is to broaden the agricultural management practices from single farming unit to the management 
of the entire landscape by multiple stakeholders (e.g. decision-makers, farmers, industrial groups). An example 
of this is the integration of trees into pastures, with the support of community-based forest management and 
planning and the collaboration of local authorities, to establish integrated production systems.  
In  the  landscape  approach  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  pressures  and  demands  on  natural  resources  and 
ecosystems,  the  biophysical  and  socio-economic  impacts  of  climate  change,  and  the  opportunities  and  the 
constraints that land users face to adapting to change and threats demand of applying landscape approaches in 
interventions to support climate change adaptation and mitigation is needed . This analysis must be undertaken 
in coordination with all stakeholders in the landscape.   
Land degradation is reflected in the loss of fertile soils, the erosion of biodiversity and a reduction in carbon 
stocks, threatens the livelihoods and well-being,  the food,  water and energy security, and the resilience of 
millions  of  people.  Land  degradation  is  both  a  cause  and  a  consequence  of  climate  change.  Ecosystem 
degradation and climate change form a ‘negative feedback loop’ that increases greenhouse gases emissions 
from agricultural production. The loss and degradation of soil and vegetation significantly reduces the capacity 
of soils to act as a 'carbon sink'. These negative loops affect agriculture production and livelihoods at all levels. 
Climate-smart energy solutions are also a priority objective for preserving natural resources and preventing 
the degradation of the natural environment.  
9 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
5.  Relevant Environmental Policy, Legal and Institutional  Framework 
5.1.  National Level Framework 
The effects of the proposed Program on the environment should be assessed in order to ensure that the PACT 
Program is in harmony with the natural and socio-economic environment and also ensure sustainability of the 
resulting  development.  The  following  section  will  review  the  national  policies,  legislative  frameworks, 
guidelines, and standards relevant to the proposed Program.  
5.1.1.  The Constitution   
The  Constitution  of  the Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia  was  issued  in  August  1995  with  several 
provisions, which provides basic and comprehensive principles and guidelines for environmental protection, 
and  management  in  the  country.  Articles  and  environmental  provisions  of  the  constitution  relevant  to  the 
proposed program are the following: 
Article 35- Rights of Women  
The historical legacy of inequality and discrimination suffered by women in Ethiopia considered, women, to 
remedy this legacy, are entitled to affirmative measures. The purpose of such measures shall be to provide 
special attention to women to enable them to compete and participate based on equality with men in political, 
social, and economic life as well as in public and private institutions.  
Women have the right to full consultation in the formulation of national development policies, the designing 
and execution of projects, and particularly in the case of projects affecting the interests of women.  
Women have the right to acquire, administer, control, use and transfer property. They have equal rights with 
men with respect to use, transfer, administration, and control of land. They shall also enjoy equal treatment in 
the inheritance of property and women shall have a right to equality in employment, promotion, pay, and the 
transfer of pension entitlements.  
Article 40-The Right to Property 
The right to ownership of rural and urban land, as well as of all natural resources, is exclusively vested to the 
State and in the peoples of Ethiopia. Land is a common property of the Nations, Nationalities and Peoples of 
Ethiopia and shall not be subject to sale or to other means of exchange.  
10 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Article 43- The Right to Development 
 The Peoples of Ethiopia as a whole, and each Nation, Nationality and People in Ethiopia  have the right to 
improved  living  standards  and  to  sustainable  development  and  Nationals  have  the  right  to  participate  in 
national development and to be consulted with respect to policies and projects affecting their community.  
Article 44- Environmental Rights  
All persons have the right to a clean and healthy environment and all persons who have been displaced or 
whose livelihoods have been adversely affected as a result of State programs have the right to commensurate 
monetary or alternative means of compensation, including relocation with adequate State assistance. 
Article 91 Social Objectives  
To the extent the country’s resources permit, policies shall aim to provide all Ethiopians access to public health 
and education, clean water, housing, food and social security and education shall be provided in a manner that 
is free from any religious influence, political partisanship or cultural prejudices.  
Article 92- Environmental Objectives  
Government shall endeavor to ensure that all Ethiopians live in a clean and healthy environment. The design 
and implementation of programs and projects of development shall not damage or destroy the environment. 
People have the right to full consultation and to the expression of views in the planning and implementations 
of environmental policies and projects that affect them directly and Government and citizens shall have the 
duty to protect the environment.  
5.1.2. Relevant Environmental Policies  
The following policies are relevant since it will give policy guidance to prevent or mitigate environmental 
impacts of PACT that may arise due to Program implementation. 
Environmental Policy of Ethiopia 
The first comprehensive statement of Environmental Policy of Ethiopia (EPE) was approved by the Council 
of Ministers in April 1997 that was based on the policy and strategic findings and recommendations of the 
Conservation  Strategy  of  Ethiopia.  The  policy  is  aimed  at  guiding  sustainable  social  and  economic 
development of the country through the conservation and sustainable utilization of the natural, man-made and 
cultural resources and the environment at large. The overall policy goal is to improve and enhance the health 
and quality of life of all Ethiopians and to promote sustainable social and economic development through the 
sound management and use of natural, human-made and cultural resources and the environment as a whole so 
as to meet the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs. 
11 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The specific Policy objectives seek to, among others: 
Ensure that the benefits from the exploitation of non-renewable resources are extended as far into the future 
as can be managed and minimize the negative impacts of their exploitation on the use and management of 
other natural resources and the environment. 
Incorporate the full economic, social, and environmental costs and benefits of natural resource development 
into the planning, implementation, and accounting processes by a comprehensive valuation of the environment 
and the services it provides, and by considering the social and environmental costs and benefits which cannot 
currently be measured in monetary terms.  
Prevent  the  pollution  of  land,  air,  and  water  in  the  most  cost-effective  way  so  that  the  cost  of  effective 
preventive intervention would not exceed the benefits. 
Conserve, develop, sustainably manage, and support Ethiopia’s rich and diverse cultural heritage. Raise public 
awareness and promote understanding of the essential linkages between environment and development. 
National Health Policy 
Ethiopia has a low level of health coverage even in  comparison  with  other Sub-Saharan countries. This  is 
largely  related  to  low  levels  of  income  and  widespread  poverty,  low  levels  of  education,  nutritional 
deficiencies, poor environmental conditions, and inadequate access to health services. The Government has 
therefore assigned a very high priority to significantly improve health care and, in 1998, issued a health policy 
The  Government  of  Ethiopia  has  in  1998  issued  the  national  health  policy  based  on  the  following  main 
principles:  
Promotion of disease preventive components. 
Ensuring accessibility to health care for the whole population. 
Development of appropriate capacity based on needs assessment. 
Promotion of private sector and NGO participation in the provision of health care. 
Promotion of inter-sect oral activities through a national self-reliance program. 
Democratization and decentralization of the health care system. 
Health Sector Development Plans and Strategies have been designed to implement the stated health principles 
within a defined period.  The strategies include raising the awareness of personal and environmental health 
care  and  sanitation  through  information,  education,  and  communication  (IEC)  to    control    disease    and 
promotion of primary health care through community participation.  
12 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
HIV/AIDS Policy 
The new policy came into  force in  January 2012 and will be  applied across  the board in  state and private 
organizations.  It  is  expected  to  protect  job  seekers  from  mandatory  HIV  tests,  while  facilitating  voluntary 
counseling  and  testing  and  defending  the  right  of  employees  living  with  HIV  to  medical  leave  or  job  re-
allocation. It  also provides guidelines for the establishment of an AIDS  fund to help employees cope with 
living  with  the  virus.  The  Policy  stipulates  that  employer  will  make  the  necessary  investments  to  ensure 
universal precautions in workplaces to protect employees from HIV infection and are also expected to put in 
place a post-exposure prophylaxis system for their workforce. 
 National Social Protection Policy of Ethiopia 
The main objectives of Social Protection Policy of Ethiopia are the following: 
Protect poor and vulnerable individuals, households, and communities from the adverse effects of shocks and 
destitution. 
Increase the scope of social insurance. 
Increase access to equitable and quality health, education, and social welfare services to build human capital 
thus breaking the intergenerational transmission of poverty. 
Guarantee a minimum level of employment for the long term unemployed and under-employed. 
Enhance  the  social  status  and  progressively  realize  the  social  and  economic  rights  of  the  excluded  and 
marginalized. and, 
Ensure the different levels of society are taking appropriate responsibility for the implementation of social 
protection policy. 
National Policy on Women  
In 1993, the government introduced the National Policy on Women (NPW) for Ethiopia.  Among the major 
objectives of the NPW are creating conducive environments to ensure equality between men and women so 
that women can participate in the political, social, and economic decisions of their country, and facilitating the 
necessary condition for rural women to have access to basic social services. The policy is also intended to 
create the appropriate structures within the government offices to establish and monitor the implementation of 
different gender-sensitive and equitable public policies.  Following the policy recommendation of creating an 
appropriate government structure at the various tiers of government, there are now ministries/bureaus/offices 
of women’s affairs.  At the federal level, one of the duties and responsibilities of the ministry for women, 
youth and children affairs is conducting and monitoring women’s affairs activities at the national level and 
creating an environment for the implementation of the NPW in different sectors.  At regional, zonal, Worde, 
13 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
and Kebele levels, there are respective offices (at Kebele level, usually individuals are assigned in lieu of an 
office).  On the other hand, those situated in line sectors/ministries are mandated to identify issues of gender 
gaps and develop strategies to address inequalities in the respective line ministries and their sub-sectors.  The 
Women’s Affairs Offices are formally accountable to their respective councils, many of which have women’s 
affairs or social affairs committee that are engaged in oversight activities.  The plans included steps to enhance 
rural women’s access to and control over productive resources like land. 
Labor Policy 
The  Constitution  of  Ethiopia  contains  a  full  chapter  (Chapter  3)  on  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms.  The 
fundamental rights have been grouped under the headings, “Human Rights” and “Democratic Rights”. The 
Constitution guarantees rights and freedoms, inter alia equality before the law, equal protection under the law, 
freedom  of  speech  and  expression,  freedom  of  religion,  belief  and  opinion,  freedom  of  assembly  and 
association, freedom of person, freedom against jeopardy and ex post facto laws, the right to property. 
Among these fundamental rights, a whole range of general principles of labor rights are firmly anchored in the 
constitution. The constitution provides for principles such as the right of the security of the person (Article 16 
of the Constitution), the prohibition against inhuman treatment and the abolishment of slavery and servitude 
(Article 18 (2)) and forced and compulsory labor (Article 18 (3) and (4) of the Constitution). General Freedom 
of Association is laid down in the Constitution (Article 31, “for any cause or purpose”), and specified in Article 
42, “Rights of Labor”, which reads: “Factory and service sector employees, peasants, agricultural workers, 
other rural workers, government employees below a certain level of responsibility and the nature of whose 
employment so requires, shall have the right to form associations for the purpose of improving their economic 
and employment conditions. This right shall include the right to form trade union and other associations and 
to  negotiate  with  their  employers  and  other  organizations  affecting  their  interests”.  The  Right  to  Strike  is 
explicitly mentioned in Article 42 (1) b) of the Constitution. This article, in its paragraph 2, also lays down the 
right  to  reasonable  limitation  of  working  hours,  to  rest,  to  paid  leave  and  to  healthy  and  safe  working 
environment. 
Article 35 of the Constitution deals with the rights of women, such as equality with men (Article 35(1)), in 
employment,  promotion,  pay  and  the  transfer  of  pension  entitlements  (Article  35(7),  and  42  (1)  d)).  The 
Constitution  grants  the  right  to  maternity  leave  with  full  pay,  as  well  as  prenatal  leave  with  full  pay,  in 
accordance with the provisions of the law (Article 35(4) a) and b)). 
Pursuant to Article 36 on the rights of children, “every child has the right not to be subject to exploitative 
practices, neither to be required not permitted to perform work which may be hazardous or harmful to his or 
her education, health or well-being”.   
Pastoral Policy 
14 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The 1995 constitution is the first in incorporated the issues of pastoralists for the first time in the country. It 
also formed a department in the ministry of federal affairs which coordinates and facilitates development in 
pastoral areas and set up Pastoralist Affairs Standing Committee in the parliament which oversees pastoral 
development  activities  in  the  country.  Regional  offices  in  charge  of  pastoral  development  have  been 
established in regions where pastoralism is an important production system. Different from the previous two 
regimes the current government has attempted to incorporate pastoral development in its national development 
plans  (2000-2004  and  2005-2009  five-year  plans).  Despite  lack  of  clarity  as  to  what  will  be  the  future  of 
pastoralist, the government set a national policy and strategies to direct development efforts in the pastoral 
areas of Ethiopia. It has made a stride in considering the need to develop the pastoral area and to give some 
development direction that triggers improvement of the livelihood of pastoralists. It also has made certain shift 
in  the  thinking  of  pastoral  development  from  its  predecessors  (Desta,  2002).  It  looks  like  it  has  made  a 
departure  from  its  predecessors  in  a  sense  that  it  is  focusing  more  on  the  poor  livestock  holders  (i.e., 
pastoralists) and poverty reduction than the livestock themselves. However, there is still a need to do more to 
bring pastoralists themselves to participate in the policy making processes that affect their livelihoods. The 
1995 Ethiopian Constitution provided for pastoralists the right to free land grazing and not to be displaced 
from their own lands without their wish. The constitution also provides pastoralists to receive fair prices for 
their products that would lead to improvement in their conditions of life. These are some of the articles in the 
constitution which specifically reflect the position of the government regarding pastoralist interest. In its short-
medium development policy the government admits the importance of investing in pastoralism to improve the 
food security situation of pastoralists. It also acknowledges the usefulness of the traditional pastoral knowledge 
to manage pastoral resources. However, in its long-term policy it advocates for settlement of pastoralists based 
on  development  of  irrigation.  There  is  a  need  for  more  and  open  dialogue  among  the  policy  makers, 
development facilitators, researchers, pastoral advocacy groups and the pastoral community to bring to the 
surface implications and appropriateness of the government long term policy of pastoral settlement. 
Ethiopian Water Resources Management Policy 
The overall goal of the Ethiopian Water Sector Policy is to enhance and promote all national efforts towards 
the efficient,  equitable and optimum utilization of the available water  resources of Ethiopia for significant 
socio-economic  development  on  sustainable  basis.  The  objectives  of  Water  Resources  Policy  are  the 
following: 
-Development of the water resources of the country for economic and social benefits of the people, on equitable 
and sustainable basis; 
-Allocation and apportionment of water based on comprehensive and integrated plans and optimum allocation 
principles that incorporate efficiency of use, equity of access, and sustainability of the resource; 
-Managing and combating drought as well as other associated slow on-set disasters through, inter-alia, efficient 
allocation, redistribution, transfer, storage, and efficient use of water resources; 
15 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
-Combating  and  regulating  floods  through  sustainable  mitigation,  prevention,  rehabilitation,  and  other 
practical  measures  and,  Conserving,  protecting,  and  enhancing  water  resources  and  the  overall  aquatic 
environment on sustainable basis. 
These are some of the articles in the constitution which specifically reflect the position of the government 
regarding pastoralist interest. In its short-medium development policy the government admits the importance 
of  investing  in  pastoralism  to  improve  the  food  security  situation  of  pastoralists.  It  also  acknowledges  the 
usefulness of the traditional pastoral knowledge to manage pastoral resources. However, in its long-term policy 
it advocates for settlement of pastoralists based on development of irrigation. There is a need for more and 
open dialogue among the policy makers, development facilitators, researchers, pastoral advocacy groups and 
the pastoral community to bring to the surface implications and appropriateness of the government long term 
policy of pastoral settlement. 
Land Tenure Policy 
The Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (FDRE) states that the right to ownership of 
rural and urban land, as well as all natural resources, is exclusively vested in the State and People of Ethiopia. 
Article 40 of the Constitution indicates that land is a common property of the Nations, Nationalities, and the 
People of Ethiopia, and shall not be subjected to sale or to other means of transfer.   
The Land Tenure Policy of Ethiopia strongly supports the principle that project plans must include attractive 
and sustainable resettlement strategies to the people who are going to be displaced because of the development 
plan, and they have to be fully convinced, compensated and have been able to participate in all phases of the 
project implementation.     
National Biodiversity Policy 
The National Biodiversity Policy (NBP) was established in 1998 based on a holistic ecosystem approach to 
conserve, develop and utilize the country's biodiversity resources. One of the objectives of the biodiversity 
policy is to integrate biodiversity conservation and development into Federal and Regional agricultural, health, 
industrial and overall national economic development strategies, and plans.  
Wildlife Policy  
The main policy that addresses wildlife conservation is the Wildlife Policy and Strategy of 2005 (WPS). This 
policy emphasizes development-oriented conservation. The main objective of the WPS is to create a conducive 
environment whereby the country’s wildlife and their habitats are protected and developed in a sustainable 
manner, and to enable the sector to play an important role in the economic development of the country. 
The WPS aims to protect wildlife through proper administration of wildlife protected areas, conservation of 
endemic and threatened species, and prevention of disasters and promotion of wildlife health services. The 
WPS also seeks to establish proper systems to control trafficking in wildlife and wildlife products. Some of 
16 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
the strategies to stop trafficking include establishing check points at entry and exit points and regulation of 
national and international trade in wildlife and wildlife products in accordance with national and international 
conventions. 
The WPS also seeks to promote sustainable wildlife utilization. The Policy states that the wildlife resources 
of the country will be properly utilized for sustainable tourism, hunting, trade, ranching and food. Eco-tourism 
will also be promoted in protected areas and international conventions regarding wildlife and wildlife trade 
will be implemented. The income secured from wildlife resources will be used to benefit local people and will 
be reinvested in wildlife conservation endeavors. The income from wildlife will also be used to enhance the 
overall growth of the national economy. 
The  WPS  further  anticipates  expanding  the  wildlife  sector  by  encouraging  investors  to  participate  in  the 
conservation of wildlife. It hopes to strengthen research in wildlife to protect and develop wildlife and their 
habitats.  Efforts  will be made to  develop  and implement  indigenous wildlife conservation experiences and 
knowledge in a bid to expand the wildlife sector. 
The WPS is to be implemented both at the Federal and Regional levels.  The Policy provides that  regional 
states can prepare their own wildlife policies and strategies using the WPS as the basis. Further, the relevant 
line  ministry  will  put  in  place  the  necessary  infrastructure  to  ensure  implementation  of  the  wildlife 
conservation policy and strategy and it will formulate programs. 
5.1.3. National proclamations and régulations 
Environnemental Impact Assessment Proclamation, Proclamation No 299/2002 
This proclamation establishes the requirement of an EIA procedure for all projects, and clearly describes the 
procedures  to  be  followed  by  project  proponents  with  respect  to  EIAs.    The  EIA  process  described  in  the 
proclamation underscores the presence of consultation requirements where reports are to be made public, and 
the  comments  of  the  public  (especially  of  the  project  affected  people)  are  to  be  solicited  and  taken  into 
consideration in the review process undertaken by the federal or regional environmental agency in charge of 
the  project.    On  top  of  this,  the  proclamation  makes  EIA  mandatory  for  specified  categories  of  activities 
undertaken either by the public or private sectors, or possibly, for the extension of EIA to policies, plans and 
programs in addition to projects.  The proponent of the project (whether it is public or private body) must 
prepare an EIA following the requirements specified in the legislation (article 8) and associated guidelines.  
The MoEPA (now restructured and reorganized as FEPA) or the sector Ministries delegated by it and relevant 
Regional Environmental Agencies will then review the EIA and either approve the project (with or without 
conditions) or reject it. 
The Proclamation on Environmental impact assessment requires, among other things: 
17 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Specified categories of projects to be subjected to an EIA and receive an authorization from the EPA or the 
relevant regional environmental agency prior to commencing implementation of the project; 
Licensing  agencies  to  ensure  that  the  requisite  authorization  has  been  duly  received  prior  to  issuing  an 
investment permit, a trade or operating license or a work permit to a business organization; 
EPA or the relevant regional environmental agencies may issue an exemption from carrying out an EIA in 
projects supposed to have an insignificant environmental impact. A licensing agency may suspend or cancel a 
license that has already been issued where the EPA change, or the relevant regional environmental agency 
suspends  or  cancels  environmental  authorization.  Procedures  that  need  to  be  followed  in  the  process  of 
conducting  an  EIA  are  described  in  the  Proclamation  and  further  elaborated  in  the  draft  EIA  procedural 
guideline issued in 2003 E.C. Thus, a project developer is expected to undertake a timely EIA, identifying the 
likely adverse impacts, and incorporating the means of their prevention. 
To put this Proclamation into effect the EPA has issued an EIA Directive (Directive no.1/2008) and other draft 
procedural guideline documents, which provide details of the EIA process and its requirements. 
Based on the Federal EIA Proclamation No 299/2002, many of the regional states have prepared and put in 
force their own EIA proclamations and regulations.  Some of these regional EIA regulations put stricter rules 
on the project proponents and EIA practitioners to facilitate for the preparation of EIAs with dependable and 
sufficient information that would enable sound decision making.  
Environnemental Pollution Control, Proclamation No 300/2002 
The Environmental Pollution Control Proclamation No 300/2002 primarily aims to ensure the right of citizens 
to a healthy environment and to impose obligations to protect the environment of the country from pollution.  
The proclamation is based on the principle that each citizen has the right to have a right for healthy environment 
on one hand and the obligation to protect the environment of the country on the other.  The law addresses the 
management of hazardous waste, municipal waste, and the establishment of environmental quality standards 
for air, water and soil and monitoring of pollution.  The proclamation also addresses noise and vibration as 
sources of environmental pollution and it seeks for standards and limits for it, providing for the maximum 
allowable noise level considering the settlement patterns.  In general, the Proclamation provides a basis from 
which  the  relevant  environmental  standards  applicable  to  Ethiopia  can  be  developed,  while  sanctioning 
violation of these standards as criminally punishable offences. 
Furthermore,  it  empowers  the  EPA  and/or  the  Regional  Environmental  Authority  to  assign  environmental 
inspectors  with  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  controlling  environmental  pollution.    To  ensure 
implementation of environmental standards and related requirements, inspectors belonging to the EPA, or the 
relevant regional environmental agency are empowered by the Proclamation to enter, without prior notice or 
court  order,  any  land  or  premises  at  any  time,  at  their  discretion.    Such wide  powers,  emanating  from  the 
proclamation, are given to environmental inspectors with a clear intention to protect the environment from 
18 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
pollution, to safeguard and ensure wellbeing of human health as well as to maintain the biota and the aesthetic 
value of nature. 
Public Health Proclamation No 200/2000 
Various  aspects  of  public  health  issues  including  water  quality  control,  waste  handling  and  disposal, 
availability  of  toilet  facilities  and  others  are  clearly  addressed  in  the  public  health  proclamation.  This 
proclamation critically prohibits discharging untreated liquid waste generated from septic tanks, seepage pits, 
and industries into water bodies, or water convergences. 
Forest Development, Conservation and Utilization Proclamation No. 1065/2018 
This Proclamation makes provision with respect to the development, conservation, and sustainable utilization 
of forest resources in Ethiopia. It concerns both private and public forests. It defines the powers and duties of 
in  respect  of  forestry  management  and  conservation,  any  regional  governmental  executive  organ  that  is 
responsible to implement forest development, conservation and utilization. There shall be the following types 
of  forest  ownership፡  1/  Private  Forest  or  2/  Community  Forest  or  3/  Association  Forest  4/  State  Forest. 
Obligations and rights of Private Forest Developers, Community Forest Developers and Associations of Forest 
Developers are defined. “Association forest" means a forest developed, conserved, utilized, and administered 
by associations established to develop a forest. The private developer and community developer shall, among 
other  things,  observe  the  laws  issued  in  respect  of  environmental  safety,  watershed  and  bio-diversity 
conservation, development, and utilization, shall use the acquired forest land only for the intended purpose, 
and shall respect the important local culture, custom and knowledge. Community Forest Developers shall have 
priority, as appropriate, in benefitting from the forest’s concession given by the government. 
 They  shall  share  any  benefits  generated  from  the  forest  development  as  per  the  community  by-laws. 
Associations  of  forest  developers  will  have  the  same  rights  and  incentives  as  private  forest  developers. 
State forests shall be classified as follows: 1/ productive forest 2/ protected forest 3/ preserved forest. The 
Proclamation defines the responsibilities with respect each of these types of forests. Preserved forest shall be 
protected from any human and domestic animals’ intervention except for the purpose of research, education, 
and  disaster  prevention.  The  Ministry  shall,  among  other  things,  ensure  the  implementation  of  this 
Proclamation  in  collaboration  with  the  responsible  regional  sector  develop  a  system  in  order  to  determine 
benefit  sharing  right  of  forest  products,  develop  an  early  warning,  prevention  and  control  mechanism  to 
prevent the occurrence of damage to forest resources and, upon the occurrence of damage, to take emergency 
measures  by  coordinating  regional  and  other  relevant  bodies,  and  enhance  watershed-based  forest 
development. Notwithstanding the power of each regional state to administer its forest resource in accordance 
with this Proclamation, the Federal Government may take over and administer, in cases where: a) The forest 
could not be properly developed and conserved jointly by neighboring regional states. b) It becomes necessary 
to  administer  the  forest  or  forest  land  by  the  federal  government  because  of  its  national,  regional  and 
19 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
international significance. The management of the forest shall be in a manner to generate revenues from eco-
tourism, carbon trade and other related eco-system services. 
Executive organs of the Regional States shall administer any forest land and state forest found in the regional 
state.  Supervise  and  support  the  development,  conservation,  and  administration  of  private  and  community 
forests in line with this  Proclamation. They shall also, among other things, regularly monitor and evaluate 
whether forest developers given land on which to develop forests have used the land for the intended purpose 
and  whether  the  use  of  the  land  is  in  accordance  with  the  agreed  forest  management  plan  and  "provide 
ownership for forest development based on watershed through community participation". The Government 
shall be instrumental in the conservation of forest resources and expansion of the trade in forest products and 
markets.  The  government  may  demarcate  a  forest  or  forest  land  for  the  purpose  of  carbon  trade.  The 
Government shall formulate forest development, conservation and utilization plans to allow the participation 
of  the  local  community  in  the  development  and  conservation  and  in  the  sharing  of  benefits  from  the 
development  of  state  forests.  The  government  shall  also  ensure  the  enhancement  of  urban  forests.  The 
Government, to introduce agro-forestry practices among the farming, semi-pastoral and pastoral communities, 
shall provide them with enough plant seeds and seedlings of tree species that could have different economic 
benefits. 
Expropriation of Landholdings for Public Purposes Proclamation No. 1161/2019  
The  Expropriation  of  Landholdings  for  Public  Purposes  Proclamation  No.  1161/2019  has  repealed 
proclamation No. 455/2005 and is  applicable throughout the country in rural and urban centers on matters 
relating  to  land  expropriation,  payment  of  compensation  and  resettlement  of  landholders  whose  land  is 
expropriated for public purpose.  The Proclamation provides  responsibilities of landholder with respect to 
handing over of the land that is subject to expropriation order. The land requesting body, on the other hand, is 
required to submit to the city or Worde administration decision (of expropriation) that shows the size and the 
exact location of the land to be expropriated at least one year before the commencement of the project and pay 
the money required for compensation and resettlement (as applicable) to the City or Worde administration. 
Handover of land takes over only after payments are made to the landholders. 
Landholders whose landholdings are expropriated are entitled for property compensation and displacement 
compensation.  Property  compensation  is  a  compensation  paid  for  the  property  on  the  land  and  permanent 
improvement  made  on  the  land.  In  case  of  rural  landholdings,  displacement  compensation  constitutes 
substitute land where available and compensation for income. 
Payment of Compensation Regulation No 135/2007  
The regulation is all about the payment of compensation for property situated on land holdings expropriated 
for public purposes.  It is issued by the Council of Ministers for the purpose of not only paying compensation 
but also to assist displaced persons to restore their livelihood. It narrates clear procedures for implementation 
20 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
of proclamation No 455/2005, for compensation payment for property situated on expropriated land for public 
benefit. 
Provisions related to Gender Based Violence (GBV) 
Gender Based Violence is among the major challenges to human dignity and is a violation of women’s rights 
as human beings. This necessitated the international community to come up with legal instruments to address 
the problem that are coherent with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The major legal instruments 
and  strategies  which  recognized  and  addressed  GBV  are  Convention  on  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of 
Discrimination  against  Women  (CEDAW),  Declaration  on  the  Elimination  of  Violence  against  Women 
(DEVAW), Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and the SDGs Goal 5.  
In line with the international legal instruments, the Ethiopian Constitution, which is the supreme law of the 
land,  devotes  over  a  quarter  of  its  provisions  to  human  rights  in  which  women  and  children’s  rights  are 
guaranteed.  The  Criminal  Code  of  Ethiopia  also  hosts  several  provisions,  which  criminalize  GBV  and  its 
different  forms.  Article  561  to  570  criminalizes  harmful  traditional  practices,  including  domestic  violence 
(564), and female circumcision (565, 566). On the other hand, the Ethiopian Criminal Codes do not adequately 
address SH. Until now, victims have no legal recourse to redress either the short or long-term consequences 
of the acts perpetrated against them which leave sexual harassment, go unreported. Positively, Proclamation 
No. 1064/2017 (2017) on federal civil not servants and the new labor proclamation no. 1161/2019 provides 
for the prohibition of sexual harassment. 
Proclamation on Cultural Heritage Proclamation No. 209/2000 
Cultural  or  archaeological  heritage  may  be  damaged  or  lost  during  excavations  and  ensuing  public  work 
activities. In addition, chance finds of cultural heritage during excavations would be at risk of loss, unless due 
measures are taken to protect and save this heritage. According to Article 41 of Proclamation No. 209/2000 
on research and conservation of cultural heritage the measures that should be taken during chance finding of 
heritages (i.e. Fortuitous Discovery of Cultural Heritage) are the following: 
Any  person  who  discovers  any  Cultural  Heritage  during  an  excavation  connected  to  mining  explorations, 
building works, road construction or other similar activities or during any other fortuitous event, shall forthwith 
report same to the Authority, and shall protect and keep same intact, until the Authority takes delivery thereof. 
'The Authority' shall, upon receipt of a report submitted pursuant to Sub-Article (I) hereof, take all appropriate 
measures to examine, take delivery of, and register the Cultural Heritage so discovered. 
Where the Authority fails to take appropriate measures within five months in accordance with Sub- Article (2) 
of this Article, the 'person who has discovered the Cultural Heritage may be released from his responsibility 
by submitting, a written, notification with a full description of the situation to the regional government official. 
. 
21 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The Authority shall ensure that the appropriate reward is granted to the person who has handed over a Cultural 
Heritage discovered fortuitously in accordance with sub-Articles (I) and (2) of this Article such person shall 
be entitled to reimbursement of expenses, if any, incurred while discharging his duties under this Article. 
5.1.4. Environmental Management Guidelines 
The  EPA  has  issued  some  guidelines  and  standards  which  are  endorsed  by  the  National  Environmental 
Council.  The  purpose  of  these  guidelines  and  directives  is  to  ensure  that development  projects  integrate  
environmental  considerations in  the  planning  process  as  a precondition  for  their  approval.  These include 
Directive No.1/2008, which was issued to determine projects subject to an EIA. According to this directive, 
the EIA Proclamation is to be applied to the types of projects listed under the directive. The types of projects 
subject to EIA in the urban sector include roads, solid waste facilities, WSS projects and any  other project 
planned to be implemented in or near areas designated as protected. In a similar manner it is indicated that the 
National Environmental Council has endorsed certain effluent standards for specified industrial sectors. The 
endorsed effluent standards for the specified 12 industrial sectors are posted on the official website of the EPA 
but are not officially published in the same way as directive no.1/2008. As a result, these are widely considered 
as draft effluent standards for Ethiopia. 
The following three draft  environmental guidelines  are prepared by  EPA  and being used with  intention of 
protecting the general environment along with implementation of any developmental activities. 
The following three draft  environmental guidelines are prepared  by  EPA  and being used with  intention of 
protecting the general environment along with implementation of any developmental activities (see Table 5.1): 
Table5. 1 Environmental Guidelines prepared by EPA 
EIA Procedural Guideline (draft), 
November 2003 
Outlines the screening, review and approval process for 
development projects in Ethiopia and defines the criteria for 
undertaking an EIA. According to this EIA procedural guideline, 
projects are categorized into three schedules: 
Schedule 1:-  This  category  includes  projects  that  may  have  
adverse  and  significant environmental impacts thus requiring a full 
EIA study. 
Schedule 2: - Projects whose type, scale or other relevant 
characteristics have potential to cause some significant 
environmental impacts but are not likely to warrant a full EIA study 
fall under this group. 
Schedule 3:- Projects which would have no impact and do not 
require an EIA. 
However, projects situated in an environmentally sensitive areas 
such as land prone to erosion. desertification. areas of historic or 
archaeological interest. important landscape. religiously important 
22 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Guideline for Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (draft), 
May 2004 
EIA Guideline, May 2000 
area, etc. will fall under Schedule I irrespective of the nature of the 
project.  
Outlines the fundamental contents that need to be featured while 
preparing an ESCMP for proposed development projects in Ethiopia 
and provides template forms to be used for such purposes.  The 
guideline also provides guidance on the preparation of institutional 
arrangements for implementation of ESCMPs. 
The EIA guideline document provides essential information 
covering the following elements: 
Environmental Assessment and Management in Ethiopia, 
Environmental Impact Assessment Process, 
Standards and Guidelines, 
Issues for sector EIA in Ethiopia covering agriculture, industry, 
transport, mining, dams and  reservoirs,  tanneries,  textiles,  
hydropower  generation,  irrigation  projects  and resettlement. 
5.1.5.  Relevant and applicable International Conventions and protocols ratified by 
Ethiopia 
Ethiopia has ratified several international/multilateral environmental conventions and protocols. Many of the 
principles  and  provisions  in  those  conventions  and  protocols  have  been  addressed  in  the  national 
environmental policies and regulations. Accordingly, Article 9(4) of the constitution of the Federal Democratic 
Republic of Ethiopia states that once an international agreement is ratified it will be automatically becoming 
an integral part of the law of the land. 
The following international/multilateral environmental conventions and protocols are relevant to the PACT 
Project. 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
The  convention  provides  a  framework  for  international  cooperation  to  combat  climate  change  by  limiting 
average  global  temperature  increases  and  the  resulting  climate  change  and  coping  with  its  impacts.  The 
objective of this convention is to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that will 
prevent dangerous interference with the climate system. Ethiopia ratified this convention in May 2/1994.  
Paris Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
The Paris agreement is a legally binding agreement on climate change, and it was ratified by Ethiopia in March 
2017. The agreement’s goal is to limit global warming to well below 1.5 degree Celsius, compared to pre-
industrial era. The Paris Agreement is a landmark in the multilateral climate change process because, for the 
23 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
first time, a binding agreement that brings all nations into a common cause to undertake ambitious efforts to 
combat climate change and adapt to its effects. 
Ethiopia's updated NDC and Climate Resilient Green Economy Strategy commit to reduce emissions by 68.8% 
compared  to  BAU  projections  by  2030,  including  14%  reductions  unconditionally  committed  and  54.8% 
contingent  on  international  support.  The  updated  NDC  also  includes  40  prioritized  adaptation  actions  that 
derive from the NAP and align with the 10-year national development plan. The updated NDC is based on a 
robust set of technical information, policy review and data, significantly improving the quality and ambition 
of Ethiopia's commitment to the Paris Agreement. It also forms the basis for updating the CRGE, Ethiopia's 
primary strategy for climate action. The updated NDC is also integrated to the 10-year development plan - 
Ethiopia's  first  long  term  development  strategy  -  with  support  from  the  World  Bank,  GIZ  and  the  World 
Resources Institute. The Partnership started engagement with Ethiopia in 2019, with a request for support to 
strengthen  MRV  systems  and  develop  a  knowledge  management  tool  to  centralize  reporting  and  provide 
information  on  Ethiopia's  implementation  progress  and  NDC  targets.  Moving  forward,  Ethiopia  is  now 
developing an implementation plan for the NDC, with support from the NDC Partnership, UNDP and other 
partners supporting Ethiopia. To support the green recovery planning process from COVID-19, Ethiopia is 
receiving support from GIZ for an economic advisor to the Ministry of Planning and Development, formed in 
late  2021.  The  Government's  priorities  are  largely  focused  on  resource  mobilization  through  project 
preparation, strengthening monitoring and reporting systems and coordinating support for implementation at 
the sector and sub-national levels. 
The United Nations Conventions to Combat Desertification 
The objective of the convention is to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of droughts in countries 
experiencing serious drought and desertification, particularly in Africa. Ethiopia has ratified the convention 
through its proclamation No. 80/1997.  
Convention on Biological Diversity 
The  convention  on  biological  diversity  has  three  goals.  These  are  (i)  conservation  of  biodiversity,  (ii) 
sustainable use of the components of biodiversity, and (iii) fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising 
from the use of genetic resources. Ethiopia ratified the convention in 1994. 
Cartagena Protocol on Bio-safety to the Convention on Biological Diversity 
The protocol protects biological diversity from the potential risk of genetically modified organisms resulting 
from  modern  biotechnology.  It  aims  to  ensure  the  safe  handling.  Transport  and  use  of  living  modified 
organisms  (LMOs)  are  resulting  from  modern  biotechnology  that  may  have  adverse  effects  on  biological 
diversity, taking also into account risks to human health. Ethiopia ratified the protocol in Oct 2003. 
24 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage 
Each  State  party  of  the  convention  recognizes  that  the  duty  of  ensuring  the  identification,  protection, 
conservation, presentation, and transmission to future generations of cultural and natural heritages belongs 
primarily to that State. .Ethiopia ratified the convention on 23 November 1972. 
Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 (ILO - No. 155) 
Article 4 of the convention stated that each member shall formulate, implement, and periodically review a 
coherent national policy on occupational safety, occupational health, and the working environment with the 
aim of the policy being to prevent accidents and injury to health arising out of, linked with or occurring in the 
course  of  work,  by  minimizing,  so  far  as  is  reasonably  practicable,  the  causes  of  hazards  inherent  in  the 
working environment. Ethiopia ratified this convention in Jan 1991. 
Ratified ILO Conventions: 
Ethiopia has become member of ILO in 28 September 1923. The country has ratified 23 conventions of 
which 22 are in force. The conventions are: 
  9 fundamental:  C029 - Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), C087 - Freedom of Association 
and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (No. 87), C098 - Right to Organise and 
Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No. 98), C100 - Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951 
(No. 100), C105 - Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105), C111 - Discrimination 
(Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111), C138 - Minimum Age Convention, 
1973 (No. 138), C155 - Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 (No. 155), C182 - Worst 
Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182) 
  1 governance: C144 - Tripartite Consultation (International Labour Standards) Convention, 1976 
(No. 144) and  
  13  technical  Conventions:  C002 -  Unemployment  Convention,  1919  (No. 2),  C011 -  Right  of 
Association  (Agriculture)  Convention,  1921  (No. 11),  C014 -  Weekly  Rest  (Industry)  Convention, 
1921  (No. 14),  C080 -  Final  Articles  Revision  Convention,  1946  (No. 80),  C088 -  Employment 
Service Convention, 1948 (No. 88), C106 - Weekly Rest (Commerce and Offices) Convention, 1957 
(No. 106), C116 - Final Articles Revision Convention, 1961 (No. 116), C156 - Workers with Family 
Responsibilities Convention, 1981 (No. 156), C158 - Termination of Employment Convention, 1982 
(No. 158), C159 - Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (Disabled Persons) Convention, 1983 
(No. 159), C181 - Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 (No. 181), MLC, 2006 - Maritime 
Labour Convention, 2006 (MLC, 2006) 
25 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Relevance of PACT implementation to the available national policy and legal frameworks as well as 
International Conventions  
Policy and Legal 
framework  
Environmental Policy of 
Ethiopia 
requirement 
Relevance to PACT 
  Sustainable use of natural resources 
  Prevent  the  pollution  of  land,  air,  and 
PACT implementation requires use 
of natural resources such as water 
water 
National Health Policy 
Promotion of disease preventive 
components 
National Policy on 
Women  
Creating conducive environments to ensure 
equality between men and women  
Labour Policy, 
proclamation and 
relevant articles of the 
constitution  
Ratified ILO 
Conventions 
  Childs should not subject to exploitative 
practices, 
 
right of the security of the person 
 
freedom of assembly and association 
  Sets minimum age for young workers at 
14 years  
 
Pastoral Policy 
  Pastoral communities should be engaged in 
policy that affects their livelihood 
  The need to exploit the traditional pastoral 
knowledge to manage pastoral resources 
Water Resources 
Management Policy 
  The  need  of  national  efforts  towards  the 
efficient, equitable and optimum utilization 
of the available water resources 
  Allocation  and  apportionment  of  water 
based  on  comprehensive  and  integrated 
plans  and  optimum  allocation  principles 
that incorporate efficiency of use, equity of 
access, and sustainability of the resource 
Some activities such as small-scale 
irrigation may cause pollution of 
environmental media  
Some activities may create 
conducive environment for the 
prevalence of diseases such as 
Malaria 
PACT will reach out to 150,000 HHs 
and need to ensure adequate 
representation of women 
Constructions and farm activities 
should consider labour rights and due 
attention to under age labour   
Pastoral communities should be 
consulted during preparation of 
Landscape Development and 
investment plans 
Investments on small scale irrigation 
schemes and rainfed agriculture 
should ensure efficient and equitable 
use of water by communities  
26 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Land Tenure Policy 
  Project  plans  must  include  attractive  and 
sustainable  resettlement  strategies  to  the 
people  who  are  going  to  be  displaced 
because of the development plan, and they 
have  to  be  fully  convinced,  compensated 
and  have  been  able  to  participate  in  all 
phases of the project implementation 
  Resettlement Action Framework 
should be prepared and 
implemented accordingly  
  Due attention to livelihood 
restoration  
Environnemental Impact 
Assessment  
Proclamation, 
Proclamation No 
299/2002 
  Establishes  the  requirement  of  an  EIA 
procedure  for  all  projects,  and  clearly 
describes the procedures to be followed by 
project proponents with respect to EIAs 
  Specified  categories  of  projects  to  be 
EIA Procedural 
Guideline (draft), 
November 2003 
subjected to an EIA  
  The need to receive an authorization from 
the  EPA  or 
regional 
the 
environmental agency prior to commencing 
implementation of the project 
relevant 
Small scale irrigation schemes and 
other construction related sub-
projects/activities may have advice 
environmental and social impacts 
and hence should be subjected the 
national EIA process 
  Outlines the screening, review and approval 
in 
the  criteria  for 
for  development  projects 
process 
Ethiopia  and  defines 
undertaking an EIA 
Environnemental 
Pollution Control, 
Proclamation No 
300/2002 
  The  law  addresses  the  management  of 
hazardous waste, municipal waste, and the 
establishment  of  environmental  quality 
standards  for  air,  water  and  soil  and 
monitoring of pollution.   
It  also  addresses  noise  and  vibration  as 
sources of environmental pollution.   
 
Construction and implementation of 
SSI may cause pollution of 
environmental media and hence 
should comply to the national 
standard 
Forest Development, 
Conservation and 
Utilization Proclamation 
No. 1065/2018 
  Defines  powers  and  duties  for  forestry 
management and conservation,  
  Defines  forest  ownership  as:  (i)  Private 
(iii) 
Forest, 
Association Forest and (iv) State Forest.  
(ii)  Community  Forest, 
PACT has huge forestry/agro-
forestry activities and there should be 
collaboration with responsible 
organizations at all level.   
27 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Expropriation of 
Landholdings for Public 
Purposes Proclamation 
No. 1161/2019  
and 
Payment of 
Compensation 
Regulation No 135/2007  
 
Indicates responsibilities of landholder with 
respect to handing over of the land that is 
subject to expropriation order.  
  The  land  requesting  body  is  required  to 
submit to the city or Worde administration 
decision  (of  expropriation)  that  shows  the 
size and the exact location of the land to be 
expropriated  at  least  one  year  before  the 
commencement of the project  
  Payment  required  for  compensation  and 
resettlement  
  Handover  of  land  only  after  payments  are 
made to the landholders 
Irrigation schemes are land intensive 
and there might be paramagnet 
and/or temporary displacements.  
Sub-projects/activities should fully 
comply with these laws.  
  Landholders  whose 
landholdings 
are 
expropriated  are  entitled  for  property 
displacement 
and 
compensation 
compensation 
Relevant Institutions 
The discussions hereunder summarize the roles and responsibilities of institutions involved in the management 
of environment in one way or another in Ethiopia.  
Ministry of Women, Children and Youth 
The Ministry of Women, Children and Youth shall have the powers and duties to:  
  Design  strategic  plan  to  ensure  that  opportunities  are  created  for  women  and  youth  to  actively 
participate in political, economic, and social affairs of the country and implement same.  
  Lead and support activities of awareness creation and movement on the rights of women and children.  
  Ensure  that  due  attention  is  given  to  assign  women  for  decision-making  positions  in  various 
Government organs.  
  Devise  means  for  the  proper  application  of  women's  right  to  affirmative  action  guaranteed  at  the 
national level and follow up the implementation of same.  
  Undertake  studies  to  identify  discriminatory  practices  affecting  women,  facilitate  the  creation  of 
conditions for the elimination of such practices, and follow up their implementation. 
28 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
  Design  strategies  to  effectively  prevent  and  take  measures  against  gender-based  violence  against 
women.  Facilitate  the  setting  up  centers  for  provision  of  holistic  health,  psychological,  legal  and 
rehabilitation services for women who were victims of violence and follow up the implementation of 
same.  
  Encourage and support women and youth to be organized, based on their interests and needs, with a 
view to defending their rights and solving their problems.  
 
In  collaboration  with  the  relevant  organs,  conduct  studies  to  identify  areas  of  job  opportunities  for 
women  and  youth.  design  programs  and  projects  so  women  and  youth  can  benefit  from  these 
opportunities by organizing themselves into cooperative associations.  
  Facilitate  the  setting  up  of  development  funds  to  create  job  opportunities  for  and  ensure  economic 
benefits to women and youth.  
  Work in collaboration with relevant organs to support women and youth living in poverty to improve 
their  livelihoods  through  improving  saving  culture,  using  alternative  energy  sources  and  use  other 
appropriate technology.  
  Design techniques to prevent harmful practices that cause harm to women and children. implement 
same upon approval.  
  Coordinate actions of all stakeholders to protect the rights and well-being of children.  
  Coordinate  actions  of  all  stakeholders  to  exert  a  concerted  effort  towards  providing  the  proper 
awareness-creation and training on good parenting, character building, support, care and rehabilitation 
for parents and caretakers.  
  Design strategies to ensure local options of care and support, including adoption, for orphaned children 
and children exposed to risk due to various reasons. implement same upon approval.  
  Follow up care taking of children adopted abroad.  
  Design strategies to ensure that government and private actors carry out their obligations to guarantee 
that children are beneficiaries of the development of the country. follow up implementation of same.  
 
In  collaboration  with  the  relevant  regional  government  organs  and  other  relevant  bodies,  design 
techniques necessary to implement the constitutional protection given to the family as the fundamental 
unit of society. follow up implementation of same.  
29 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
  Design strategies to follow up and regulate that the preparation of policies, legislations, development 
programs and projects by Federal Government organs consider the issues of women, children, and the 
youth. 
  Conclude international treaties relating to women and children in accordance with law and, follow up 
the implementation of same and submit reports to the concerned bodies. 
  Collect, compile, and disseminate to relevant stakeholders’ information on the objective realities of 
women, children, and the youth.  
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
The Ministry of Agriculture shall have the powers and duties to:  
  Follow up and provide support for the establishment of rural land management and sustainable grazing 
land utilization systems and organize a national data base on same. 
  Facilitate the establishment of accessible rural finance system by the relevant finance institutions to 
farmers, pastoralists, and semi-pastoralists.  
  Foster basin developments on water bodies in pastoral and semi-pastoral areas. establish natural and 
irrigated pasture utilization system and  foster small-scale irrigation developments.  
  Establish and run training centers that assist to the enhancement of agricultural development and the 
improvement of rural technologies. 
  Coordinate activities relating to food security and job creation schemes.  
  Follow  up  the  expansion  of  basin  developments,  infrastructure,  and  fodder  banks  necessary  for 
livestock development. 
 
In collaboration with the relevant organs, formulate techniques for a successful urban agriculture, and 
a procedure for their implementation.  
  Promote  the  expansion  of  effective  technologies,  agricultural  extension,  trainings,  and  capacity 
building services that help to improve production and productivity and quality of crops, livestock and 
fishery, and reduce wastages.  
  Formulate national livestock breeding policy, strategy, and program.  
  Establish a system that ensures access to quality veterinary services to improve the prevention and -
timely  control  of  animal  and  fish  diseases.  cause  the  building  of  animal  health  laboratories  in  the 
country and build their capacity.  
30 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
  Establish early warning system in respect of current situations that affect crop production, and livestock 
and fishery development.  
  Build capacity for supplying, distributing, and marketing of inputs for crop production, livestock, and 
fishery  development  in  order  to  ensure  reliable  supply  of  produce  and  establish  and  follow  up  the 
implementation of a quality control system and provide technical support to improve supply of products 
through the creation of market linkage.  
  Establish a system to ensure that all crop, livestock, fish, livestock, and fish products marketed maintain 
the required quality. follow up the implementation of such system and provide technical support to 
create modern production systems and market linkages.  
  By devise strategy to promote large agricultural investments creating effective collaboration with the 
relevant  organs,  ensure  that  agricultural  investment  activities  are  undertaken  properly.  Work  in 
coordination with relevant Federal Government and Regional State bodies to strengthen the linkage 
between agriculture and industry.  
  Develop a system that ensures integration and coordination of stake holders engaged in crop production 
and livestock development research. 
  Ensure the proper execution of pesticide and animal feed quality control, and veterinary administration 
and regulatory activities. 
  Establish a system that enables the prevention of plant and animal diseases. Lead research and studies 
necessary  to  this  end.  Conduct  disease-control  activities  in  respect  of  plants,  cereals,  animals,  and 
animal products crossing Ethiopia's border. Ensure the proper execution of functions relating to coffee 
and tea development and marketing activities.  
  Promote the expansion and strengthening of agricultural cooperatives. 
  Establish a mechanism for the implementation of soil erosion prevention strategies by identifying its 
causes.  design  mechanisms  for  the  improvement  of  soil  fertility,  protection  of  soil  health,  and  for 
establishing national soil database. 
  Cause  the  expansion  of  integrated  farming  to  ensure  sustainable  development  and  maintenance  of 
natural resources.  
  Coordinate,  in  collaboration  with  concerned  organs,  activities  that  enable  to  mitigate  drought 
vulnerability.  
  Determine conditions for the issuance of certificates that may be required by companies engaged in 
agricultural investment 
31 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Ministry of Irrigation and Low Lands 
Carry  out  feasibility  and  design  of  irrigation  projects  and  supervision  to  ensure  projects  are  implanted 
according to  feasibility study and design; 
  Scale up  small scale irrigation schemes project  
  Provide technical assistance to the small medium and large-scale irrigation projects;  
Federal Environmental Protection Authority 
As  per  proclamation  916/2015,  the  Federal  Environmental  Protection  Authority  is  bestowed  among  others 
with the powers and duties listed below.  
  Coordinate activities to ensure that the environmental objectives provided under the Constitution and 
the basic principles set out in the Environmental Policy of the Country are realized. 
  Establish a system for evaluating and decision making, in accordance with the Environmental Impact 
Assessment  Proclamation,  the  impacts  of  implementation  of  investment  programs  and  projects  on 
environment prior to approvals of their implementation by the concerned sectoral licensing organ or 
the concerned regional organ. 
  Coordinate actions on soliciting the resources required for building a climate resilient green economy 
in  all  sectors  and  at  all  regional  levels.  as  well  as  provide  capacity  building  support  and  advisory 
services. 
  Establish  an  environmental  information  system  that  promotes  efficiency  in  environmental  data 
collection, management, and use. 
  Enforcing and ensuring compliance to the ESIA proclamation which currently is being implemented 
through delegated authority provided to sector ministries. 
  Reviewing ESIAs and monitoring the implementation of ESIA recommendations which is also in part 
being implemented through delegated authority provided to sector ministries. 
  Regulating environmental compliance and developing legal instruments that ensure the protection of 
the environment. 
  Ensuring that environmental concerns are mainstreamed into sector activities. and 
  Coordinating,  advising,  assessing,  monitoring,  and  reporting  on  environment-related  aspects  and 
activities 
32 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
National Meteorology Agency (NMA) 
In accordance with proclamation No. 201/1980 the National Meteorology Agency has the following powers 
and duties to: 
  Establish  and  operate  a  national  net-work  of  meteorological  stations  designed  to  represent  various 
climatic  regions  of  Ethiopia  and  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  various  national  development  plans  and 
activates. 
  Collecting all meteorological data. 
  Exchange meteorological data in accordance with international agreements to which Ethiopia is a party. 
  Establish  and  operate  communication  systems,  in  accordance  with  the  law  for  the  collection  and 
dissemination of meteorological data. 
  Publish and disseminate analyzed and interpreted meteorological data and meteorological forecasts. 
  Give  advance  warning  on  adverse  weather  conditions  and  disseminate  advice  and  educational 
information through the mass media and provide, upon request meteorological services to any person. 
  Collect and centrally administer, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 5 of this proclamation, any 
meteorological data collected by any person in the country. 
  Control air pollution and maintain the natural balance of the air in the country. 
Mandates of Environment Office at the regional level 
The environmental Offices of the Regional States is to evaluate environmental performance of projects within 
their respective regions.  
  Duties and responsibilities of environment offices include the following:  
  Enforcing and ensuring compliance to the ESIA proclamation which currently is being implemented. 
  Reviewing ESIAs and monitoring the implementation of ESCMP recommendations.  
  Regulating environmental compliance monitoring to ensure the protection of the environment. 
  Ensuring that environmental concerns are mainstreamed into sector activities.  
  Coordinating,  advising,  assessing,  monitoring,  and  reporting  on  environment-related  aspects  and 
activities  
33 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
5.2.  Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP, updated in 
2021) 
Social, environmental and climate sustainability is critical for achieving IFAD’s mandate. Projects 
and Programs that foster social, environmental and climate sustainability  rank among the Fund’s 
highest operational priorities. To meet these objectives, in 2021 IFAD has updated its 2017 Social, 
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). This updated edition of SECAP lays out 
an improved framework and process for managing risks and impacts and integrating mainstreaming 
priorities  into  new  IFAD-supported  investments.  SECAP  will:  (i)  help  IFAD  to  identify  social, 
environmental and climate risks and impacts,  and  their  significance,  and  determine  the  level  of 
risk  management  required  to  address  the  risks  and  impacts  associated  with  IFAD-supported 
investments  and global and regional grant-funded Programs. (ii) help  to  identify opportunities  to 
mainstream  climate  resilience,  environmental  sustainability,  nutrition,  gender  equality  and  the 
empowerment of women, youth and other vulnerable groups into IFAD strategies and programming. 
(iii) Support borrowers/recipients/partners and IFAD in improving decision-making and promoting 
the sustainability of project and Program outcomes through  ongoing  stakeholder  engagement.  (iv) 
Assist  borrowers/recipients/partners  in  fulfilling  their  own  international  and  national  social, 
environmental and climate commitments. (v) Ensure that IFAD’s practices are aligned with its own 
policies  and  the  procedures  of  other  multilateral  financial  institutions  and  (vi)  enable  IFAD  to 
continue accessing environmental and climate financing. 
IFAD’s Environmental and Social Standards 
IFAD’s Environmental and Social Standards comprise key requirements for the environmental and 
social  sustainability  of  projects.  The  table  below  summarizes  IFAD’s  Environmental  and  Social 
Standards. 
Table5. 2 Summery IFAD’s Environmental and Social Standard 
Environmental 
and Social 
Standards 
Standard 1: 
Biodiversity 
conservation 
Objectives 
Scope of Application 
-Maintain and conserve 
biodiversity. 
-Ensure the fair and equitable 
sharing of benefits from the 
utilization of genetic resources. 
-Respect, preserve, maintain, and 
encourage knowledge, 
innovations and practices of 
indigenous peoples and local 
communities relevant for the 
This  Standard  and  its  associated  requirements 
apply to all IFAD-supported projects that are: 
-Located in modified, natural or critical habitats. 
-Located  in  areas  providing  ecosystem  services 
upon  which  project  stakeholders  depend  for 
livelihoods  or  primary 
survival,  sustenance, 
income, or that are used for sustaining the project. 
-Extracting  renewable  natural  resources, 
i.e. 
34 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Environmental 
and Social 
Standards 
Objectives 
Scope of Application 
Standard 2: 
Resource 
efficiency and 
pollution 
prevention 
conservation and sustainable use 
of biodiversity, and their 
customary use of biological 
resources. and 
-Adopt a precautionary approach 
to natural resource conservation 
and management to ensure 
opportunities for environmentally 
sustainable development. 
This  standard is  found  relevant to 
the PACT Project  
Avoid, minimize, and manage the 
risks and impacts associated with 
hazardous substances and 
materials, including pesticides. 
Avoid or minimize project-related 
emissions of short- and long-lived 
climate pollutants. 
Promote more sustainable use of 
resources, including energy, land 
and water. and 
Identify opportunities for 
improving resource efficiency. 
This Standard applies to any 
IFAD-supported projects that: 
-Significantly consume or cause 
consumption of water, energy or 
other resources. 
-Aim to improve existing waste-
management practices. 
-Generate or cause generation of 
solid, liquid or gaseous waste or 
emissions. or 
-Use, cause the use of, or manage 
the use, storage or disposal of 
hazardous materials and 
projects  that  include  the  generation  of  living 
forestry, 
natural 
commercial  harvesting,  agriculture,  livestock, 
fisheries, aquaculture). or 
(e.g.  plantation 
resources 
-Using  and  commercializing  an 
knowledge system. 
indigenous 
This Standard also applies to situations where the 
livelihoods  of  affected  communities  –including 
those of indigenous peoples – whose access to or 
use  of  biodiversity,  ecosystem  services  or  living 
natural  resources  may  be  affected  by  project 
activities. 
This Standard applies to any IFAD-supported 
projects that: 
-Significantly  consume  or  cause  consumption  of 
water, energy or other resources. 
-Aim  to  improve  existing  waste-management 
practices. 
-Generate  or  cause  generation  of  solid,  liquid  or 
gaseous waste or emissions. or 
-Use, cause the use of, or manage the use, storage 
or disposal of hazardous materials and chemicals, 
including pesticides and fertilizers. 
35 
Environmental 
and Social 
Standards 
Standard 3: 
Cultural 
heritage 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Objectives 
Scope of Application 
chemicals, including pesticides 
and fertilizers 
This  standard is  found  relevant to 
the PACT Project 
-Preserve and safeguard cultural 
heritage. 
-Ensure that active efforts are 
made to prevent IFAD-supported 
projects from altering, damaging, 
or removing any tangible or 
intangible cultural heritage. 
-Promote the equitable sharing of 
benefits from the use of cultural 
heritage. and 
-Promote meaningful consultation 
on matters related to cultural 
heritage. 
This  standard is  found  relevant to 
the PACT Project 
Tangible cultural heritage may be defined as 
movable or immovable objects, sites, structures, 
groups of structures, natural features and 
landscapes that have archaeological, historical, 
religious, spiritual, or other cultural significance. 
Tangible cultural heritage can be found almost 
anywhere: in urban or rural settings, above or 
below ground, and even under water. Tangible 
cultural heritage derives its significance from 
various sources, whether as part of a 
community’s cultural identity and heritage, as 
assets for economic or social development, or as 
a source of valuable scientific or historical 
information. As a result, its cultural significance 
may be local, provincial, national, or even 
international. 
Intangible cultural heritage can be defined as 
practices, representations, expressions, 
knowledge, skills, and associated instruments, 
objects, artifacts, and cultural spaces, that 
communities and groups recognize as part of 
their cultural heritage. Intangible heritage is 
transmitted from generation to generation, and 
constantly recreated in response to changes in 
their environment, their interaction with nature 
and their history. 
The Standard applies to projects that may create 
risks and/or result in adverse impacts on cultural 
heritage, including those that may be in – or in 
the vicinity of – a cultural heritage site, or that 
propose to utilize tangible or intangible forms of 
cultural heritage for commercial or other 
purposes. 
IFAD is committed to identifying and protecting 
cultural heritage that borrowers/ 
recipients/partners could impact upon. Even 
smallholder agriculture and rural development 
36 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Environmental 
and Social 
Standards 
Objectives 
Scope of Application 
projects on marginal lands may, depending on 
their location, involve resources of 
archaeological (e.g., ancient ruins, monuments, 
prehistoric caves), historical (e.g., original 
structures, architectural works, historic sites), 
religious (e.g., churches, mosques, temples, 
sacred grounds) or cultural (e.g., cemeteries, 
traditional meeting places) significance. Of 
particular concern are IFAD projects: (i) 
involving significant excavations, demolition, 
movement of earth, flooding, or other 
environmental changes and (ii) located in – or in 
the vicinity of – cultural heritage sites. IFAD will 
use the SECAP to ensure that any cultural 
heritage site involved in or potentially affected 
by an IFAD-supported project is identified and 
adequately protected. 
Consistent with international best practices49 and 
with  respect  for  the  right  of  self-determination, 
IFAD’s  Policy  on  Engagement  with  Indigenous 
Peoples defines indigenous peoples based on the 
following criteria: 
Priority in time, with respect to occupation and 
use of a specific territory. 
The voluntary perpetuation of cultural 
distinctiveness, which may include aspects of 
language, social organization, religion and 
spiritual values, modes of production, laws, and 
institutions. 
Self-identification, as well as recognition by 
other groups, or by state authorities, as a distinct 
collectivity. and 
An experience of subjugation, marginalization, 
dispossession, exclusion, or discrimination 
Standard 4: 
Indigenous 
peoples 
indigenous  peoples 
Support 
to 
determine  priorities  and  strategies 
for  exercising 
to 
development. 
right 
their 
that  each  project 
is 
Ensure 
designed 
in  partnership  with 
indigenous peoples and  with their 
full,  effective  and  meaningful 
consultation, leading to FPIC. 
Ensure  that  indigenous  peoples 
obtain  fair  and  equitable  benefits 
and  opportunities  from  project-
supported activities in a culturally 
appropriate  and  inclusive manner. 
and 
Recognize and respect the rights of 
indigenous  peoples  to  the  lands, 
and  other 
territories,  waters 
resources 
have 
traditionally owned, used or relied 
upon. 
they 
that 
This  standard is  found  relevant to 
the PACT Project 
37 
Environmental 
and Social 
Standards 
Standard 5: 
Labor and 
working 
conditions 
Standard 6: 
Community 
health and 
safety 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Objectives 
Scope of Application 
Promote  direct  action  to  foster 
decent rural employment. 
Promote, 
realize 
respect,  and 
fundamental  principles  and  rights  
by: 
Preventing  discrimination 
and 
promoting  equal  opportunities  for 
workers. 
Supporting freedom of association 
and 
collective 
the 
bargaining. and 
right 
to 
Preventing  the  use  of  child  labor 
and forced labor. 
Protect and promote the safety and 
health of workers. 
Ensure  that  projects  comply  with 
national  employment  and  labor 
laws, 
international 
commitments. 
and 
Leave no one behind by 
protecting and supporting workers 
in disadvantaged and vulnerable 
situations, including women (e.g., 
maternity protection), young 
workers, migrant workers, 
workers in the informal economy 
and workers with disabilities. 
This standard is found relevant to 
the PACT Project 
construction 
Ensure  quality  and  safety  in  the 
design 
of 
and 
programming-related 
infrastructure, 
and 
minimizing  potential  safety  risks 
and accidents. 
preventing 
Avoid or minimize community 
exposure to disaster risks, diseases 
- The following requirements should be applied in 
line  with  the  unique  nature  of  each  project,  its 
specific  activities,  the  associated  social  and 
environmental 
the 
contractual relationships with workers engaged in 
the project. 
impacts,  and 
risks  and 
(e.g. 
-These requirements apply to all project  workers 
directly engaged by borrowers/recipients/ partners 
to work on a project or perform work essential to 
the  project,  and  to  people  employed  or  engaged 
contractors, 
parties 
through 
third 
and 
brokers, 
subcontractors, 
intermediaries)  to  perform  work  essential  to  a 
project.61  When  a  project  engages  community 
workers,  relevant  provisions  of  the  requirements 
will  be  applied  in  a  proportionate  manner, 
recognizing  the  potential  risks  and  impacts. 
Paragraphs  23  and  24  apply  to  primary  supplier 
workers. The full requirements apply to full-time, 
temporary,  seasonal,  and  migrant 
part-time, 
workers. 
agents 
-Government civil servants working in connection 
with  IFAD-supported  projects  remain  subject  to 
the terms and conditions of their existing public-
sector employment arrangements 
 This  Standard  applies  to  projects  that  may  pose 
significant risks to and adverse impacts on human 
health,  nutrition,  and  safety.  The  applicability  of 
this  Standard  will  be  determined  during  the 
environmental,  social  and  climate  risk  screening 
and  assessment  phase,  as  outlined  in  Chapter  3. 
Measures to ensure occupational health and safety 
are  covered  in  Standard  5:  Labor  and  working 
38 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Environmental 
and Social 
Standards 
Objectives 
Scope of Application 
conditions.  Further  requirements  to  avoid  or 
minimize  impacts  on  human  health  and  the 
environment  from  pollution  are  included  in 
Standard  2:  Resource  efficiency  and  pollution 
prevention. 
and hazardous materials 
associated with project activities. 
Ensure that the safeguarding of 
personnel and property minimizes 
risks to communities and is 
carried out in accordance with 
international human rights 
standards and principles. 
Have in place effective measures 
to address emergency events, 
whether human-made or natural 
hazards. 
This standard is found relevant to 
the PACT Project 
Standard 7: 
Physical and 
economic 
resettlement 
Avoid involuntary resettlement or, 
unavoidable,  minimize 
when 
involuntary 
by 
resettlement 
exploring 
project 
designs and sites. 
alternative 
Avoid forced eviction. 
Ensure  that  resettlement  activities 
implemented 
are  planned  and 
the 
collaboratively 
with 
meaningful 
of 
affected people. 
participation 
Enhance and restore the 
livelihoods- of all displaced 
people. and 
explicit  guidance 
Provide 
to 
borrowers/recipients/partners  on 
the conditions that need to be met 
regarding 
involuntary 
resettlement. 
This  Standard  applies  to  all  IFAD-supported 
projects that involve any displacement or need for 
resettlement.  The  displacement  may  be  full  or 
partial, permanent or temporary, and could result 
from a variety of project activities. This Standard 
to  any  physical  or  economic 
also  applies 
displacement 
a 
caused 
borrower/recipient/partner  for  purposes  relevant 
to the project before IFAD’s involvement. 
by 
Application  of  this  Standard  must  be  consistent 
with  universal  respect  for  fundamental  human 
rights  and  freedoms,91  the  principles  of  non-
discrimination,  equal  opportunity  and 
fair 
treatment,  and  the  right  to  private  property, 
adequate  housing,  and  improvement  of  living 
conditions. 
Standard 8: 
Financial 
intermediaries 
and direct 
investments 
Promote sound environmental, 
social and climate practices, and 
sound human resource 
management with FIs and direct 
investees. 
This Standard applies to FIs and direct investees 
that receive financial support from IFAD, guided 
by its Rural Finance Policy and NSO Framework. 
When  an  FI  receiving  support  from  IFAD 
39 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Environmental 
and Social 
Standards 
Objectives 
Scope of Application 
Standard 9: 
Climate change 
Ensure that FIs and direct 
investees access and manage any 
environmental and social risks 
and impacts of subprojects. and 
Promote good environmental and 
social management practices by 
direct investees and in the 
subprojects financed by FIs. 
This standard  is found not 
relevant to the PACT Project 
Ensure alignment of IFAD-
supported projects with the 
Nationally Determined 
Contributions of countries and the 
goals of the Paris Agreement and 
other international frameworks. 
Ensure that proposed activities are 
screened and assessed for climate 
change and disaster risks and 
impacts, including both impacts of 
projects and on them. 
Apply  the  mitigation  hierarchy  in 
project design. 
the 
resilience  of 
Strengthen 
communities to address the risk of 
climate 
and 
impacts 
change 
climate-related disasters. and 
Increase the ability of communities 
to adapt to the adverse impacts of 
climate change, and foster climate 
resilience  and  low  GHG-emitting 
projects  that  do  not  threaten  food 
production. 
This  standard is  found  relevant to 
the PACT Project 
financial 
intermediaries, 
provides  financing  or  de-risking  instruments  to 
the  primary 
other 
financial intermediary should apply this Standard, 
guided by IFAD’s Rural Finance Policy and NSO 
Framework,  and  should  ensure  that  each  FI  also 
applies this Standard. 
 If  a  direct  investee  implements  other  projects, 
subprojects  or  sub-activities  concurrently,  the 
investee  should  ensure  that  this  Standard  is 
applied. 
The  requirements  of  this  Standard  apply  to  all 
IFAD-supported projects that: 
Have  development  outcomes 
that  may  be 
threatened  by  climate  change  or  related  disaster 
risks. 
to 
increased  exposure  or 
May  contribute 
to  climate  change  and  related 
vulnerability 
disaster  risks.  or  may  produce  significant  GHG 
emissions. 
40 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
6. 
 Socio-economic and Environmental Baseline 
6.1. 
 National Context 
Ethiopia  is  a  country  hosting  very  diverse  ecosystems  and  habitats  ranging  from  desert  to  afro  alpine 
ecosystems in its huge altitudinal gradient. Most of the country’s landscape is fabulous, rich in water resources 
and fertile soil for agriculture. Even though the country is rich in biodiversity resources, both its highlands and 
lowlands  are  among  the  thirty-five  biodiversity  hotspot  regions  of  the  world,  implying  its  biodiversity 
resources  are threatened by degradation (WLRC, 2016). The country has a long history of coping with extreme 
weather events. Rainfall is highly erratic and typically falls in the form of intensive convective storms spawned 
by the country’s varied topography. Over the past three decades it has experienced countless localized drought 
events and major droughts. Future climate variability and change are expected to accelerate the already high 
levels of land degradation and soil erosion, increase vulnerability to droughts and floods, negatively impact 
agricultural productivity. Over the past 15 years Ethiopia has achieved substantial development progress with 
the poverty headcount falling from 44.2 percent to 23.5 percent from 2000-2015. However, these gains are 
vulnerable to climate change: more than 87% of the poor live in rural areas  and are dependent on rain fed 
agriculture. 
Land  degradation  in  the  form  of  soil  erosion,  sedimentation,  depletion  of  nutrients,  deforestation,  and 
overgrazing is one of the basic problems facing farmers in the Ethiopian highlands, and this limits their ability 
to increase agricultural production and reduce poverty and food insecurity. Land degradation in Ethiopia has 
proceeded  at  an  alarming  rate  and  will  be  increasingly  aggravated  by  the  impact  of  climate  change. 
Conservative estimates suggest that climate change will reduce agricultural crop productivity in Ethiopia by 5 
-10 percent by 2030.  
The  proposed  PACT  Project  will  be  implemented  in  different  agro-ecological  and  administrative  regions 
characterized by different regimes of rainfall, temperature, growing periods, socioeconomic and biophysical 
environments. The project will be implemented in 90 woredas of the five regions; namely Oromia, Amhara, 
SNNPRS,  Somali  and  Sidama  Regional  States.  Majority  of  the  areas  are    typically  highland  agro-climatic 
zones (in Dega or high altitude and dry Woina Dega or mid-altitude) with cereal crop-based or mixed crop-
livestock faming systems, high altitude and high rainfall, high potential productivity and moderate to severe 
land degradation, longer growing periods and high population density. There are also some woredas which are 
in the lowland agro-climatic zones where farming is crop-livestock mixed or annual/perennial crop-livestock 
mixed farming systems are practiced. The environmental and socioeconomic milieu of the intervention areas 
are characterized by high production potential but with significant limitations due to severe land degradation, 
high agro-ecological variability and diverse farming systems, high population density and land fragmentation. 
Those areas with potential access to markets to maximize return from agricultural production, development 
potential for surface and ground water resources to increase production and areas with critical importance for 
the protection of vital economic infrastructures from on-going or potential erosion-sedimentation problems 
41 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
will be selected for intervention.  
The planning and implementation of the PACT  Program activities will be guided by the Project  Appraisal 
Document  (PAD).  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM).  The  Environmental  and  Social  Management 
Framework  (ESCMF),  Social  Assessment  (SA),  Resettlement  Policy  Framework  (RPF),  Gender 
Mainstreaming,  Community  Based  Participatory  Watershed  Development  Guideline  and  Exit Strategy  and 
Performance Assessment for Watershed Management. 
6.2.  Socio-economic and Environmental Baseline at the Regional levels 
The proposed project is planned to be implemented in Oromia, Amhara, Southern Nations, Nationalities and 
People’s (SNNP) Region, Somali and Sidama regional states. The project is expected to be implemented in 90 
Woredas of these regions.  
Figure 6. 1 Map Showing Project Regions 
6.2.1.  Amhara National Regional State 
(a) Bio - Physical Environment 
42 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
 Topography and Climate 
The  Amhara  National  Regional  State  has  diverse  topographic  features,  with  rugged  mountains,  extensive 
plateau and scattered plain separated by deeply cut gorges, steep slopes and cliffs. The elevation varies from 
600 masl at Matera up to 4,620 masl at Ras Dashen. 
The Amhara National Regional State is located between N and 130 45' North latitude and 360 to 40030' East 
longitude. It is bounded by Tigray in the north, Oromia in the south, Benishangul Gumuz in the west and Afar  
region in the east. The Regional State has a land area of about 161,828 km2 (15% of the land area of Ethiopia). 
The climatic condition of the Region is divided into temperate (Dega), subtropical (Woina Dega) and arid 
(Kola) agro-climatic zones. Mean annual rainfall of the Region varies from 700 mm to over 2,000 mm and the 
temperature range is between 100 C and 260 C. There are two rainy seasons. Short rain occurs during March, 
May, and April and heavy rain is during June, July and August. 
Geology and Soils 
The Precambrian rocks, Cenozoic rocks and Mesozoic rocks cover most part of the Amhara Region. The soil 
of the region includes: Arthic Acrisds, cambisols, Rendizinas, phaeozems, Lithisols, Aluvisds, and vertislols. 
Soil erosion is the major environmental degradation problem in the Region due to lack of vegetation cover and 
rugged topography. Soils in the Region are highly eroded as compared to other parts of the country. According 
to a study conducted in 1984 E.C, the quantity of soil loss in Amhara Region was estimated at 1.1 billion tons 
per year. This accounts for 58% of the total annual soil loss of the country. 
Water Resources 
There is an abundant water resource in the Region. The major water resources in the region are the Abay River 
/Blue Nile/, Tekeze River and Awash River basins. There are also several lakes like Lake Tana, Lake Zengena 
and Haik. Ground water resource is abundant, and it is the major water supply source in the region. 
 Amhara is one of the most fertile region of the country, with total rainfalls varying from 300 mm to 2,000 mm 
and  rich  in  natural  resources  like  gold,  opal,  coal  and  limestone.  The  region  is  further  gifted  with  varied 
types of  topography  including plains,  gorges, plateaus,  hills and  mountains, three  major  agricultural 
climatic zones  (highland,  semi-  highland  and  lowland)  and has  several  agro-ecological  zones  suitable  for 
agricultural activities. 
Vegetation and Wildlife 
The natural forest in the Region is heavily depleted and degraded by intensive human interference, mainly 
for agricultural purpose and for energy (firewood) production. Currently less than 10% of the total estimated 
forest area is considered to be natural forest in the Region. The rest are scattered wood lots (planted by 
individual farmers on different land use types) and plantation forests (those that have been planted for 
different purposes). 
43 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Indigenous  tree/shrub  in  the  area  include:  olea,  africana,  Juniperous  procera,  podocarpus  falcatus,  Acacia 
species, hygenia abyssinica, ximenia american and Ficus though some of these are diminishing in the area due 
to human activities. 
Wildlife availability among other factors depends on the extent of vegetation cover of a given area. Parks of 
the Siemen Mountains are preserved for the most endangered species, such as Walia Ibex, Siemen Fox, Gelada 
Baboons and different species of birds, most of which are endemic to Ethiopia. Endangered bird species in the 
region include Harwood, Francolin and Ostrich. 
The Siemen Mountain National Park and protected areas of main bird sanctuaries like, Lake Tana, Ankober -
Debre Sina mountain, Awi Zone, Choke Mountain, Fogera, Guasa/ in Menze/, Jama and Jara valley, Middle 
Abay valley, Gofa Forest are found in the region. 
 (b) Socio-economic Environment 
Population, Ethnic and Religious Group 
As per the population estimates of the CSA, in July 2016 the Region’s total population was estimated to be 
20,769,985.  In  the  same  estimation,  the  rural  population  was  estimated  to  be  83.2%  whereas  the  urban 
population  constituted  16.8%.  The  population  density  of  the  region  during  this  period  was  119.8  persons/ 
square kilometre. 
At  91.47%  of  the  local  population  of  the  Region  is  predominantly  inhabited  by  people  from  the Semitic-
speaking Amhara ethnic group.  
The  predominant  religion  of  the  Amhara  for  centuries  has  been  Christianity,  with  the Ethiopian  Orthodox 
Tewahedo Church. According to the 2007 census, 82.5% of the population of the Amhara region is Ethiopian 
Orthodox, 17.2% Muslim, and 0.2% was Protestant . The Ethiopian Orthodox Church maintains close links 
with  the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria. Easter and Epiphany are the most important  celebrations, 
marked with services, feasting and dancing. There are also many fasting days throughout the year, when only 
vegetables or fish may be eaten. 
Economy 
There are several Industrial Parks (IPs) that are in operation or under construction. The Kombolcha IP employs 
20,000 people. Arerti IP and Debre Birhan IP are under construction.  
the  Amhara  population 
through 
Majority  of 
farming. Barley, corn, millet, wheat, sorghum, and teff, beans, peppers, chickpeas, and other vegetables, are 
the most important crops grown in the Region. In farm lands at the highlands grows one crop per year while 
in the lowlands two are possible. Cattle, sheep, and goats are also raised.  
the  rural  area  and  makes 
living 
their 
live 
in 
Socio-Cultural and Historical Heritage 
44 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Amhara Region is rich in cultural and historical heritages. Very old Monasteries, rock-hewn churches, palaces 
and castles are found in the region. The Lalibella Rock-hewn Churches, the Gondar Castle that are registered 
as International Cultural Heritage sites are found in this Region. There are several monasteries in Lake Tana 
Islands, which is also the origin of Blue Nile (Abay) River. The Blue Nile Falls is found just few kilometres 
downstream of the Regional Capital, Bahir Dar, which is a tourist attraction site. 
6.2.2.  Oromia National Regional State 
(a) Bio- Physical Environment 
 The region borders Amhara in the north, Kenya in the south, Somali Region in the east, the Republic of the 
Sudan  and      Benishangul-  Gumuz  in  the  west,  Southern  Nations,  Nationalities  and  Peoples'  Region  and 
Gambela in the south.  
Oromia  National  Regional  State  is  located  in  the  central  part  of  the  country  and  extends  from  south-east, 
bordering with Kenya in the south part and to the Sudan border in the western part. Oromia National Regional 
State lies between 30 40’ N and 100 35’ N latitude and 340 05’ E and 43011’ E longitude. 
Oromia is a region of great physiographic diversity. Its landscape includes high and rugged mountain ranges, 
undulating plateaus, panoramic gorges, and deep incised river valleys and rolling plains. Mt. Batu 4607 high 
is the highest peak of the region. Oromia is endowed with varied relief features which in turn accentuate varied 
climatic condition and other rich natural resource bases. 
The Regional State has topographic mountainous features and rolling terrain in the north-western and north-
eastern parts, valleys and gorges in the central and eastern, flat and plain land in the south and south-eastern 
part. Altitude in the Region varies from 500 masl in the south eastern part to 4,300 masl in the central and 
north-western parts of the region. 
The topographic features of the Region have been characterized by immense geographical diversity consisting 
of high rugged contoured mountains dissected by the great African Rift Valley. The high mountains include 
Tulu Dimtu in Bale (4,307 masl), Kecha (4,245 masl), Ankolo (4,300 masl) in Arsi, Gara Mulat in East Hararge 
(3,492 masl) and Bada Roge in Shewa (3,350 masl). 
Climate 
The climatic types prevailing in the region can be grouped into three major categories: the dry climate, tropical 
rainy climate and temperate rainy climate. The dry climate is characterized by poor sparse vegetation with 
annual mean temperature of 27°Cto 39°C, and mean annual rainfall of less than 450 mm. The hot semi-arid 
climate with annual temperature varying between 18°Cand 27°C is area of pastoralist and agro- pastoralists 
where the proposed project is planned to be implemented. It has a mean annual rainfall of 410-820 mm with 
noticeable rainfall variability from year to year.  
45 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
 The east and southern parts are dominated by arid climate while the central and north western parts are more 
of temperate climate. The lowlands (500 - 1,500 masl) experience mean annual temperature of 200 C – 250C 
and altitude (1,500- 2,300 masl) have mean annual temperature of 150 C – 200 C, while the highland areas 
(2,300  -  3,300  masl)  have  mean  annual  temperature  range  of  100  C  –  150  C.  Mean  annual  rainfall  ranges 
between 200 mm in the southeast to 2,000 mm in the north western part of the Region. 
Geology, Physiographic Divisions and Seismicity 
A major part of Oromia falls in the Great Rift Valley of East Africa and is tectonically unstable. It appears to 
be a zone of volcanic and seismic activities. There are  five physiographic sub-regions in Oromia: The Rift 
lakes plain, the transitional scrap slopes, the young lava plain, zone of ancient crystalline rocks, the central 
lava highlands and massifs and zone of Mesozoic sedimentary rocks. The geology of the region consists of: 
rocks of the Precambrian era, rocks of the Paleozoic era, rocks of the Mesozoic era, and rocks of the Cenozoic 
era. 
 Soils 
The major soil types of the region constitute Luvisols, Andosols and Fluvisols commonly found in the plain 
lands of riverbanks and lake shores. Andosols are formed from volcanic ash parent material. They are light, 
loose, and porous and have high draining capacity and easily eroded by rain or wind action. Andosols have 
limited agricultural value. Luvisols on the other hand are good for agriculture. 
Water Resource  
In the region there is an abundant water resource including surface and ground sources. Oromia possess portion 
of the three major drainage systems or river basins namely; Rivers that drain to the Blue Nile, Rivers that drain 
to the Indian Ocean and the Rift Valley closed drainage system. Most of the rift valley lakes in Ethiopia, like 
Lake Langano, Zeway, Abiyata, and Shalla are found in Oromia. The wetland ecosystem of these water bodies 
has significant environmental and socioeconomic values. Awash, Wabe-Shebele, Genale, Gibe, Baro, Dedessa 
and Guder are major rivers found in the region.  
The crater lakes such as Green Lake, Bishoftu, Kuriftu, Bishoftu-Gudo, Hora-Kilole, Horsa Arsedi are found 
in this region. These lakes have immense potential for recreation and fishery development. 
Vegetation and Wildlife  
Oromia region possesses most of flora and fauna types found in Africa and possess several endemic species. 
There are about 12 million Ha of woodland and bush land covering 32% of the Region. About 70 percent of 
the national forest priority areas are located in Oromia. The Munesa (1,385 ha), Tiro Boter Becho (8,500 ha), 
Menagesha Suba (9,000 ha) are set aside as Nature Reserves in the region. The region has dense forest cover 
in the central, south western and western areas, while southern and south-eastern areas are covered mainly by 
46 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
sparse vegetation, bushes and scrubs. The vegetation types are varied including coniferous forest, broad leaved 
forest, woodland and savannah, grassland, riverside forests and wetland vegetation. 
Oromia is also rich in wild animals. There are around 800 bird species and more than 100 wild animals in the 
region.  Endemic  wild  animals  such  as  Red  Fox  and  Menelik  Bushbuck  are  found  in  the  Bale  mountains 
national park. Awash National Park is home to the Oryx, Kudu, Caracal, Aardavark, Colobus Monkey, Green 
Monkeys, Baboons, Leopard, Klipspringer, Hippo, Seemering's Gazelle, Grevy's Zebra and Cheetah. Awash 
National  Park has  also  bird sanctuary  with  bird species such as  Limburger, Wattle Crane, Anger  Buzzard, 
Verreaux Eagle and long eared owls. Waterfowl, Shore Birds and the colourful Ruddy Shelled Duck as well 
as the endemic Blue-winged Goose are common in the marshy areas of the park. 
Parks and Natural reserve Areas 
There are parks and protected sites in the region, including  Awash National Park  Abijatta–Shala National 
Park, Bale Mountain National Parks, Yabelo mountains, Controlled hunting zone of Borena, wildlife Reserves 
(Sanctuaries) of Babile, Senkele, and Yabelo. There are also Game Reserves in Arsi, Bale and Borena with 
over 20 main Bird Sanctuaries. Those parks and protected areas host variety of wildlife and important bird 
species. Wide varieties of wild animals exist in the Region. These include  Mountain Nyala, the Giant Molerat, 
Ethiopian Wolf, Minilik’s Bushbuck, Bohor  Reed Buck,  grey duiker, Oribi, Klipspringer, Grant’s Gazelle, 
Greater Kudu, Lesser Kudu, Swayen’s Hartebeest, Gerenuk, Burchell’s Zebra, Warthog, Giant Forest Hog, 
Bush Pig, Colobus, Monkey, Anubis baboon, Spotted Hyaena, Serval Cat, Lion, Leopard, Golden Jackal and 
African Hunting Dog. 
(b) Socio-economic Environment 
 Population, Ethnic and Religious Group 
In the year July 2016, the CSA estimated the total population of Oromia Region as 34,575,008 comprised of 
17,345,004  male  and  17,230,004  female.  In  this  estimation,  the  rural  population  and  the  urban  population 
constituted 85.2% and 14.8% respectively. The religious composition of the population in the Region is 44.3% 
Muslims,  41.3  %  Orthodox  Christians,  8.6%  Protestants,  and  4.2%  followers  of  traditional  type.      Ethnic 
composition of the region is e 85 % Oromo, 9.1% Amhara and 1.3% Gurage. The remaining 4.6% constitute 
other groups.  
Based  on  the  estimate  made    by  local  district  and  kebele  authorities  about  21,520  people  have 
become internally  displaced  persons (IDPs)  in  border  districts,  namely Mieso, Doba,  and Erer in  the West 
Hararghe Zone and East  Hararghe Zones. There are also being displaced in the border area of Moyale and 
Borena zones due to the conflict in the southern part of the region  
Ethnic group residing in the region is also varied, the majority being Oromo, followed by Amhara, and several 
other ethnic groups. The density of the population is 106.8 persons / square kilometre. 
47 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Economy  
Agriculture  is  the  basis  of  livelihood  for  the  majority  of  the  population  in  the  region.  The  region  is  also 
endowed  with  livestock  resources,  although  quality  and  productivity  is  very  low.  Traditional  range 
management practices have deteriorated, and development in the water sector for various purposes has led to 
the  degradation  of  some  wet  season  grazing  areas.  In  this  region  grazing  land  has  been  taken  away  from 
pastoralists  for  irrigation  and  for  resettlement.  Bush  encroachment  to  the  grazing  lands  is  also  a  serious 
problem the  agro pastoralist is currently facing threatening their livelihood.  
Based on the information published by the Commercial Department of the Oromia Region in 2014, agriculture, 
services  and  industry are  the  three  major  economic  activities  within  the  Oromia  region,  accounting  for  a 
respective share of 56.2%, 32.9% and 10.9% of the overall regional economy. 
Oromia is a major contributor to Ethiopia's main exports - gold, coffee, khat and cattle. Lega Dembi in Guji 
Zone, owned by MIDROC has exported more than 5000 kilograms of gold followed by Tulu Kapi gold deposit 
in West  Welega  Zone. Awoday 
the  biggest  market  of khat exporting 
to Djibouti and Somalia. Oromia also has more abundant livestock than any other region of Ethiopia, including 
camels. It is also the largest producer of cereals and coffee. 
in East  Hararghe  Zone is 
According to the information obtained from Ethiopian Coffee and Tea Authority 115,083 tons of coffee was 
produced in Oromia from 2004 to 2005. This represents 50.7% of the total production in Ethiopia.  
Archaeological and Cultural Heritages and Tourist Attraction Sites 
Two project Woredas of Oromia region are endowed with different tangible and intangible cultural resources. 
Madda Walabu woreda Madda village (inhabited by an agro- pastoral community) where PAP-LDP is planned 
to be implemented has significant importance in history of Oromo people. Traditionally, it is believed to be 
the home and origin of Oromo people. It has thus been serving as a center of the Oromo traditional governance. 
The  place  has  also  served  as  the  center  of  Gumiigayyoo  and  the  seat  for  a  number  of  abbaagadaas  and 
abbaamuuda (spiritual leaders) at one  time. Even if the Islamic religion is expanding and dominating the area, 
still today the same ritual and gadaa ceremonies are held annually by all Oromo people from the whole of 
Borana and Arsi rangeland in this village. 
Karjul is another sacred and religious place found in MaddaWalabu at 33 kms west of Bidire town. Karjul is 
equivalent to the monastery and religious place of Shek Hussein in eastern part of Bale administrative zone. 
In addition to these historical physical resources, the natural bridge under the Welmal Falls is a wonderful site 
of  aesthetic  value.  In  Liben  woreda,  there  are  16  different  sacred  places  where  the  gadaa  ceremonies  take 
place. These places are located in 10 different kebeles. They are believed to be sacred and thus protected from 
any intrusion by customary law. In addition to these places, there are a number of natural and cultural sites 
including waterfalls, elephant sanctuaries, natural caves and endemic birds.  
In these woredas there are also historically underserved groups having their own boundary, language, identity, 
unique culture and practices. These groups are undeserved, very vulnerable and some groups are out casted. 
48 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The above-mentioned groups in these Woredas are  different from the wider communities because they are 
minorities and historically disadvantaged groups.  
The hot springs in Walliso and Sodere (about 114 km southwest and east of the capital respectively) are popular 
attraction sites for tourists. The Sof-Omar caves in central Bale, with their galleries of polished white cone and 
chamber of columns are the incredible natural phenomena of great interest and beauty. The palace of Aba Jifar 
in Jimma is another historical attraction in the region. 
Ethnicity and Religious Groups 
The Sof Oumar Cave and the Aba Jiffar palacee found in the Oromia National Regional State are  sites of 
cultural heritage. The Sof-Omar caves in central Bale, with their galleries of polished white cone and chamber 
of columns are the incredible natural phenomena of great interest and beauty. The palace of Aba Jifar in Jimma 
is another historical attraction.  
6.2.3.  Southern Nations and Nationalities and Peoples Regional State (SNNPRS) 
(a) Biophysical Environment 
Location and Topography 
SNNPR covers an area of 111,000 km2, and accounts for 10% of the total area of the country. The region is 
home to more than 56 ethnic groups. SNNPR is located in the southern and south-western parts of the country. 
It shares borders with the neighboring counties of Sudan in the west and Kenya in the south. In the northwest, 
the region borders with Gambella Regional State and with Oromia Regional State in the east and north. Sidama 
which was once one of the   zones in this region has recently declared as a separate region raising the number 
of regions in Ethiopia to 10. 
The region has undulating topography and is dissected by the Omo river basin into western and eastern parts. 
The elevation ranges from 376 to 4207 m.a.s.l, the lowest part being Lake Rudolf in South Omo and the highest 
being Mount Goge in North Omo. About 56% of the total area of the region lies below 1500 m.a.s.l, and is 
largely categorized as kola having hot climate. 
Climate 
The climatic condition of the area is varied, like most part of the country. About 85 % is Kola (Hot climate), 
10% Woina Dega (Semi –Temperate) and 8% has Dega (Temperate)  climatic conditions. The annual rainfall 
in Metekel zone of the Region ranges from 600 mm to 1,450 mm. The rainy season in this region is from 
April/May up to October/November. The dry period is between February and April. Annual temperature of 
Metekel zone ranges between 180c and 400c. 
Water resource 
Many perennial and seasonal rivers are found in this Region. These include, Omo, Gojeb, Mago, Segen, 
49 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Woito, Akobo, Dima, Wabi, Wolga, Bilate, and Genale River. Among the known Rift Valley lakes found in 
this region are Awassa, Abaya, Chamo, Chew Bahir and Rudolf. . These rivers and lakes can be utilized to 
produce food crop and fish and for irrigation and hydroelectric development.  
Coffee is the most important cash crop. Other major crops of the region include maize, teff, enset, potato, and 
wheat. The region has an undulating land feature dissected by the Omo River basin into western and eastern 
parts. The elevation ranges from 376 to 4, 207 meter above sea level. The lowest area and highest peaks in the 
Region is found near Lake Rudolf in South Omo and at Mount Goge in North Omo, respectively. About 56 % 
of the total areas of the Region are found below 1,500 meters elevation, which is categorized largely as hot 
low land ("Kolla"). The rest 44% is found in the temperate climatic zone. 
There are 23 kinds of wild animals and 300 species of birds. Some of the wild animals found in this region are 
Elephant,  Lion,  Giraffe,  Leopard,  Zebra,  Monkey,  Lesser  kudu,  Water  Buck,  Crocodile,  Rhinoceros, 
Warthogs, and Buffalo. 
Some of the major tourist attraction sites in the Region are wassa, Abaya and Chamo lakes. Tropical forests 
such as Kaffecho, Shekecho and Omo are best tourist destination sites in the country. The Nechsar, Mago and 
Omo national parks are also found in this region. 
(b) Socio-economic Environment  
The larger portion of the Region is cultivated land (35%), followed by forest land (21%), and grazing land 
(14.9%). Agriculture is still the single most important economic activity of the Region. The land holding of 
peasants is generally very small. The average land holding is less than one hectare per household. Livestock 
production is the region’s major economic activity, followed by enset, coffee production, fisheries, irrigation 
and eco-tourism. Teff, wheat, maize and barely are the main crops grown in most of the areas in the region. 
SNNPR  has  five  national  parks  (Mago,  Nechsar,  Omo,  Chebera  Churchura  and  Maze)  and  two  wildlife 
reserves.  
The State of Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples' Region comprise 10% of the total area of the country 
that is administratively divided in to 9 zones, 72 woredas and 5 special woredas. There are a total of 77 woredas 
and 149 towns in the State. The rural part of the State had 3804 farmers' association at the time of the 1994 
census. The State lies in the southern part of the country. It has common borders with Kenya in the south, the 
Republic of the Sudan in the Southwest, the State of Gambella Peoples in the Northwest, and the State of 
Oromia in the North and East. 
According to the 1994 census report, the total population size of the State is 10,377,028 of which 5,161,787 
were males and 5,215,241 females. The rural population of the Region accounts to about 93.2% of the total 
population. North Omo, Sideman, and Garage are the three zones with the highest number of populations.  The 
50 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
population is concentrated mostly in eastern, northern, and central part of the Region while the western and 
southern part of the State is sparsely populated. 
There are about 45 ethnic groups in the Region.  Sidamigna Gruagigna,Wolayitagna, Hadiyigna,  Keffigna, 
and Kembatigna are widely spoken in the region. Other languages such as Gamoigna, Malo, Goffa and Gedeo 
are also used for communication purposes. The working language of the region is Amharic. 
6.2.4.  Somali Region 
(a) Biophysical Environment  
Location and Topography 
This Region is located in the eastern and southeastern part of Ethiopia. It shares borders with Kenya at the 
South,  Somalia  Southeast  and  East,  Djibouti  to  the  north–West  and  locally  Oromia  and  Ethiopian  Somali 
Regional  States  to  the  west  and  Southwest  and  Northwest  respectively.  It  has  an  estimated  area  of  about 
328,000 square kilometers with population size over 11 million. Somali Region large in size ranking second 
next to Oromia. At present the state comprises 9 administrative zones and 49 woredas.  
The  topography,  agro  climatic  and  agro-ecology  of  Somali  Region  is  similar  to  Afar  Region  with  the 
exception that land in this region is relatively fertile and water availability is not that scarce. 
Most of the region has an altitude of 500 meters above sea level and in some areas the altitude reaches 1600 
meters. Of the total area size of the Region approximately 80% is flat & 7% mountainous. Regarding climate, 
80% of the region is classified as "Kolla" (lowlands), 5% highland ("Dega"), and 15% of the area fall under 
temperate ("Woyna Dega") category.  
Climate 
Similar to the Afar - region most of Somali Region is arid and semi-arid.  Somali region have many rivers 
(Wabeshebele,  Genale  and  Weybe  Rivers)  that  can  be  harnessed  to  expand  irrigation  and  sustainably 
produce food crops to pastoral and agro-pastoral communities of the region. Temperature reaches 32-40°C. 
In the temperate ("Woyna Dega") areas the temperature is within 20- 28°C. The mean annual rainfall of the 
State is estimated to be 300-500 mm. 
Soils 
Severe deforestation in and around Gode has exposed the soil to more wind erosion and affected soil depth 
and quality. Wind erosion has become a serious problem particularly during June to August as the Westerly 
Monsoon wind blows east with average speed of 6 m/s to the level of 2 m above the ground, eroding the loose 
alluvial soil and causing destruction to irrigation infrastructure. The worst affected kebeles are Kunka, Barsan, 
Godiray and Badila’ad. The threat necessitates embarking on a re-afforestation program in earnest through 
community awareness. The invasion of Prosopis julifora into farmlands in Kelafo complicates the problem.  
51 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Salinity was reported to be a major problem of increasing concern in both the gravity and pump-fed irrigation 
systems. It was becoming normal practice for people to abandon farms affected by salinity and move on to 
new plots. In Gode, Berano and Kalafo, informants reported that 51%, 58% and 21% of the agricultural land 
is abandoned due to salinity and other problems. Moving on to new plots is temporary solution to the problem 
of salinity and the new plots are will be far from the water sources. With the new plots the fields will be far 
from the water sources and longer canals will be required to take the water to the e plots.  Such a move will 
also increase the risk of the canal water being contact with gypsum in those sections aggravating soil erosion 
in the canals. 
(b)Socio-Economic Environment  
Population, Ethnicity and Religious Group 
Based on the 2007 Census conducted by the Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia (CSA), the Somali Region 
has a total population of 7,445,219, consisting of 3,472,4132  men and 3,972,729 women and  urban inhabitants 
number is 1,489,044 or 20% of the population. About 80% were pastoralists and farmers. With an estimated 
area of 327,068 square kilometers, this region has an estimated density of 20.9 people per square kilometer. 
 Ethnic groups living in this region include Somalis (99.2%), Amhara (0.06%), Oromo (0.46%), foreign-born 
Somalis (0.20%) and Gurages (0.08%). The population was projected to be 11,748,998 in 2017. There are 8 
refugee camps and 1 transit center, housing 212,967 refugees from Somalia. 71.8% of the inhabitants fall into 
the  lowest  wealth  quintile.  Adult  literacy  for  men  is  22%  and  for  women  9.8%  and  the  Regional infant 
mortality rate is 57 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, which is less than the nationwide average of 77. 
The region is home to almost all major Somali clan families. The Issa and Gadabuursi subclans of the Dir 
primarily inhabit the northern Sitti zone and the Awbare woreda in Fafan zone. The Habr Awal, Garhajis, Habr 
Je'lo and Arap clans of the Isaaq clan family inhabit the northern part of the region bordering Somaliland, with 
the Habr Awal making up the majority in Harshin woreda as well as making up a significant portion of the 
population of the Kebribeyah woreda, as well as the lucrative border town of Tog Wajaale. The Garhajis and 
Habr Je'lo make up the majority of Awaare and Misrak Gashamo woredas in Jarar zone with a significant 
presence in the Danot woreda. Subclans of the Hawiye inhabit the western and southern areas of the region, 
with the Degodia being the majority in Liben and also having a large presence in Afder, Dollo, Jarar and Jijiga. 
Karanle and Sheekhaal are present in the western areas bordering the Oromia region and the Hawadle and 
Habar Gidir subclans are present in the Shabelle zone. The closely related Samaale subclan of Garre are also 
present in the Liben zone.Various subclans of the Darod clan family primarily inhabit the central and eastern 
parts of the region, with the Ogaden and Jidwaq inhabiting the interior as well as the major towns of Jijiga, 
Gode, Kebridehar. The Harti as well as the Leelkase clans inhabit the Dollo zone where they make up the 
majority while the Marehan clan inhabit the Shilavo woreda and the Liben zone. Sunni Islam accounts for 
99.4% of the population whereas  0.50% Orthodox Christian, and 0.10% are followers of all other religions. 
Economy 
Somali has the largest pastoral area of all the regions. The Regional Disaster Prevention and Preparedness 
52 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Bureau  (DPPB)  of  the  Somali  State  divide  the  region  into  17  ‘food  economy  zones.  Of  these,  eight  are 
categorized as ‘pastoralist’ and five are ‘agro-pastoralist’ and three are agricultural zone. 
Most of the people of the Somali Region i mainly earn their livelihood by rearing livestock. Some people in 
the region also practice crop production as well. The major crops cultivated in the region are sorghum and 
maize. Wheat and barley are also harvested in a smaller amount each year. Commercial activity is another 
occupation that is significantly exercised in the region. 
The state of Somali is known for its livestock resources from which most of the Somali people earn their 
livelihood.  The  region  is  estimated  to  have  about  15.2  million  domestic  animals  out  of  which  sheep 
constitute 53%. Goats and cattle are the second and third most important domestic animals in the region 
accounting  for  20%  and  15%  respectively.  Camels  are  the  most  important  animals  in  day-to-day  life  of 
Somali pastoralists, and they constituted about 9% of the livestock. Somali society is based on the nuclear 
family, which consists of a husband, wife, and children. A typical family owns a herd of sheep or goats and 
a few burden camels. Some may also own a herd of milking camels. The more camels a man has, the greater 
his prestige within the society. 
Cultural practices 
The  nomads  live  in  portable  huts  made  of  wooden  branches  covered  with  grass  mats.  They  are  easily 
collapsible so that they can be loaded on pack animals and moved along with the herds. Their diet includes 
milk, meat, and wild fruits. The more settled Somali farmers live in permanent, round huts that are five to nine 
feet  high.  They  have  a  more  varied  diet,  which  includes  maize,  beans,  rice,  eggs,  poultry,  bananas,  dates, 
mangoes, and tea. The Somali share a common language, adhere to a single faith, and share a cultural heritage 
that is  an integral  part of their nomadic lifestyle. Their name is  derived from  the words, "so maal," which 
literally mean, "Go milk a beast for yourself!" To the Somali, this is a rough expression of hospitality. 
6.2.5.  Sidama Regional State 
Sidama,  which  was  part  of  Southern  Nations,  Nationalities  and  Peoples’  Region  (SNNPR)  with  Zonal 
Administration  level,  has  become  Ethiopia’s  10th  regional  state  in  a  referendum  conducted  on  November, 
2019.The Sidama region is   formed on 18 June 2020.  
Since Sidama was part of the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples Region (SNNPR) until 2020 there 
is no much data/ information that can specifically address the socio-economic and environmental status of the 
Region. The limited information available that describes the state of environment of the region is discussed 
below.  
53 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
(a) Biophysical Environment  
Location and Climate  
Sidama Region is northeast of Lake Abaya and southeast of Lake Awasa. Sidama is bordered on the south by 
the Oromia Region (except for a short stretch in the middle where it shares a border with Gedeo zone), on the 
west by the Bilate River, which separates it from Wolayita zone, and on the north and east by the Oromia. The 
Sidama live between Tikur Wuha River in the north and Dilla town in the south, spread out in a cone-shaped 
area of the middle of southern Ethiopia. Sidama is generally a fertile area, varying from flat land (warm to hot) 
to highland (warm to cold). 
Sidama has geographic coordinates of latitude, north: 5'45" and 6'45" and longitude, East, 38' and 39'. It has a 
total area of 10,000 km2, of which 97.71% is land and 2.29% is covered by water. Hawassa Lake and Logita 
falls are water bodies that attract tourists. Of the land, 48.70% is cultivated, 2.29% is forested, 5.04% is shrub 
and bushland, 17.47% is grazing land, 18.02% is uncultivated, 6.38% is unproductive and 2.10% has other 
uses. Some of the cultivated lands are in undulating escarpment and create difficulties for the farmers in the 
area. 
Sidama  has  a  variety  of  climatic  conditions.  Warm  conditions  cover  54%  of  the  area.  Locally  known  as 
Gamoojje or Woinadega, this is a temperate zone ranging from an elevation of 1500 m to 2500 m above sea 
level. The mean annual rainfall of the area varies between 1200 mm and 1599 mm, with 15 °C to 19.9 °C 
average annual temperature. A hot climatic zone, Kolla, covers 30% of the total area. Its elevation ranges from 
500 m to 1500 m above sea level. It has a mean annual rainfall of 400 mm to 799 mm, and the mean annual 
temperature ranges from 20 °C to 24.9 °C. Cool climatic conditions known as Aliicho or Dega exist in the 
mountainous highlands. This covers 16% of the total area with an elevation between 2500 m and 3500 m above 
sea level. This part gets the highest amount of rainfall, ranging from 1600 mm to 1999 mm. It has a mean 
annual temperature of 15 °C to 19.9 °C. 
Environmental degradation  
The prevalent farming system of the midlands of Sidama is under stress mainly because of burgeoning human 
population.  Symptoms  are  not  only  the  high  proportion  of  children  acutely  or  chronically  affected  by 
malnutrition but also the progressive degradation of resources in an environment once extremely fertile. Land 
erosion is commonly observed by farmers who consider it a major problem though in some plots nutrients 
surplus, as unused manure, was observed. Hurni (1988) classified soil erosion in Sidama as medium (20–40%). 
Pastureland is shrinking and degrading in its botanical composition. Most of the abundant water resources are 
now polluted. In order to buffer the progressive crisis, and given the presence of markets for cash crops and 
dairy products, the mixed system in the Sidama midlands is rapidly evolving into specialization. The area is 
among  the  richest  in  Ethiopia  (MOA,  1984).  Because  of  their  positive  role  as  a  source  of  cash  in  the  HH 
economy, coffee and khat plants are gradually replacing food crops in the garden such as ensete, yam and 
maize. 
54 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
(b) Socio-economic environment  
Demography  
Based on the 2007 census conducted by the CSA, the region has a total population of 2,954,136, of whom 
1,491,248 are men and 1,462,888 women; with an area of 6,538.17 square kilometers, Sidama has a population 
density of 451.83. While 162,632 or 5.51% are urban inhabitants, a further 5,438 or 0.18% are pastoralists. A 
total  of  592,539  households  were  counted  in  this  region,  which  results  in  an  average  of  4.99  persons  to  a 
household, and 566,926 housing units. The three largest ethnic groups reported in this region were the Sidama 
(93.01%),  the  Oromo  (2.53%),  and  the  Amhara  (1.91%);  all  other  ethnic  groups  made  up  2.55%  of  the 
population. Sidamo is spoken as a first language by 94.23% of the inhabitants, 2.14% speak Amharic, and 
2.07% Oromiffa; the remaining 1.56% spoke all other primary languages reported. 84.38% of the population 
said  they  were  Protestants,  4.62%  were  Muslim,  3.35%  practiced  Ethiopian  Orthodox  Christianity,  3.01% 
embraced Catholicism, and 2.72% observed traditional religions  
In the 1994 census, Sidama had a population of 2,044,836 in 439,057 households, of whom 1,039,587 were 
men and 1,005,249 women; 143,534 or 7.02% of its population were urban dwellers. The four largest ethnic 
groups reported in this region were the Sidama (88.6%), the Amhara (4.15%), the Oromo (2.97%), and the 
Welayta  (1.84%);  all  other  ethnic  groups  made  up  2.44%  of  the  population.  Sidama  is  spoken  as  a  first 
language  by  88.6%  of  the  inhabitants,  4.15%  speak  Amharic,  2.97%  Oromiffa,  and  1.84%  Welayta;  the 
remaining  2.44%  spoke  all  other  primary  languages  reported.  62.54%  of  the  population  said  they  were 
Protestants, 13.64% observed traditional religions, 8.24% practiced Ethiopian Orthodox Christianity, 8% were 
Muslim, and 4.24% embraced Catholicism. 
According to  a 24 May  2004, World Bank memorandum,  8% of the inhabitants of Sidama have access  to 
electricity, this region has a road density of 137.4 kilometers per 1000 square kilometers (compared to the 
national average of 30 kilometers),[9] the average rural household has 0.3 hectare of land (compared to the 
national average of 1.01 hectare of land and an average of 0.89 for the SNNPR) and the equivalent of 0.5 heads 
of livestock. 15.4% of the population is in non-farm related jobs, compared to the national average of 25% and 
a regional average of 32%. 68% of all eligible children are enrolled in primary school, and 18% in secondary 
schools. 72% of the region is exposed to malaria, and none to tsetse fly. The memorandum gave this region a 
drought risk rating of 329. 
Economy 
Sidama region is the leading coffee producing region in Ethiopia. It is generally a fertile area, varying from 
flat land (warm to hot) to highland (warm to cold). Economically, most are subsistence farmers. Cattle 
especially are a measure of wealth. The false banana or "enset", along with maize, as well as fermented 
cows' milk and butter, are the major staple foods of the Sidama. 
Most residents are subsistence farmers. Cattle especially, are a measure of wealth. Sidama grows several crop 
types. It is a major coffee-growing area, with coffee the most popular agricultural product in the region. Its 
55 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
prized  coffee is  sold  on  the  world  market.  Coffee  exports  contribute  to  the  country's  revenue  and  foreign 
exchange and the production and exchange of coffee has been used as the main economic power of people 
living in Sidama. The Sidama economy is based primarily on subsistence agriculture characterized by archaic 
production  techniques.  However,  coffee  has  been  the  major  source  of  income  for  rural  households  in  a 
substantial  part  of  Sidama,  although  the  recent  plunge  in  international  coffee  price  drew  most  of  these 
households back into the subsistence production and absolute poverty (coffee prices fell dramatically even 
during the commodity price boom of 2001 to mid-2008). Sidama is one of the major coffee-producing regions 
in Ethiopia. It supplies over 40% of washed coffee to the central market. Coffee is the single major export 
earner for the country. Export earnings from coffee ranges from 60 to 67% although the country's share in the 
world  market  is  less  than  3%.[3] The  Sidama  people  have  not  faced  major  hunger  and  famine  until  very 
recently. Due to reliable rainfall and evergreen land area, they were always able to produce enough to ensure 
food security. The society has been characterized by what one may call a low-level economic equilibrium. 
Even the 1984  great  famine that hit all other parts of the country did not  have  a major impact  in Sidama. 
However, a continued dependence on subsistence agriculture, which relies on archaic technology and vagaries 
of nature coupled with massive growth of rural population, and limited rural development, has made Sidama 
prone to frequent hunger and famine recently. Thus about a quarter of the total population in Sidama is directly 
or indirectly dependent on food aid from the international community today.  
Sidama Region is the leading coffee-producing region in Ethiopia, which contributes greatly to the foreign 
exchange of the federal government. The Central Statistical Agency (CSA) reported that 63,562 tons of coffee 
was produced in Sidama and Gedeo combined in the year ending in 2005, based on inspection records from 
the Ethiopian Coffee and Tea authority. This represents 63% of the SNNPR's output and 28% of Ethiopia's 
total output.  
The  region  is  also  rich  in  water  resources,  which  are  underutilized.  The  leading  causes  of  morbidity  and 
mortality in SNNP Region are mostly attributable to lack of clean drinking water, poor sanitation, and low 
public awareness of environmental health and personal hygiene practices.  
There is a high value attached to livestock by the Sidama, among whom a person without cattle is not regarded 
as a fully-grown social person, but as an outcast.  
Health 
Access to water supply and sanitation in Ethiopia is amongst the lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa and the entire 
world. According to a 2009 IRC baseline KPC survey conducted in the Sidama region, only 7% of households 
reported using a latrine, whilst 93% percent practiced open defecation.[16] There have been outbreaks of acute 
watery diarrhea in Sidama. The 2009–2011 Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan (EPRP) for SNNPR 
estimated that up to 65,260 people were affected by acute watery diarrhea in 2009.  
Health  extension  workers  (HEWs)  and  community  health  promoters  (CHPs)  play  the  greatest  role  in 
disseminating  hygiene  and  sanitation  education  to  the  whole  community  in  rural  areas.  "The  preventive 
elements  of  the  HEWs’  and  CHPs’  roles  involve  continuous  education  on  sanitation  and  hygiene  to 
56 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
communities,  including  selection  and  communication  of  messages  on  sanitation  and  hygiene  as  well  as 
demonstrations and actions to persuade HHs [households] to make changes in their behavior – followed by 
monitoring  of  the  progress  made  by  HHs.  To  assemble  site-specific  processes  of  development  in  each 
community, a large environment needs to be in place to encourage local groups to create their own appropriate 
solutions. Community members receive good awareness about the importance of community involvement in 
different processes and community members collaborate with the government and start to solve their water, 
hygiene and sanitation (WASH)-related problems through participatory learning and action. 
Education 
In the Sidama region, due to less community awareness and lower availability of schools, a smaller percentage 
of young children attend education. In the Sidama region there are currently 75 kindergartens, 633 primary 
schools  and  12  secondary  schools.  Considering  kindergarten  enrollment,  a  total  number  of  6,863  students 
(3,700 male and 3,163 female) attend class. Total school age (4–6 years age) boys and girls are about 360,547 
(181,543 male and 179,004 female), however.[20] The gross enrollment ratio (%) in kindergarten is about 1.9% 
(2.04% for males and 1.77% for females). The data reveals that many fewer children in the younger generation 
receive educational opportunities in the Sidama Region. 
Culture 
Fichchee is the most celebrated Sidama cultural holiday, representing the Sidama New Year. Fichchee is based 
on the lunar system. Sidama elders (astrologists) observe the movement of the stars in the sky and decide the 
date for the New Year and the Fichchee celebration. The Sidama New Year is therefore unique in that it does 
not have a fixed date. It rotates every year following the movements of the stars. Sidama has 13 months in a 
year, and each of the months is divided equally into 28 days, while the 13th month has 29 days. This is because 
the Sidama week has only four days and hence each month has seven weeks instead of the conventional four 
weeks. The names of the four days in the Sidama week are called Dikko, Deela, Qawadoo and Qawalanka, to 
be followed by Dikko, completing the cycle of a four-day week. 
6.3.  Ethiopian National Parks  
There are several national parks in Ethiopia. Some of these parks are found in the regions where PACT Project 
is planned to be implemented. The size and locations of the national parks in Ethiopia   are summarized in the 
table below. 
57 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Figure 6. 2 Location map of National Parks of Ethiopia 
The table 6.1 below shows names of the national Parks, their coordinates and the areas coverage within the 
regions. 
Table 6. 1 Name, size and the corresponding coordinates of the national park within the regions 
S. No 
National Park 
Region 
Coordinates 
Established 
Area 
1 
Abijatta-Shalla 
National Park 
Oromia 
7°31′46″N 38°31′07″E 
1963 
887 Km2  
58 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
S. No 
National Park 
Region 
Coordinates 
Established 
Area 
Alitash National Park   Amhara 
12°06′32″N 35°33′13″E  2006 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
2011 
9°04′42″N 39°59′36″E 
6°53′09″N 39°44′05″E 
1958 
1962 
2015 
2017 
6°53′14″N 36°38′11″E 
1997 
1998 
2001 
2001 
Oromia 
Arsi Mountains 
National Park 
Awash National Park  Oromia and - 
Bale Mountains 
National Park   
Bejimiz National Park 
Oromia 
Benishangul-
Gumuz and 
Amhara 
Borena National Park   Oromia and 
Somali 
SNNPR 
Oromia 
SNNPR 
SNNPR 
Chebera Churchura 
National Park    
Dati Wolel National 
Park 
Gibe Sheleko 
National Park    
Loka-Abaya National 
Park 
Mago National Park 
Mao-Komo National 
Park 
Maze National Park 
Benishangul-
Gumuz and 
Oromia 
  SNNPR 
SNNPR 
5°31′08″N 36°20′38″E 
1974 
2016 
2,666 887 
Km2 
10,876 887 
Km2 
850 887 Km2 
2,200 887 
Km2 
not reported 
45,366 887 
Km2 
1,1- 887 Km2 
431 887 Km2 
360 887 Km2 
500 887 Km2 
1,942 887 
Km2 
not reported 
6°26′29″N 37°11′19″E 
1997 
202 887 Km2 
Nech Sar National 
Park 
Omo National Park 
Simien Mountains 
National Park 
SNNPR 
5°56′01″N 37°40′53″E 
1966 
750 887 Km2 
  SNNPR 
6°0′N 35°50′E 
1980 
4,068 km2 
Amhara 
13°18′23″N 38°15′51″E  1959 
412 887 Km2 
59 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
1  Abijatta-Shalla National Park: It is located in the Oromia Region 200 kilometers south of Addis Ababa, 
and east of the Batu–Shashamane highway. It contains 887 square kilometers. The Park includes the Rift 
Valley lakes of Abijatta and Shalla. The altitude of the park ranges from 1540 to 2075 meters, the highest 
peak being Mount Fike, which is situated between the two lakes. The  primary attraction of this national 
park  are  a  number  of  hot  springs  on  the  northeast  corner  of  Lake  Abijatta,  and  large  numbers 
of flamingoes on the lake. More than 300 bird species have been recorded in Abijatta-Shalla Park. There 
are  also  Hippo, Crocodile,  Giraffe, Leopard, Zebra, Warthog, Hyena, Egyptian  Geese and Cheetah 
within this Park. 
2  Alitash  National  park:  This  Park  also  called  Alitash is  a national  park located  in North  Gondar 
Zone, Amhara Region, Ethiopia.  It  is  adjacent  to  Sudan's Dinder National Park. The national  park was 
founded in 2006. It covers an area of 2,666 Km2 . In this Park a lion of African origin was found in 2016.   
3  Arsi Mountains National Park: This is a national park in Arsi Zone of Oromia Region in Ethiopia. The 
park was designated in 2011 and covers an area of 10876 km2. The Park encompasses the Arsi Mountains, 
which are part of the Ethiopian Highlands. There are three main vegetation zones in the park, generally 
defined by altitude. The dry evergreen Afromontane forests that predominate on the lower slopes, from 
2843 to 3756 meters elevation. The dry evergreen forests are interspersed with areas of mixed plantations 
of native and exotic trees between 3181- and 3340-meters elevations. Subalpine vegetation which is mostly 
scrubland is dominated by the shrubs Erica arborea and Erica trimera and it occurs from 3202 to 3985 
meters elevation. Afro-alpine vegetation occurs at the highest elevations, from 3576 to 4008 meters. It is 
mostly made up of grasses, herbs, shrubs, including species of Helichrysum and Alchemilla, interspersed 
with stands of the giant lobelia Lobelia rhynchopetalum, which is endemic to the Afro-alpine Ethiopian 
endangered mountain  nyala (Tragelaphus 
Highlands.  Wildlife 
buxtoni) and Ethiopian wolf (Canis simensis).  
the  park 
includes 
the 
in 
4  Awash National Park: This Park   is found in Oromia and - regions. This park is the oldest and most 
developed wildlife reserve in Ethiopia. Featuring the 1,800-metre Fantalle Volcano, extensive mineral hot-
springs  and  extraordinary volcanic  formations,  this  natural  treasure  is  bordered  to  the  south  by  the 
Awash River and lies 225 kilometers east of the capital, Addis Ababa. Wildlife in this Park consists mainly 
of East African plains animals. Oryx, bat-eared fox, caracal, aardvark, colobus and green monkeys, Anubis 
and Hamadryas baboons, klipspringer, leopard, bushbuck, hippopotamus, Soemmering's gazelle, cheetah, 
lion,  kudu  and  450  species  of  bird  all  live within  the  park's  720  square  kilometers. Over  four  hundred 
species of birds are recorded in the park. They range from the great ostrich, frequently and easily observed, 
and the less common Secretary Bird and Abyssinian Ground Hornbill, to the flashes of brilliant pink which 
are the Carmine Bee-eaters, and the Abyssinian Roller with turquoise and purple, wings. 
5  Bale Mountains National Park: This Park is found in Oromia Region consists  of an area of high-altitude 
plateau that is broken by numerous spectacular volcanic plugs and peaks, beautiful alpine lakes and rushing 
mountain streams that descend into deep rocky gorges on their way to the lowlands below. As you ascend 
into the mountains  you will experience changes in the vegetation with altitude, from juniper forests to 
60 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
heather moorlands and alpine meadows, which at various times of year exhibit an abundance of colorful 
wildflowers.  
Bale  Mountains  National  Park  is  the  largest  area  of  Afro-Alpine  habitat  in  the  whole  of  the  Africa 
Continent. It gives visitors opportunities for unsurpassed mountain walking, horse trekking, scenic driving 
and  the  chances  to  view  many  of  Ethiopia's  endemic  mammals,  in  particular  the  Mountain  Nyala  and 
Semien Fox, and birds, such as the Thick-billed Raven, Wattled Ibis, Blue-winged Goose, and Rouget's 
Rail. The mountains are most famous as home and refuge of the endemic Mountain Nyala and Semien 
Fox. Both these mammals occur in reasonable numbers in this park 
6  Borena  National  Park:  This  Park  is  found  in  Oromia  and  Somali  Regions  in  southern  Ethiopia.  The 
national park was established in 2017.Most of the Park is covered by dry bush lands and thickets. The area 
was formerly designated as a controlled hunting zone and was predestinated a national park in 2017.  
7  Chebera Churchura National Park: This national park located in Southern Nations, Nationalities, and 
Peoples' Region in the south west of Ethiopia. The park was founded by the regional government in 2005.  
8  Dati_Wolel_National_Park: This Park  is found in Oromia Region and is unique in harboring the largest 
number of buffalo and hippopotamus of all the national parks in #Ethiopia. The park was established in 
1998, it covers an area of 431sq km. the Park is one of the few youngest protected areas in Ethiopia’s 
western tropical forests belt. The Park is best for Buffaloes and hippos.  Other notable mammals’ species 
that are found in the park include warthogs, vervet monkeys, olive baboons, common jackal and African 
buffaloes. 
9  Gibe Sheleko National Park: This Park is found in Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples' Region 
and it was Gazetted in 2011. It covers 360 sq km of upland plateau, parts of the Gibe River gorge area and 
patches of endemic forest. Wildlife found in this Parklincludes 17 mammal species, such as greater kudu 
and a few hippos in the river valley. Over 200 of bird species including red-winged pytilia and white-
winged cliff chat are   recorded in this park.  
10  Loko Abaya National Park: This Park is one of the woredas in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and 
Peoples' Region of Ethiopia. It is part of the Sidama Zone located in the Great Rift Valley.  Loko Abaya 
is  bordered  on  the  south  by  the Oromia  Region,  on  the  southwest  by Lake  Abaya,  on  the  west  by 
the Wolayita Zone, on the north by Boricha, on the northeast by Dale, on the east by Shebedino, and on 
the southeast by Chuko.  
11  Mago National Park: This Park is found the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples' Region located 
about 782 kilometers south of Addis Ababa. The major environments in and around the park are the rivers 
and riverine forest, the wetlands along the lower Mago and around Lake Dipa, the various grasslands on 
the more level areas, and scrub on the sides of the hills. Indigenous bird life in this park include  Turdoides 
tenebrosus especially  at  Lake  Dipa, Estrilda  troglodytes in  the  rank  grass  along  streams  and  swamp 
61 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
edges, Phoeniculus damarensis,  Porphyrio  alleni,  Butorides striatus also  at  Lake Dipa,  and in  riverine 
contexts Pluvianus aegypticus, Scotopelia peli and Cossypha niveicapilla. The park's perhaps best known 
attraction are the Mursi, known for piercing their lips and inserting disks made of clay.Big mammals such 
as  Black  Rhinoceros, Lion, Leopard, Hippopotamus, Cape  buffalo, Cheetah, Giraffe, Hyena, African 
Wild Dog, Warthog, Nile crocodile, Zebra and African Elephant are found in this Park 
12  Maze  National  Park:  This  Park  is  found  in  the Southern  Nations,  Nationalities,  and  People's 
Region of Ethiopia. It is 210 square kilometers in size. Elevations within the park range between 1000 and 
1200  meters  above  sea  level.  Maze  was  founded  in  2005  and  is  managed  by  the  Ethiopian  Wildlife 
Conservation  Authority.  Maze 
the endangered Swayne's 
for 
hartebeest  (Alcelaphus buselaphus swaynei).  
its  population  of 
is  noted 
animals 
Other 
kudu, Cheetah, Warthogs, and Bushpigs. 
are African 
here 
buffalo, Lion, Leopard, Vervet  monkeys, waterbucks, Lesser 
13  Nechi Sar National Park: This Park is a national park found in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and 
Peoples' Region (SNNPR) of Ethiopia and encompass an area of750 Km2 . It is in the Great Rift Valley, 
within the southwestern Ethiopian Highlands.  It is found between Lake Abaya and Lake Chamo plains 
east of the lakes. The Park elevations range between 1,108 and 1,650 metres above sea level. Nechisar 
National Park was established in 1974. 
Wildlife in the park include plains zebra, Grant's gazelle, dik-dik, and the greater kudu as well as one of 
the last three populations of the endangered Swayne's hartebeest, African leopard, Hyena, Lion, Cheetah, 
African wild dog and Hippopotamus. 
 The park also has populations of bushbuck, bushpig, Anubis baboon, vervet monkeys, and black-backed 
jackal. The endangered painted hunting dog, Lycaon pictus, once existed in the park may now be extirpated 
due  to  human  population  pressures  in  this  region.  In  2009,  a  small  group  of  less  than  23  lions  were 
estimated to have lived in and around the protected area.  
Nechisar  National  Park  is  considered  an  important  habitat  for  bird  populations  particularly  those 
migrating. It is noted population of kingfishers, storks, pelicans, flamingos and African fish eagles. Other 
birds include Falco naumanni and Circus macrourus, which are fairly common on passage. Other species 
of note include Accipiter ovampensis, Aviceda cuculoides, Gypaetus barbatus, Macheiramphus alcinus, 
Chelictinia riocourii, Francolinus levaillantii, Podica senegalensis, Crithagra reichardi, Schoutedenapus 
myoptilus, and Coracina caesia. 
14  Omo National Park:  This Park is found in Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples' Region. Far to 
the south-west lays Omo National Park, the largest in the country, with an area of 4,068 square kilometers. 
62 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
It  is  a  vast  expanse  of  true  wilderness,  adjacent  to  the  Omo  River,  which  flows  southwards  into Lake 
Turkana  and  is  one  of  the  richest  and  least-visited  wildlife  sanctuaries  in  eastern  Africa.  Eland,  oryx, 
Burchell's zebra, Lelwel hartebeest, buffalo, giraffe, elephant, waterbuck, kudu, lion, leopard and cheetah 
roam within the park's boundaries. The Omo Valley is virtually free of human habitation and is rich in 
palaeo-anthro-pological  remains.  According  to  scientific  research  done  in  1982  by  the  University  of 
California at Berkeley, hominid remains from the Omo Valley probably date back more than four million 
years.Abundant wildlife, spirited rapids, innumerable side creeks and waterfalls, sheer inner canyons and  
hot springs all combine to make the Omo one of the world's classic river  adventures. 
East of the Omo  River and stretching south towards the Chew Bahir basin lies the Mago National Park, 
rich in wildlife and with few human inhabitants. The vegetation is mainly savannah grassland and bush, 
extending  across  an  area  of  2,160  square  kilometers.  Mammal  species  totaling  to  about  81,  includes 
hartebeest, giraffe, roan antelope, elephant, lion, leopard and perhaps even a rare black rhino.   
15. Semen Mountain National  Park:   This  Park  which is  classified  as  IUCN Category  II is  found in the 
Amhara Region twenty kilometers north-east of Gondar and covers an area of 179 Km2 of highland area 
at an average elevation of 3,300 meters. Ras Dashen, at 4,620 meters the highest peak in Ethiopia, stands 
adjacent to the park. Within this spectacular splendor live the Walia (Abyssinian) ibex, Simien red fox and 
Gelada baboon all endemic to Ethiopia as well as the Hamadryas baboon, klipspringer and bushbuck. Birds 
such as the lammergeyer, augur buzzard, erreaux's eagle, kestrel and falcon also soar above this mountain. 
Within this spectacular splendor live the Walia (Abyssinian) ibex, Simien red fox and Gelada baboon all 
endemic to  Ethiopia  -  as well as the Hamadryas baboon, klipspringer and bushbuck. Birds such as the 
lammergeyer, augur buzzard, Verreaux's eagle, kestrel and falcon also soar above this mountain.The park 
was created primarily to protect the Walia Ibex, a type of wild goat, and over 1000 are said to live in the 
park. Also in the Park are families of the Gelada Baboon and the rare Simien fox. The Simien fox, although 
named after the mountains, is rarely seen by the visitor. Over 50 species of birds have been reported in the 
Simien Mountains. 
6.4.  Wildlife Reserves and Sanctuaries 
Wildlife Reserves 
Chelbi  Wildlife  Reserve  is  a  protected  area  in  Ethiopia's  Southern  Nations,  Nationalities,  and  Peoples' 
Region.The reserve covers an area of 4212 km2 surrounding Lake Chew Bahir, aka Lake Chelbi, and portions 
of the Woito and Segen River watersheds, which empty into the lake. The reserve was established in 1973, 
and is also known as Chalbi, Chew Bahir, or Stephanie Wildlife Reserve. It is bounded on the south by the 
Kenyan border, on the east by Borena National Park, and on the west by the Murle (or Murulle) Controlled 
Hunting Area. 
63 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Sanctuaries 
Existing sanctuary in the project area include  Kuni-Muktar Mountain Nyala, Senkelle Swayne's Hartebeest 
and Yabelo Wildlife Sanctuary. Kuni-Muktar Mountain Nyala Sanctuary is a wildlife sanctuary in Oromia 
Region of Ethiopia. It was set up in 1989 through the intervention of the Zoological Society of London to 
safeguard a small decreasing population of the critically endangered Mountain nyala (Tragelaphus buxtoni). 
Senkelle  Swayne's  Hartebeest  Sanctuary  is  a  protected  area  in  the  Oromia  Region  (or  kilil)  of  Ethiopia, 
dedicated especially to the protection of the Swayne's hartebeest (Alcelaphus buselaphus swaynei). Covering 
54 square kilometers, the reserve is located some 10 kilometers south of the Shashemene-Arba Minch road 
near the town of Aje.Yabelo Wildlife Sanctuary is a protected area and wildlife sanctuary in southern Ethiopia. 
It is located in the Borena Zone of the Oromia Region west of the town of Yabelo, having an area of 2,500 
square kilometers and elevations ranging from 1430 to 2000 meters above sea level. The wildlife sanctuary 
borders on Borena National Park to the south. 
6.5.  International designated Areas 
UNESCO-MAB Biosphere Reserves found within the PACT Program Area include Kafa Biosphere Reserve 
and Yayu Biosphere Reserve . The Kafa Biosphere Reserve is located in the Kafa Zone of the Oromia Region 
approximately 460 km southwest of Addis Abba. Kafa Biosphere Reserve is the birthplace of wild Arabic 
coffee and contains close to 5,000 wild varieties of the plant in this biodiversity hotspot.  The Yayu coffee 
forest  biosphere  reserve  is  in  the  Illubabor  Zone  of  Oromiya  Regional  State,  in  the  south-western  part  of 
Ethiopia.  The  biosphere  reserve  contains  landscape  elements  of  regional,  national,  and  international 
importance.  The  most  important  landscapes  are  forest,  agricultural  land,  wetland,  and  grazing  land.  The 
biosphere  reserves  include  Eastern  Afromontane  Biodiversity  Hotspot  and  Important  Bird  Areas  of 
international significance. The area is also of cultural and historical significance. 
6.6.  Vulnerable Groups and Underserved Peoples in the program areas 
To conceptualize and define vulnerability in the context of PACT Program, it is important to understand and 
determine the factors that expose people to vulnerability situation. Vulnerability describes a situation in which 
people find themselves that is likely to expose them to certain adversities and reduce their resilience to cope 
with the resulting negative impacts. Accordingly, situations that make people vulnerable may include poverty, 
inflation, natural disasters like flood, conflict, lack of access to information and communication, and embedded 
social and cultural attitudes and practices. Factors such as gender, ethnicity, religion, occupation, disability 
have acted as vulnerability grounds on which people have been discriminated against and experienced various 
disadvantages.  
The  National  Social  Protection  Strategy  (NSPS)  of  Ethiopia  recognizes  vulnerability  as  having  various 
dimensions, and one of these is social exclusion and deprivation. Vulnerability in the context of exclusion and 
deprivation encompasses ‘Individuals/households who due to gender, disability, age, orphan hood, ethnicity, 
64 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
location or other factors face marginalization from society, or discrimination in access to services or work, 
people who are powerless and voiceless within their household or community’. Vulnerability can therefore be 
understood  as  an  all-encompassing  concept  that  covers  all  types  of  disadvantaged  social  groups  who  are 
objects of denial, exclusion, neglect, and contempt, in connection with the share of benefits and participation 
in decision making in multi-layered mainstream development programs. 
In respect to this, focus on the identification of vulnerable groups and their circumstances, needs and interests 
constitute a key principle in the design and overall management of PACT. Considering this and based on the 
review of relevant  literature  gathered for Social  Assessments  carried out  for other relevant  projects,  in  the 
context of this ESCMF vulnerable groups and underserved peoples  in the Program are women particularly 
female-household heads and those in polygamous unions, pastoral and agro-pastoral groups, unemployed and 
underemployed rural youths, and culturally distinct groups. 
6.7.  Women  
PACT  program  treats  gender  as  crosscutting  issue  requiring  special  focus,  to  empower  women  to  fully 
participate and benefit in the whole range of program interventions. In the program area, as is the case in wider 
society, women become vulnerable because of socially constructed gender-based values and belief systems 
and their productive and reproductive roles in the household. In specific terms, women’s status in relation to 
their domestic division of labor (childcare and food preparation), socioeconomic status (limited property and 
ownership rights), and unequal power relations and burden of responsibilities deserve closer examination in 
the overall PACT project design and implementation. The status of Ethiopian women can also be seen in terms 
of societal attitudes towards women, their educational status and awareness of their rights. More specifically, 
societal  attitudes  towards  women  (e.g.,  they  are  meant  to  care  for  the  domestic  affairs,  namely  childcare, 
preparation of food, etc.)  no or little education (with all its ramifications such as low awareness of their rights 
both at micro- and macro-level)and their roles and status in the family (e.g., in polygamous unions, female-
headed households) deserve closer examination in view of meeting the objective of PACT Program. 
The World Bank task team in consultation with relevant stakeholders in Ethiopia conducted a rapid analysis 
to identify key gender gaps in Ethiopia that may help to consider these issues during the implementation of 
the PACT program. According to the preliminary findings of the assessment, key gender gaps are: (i) women 
and girls face higher risks after a natural disaster takes place, partly because of their limited voice and agency. 
(ii) women often do not have the income and means to effectively respond to disaster and reduce their exposure 
and vulnerability, which, in  turn,  affects  their capacity  to  cope  up  with  future shocks  and(iii)  women lack 
access to early warning, as these are often issued in public places, while women spend most of their time at 
home for childcare and other household chores.  
Therefore, it is crucially important to seriously consider the gender specific statuesque in the development of 
the PACT program, the place of women in the program and how gender issues should be mainstreamed in 
respect to the key principles, prime objectives, and activities of PACT.  
65 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
6.8.  Pastoral and Agro-Pastoral Groups  
Historically, pastoral and agro-pastoral groups used to be the most underserved communities in Ethiopia. An 
estimated  eight  to  ten  million  people,  10%  of  the  country’s  total  population  practice  pastoralism  as  their 
predominant mode of survival across the lowlands of Ethiopia. The rangelands where pastoral practices are 
extensively carried out represent two-third of the total national land area. These are located in Somali and - 
national regional states, the Borana Zone of Oromia Region, and the South Omo Zone of the Southern Nations, 
Nationalities and Peoples Regional State. The pastoral and agro-pastoral populations belong to some twenty-
nine ethno-linguistic groups that are classified as Cushitic, Omotic and Nilotic. The main pastoral nomadic 
ethnic groups in Ethiopia are geographically locates as follows: the -, Issa, and Karrayu in the northeast and 
east of Oromia, the Somali in the southeast, the Borana and Gujji in the south, and the Hamar, Benna, Arbore, 
Tsemai, Mursi, Bodi, Dassanecth, Nyangatom, and Karro, in the southwest.  
Beset as it is by a range of adverse conditions, migratory pastoralist continues to sustain an increasing size of 
human  population.  Since  the  recent  past,  the  herding  populations  in  the  lowland  have  largely  been 
impoverished and food insecure. The arid climate of the regions characterized by frequent cases of drought 
has been a principal contributory factor to the prevailing conditions. Resource degradation and water scarcity 
aggravated by steady increases in human and livestock population, recurrent droughts, and the conversion of 
sizable areas of pastoral territory into dry land agricultural zones have resulted in the reduction of rangelands 
in  terms  of  both  quality  and  size.  Poverty  among  the  nomadic  populations  extends  far  beyond  food 
insufficiency. They also have little access to socioeconomic benefits like health and education services and 
opportunities to income generating activities outside of the livestock domain.  
The  situation  of  pastoral  communities  was  further  compounded  by  lack  of  due  policy  attention.  by  the 
government. The needs and interests of pastoral groups are not given the attention they deserved in the design 
and implementation of development policy intervention, as compared to smallholder agricultural communities 
in the highlands. As a result, a substantial portion the development investment was devoted to the promotion 
of the non-pastoral sector of the economy. Thus, in addition to the ecological stress that pastoralists suffered, 
they also experienced economic and political marginalization. 
Another area of possible constraints to development interventions is inter-ethnic tension and conflict in the 
nomadic and transhumant pastoral areas. Current studies indicate that in most of the pastoral and agro-pastoral 
areas where PACT will be implemented have been marked by intermittent conflicts and animosities and even 
open warfare. In this regard, critical problems have been witnessed among the Borana and Somalia and Guiji 
on the one side, and the Kore and Burji on the other, also among the Konso and Derashe and the agro-pastoral 
groups of the South Omo Region, in the Rift Valley Lakes Basin. There are also frequent clashes between the 
- and Karrayu, the - and Issa Somali, the - and Arsi Oromo, and the - and Ittu in the middle and lower Awash 
Valley. In the lower flood plains of the Omo-Gibe Basin, recurrent inter-group conflicts are widely prevalent 
66 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
between the Hamar and Dassanetch, the Borena and Arbore, the Borena and Dassanetch, and the Ngnagatom 
and Turkana. 
The main reasons for the conflict are competition over the use of grazing land and water, cattle raiding and 
counter-raiding,  land  ownership  and  boundary  disputes.  Ethnic  based  regionalization  has  also  contributed 
considerably to the escalation of conflicts among some neighboring groups, as there are no clear demarcations 
of ethnic boundaries.  
For instance, hostilities among the nomadic pastoral groups in the Middle and Upper Awash Valley region are 
aggravated  largely  by  the  alienation  of  grazing  land  by  the  expansion  of  large-scale  commercial  irrigated 
agriculture and the extensive network of conservation areas for game/tourist parks. The conflicts are intensified 
as one group encroached into the territory of the other following their displacement by the development of 
concession  agriculture.  In  the  same  way,  in  the  1980s,  part  of  the  territory  inhabited  by  the  agro-pastoral 
communities in the Lower Omo Basin was turned into a state-run irrigated farm, and recently the government 
has begun leasing out huge tracts of community land to foreign companies and foreign governments so that 
they grow cash crops including bio-fuels. As the government has taken over more and more community land, 
competition for scarce resources has intensified. Moreover, in July 2006, the Ethiopian government signed a 
contract with the Italian company, Salini Costruttori, to build Gibe III, one of the biggest hydro-electric dams 
in the country. This has put an end to the natural floods of the Omo River, and as the natural flood with its rich 
silt  deposits  disappears, subsistence economies are threatened with  collapse, and many of the flood retreat 
cultivating agro-pastoral groups in the area facing food shortage. The potential for inter-group conflict will 
increase as people compete for scarce and dwindling resource. 
Thus,  if  left  alone  such  inter-ethnic  conflicts  will  be  serious  challenges  for  the  development  undertakings 
planned to be implemented in these areas where there is resource use conflict.  No doubt these inter-ethnic 
tensions and conflicts would pose contextual security risks in the implementation of the prgramme. This will 
necessitate into account when planning to implement some of the program activities in these conflict t zone. 
6.9.  Unemployment and Underemployed Rural Youths 
In all the regions where PACT Program is selected unemployment and underemployment are the main factors 
that  cause  rural  youths  to  be  vulnerable  groups.  In  the  local  setting  of  these  program  areas  identified  as 
unemployed rural youths are boys and girls who are out of work, not being able to find jobs in the farming 
villages to earn their own income and support themselves. These are young people who were forced to quit 
school at secondary or preparatory levels because of various challenges. Included in the same category are 
young men and women who have returned to their l villages to live with their families, not finding work in the 
urban areas after graduating from technical and vocational colleges or institutions of higher learning.  
On the other hand, underemployed rural youths refer to young villagers who continue to live with their families 
or kids but are without their own source of income. For this reason, they engage in livestock husbandry and 
67 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
crop production as part of the labor force in the household. Due to the ever-dwindling family land resulting 
from land fragmentation, the range of household tasks can hardly fully engage them of their time and energies. 
Regional rates of unemployment and underemployment are high. In the -, according to the 2013 Labor Force 
Survey, rural unemployment stood at 7.3%, while underemployment was recorded at 29.7. In Amhara, the 
figure is 1.6% and 33.6%, in Oromia, 1.5% and 43.8, Somali, 3.8% and 21.5%, SNNPR 2.6% and 38.8%, and 
Dire Dawa, 22.3 and 23.5%, respectively. 
In respect to this, the situation of rural youths is critical particularly in Oromia and SNNPR regions, and these 
areas are characterized by land scarcity because of high rates of land fragmentation and population growth.  
Cognizant of these facts in the regions, the Oromia and SNNPR regional states have developed plans to invest 
large amounts of finance on the expansion of rural youth job-creation in parts of the regions. 
68 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
7.  Potential Environmental, Social and Climate Impacts, Risks, & Proposed 
Mitigation Measures 
Participatory  Agriculture  and  Climate  Transformation  (PACT)  Project  will  use  landscape  management 
approach to improve community livelihood by implementing climate resilient program activities. The Program 
activities are primarily    aimed  at  enhancing  the positive  impacts  but  may  have  some  negative  impacts 
which may occur at different stages of the program cycle mainly  during  implementation  and  operation  due 
to  improper  design  and implementation. The ESCMF is prepared to ensure that the implementation of the 
PACT  Program  will  be carried  out  in  an  environmentally  sound  and  socially  acceptable  manner 
while at the same time addressing issues related to climate change.  It  provides  a framework  to  enable 
communities  t o   screen program activities  and  take  institutional  measures  to  address  adverse  climatic, 
environmental,  and  social  impacts. The  environmental, climate  and  social  management  intervention  is 
to  maximize  positive  impacts  and  ensure  sustainability  of  the  Program  minimizing  and/or 
intended 
mitigating  the negative impacts through appropriate mitigation measures. Some of the project interventions 
may have some localized but less sensitive, site specific and perhaps irreversible environmental and social 
impacts if appropriate measure is not taken and if such impacts are not considered in relation to their locations 
during the design of the sub-projects. The types of sub-projects which include those related to construction 
and maintenance of water harvesting structures (e.g., ponds, storage tanks); construction of community access 
roads; roadside flood harvesting/drainage systems; diversion canals, small dams; area closures; agro- forestry, 
small-scale irrigation, reforestation and afforestation in communal and private lands which may sometimes 
require land acquisition and affect the local community. The following sections discuss positive impacts and 
the  likely  negative  impacts  associated  with  PACT  Program  activities  and  mitigation  measures  to  propose 
minimize impacts. 
7.1.  Positive Impacts 
The PACT Program will enhance farmers ‘adaptive capacity and improve management of natural resources. 
Moreover, PACT will support farmers in creating market linkage to reliably  sell more of their agricultural 
products at higher prices. This in turn encourages farmers to invest in their own businesses and increase the 
quantity, quality and diversity of the goods they produce. The program will also support market research to 
help a farmer determine with how much of the product must be produced and for and when and for how much 
they should sell products in the market. The marker research will also support farmers to develop a production 
plan that will always ensure satisfaction of customers’ demands. Support will also be provided by the project 
to the farmers to have access to digital market-based information system through farmer cooperatives /unions, 
facilitating access to matching grants for agri-business start up;  provide timely  information of the  current 
market price of food commodities. 
 The table below indicates some of the positive impacts related to the PACT Project Components. 
69 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Table 7. 1 Positive Impacts 
Component/ 
sub -
component 
Component 1: 
Community-Led 
Climate-Smart 
Productive Landscapes 
Subcomponent 1.1: 
Community-led 
Participatory Agricultural 
Development Planning 
Subcomponent 1.2 
Integrated Natural 
Resource Management 
Subcomponent 1.3: 
Climate Resilient Water 
Development for 
Households, Crops and 
Livestock Use  
Subcomponent 1.4: 
Market-Oriented and 
Nutrition-sensitive 
Climate-resilient Food 
Production and 
Productivity 
Component 2: Inclusive 
and Equitable Market 
Access 
Subcomponent 2.1: 
Market Access Linkage 
Support  
Subcomponent 2.2: 
Tailored Business and 
Positive social impacts 
Positive environmental 
impacts 
-Farm and landscape productivity will be 
improved; 
-Food security will be improved through 
better crop yields and managed 
agricultural resource base; 
-Increase income of the local community, 
create job opportunity (employment 
opportunity) for landless community 
members; 
-improved soil fertility and yields and 
reduce farmer’s economic loss; 
-Creates additional job for cook-stove 
producers and improve their income and 
reduce exposure to indoor air pollution; 
-Possibility for the  farmers to benefit from 
carbon financing will increase;   
-Mainstream nutrition across the 
components to equip, the PMU with 
adequate knowledge and skills to conduct 
relevant nutrition analyses, identify entry 
points along the food value chains, design 
targeted interventions for the most 
nutritionally vulnerable and -strengthen 
integration of gender, youth, environment, 
and climate in a food system perspective; 
-Leverage the climate-gender-nutrition 
nexus and ensure women and youth to 
adequately benefit from enhanced 
landscape restoration and management by 
exploring gendered specific activities, 
including skill enhancement and promoting 
income-generating activities; 
imply 
ecosystems  will 
-Important  habitats  and  biodiversity 
will  be  restored  at  the  landscape 
level;This  will 
the 
development of a baseline assessment 
for critical ecosystems 
-Critical 
be 
rehabilitated,  and  ecosystem  goods 
and services will be revitalized; 
-Enhance ecosystem service ; 
-Adaptive capacity of local 
communities will be improved by 
promoting climate smart agriculture; 
-Increase crop diversification and 
agricultural practices will be 
improved; 
-GHG emissions from AFOLU will 
be reduced and carbon sequestration 
will be increased; 
- 
Improves  environmental  conditions 
through soil and water conservation 
measures by increasing vegetation 
cover; 
enhance biodiversity conservation; 
-The different SWC practices help to 
hold soil in place during and after 
harvest of farm crops. This allows for 
ground  moisture  levels  to  remain 
stable ,  reduces  soil  degradation; 
-Rehabilitation of degraded lands 
through reforestation, Farmer-
Managed Natural Regeneration 
70 
Component/ 
sub -
component 
Finance Linkage to 
Agribusiness 
Subcomponent 2.3: Local 
Market-Related 
Infrastructure 
Component 3: 
Institutional and Policy 
Strengthening and 
Implementation 
Support Services 
Subcomponent 3.1: 
Institutional 
Strengthening 
Subcomponent 3.2: 
Programme Coordination 
and Implementation 
Support Services 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Positive social impacts 
Positive environmental 
impacts 
-Promote climate smart technologies such 
as the use of power saving devices and 
efficient technologies such as adoption of 
improved cook stoves . 
-Community-led landscape rehabilitation 
and management of natural resources that 
includes infrastructure development such 
as water supply for domestic use and for 
irrigation;  
-Increased targeted food commodities in 
the rural areas through the introduction of 
small irrigation, improving value chain and 
facilitating service delivery to the rural 
poor by providing access to markets. This 
will involve the construction of rural road  
to access market and irrigation schemes, 
small scale irrigation sites; 
(FMNR) and agroforestry as well as 
soil water Conservation construction;   
-Introduce Climate adaptation and 
resilient technologies such as  Climate 
smart agricultural technologies; 
- Improved soil fertility and 
agroecosystem productivity 
- potential increase of water 
availability from land restoration 
Reduced soil and water pollution from 
agroecological and Integrated crop 
management practices 
-Construction of rural water supply 
projects to provide drinking water to the 
rural poor; 
-Introduction of  climate smart 
technologies such as  fertilizer and 
pesticide inputs, mechanisation and the 
necessary information related to drought 
and climate change to the farmers; 
-Promotion of business to business 
linkages and investment in market 
infrastructure such as storage facilities, 
market sheds and rural roads; 
-Promotion of technological change for 
smallholder production systems to 
improved production and productivity of 
71 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Component/ 
sub -
component 
Positive social impacts 
Positive environmental 
impacts 
target crop and livestock commodities by 
introducing solar-small-scale farmer-led 
irrigation-related infrastructure, 
multipurpose water infrastructure and 
rehabilitation of irrigation schemes 
damaged due to the conflict. Promotion of 
renewable energy sources for powering 
water acquisition; 
-Enhancement of production and 
productivity through the use of fertilizers 
and pesticides and creating access to 
markets that help in increasing household 
incomes; 
-Development of Improved Farmer Led 
Small-scale Irrigation Systems through 
construction of new or  rehabilitation 
small-scale irrigation; 
-Address production-related constraints of 
target crops selected by women and men 
farmers and create  access to improved 
seed and  soil fertility/health management 
including upscaling soil fertility 
technologies; 
-Improve crop protection system including 
integrated pest management practices;  
-Improve household level food production 
for home consumption and marketing and 
improve production of forage and feed for 
livestock; 
-Implement package tailored training to 
enhance entrepreneurial and business 
skills, financial literacy, climate change 
72 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Component/ 
sub -
component 
Positive social impacts 
Positive environmental 
impacts 
adaptation, leadership and digital skills and 
a matching grant. 
-support rural infrastructure investments 
that can add market and nutritional value at 
the location, guarantee food safety, extend 
shelf life, upgrade performance of 
enterprises and support associated 
agricultural producers, including women, 
to become competitive, sustainable 
commercial businesses in an 
environmentally friendly manner 
Infrastructure including   market sheds, 
storage facilities for farmer’s 
organizations, renovation/improvement of 
rural access roads;  
-Support to Young Women and Men 
Agripreneurs Local Climate resilient, 
Market-Related Infrastructure by 
strengthening Institution and Policy 
Support that will be responsible for 
overseeing and/or implementing safeguard 
policies indicated in the ESMCF 
document. 
7.2.  Positive Role of PACT Project in the Adaption and Mitigation of Climate Change 
PACT  will  support  interventions  that  will  reduce  land  degradation  and  enhance  climate  resilience  of 
communities  and  ecosystems.  Natural  Resource  management  and  climate  adaptation  and  mitigation 
interventions  pursuant  measures  specified  into  the  Ethiopia’s  Climate  Resilient  Green  Economy  Strategy 
(CRGE), National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and the Updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) will 
be implemented in target regions and Woredas. PACT implementation will use participatory and landscape 
approaches in which target communities and other stakeholders will be consulted to identify environment and 
climate challenges and prioritizes proved traditional and innovative technologies and techniques to address the 
73 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
challenges. Besides, IFAD’s tools will be used to prioritize adaptation measures. NRM and climate adaptation 
and mitigation measures will be integrated into project intervention and implemented across the landscape. 
PACT Project is expected to play positive role in the reduction of carbon releases into the atmosphere. Most 
of the PACT Project activities are aimed to promote agricultural productivity. At the same time, they will 
enhance climate adaption and mitigation and minimize carbon release into the atmosphere.  
Mitigation aims to reduce emissions or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases, while adaptation aims to reduce 
the vulnerability of people and ecosystems to climate variation and change that is the degree to which they are 
susceptible to, and unable to cope with, adverse impacts of climate. 
The table 7.2 below depicts the role of PACT Project in Mitigation and adaption of Climate change 
Table 7. 2 The positive role of PACT Program in   Mitigation and adaption of Climate change 
PACT Project Activities 
Adaption and mitigation actions 
Ecological resilience  
Ecosystem services. 
Minimization of 
displacement activities  
Carbon funding  
Target groups  
Mainstreaming   
PACT Project activities such as enhancing ecosystem resilience improve the 
permanence of carbon storage and reduce climate risks for projects 
Protecting  watershed  initiatives  in  the  PACT  Project  for  adaptation  can 
benefit  to  generate  hydropower  and  clean  energy  production.  Adapting 
feedstock production can ensure the sustainability of clean energy initiatives. 
Adapting  agriculture  that  minimizes  displacement  of  people  due  PACT 
Project  livelihood  activities  may  improve  the  sustainability  of  REDD+ 
projects  by  reducing  pressures  on  forests  and  enhancing  carbon 
sequestrations 
Adaptation  initiatives  by  the  local  communities  such  as  agroforestry  and 
afforestation of the PACT Project can benefit from mitigation funding and 
carbon markets  
Climate change mitigation objectives of PACT project such as for example 
agroforestry, soil and water conservation and afforestation activities of the 
PACT Project   may change the project beneficiary target groups of PACT 
from the most vulnerable to the most responsible for emissions 
Adaptation and mitigation integration such as gender mainstreaming of the 
PACT Project will creates new opportunities for adaptation (or mitigation) 
due to women participation in all PACT Project activities. 
74 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
7.3.  Adverse Impacts on Social, Environmental and Climate and Proposed Mitigation 
measures 
7.3.1.  Social, Environment and Climate and Risks and Proposed Mitigation Measures  
Classification  of the level of Level of risks of the PACT Project indicated in the project concept note  are 
slightly modified in the table below based on the socioeconomic and biophysical assessment of the project 
areas and  feedback obtained from  the regional  consultations from the project design team.  
Table 7. 3 Level of environment related project Risks    
Level of Risk 
Inherent 
Residual 
Risk 
Substantial 
Moderate 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Risks 
Risks and Proposed Mitigation Measures 
Environment and Climate 
Context 
Project vulnerability to environmental 
conditions 
Land degradation is increasing at an alarming 
rate. The most important forms of land 
degradation are soil erosion, nutrient depletion, 
soil compaction, and increased salinization and 
acidity.  Approximately 11 million ha of land 
are salt affected soils. The current rate of 
deforestation is estimated at 150,000 to 
200,000 hectares per year 
Integrated Natural Resource Management 
activities will be implemented by the project as 
well as through the finance from IGREENFIN 
and ASAP+. The most important and 
appropriate mitigation actions will be physical 
and biological soil and water conservation 
activities, climate smart agriculture, and 
landscape management including forestation, 
restoration and afforestation activities. Good 
lessons from PASIDP II (ASAP) will be scaled 
up.  
Project vulnerability to 
climate change impacts 
Ethiopia is the 20th most vulnerable country to 
the impact of climate change. Climate 
75 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Risks 
Risks and Proposed Mitigation Measures 
Level of Risk 
Inherent 
Residual 
Risk 
variabilities, in the form of flood and drought, 
have long been affecting crop, livestock and 
forestry productivity, infrastructures, 
livelihood, water availability.   
Climate resilient infrastructure development, 
crop and livestock productivity enhancement 
through the application of climate smart 
agriculture such as conservation agriculture, 
watershed management activities, nature-based 
solutions, ecosystem-based adaptation, and 
awareness and capacity development will 
enhance resilience of the community and 
ecosystem.  
Institutions are available but there might be a 
lack of adequate capacity in the 
implementation of safeguard policy in terms of 
manpower, skill, infrastructure as well as 
systems particularly at Region and Woreda 
level 
Capacity need assessment on the 
implementation of safeguard policy  
Training of experts in environmental 
management and safeguard policy instruments 
-Sharing  experience on the implementation of 
safeguard policy from similar projects such as 
PASIDP II 
The inclusion of new elements may stretch the 
capacity of the M&E in the implementation of 
safeguard measures for the MoA. 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Low 
moderate 
Moderate 
Institutional Capacity for 
project Implementation and 
Sustainability 
M&E arrangements 
Biodiversity conservation 
Project activities will in one way or another 
create genetic erosion. Avoid sites rich in 
biodiversity  
moderate 
Low 
76 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Level of Risk 
Inherent 
Residual 
Risk 
Moderate 
Low 
Substantial 
low 
Moderate 
moderate 
Risks 
Risks and Proposed Mitigation Measures 
Environment, Social and 
Climate Impact 
Resource efficiency and 
pollution prevention 
Climate change, use of agrochemicals as well 
as use of forest clearance may cause loss of 
biodiversity  
Climate screening and implementation of 
mitigation measures, integrated pest 
management system and compliance to 
SECAP and national law on environment  
Wasteful/in-efficient use of water for 
irrigation, drinking as well as pollution of 
environmental media such as water, soil, air by 
construction activities, pesticides, chemical 
fertilisers.  
Efficient use of water through training of 
IWUA, deploying water regulation systems 
promotion of precise irrigation systems. 
Compliance to SECAP and national law on 
pollution prevention and precautionary 
approaches and increase use of organic 
fertilizer  
Cultural heritage 
Some construction activities may impact 
historical, religious or cultural resources. 
moderate 
Low 
Appropriate screening of project/sub project, 
consultation with responsible government 
representatives. 
There may also arise the need to modify 
project design to save heritage 
Underprivileged/vulnerable   
Population 
Pastoralist, vulnerable, and disadvantaged 
people may be impacted by project activities. 
moderate 
Low 
Community health and 
safety 
Construction activities and use of 
agrochemicals may have a negative impact on 
community health and safety. Furthermore, 
some project activities such as water 
Substantial 
Moderate 
77 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Risks 
Risks and Proposed Mitigation Measures 
Level of Risk 
Inherent 
Residual 
Risk 
Labour and working 
conditions 
Physical and economic 
resettlement 
ponds/diversions may cause water-borne or 
other vector-borne diseases (e.g. temporary 
breeding habitats), and/or communicable and 
non-communicable disease. COVID-19 is still 
potential health threat   
Provision of PPE, Integrated Pest management 
practices and also deploying of COVID-19 
preventing measures  as well as SECAP 
compliance  
Project activities may cause forced or child 
labour, gender-based violence, discriminatory 
and unsafe/unhealthy working conditions, low 
wage 
Awareness creation and capacity development 
to ensure project activities are conducted in a 
safe working environment. Contractor 
contracts will include clauses to ensure 
adequate working conditions. Furthermore, 
GRM system will be established/ 
strengthened so that affected people have 
access to address and resolve their complaints. 
Sensitization will also be done in collaboration 
with relevant authorities to prevent GBV.  
The proposed infrastructure development such 
as irrigation schemes, warehouses, and rural 
roads may cause physical, economic, and 
involuntary resettlement and limit access to 
natural resources.  
Adherence to SECAP and national laws entails 
screening of project activities and elaborating 
ESCMPs for the infrastructure development. 
FPIC, preparation of RAP and compensation 
prior to commencement of any physical 
activities will be ensured and resettlement 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Substantial   
Moderate 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Moderate 
Substantial 
Substantial 
78 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Risks 
Risks and Proposed Mitigation Measures 
Greenhouse gas emissions 
Vulnerability of target 
populations and 
ecosystems to climate 
variability and hazards 
Stakeholder engagement/ 
coordination 
should be voluntary. GRM should be 
strengthened to ensure timely and satisfactory 
responses to complaints.  
Use of chemical fertilizer, deforestation and 
land degradation may cause emission of  
GHGs. Generally, the project's contribution to 
GHG emission is low. Much focus on low 
emitting animals such as poultry, sheep, and 
goats. Furthermore, intensive, afforestation, 
assisted restoration, regenerative agriculture 
practices and agro forestry activities to 
sequester large amount of GHGs.  
Target community and ecosystem are 
vulnerable to the impact of climate variability 
such as drought and flood. There are high 
hazard risks such as flood, extreme weather, 
wildfire , pest outbreaks 
PACT will promote climate smart agriculture 
technologies included improved crop varieties 
and support financing of smallholder farmers 
for climate adaptation and mitigation. 
Stakeholders may not be adequately engaged 
during project design and implementation. 
Lack of budget and COVID related restrictions 
may affect stakeholder participation as needed  
Budgeted stakeholder engagement plan will be 
prepared to ensure (i) adequate mapping of 
stakeholder  and beneficiaries, (ii) their 
demands are incorporated in the design, (iii) 
compliments are resolved in fair and timely 
manners and (iv) required capacity and 
awareness are in place.  
Level of Risk 
Inherent 
Residual 
Risk 
low 
low 
High  
Substantial 
moderate 
Moderate 
high  
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Stakeholder grievances 
Government representatives, 
contractors/consultants/ target community, 
high  
Moderate 
79 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Risks 
Risks and Proposed Mitigation Measures 
Level of Risk 
Inherent 
Residual 
Risk 
downstream communities may have grievances 
because of the nature of the project. lack of or 
non-functional GRM system. 
establishment/strengthening of GRM system, 
awareness creation to complainants, capacity 
development/training to GRM committee  
Moderate 
Moderate 
The overall PACT Project risk is assessed as substantial. 
7.2.2 Adverse Social, Environmental and Climate Impacts and Proposed Mitigation 
Measures 
Project activities financed by PACT resources such as food crop production, water infrastructure development, 
reforestation,  afforestation,  agroforestry  development  and  process/value  addition  on  some  agricultural 
products will have adverse impacts on the surrounding natural resources. These will include adverse impacts 
on climate, ground water pollution due to excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides, soil erosion due to farming 
of  steep  slope/  marginal  land,    lowering  of  ground  water  levels  due  to  excessive  water  use  for  irrigation, 
contamination of food and  water bodies   due to improper use/storage of   agro chemicals, breeding ground  
for  insect  vectors  due  to  lack  of  proper  drainage,  shortage  in  animal  fodder    due  to  increase  in  livestock 
population , deforestation due to expansion of agricultural  land, pollution of surface and ground water and 
release of pungent smell due to release of  animal wastes, power shortage  due to additional energy demand 
for agro processing and  health risks due to improper use of agro-chemicals are expected to occur .  
Soil erosion due to expansion of farmland  
Activities like excavation and digging works during agricultural expansion will involve clearing of existing 
vegetation within the homestead, which may contribute to the loss of plant cover to a certain degree, and this 
will result in a disturbance of topsoil and cause of micro level erosion and loss of carbon in the soil. Similarly, 
farmers may expand their farmland to steep slopes and marginal lands. Areas that are at high risk for erosion 
due to steep slopes or erodible soils can be alternatively used for forage production or grazing and steeply 
sloped lands under cultivation can be converted to perennial plantation to minimize soil erosion. Wooded areas 
with poor soils and steep slopes should be left in their natural state to minimize soil erosion.  
Loss of soil Fertility  
80 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The increase in the demand of staple food production could lead to overuse of arable land which becomes 
susceptible to loss of soil fertility. Farmers should receive training on how soil fertility can be maintained by 
changing cropping patterns, growing nitrogen-fixing crops and composting of crop residues to minimize loss 
of soil fertility using CA application 
Ground water Depletion  
Farmers benefitting from resources may buy water pumps to irrigate their land and produce crops, fruits and 
vegetables. Excessive pumping of ground water for irrigation may cause ground water depletion and drying 
out  of  boreholes  that  are  in  use  by  the  nearby  community.  Ground  water  depletion  and  its  impact  can  be 
avoided/ minimized by keeping recharge –discharge balance of the catchment areas. The farmers need some 
capacity building or sensitization on the sustainable volumes of ground water that can be abstracted annually 
to minimize avoid ground water depletion. 
Deforestation due to expansion of Agricultural land  
The availability of funds may encourage farmers to expand their agricultural land to the adjacent forest areas. 
Similarly, smallholder farmers will be tempted to grow crops on steep slopes and riverbanks or encroach to 
the nearby forest reserves   Farmers should be sensitized and be informed of the benefits of conserving forest 
in terms of maintaining the balance of the ecosystem. To minimize impact assist farmers to increase production 
from small land and using agro- smart technology.  
Impact on Biodiversity 
Some project activities will generally not have any adverse impacts on terrestrial and/or aquatic biodiversity. 
However, there may be a case where big trees that obstruct farming activities and trees and other vegetation 
cover could be found within and around the farms. Under such circumstances vegetation clearance to a certain 
extent will sometimes be required and this may adversely affect   the biodiversity of the area to some degree. 
It is essential to preserve tree species of biodiversity importance to minimize impacts.  Similarly some project 
activities may disrupt wildlife habitat if such sub projects are planned to be implemented near national parks.  
Impact on agriculture due to climate change 
Agricultural yield could reduce from time to time due to recurrent drought and climate variability. To minimize 
these impacts the following mitigation measures are proposed. 
-Use  a  set  of  climate  resilient  cropping  systems  and  practices  will  be  promoted  to  offer  important 
adaptation benefits.  
-Introduce crop diversification and the promotion of agricultural practices that are better adapted to the 
changing climate 
-Improve production yields, greater income generation and reduced dependence on the exploitation of 
natural resources in lean periods. 
81 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
-Enhance and improve agro-meteorological infrastructure to provide timely information services to the 
project beneficiaries such as cluster of smallholders, public and private investors, and value chain actors. 
-Adopt climate smart technologies (sustainable land management, water harvesting technologies, clean 
energy and conservation of forests ecosystems 
Impact on climate due to the use of diesel fuel and wood to generate power 
The use of diesel and wood to generate power will contribute to global warming.  To minimize such impact 
energy efficient technologies and power sources such as wind and solar should be use and forests should be 
sustainably  managed.  Moreover,  private  investments  should  be  encouraged  to  invest  on  climate  resilient 
technologies to improve Energy Efficiency and practice 
Shortage in animal fodder 
Animal rearing and fattening will increase the number of animals and may result in shortage of animal fodder 
and overgrazing. Increase in the animal population will increase the likelihood of reaching the limits of the 
carrying capacity of the grazing land. To minimize adverse impacts the following measures can be taken. 
•  Control number of animals and use improved breed so that it will not exceed the carrying capacity of 
the grazing land- 
•  Avoid grazing too early so that there will be enough grass in the dry season 
•  Monitor rainfall patterns and growth of pasture 
Cumulative Impacts of the Project  
The  business  operations  supported  by  the  project  may  not  have  serious  adverse  environmental  impacts. 
However, several projects in combination, or in combination with other government or private sector activities, 
could also have a larger, more significant cumulative impact. Particularly, given the nature of MSEs and their 
tendency to form clusters, the cumulative impacts can be considered significant. These impacts may be a result 
of the disposal of non-hazardous and hazardous wastes and chemicals, which may not be significant when 
considered individually, but significant when considered collectively.  
Minimizing  cumulative  impacts  requires  introducing  mitigation  of  the  impacts  of  individual  businesses 
supported by this project and of other development activities that are currently operating in the project area. 
Exposure to COVID 19, HIV Aids, sexually transmitted Diseases and Gender Base Violence (GBV) 
Exposure to COVID 19, HIV Aids, sexually transmitted Diseases and Gender Base Violence (GBV) may be 
intensified because of labor migration from place to place in search of work on public and private investments 
financed by PACT+   
Impact to COVID 19 may be intensified because of labor migration from place to place in search of work from 
PACT financed Program.   Any envisaged physical interaction during the project poses a high risk for Covid-
82 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
19  infection  and  transmission  for  everyone  involved.  The  likely  impacts  of  Covid-19  can  range  from  the 
following: 
•  Contraction  of  Covid-19  from  gatherings  for  example  multi-stakeholder  cluster  meetings,  producer 
• 
organisations etc which affects coordination and decision making;  
Instability  of  family  units  who  are  laying  to  the  project  due  to  sickness  and  possible  deaths  within 
households  
•  Farm Labour shortages due to Covid-19 regulations, sickness and/or deaths; 
•  Women facing additional  work in  caring  for the  sick, on top  of their often already heavy domestic 
workloads. Young girls may also be required to help at home thereby limiting their opportunities in the 
productive sector;  
•  Disruption of value chain due to reduced activity on the part of financing officers, produce aggregators, 
transporters, processors and traders among other stakeholders; 
•  Market disruptions due to value chain instability and reduced demand due to reduced buying power 
among consumers which will result in high value perishable produce and exports being affected thereby 
affecting repayment schedules 
HIV Aids and Sexually transmitted Disease 
HIV Aids and Sexually transmitted Diseases may be intensified because of labor migration from place to place 
in search of work on public and private investment Sub projects financed by PACT.   
As community interacts with contractors, there is possible risk of HIV infections and transmission among the 
youth  during  construction  of  climate  change  resilient  infrastructure  and  at  the  markets  with  increased 
productivity and improved market linkages.  There is need to increase health seeking behavior among HIV 
positive women and youth to curb new incidences.   
Intensification of Malaria 
 Increased prevalence of consequent health implications (both for employees and the surrounding community) 
may be associated to some businesses supported by the project. For example, malaria could be intensified in 
the  small-scale  irrigation  schemes  due  to  the  formation  stagnant  water,  site  suitable  for  the  breeding  of 
mosquitoes. The following measures should be taken to control malaria intensification.  
-Avoid mosquito breeding sites by draining ponds and standing waters;-Wear clothing such as long-sleeved 
shirts and pants when working outdoors;-Spraying clothing with repellents ;Use impregnated mosquito net 
during night. 
Impact due to Increased Use of Fertilizers and Pesticides 
Increase in  yields of staple food-crops, commercial crops such fruits and vegetables will probably need an 
increased use of fertilizers and pesticides. An unsafe use of fertilizers and pesticides leads to the pollution of 
83 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
soils, rivers, streams and shallow aquifers. Farmers are also at risk if they do not properly control the use and 
storage of agrochemicals. Consumers are at risk if they eat products that are polluted by agrochemicals. In this 
context, the program will synergize with other IFAD projects in Ethiopia in irrigation, food crops, horticulture, 
dairy, natural resources management for them to not only provide starter kits to the farmers but will train them 
in the proper application and storage of agrochemicals.  
Excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides by farmers may pollute ground water. To minimize such impacts of 
these  inputs  farmers  should  receive  these  inputs  after  creating  awareness  of  the  effects  of  these  inputs  on 
ground water and the resulting public health consequences. It is also important to   encourage   farmers to use 
manure (organic fertilizer) and apply integrated Pesticide management to fight agricultural pests suing IPM 
and FFS establishment to minimize the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides.  
Health Impact due to poor storage and use of Agro-chemicals  
Agro  chemicals  such  as  fertilizers  and  pesticides  will  be  used  by  farmers  to  enhance  their  agricultural 
production. If these agro chemicals are not properly used and stored, they will contaminate food and water 
bodies and adversely affect the public health and the environment.  
To minimize such adverse health effects training should be given to farmers to properly store and use the agro-
chemicals. The following safety procedures should be maintained to minimize   impacts of agro-chemicals. 
Also, provision for use of Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) will be promoted by PACT  
Occupational Health and Safety Impacts  
Child labor  
With the high poverty and unemployment levels in the country, there is risk of vulnerable children flocking to 
construction sites for jobs with higher chances of being employed because they accept very low wage rates 
and have low negotiation power to poor treatment. This is especially true for the sub project that requires labor 
intensive work like plowing and weeding in agricultural fields to enhance crop production. Contractors and 
other parties may use child labor due to lack of awareness on the proclamation and the negative impact of child 
labor.  Child  labor  is  gross  oppression  of  children’s  rights  and  results  in  cyclic  poverty  in  the  community.  
Project implementers should be aware that children under age of 15 years will not be employed and young 
workers below 18 years shall not perform work that is likely to jeopardize their health or safety. Child labour 
should be monitored in each project implementation area and when it takes place, a socioeconomic analysis 
of its cause should be conducted after taking the legal measures.  Child protection laws should be disclosed to 
prevent the use of child labour in project activities and a surveillance and control system. 
Impact of workers and community  
Occupational health and safety issues will arise during the program implementation periods. This may result 
from improper use and lack of availability of the required Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). The contractor 
84 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
should provide PPE to the program beneficiaries and laborers who are engaged in the construction, installation, 
operation and maintenance and their proper use should be regularly monitored by the Project Coordination 
Unit the zonal level at all phases of the project.  
Labour  force  may  be  encountered  with  accident  during  construction  activities  in  developing  irrigation 
infrastructures.  To minimize such accident the contractor should avail PPE required at the construction site. 
The contractor should also provide to the labouers working on the construction sites camps that have adequate 
water supply and sanitation facilities.  
Gender Based Violence  
With high poverty and economic hardships, it is likely that adult women, young girls and young men may face 
exploitation in and outside their homes due to a strong patriarchal nature of the society and low negotiation 
power of the affected segments.  There is need to:  
-Take administrative and legal measures against those workers who commit GBV and sexual harassment 
-Ensure  that  construction  workers  do  not  encounter  any  type  of  GBV  and  sexual  exploitation,  abuse  and 
harassment 
-Ensure the safety and security of construction workers and protect them from GBV and sexual harassment 
through code of conduct. 
The following table indicates impacts directly related to the PACT Project Components, proposed mitigation 
measures, institution responsible for the implementation and approximate budget for the implementation of 
the proposed mitigation measures.  
PACT Project Related impacts, proposed mitigation measures, institution responsible for the implementation 
of the mitigation measures and budget estimate for the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is 
shown in Table 7.4 below:   
85 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Table 7. 4 PACT Project Related impacts, proposed mitigation measures, institution responsible for the implementation and budget 
estimate for the mitigation measures 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Level of 
significance 
Mitigation Measures 
Land 
Acquisition 
Impact on Socio-
economic 
environment 
Farmers may lose 
their land during 
the implementation 
of some of the 
PACT sub project 
activities  
Impact on 
Livelihoods 
Pre-construction phase 
Moderate  
-  Prepare an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) and Land 
acquisition plan and proper compensation based on the new 
proclamation 1161/2019 should be made to small holders’ farmers 
prior to the commencement of project construction activities    that 
have lost property for    agricultural/grazing or carbon financing, or 
equivalent land should be provided to the affected population 
-  To minimize livelihood impact plans should be prepared and 
implemented to restore livelihood of the project affect population 
Moderate 
Impact on air   
Moderate  
Some of the techniques that must be considered by the contractor for the 
reduction and control of air emissions from construction sites include: 
-  Minimize  dust  during  transportation  of  construction  materials  by 
using covers and/or control equipment  
-  Minimize  dust  by  spraying  water  along  the  construction  material 
transportation route  
-  Manage  and  control  emissions 
transporting 
construction  material  by  operating  in  compliance  with  relevant 
vehicle emission standards and regular maintenance to minimize air 
pollution;  
from  vehicles 
-  Rehabilitate quarry to its original status 
86 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Impacts on Land 
Use 
Level of 
significance 
Moderate 
Mitigation Measures 
The following mitigation measures should be taken to minimize impact 
on land use 
- 
 Disturbances must be limited to the areas where structures will be 
constructed;  
-  Minimize the clearance of vegetation to avoid exposure of soil to 
erosion. 
- 
Impact on 
biophysical 
environment 
Impact on 
Livelihoods 
Traffic Congestion 
and Accident   
Moderate 
Moderate   
livelihood 
impact  plans  should  be  prepared  and 
To  minimize 
implemented to restore livelihood of the project affect population  
Traffic congestion may occur during construction of PACT project 
activities. The following measures should be taken to minimize impacts;  
-  Ensure that construction vehicles are operated during non-peak 
hours;   
-  Provide appropriate road  signs to warn motorists and other road 
users of the ongoing construction activities ;  
-  Appropriate signs must be displayed on appropriate sites to avoid 
people accidentally falling into open trenches  
-  The incidence of road accidents  during construction must be 
avoided or minimized through a combination of education and 
awareness-raising 
-  Contractor must hire traffic controller to ensure no traffic build up 
along the roads;  
-  The Resident Engineer has to ensure that transportation vehicles are 
operated during off-peak hours to avoid peak traffic 
87 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Exposure to 
HIV/AIDS and 
other Sexually 
Transmitted 
Diseases (STD) 
Level of 
significance 
Moderate  
Impact on Socio-
economic 
environment  
Gender Base 
Violence (GBV) 
and SEAH 
Low   
Mitigation Measures 
-  Conduct education and awareness creation campaigns to minimize 
the spread and impact of STDs and HIV/AIDS among the workforce 
-  Provide free distribution and provision of condoms to construction 
workers by the Contractor to avoid the spread of STDs and 
HIV/AIDS. 
-  Put educational posters and flyers on HIV/AIDS, using local 
languages to minimize the spread of HIV/AIDS. 
-  Adopt FDRE Policy on HIV/AIDs, and provide special care and 
support to HIV/AIDs positive staff and AIDs patients 
-  Assign women in works that do not affect their biological condition  
-  Ensure that women construction workers do not encounter any type 
of GBV and sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment through 
extending monitoring activities and system of the institution to cover 
construction workers. 
-  Ensure the safety and security of women construction workers and 
protect them from GBV and sexual harassment in the construction 
site by establishing a standard code of conduct that will be produced 
by the contractor and signed by all workers  
Incorporate administrative and legal measures against those workers 
who commit GBV and sexual harassment. 
- 
Labor Influx 
Moderate 
-  prepare a comprehensive baseline with sufficient detail on local labor 
market dynamics   
-   Ensure that project information and planning documentation includes 
project workforce estimates   
-   Monitor for change throughout the project cycle on labor influx 
related mitigation compliance and on mitigation effectiveness from 
projects/contractors. 
-  -Specify contractor obligations and commitments related to labor 
influx mitigation, worker management and compliance reporting in 
contractor documentation 
-  Make sure the contractor provide personal protection  equipment 
(PPE) to the workers engaged in accident prone construction sites 
88 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Level of 
significance 
Mitigation Measures 
Child labor 
Moderate 
-  Make sure the contractor provide water , food and appropriate shelter 
with sanitation facilities to the work force 
-Targeted awareness-raising campaigns, especially for those who are 
most at risk of becoming victims of child forced labour and inform 
them about how to protect themselves against fraudulent or abusive 
recruitment and employment practices; 
-Targeted awareness-raising campaigns regarding sanctions for 
violating the prohibition on child forced labour; 
Moderate  
-  Basic service providers in the project area must be consulted in 
Disruption of 
Public Services 
(such as water, 
electricity, 
telecommunication)  
Occupational 
Health and Safety  
Substantial 
advance for possible disruption due to the construction work so that 
they can plan alternative means to minimize such impacts;  
-  The contractor must communicate to the community any intended 
disruption of the basic services; 
-  Any damage on the basic infrastructures must be reported as soon as 
possible and must be replaced or repaired immediately 
-  Restrict access to the site, through a combination of institutional and 
administrative controls, including fencing, signage, and 
communication of risks to the local community 
-  Effort must be made on minimizing disruption of infrastructure 
facilities; 
-  Prepare  Contractor’s Health, Safety and Environment Management 
Plan (HSE-MP) as per the guidelines for construction Contractors 
annexed in the ESCMF) 
-  Ensure safe work practices and guidelines and adhere to safe work 
practices/procedures.  
-  New workers must be provided with introduction training/awareness 
on health and safety features and procedures of the site. In addition, 
89 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Level of 
significance 
Mitigation Measures 
Impact on Socio-
economic 
environment 
workers must also receive tool box & briefings when they move to 
new sites.  
-  Conduct training on how to prevent and manage incidences. This 
will involve proper handling of electricity, water, machinery etc. and 
on various modes of escape, conduct and responsibility during such 
incidences. All workers must fully be aware and mentally prepared 
for potential emergency. 
-  Use signage to warn staff and/or visitors in the construction 
activities of dangerous places and activities. 
-  Clear marking of work site hazards and training in recognition of 
hazard symbols, 
-  Strict instructions on safety must be given for drivers of heavy 
equipment to avoid accidents. 
-  Supervision of works must be done regularly to ensure that safety 
conditions are met while any deviation from safety regulations is 
immediately reclaimed following the best practices of work safety 
-  Develop evacuation procedures to handle emergency situations. 
-  Provide adequate OHS protective gear (PPEs) to construction 
workers, such as hearing protection; safety glasses, gloves; use body 
overall to protect against dust, vapors, splashes; use safety shoe and 
hard helmets to prevent injuries from falls and overhead material 
drop.  
-  Avail or provide a full first aid kit at the construction sites, 
-  Fence the construction or hazard sites to restrict entry of 
unauthorized persons 
90 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Level of 
significance 
moderate 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Water use conflict 
between upstream 
and downstream 
uses 
Impact on 
biophysical 
environment  
Mitigation Measures 
-Locate irrigation schemes where water supplies are adequate, and the 
scheme  will  not  create  conflict  with  existing  human,  livestock, 
wildlife, or aquatic water uses, especially during dry seasons  
-Establish effective community organization to equitably administer 
water among the communities. 
-Carry out assessment study on water demand and availability of the 
project area under consideration. 
-Carry  out  community  consultations  to  reach  consensus  with  upper 
and downstream community; 
-Encourage crops with lower water demands; 
-Mulch exposed soil surfaces to reduce evaporation; 
-Consider alternatives sites when constructing a new micro dams and 
reservoirs; 
-give priority to upgrading and renovating existing water supply and 
irrigation system instead of constructing new ones; 
-Ensure full participation of all water uses for the purpose of   water 
supply, irrigation: livestock during the  planning of micro-dams and 
small-scale irrigation schemes; 
Provide/ensure alternate facilities for domestic water supply; bathing 
and human waste disposal; 
91 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Impact on climate 
Level of 
significance 
low 
Impact on 
biophysical 
environment 
Mitigation Measures 
To minimize impact on climate the following measures will need to  be 
taken: 
-Use  of  sets  climate  smart  agriculture  such  as  climate  resilient 
cropping systems and practices will be promoted to offer important 
adaptation benefits.  
-Introduce  crop  diversification  and  the  promotion  of  agricultural 
practices that are better adapted to the changing climate 
-Improve production  yields,  greater income  generation and reduced 
dependence on the exploitation of natural resources in lean periods. 
-Enhance and improve agro-meteorological infrastructure to provide 
timely information services to the project beneficiaries such as cluster 
of smallholders, public and private investors, and value chain actors. 
-Adopt  climate  smart  technologies  (sustainable  land  management, 
water  harvesting  technologies,  clean  energy  and  conservation  of 
forests ecosystems 
-Use climate smart agriculture approach to minimize greenhouse-gas 
emissions linked to food production 
-  integration  of  innovative  techniques  into  the  production  system, 
capturing methane from manure, more efficient use of fertilizers and 
92 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Level of 
significance 
Mitigation Measures 
greater  efficiency  in  forage  production  to  reduce  greenhouse 
emission.  
-Reduce food waste and consumption of emission-intensive food to 
contribute to cutting the greenhouse-gas emissions of agriculture.  
-Reduce livestock numbers and use improved breed, more efficient 
application of fertilizers, and better manure management to reduced;  
-Use  integrated  approach  to  climate  change,  energy,  and  food 
security; 
-Food  system  will  need  to  transformed  be  much  more  resource 
efficient  while  continuously  reducing  its  environmental  impacts, 
including its greenhouse-gas emissions 
-Increase yields while reducing our dependence on agrochemicals, to 
reduce  food  waste,  and  to  reduce  our  consumption  of  resource-
intensive and greenhouse gas-intensive foods. 
Use climate Smart Sustainable Agriculture model aims to enhance the 
capacity  of the  agricultural  systems  to  support  food  security, 
incorporating the need for adaptation and the potential for mitigation 
into sustainable agriculture and ensure that farmers can contribute to 
climate  change  mitigation  and  at  the  same  time  adapt  to  climate 
change. 
-Protecting the ecosystem services essential for maintaining 
productivity and the ability to adapt to climate changes. 
The  increase  in  the  demand  of  staple  food  production  could  lead  to 
overuse of arable land which becomes susceptible to loss of soil fertility. 
Activities  like  excavation  and  digging  works  during  agricultural 
expansion  will  involve  clearing  of  existing  vegetation  within  the 
homestead, which may contribute to the loss of plant cover to a certain 
degree, and this will result in a disturbance of topsoil and cause of micro 
level  erosion.  Similarly,  farmers  may  expand  their  farmland  to  steep 
slopes and marginal lands.  
93 
Impact on Soil 
moderate 
Impact on 
biophysical 
environment 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Level of 
significance 
Mitigation Measures 
The following mitigation measures should be   taken to minimize impact 
on soil 
-Farmers should receive training on how soil fertility can be maintained 
by  changing  cropping  patterns,  growing  nitrogen-fixing  crops  and 
composting of crop residues to minimize loss of soil fertility.  
 -Areas  that are  at  high risk  for erosion due to  steep slopes or erodible 
soils  can  be  alternatively  used  for  forage  production  or  grazing  and 
steeply  sloped  lands  under  cultivation  can  be  converted  to  perennial 
plantation to minimize soil erosion. 
- Wooded areas with poor soils and steep slopes should be left in their 
natural state to minimize soil erosion.  
The  availability  of  funds  may  encourage  farmers  to  expand  their 
agricultural  land  to  the  adjacent  forest  areas  and  wild  life  habitat. 
Similarly,  smallholder  farmers  will  be  tempted  to  grow  crops  on  steep 
slopes  and  riverbanks  encroaching  to  the  nearby  forest    The  following 
mitigation measures should be taken to minimize impact Re-plant trees as 
much as practical to compensate losses; 
-  Minimize the amount of destruction caused by machinery by 
promoting non-mechanized methods of construction.  
-  Limit extent of vegetation and tree clearing to only what is necessary 
- 
and avoid the removal of indigenous species   
Indigenous species should be planted in the area where there is no 
development or disturbed footprint. 
-  Farmers should be sensitized and be informed of the benefits of 
conserving forest in terms of maintaining the balance of the 
ecosystem. 
-  Avoid project activities away from parks and protected areas rich in 
wild life habitat 
reserves    
94 
Impact on flora and 
fauna 
Impact on 
biophysical 
environment 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Level of 
significance 
Mitigation Measures 
Impact on water 
resources 
moderate 
Impact on 
biophysical 
environment 
Impact on 
biodiversity 
low 
- 
Increase production from small land using appropriate agricultural 
technology 
Farmers  benefitting  resources  from  the  PACT  Project  may  buy  water 
pumps  to  irrigate  their  land  and  produce  crops,  fruits  and  vegetables. 
Excessive  pumping  of  ground  water  for  irrigation  may  cause  ground 
water depletion and drying out of boreholes that are in use by the nearby 
community.  
- 
-Ground water depletion can be avoided/ minimized by keeping 
recharge/discharge balance of the catchment areas. The farmers need 
be educated   to have the knowledge on the sustainable volumes of 
ground water that can be abstracted annually to minimize avoid 
ground water depletion. 
The following mitigation measures should be also be taken to minimize 
pollution impacts on surface water 
-  Ensure protection of the water body ecosystem by proper handling 
construction materials during civil works;  
-  Develop and implement emergency response plan for accidental oil 
and chemical spills; 
-  Contaminated standing water must be immediately removed and 
treated or disposed of appropriately. 
PACT      project  activities  will  not  generally  have  adverse  impacts  on 
terrestrial  and/or  aquatic  biodiversity.  However,  there  may  be  a  case 
where big trees that are obstructing farming activities and trees and other 
vegetation cover could be found within and around the farms. Under such 
circumstances vegetation clearance to a certain extent will sometimes be 
required  and  this  may  adversely  affect      the  biodiversity  of  the  area  to 
some  degree.  Similarly,  some  project  activities  may  disrupt  wildlife 
habitat if such sub projects are planned to be implemented near national 
parks. 
To minimize impact  on  biodiversity the following mitigation measures 
should be implemented 
-Preserve tree species of biodiversity importance; 
95 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Level of 
significance 
Mitigation Measures 
Impact on 
biophysical 
environment 
Impact of the use of 
chemical fertilizers 
and pesticides 
-  avoid  infringing  on  protected  natural  reserves  and  critical  wildlife 
habitats with significant biodiversity.  
Moderate  
-  Provide safety training to the operators applying pesticides to 
Intensification of 
malaria 
Substantial  
Impact on socio-
economic 
environment  
eradicate pests and fertilizers to enhance crop yield 
-  Provide Personal protection equipment while handling fertilizers 
Provide appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and 
training on proper use and maintenance. 
Install safety showers and eye wash stations near areas where 
hazardous chemicals are stored or used; 
- 
-  Use integrated pest management approach to control pests 
-  Use traditional and cultural means to control crop pests  
-Eradicate mosquito breeding sites such as ponds and stagnant water 
bodies 
-Provide impregnated net 
96 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Exposure to 
COVID-19 
infections  
Level of 
significance 
Moderate  
Impact on Socio-
economic 
environment  
 Decommissioning Phase 
Dust and odor 
impact on Air 
Quality 
Moderate  
Mitigation Measures 
-  Provide sensitization or awareness creation session on COVID-19 
for all workers 
-  Engaging in frequent hand hygiene using appropriate techniques; 
- 
Implementing regular environmental cleaning and disinfection 
practices; 
-  Managing excreta (faeces and urine) safely 
-  PPE (long-sleeved gown, gloves, boots, masks, and goggles or a face 
shield) should always be worn when handling or transporting excreta 
offsite and great care should be taken to avoid splashing. 
-  Practice proper hand hygiene and provide mask and sanitizer to all 
workers; 
-  Keep a distance of minimum 2m between workers to minimize 
transmission of COVID-19; 
-  Body temperature must be measured for all persons entering the site; 
-  Put educational posters and flyers on COVID-19, using local 
languages to minimize the spread of COVID-19 
Dust will be generated during demolition of project infrastructures. To 
minimize Impact  of dust generation  the following mitigation measures 
should be taken 
-  Minimize dust from material handling, open area sources, including 
storage piles, by using control measures such as by using covers 
and/or control equipment (water suppression, cover) 
-  Apply dust suppression techniques such as applying water or non-
toxic chemicals to minimize dust from vehicle movements 
-  Manage emissions from mobile sources 
-  Dust may chock the respiratory truck of the work force while 
dismantling concrete structures and this effect can be minimized 
aeration and the using appropriate PPEs 
- 
97 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activity/Impact 
Type 
Impact on 
Biophysical 
environment  
Potential 
Impacts/Issues 
Contamination on 
Soil and Water 
bodies 
Solid Waste 
Generation 
Level of 
significance 
Low  
Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
Job losses as a 
result of project 
closure 
Noise and vibration 
During 
demolishing of 
project 
infrastructure  
Impact on Socio-
economic 
environment   
Mitigation Measures 
-  Avoid waste spillage to the surrounding environment using 
appropriate waste containment facilities  
- 
recycle, reuse or sell demolition waste to ensure that materials that 
would otherwise be disposed of as waste are diverted for productive 
uses 
-  dispose appropriately to a licensed and designated disposal sit 
materials that cannot be reused or recycled  
- 
-  Minimize the job loss by properly planning for possible alternative 
job opportunities 
-  Planning activities in consultation with local communities so that 
activities with the greatest potential to generate noise are planned 
during periods of the day that will result in least disturbance 
-  Using noise control devices, such as temporary noise barriers and 
deflectors for impact and blasting activities, and exhaust muffling 
devices for combustion engines. 
-  Avoid or minimize transportation through crowded community areas 
-  Provide maintenance and proper operation of construction 
machinery to minimize noise  
Occupational 
Health and safety 
of workers engaged 
in demolishing 
project structures  
Moderate  
-  Workers must be issued with appropriate PPEs and the contractor 
enforces their use. 
-  Restrict onlookers/scavengers from the site 
-  mentioned in the construction phase above 
98 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
8. 
Social, Environmental and Climate management Plan (ESCMP) 
The table below is an indicative plan and must be further developed/updated for specific sub-projects and 
Contractor’s-ESCMP  (C-ESCMP)  shall  be  prepared  by  the  contractors  before  project  implementation.) 
Please note that most of the cost required to implement the mitigation measures are indicative and are already 
considered/embedded  in  the  budget  under  component  one  of  the  PACT  design.  It  is  also  important  that, 
although the responsible institutions to implement the ESCMP is the Ministry of agriculture and its structures 
at Region and Woreda level, Federal and Regional Environmental Protection Authorities (EPA) will take part 
in  the  compliance  monitoring  and  auditing.  To  this  effect,  the  MoA  will  collaborate  with  EPA  on:  (i) 
screening, categorization as well as preparation of ESIA/ESCMP, (ii) implementation of ESCMF and ESCMP 
of  sub  projects  and  (iii)  Compliance  monitoring  and  auditing.    Furthermore,    other  organizations  such  as 
water, meteorology, health, women and youth as well as contractors and consultants  will have a pivotal role 
in the implementation of the ESCMP.
99 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Table 8. 1 Environmental Social and Climate Management Plan 
Recommended  Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Environment
al/Social  and 
climate 
Impacts  
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution 
Implementation 
Phase 
in 
of 
Means 
Verification 
(Monitoring 
& Reporting) 
Frequency  of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate  
In USD 
Impact on the biophysical environment 
Impacts 
Land Use 
on 
Disturbances  must  be  limited  to  the  areas 
where structures will be constructed;  
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Impact on soil 
Minimize  the  clearance  of  vegetation  to 
avoid exposure of soil to erosion. 
Awareness  
Awareness creation 
 -Areas that are at high risk for erosion due 
to  steep  slopes  or  erodible  soils  can  be 
alternatively used for forage production or 
grazing  and  steeply  sloped  lands  under 
cultivation  can  be  converted  to  perennial 
plantation to minimize soil erosion. 
-  Wooded  areas  with  poor  soils  and  steep 
slopes should be left in their natural state to 
minimize soil erosion.  
Stakeholder 
engagement, 
particularly 
Farmers 
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
on 
Survey 
land  use  and 
land cover 
Every year  
115,000 
Monitoring 
report 
Monitoring 
report 
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
Every years  
96,000 
Impact  on  air  Minimize  dust  during  transportation  of 
construction  materials  by  using  covers 
Stakeholder 
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Monitoring 
Every 
months 
3 
96,000 
100 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
quality 
and/or control equipment  
engagement,  
Woreda levels 
report 
Minimize dust by spraying water along the 
construction material transportation route  
Awareness  
Manage  and  control  emissions 
from 
vehicles transporting construction material 
by  operating  in  compliance  with  relevant 
vehicle  emission  standards  and  regular 
maintenance to minimize air pollution;  
during project 
construction 
phase 
on 
Impact 
water 
resources 
Ground  water  depletion  can  be  avoided/ 
minimized  by  keeping  recharge/discharge 
balance of the catchment areas.  
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report  
every year 
155,000 
the  water  body 
Ensure  protection  of 
ecosystem by proper handling construction 
materials during civil works;  
and 
implement 
Develop 
emergency 
response  plan  for  accidental  oil  and 
chemical spills; 
Impact 
flora 
fauna 
on 
and 
Re-plant  trees  as  much  as  practical  to 
compensate losses; 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Minimize the amount of destruction caused 
by  machinery 
non-
by 
mechanized methods of construction.  
promoting 
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report 
Area  covered 
by plantation  
Every year 
155,000 
Limit extent of vegetation and tree clearing 
to  only  what  is  necessary  and  avoid  the 
removal of indigenous species   
Indigenous species should be planted in the 
area  where  there  is  no  development  or 
101 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
disturbed footprint. 
Farmers  should  be  sensitized  and  be 
informed  of  the  benefits  of  conserving 
forest in terms of  maintaining the balance 
of the ecosystem. 
Avoid  project  activities  away  from  parks 
and protected areas rich in wild life habitat 
reserves    
Impact 
biodiversity 
on 
-Preserve 
importance; 
tree  species  of  biodiversity 
-  avoid  infringing  on  protected  natural 
reserves and critical wildlife habitats with 
significant biodiversity 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report 
Every  year 
115,000 
Impact 
Climate 
on 
-Use of sets climate smart agriculture such 
as  climate  resilient  cropping  systems  and 
practices  will  be  promoted 
to  offer 
important adaptation benefits. 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
reports 
Every year 
230,000 
-Introduce  crop  diversification  and  the 
promotion of agricultural practices that are 
better adapted to the changing climate 
Awareness  
-Enhance and improve agro-meteorological 
infrastructure to provide timely information 
services to the project beneficiaries such as 
cluster of smallholders, public and private 
investors, and value chain actors. 
climate 
technologies 
Adopt 
(sustainable 
land  management,  water 
harvesting  technologies,  clean  energy  and 
smart 
Status 
mitigation 
and 
adaptation 
actions 
verified 
field  
of 
at 
102 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
conservation of forests ecosystems 
Use climate smart agriculture approach to 
minimize greenhouse-gas emissions linked 
to food production 
Reduce 
livestock  numbers  and  use 
improved breed, more efficient application 
of 
better  manure 
and 
management to reduced; 
fertilizers, 
the ecosystem 
-Protecting 
services essential 
maintaining 
productivity  and  the  ability  to  adapt  to 
climate changes. 
for 
Impact on the socio-economic Environment 
Land 
Acquisition 
Prepare  RAP  or  ARAP      and  Land 
acquisition  plan  and  provide  adequate 
compensation to affected parties as per the 
plans 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
Impact 
Livelihoods 
on 
Prepare 
implementation plan 
and 
implement 
Consultation 
with  project 
affected 
people (PAP) 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Awareness  
livelihood 
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report 
Evidence  of 
compensation 
of 
Number 
PAPs 
compensated   
Monitoring 
report   
Traffic 
Ensure 
that  construction  vehicles  are 
Stakeholder 
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Monitoring 
103 
300,000 
Once  prior  to 
the 
implementati
on  of 
projects  
sub 
years 
the 
Two 
after 
project 
implementati
on  
230,000 
115,000 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Accident   
operated during non-peak hours;   
engagement,  
Woreda levels 
report  
Provide  appropriate  road  signs  to  warn 
motorists  and  other  road  users  of  the 
ongoing construction activities;  
Awareness  
Every  month 
during project 
construction 
Appropriate  signs  must  be  displayed  on 
people 
appropriate 
accidentally falling into open trenches  
avoid 
sites 
to 
Conduct education and awareness creation 
campaigns  to  minimize  the  spread  and 
impact of STDs and HIV/AIDS among the 
workforce 
Provide  free  distribution  and  provision  of 
condoms  to  construction  workers  by  the 
Contractor to avoid the spread of STDs and 
HIV/AIDS. 
Awareness  to 
Project 
labourers  and 
local 
communities  
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report  
Every 
months 
six 
115,000 
to 
other 
Exposure 
HIV/AIDS 
and 
Sexually 
Transmitted 
Diseases 
(STD) 
Put  educational  posters  and  flyers  on 
HIV/AIDS,  using 
to 
minimize the spread of HIV/AIDS. 
languages 
local 
Labour Influx 
prepare  a  comprehensive  baseline  with 
sufficient  detail  on  local  lab  our  market 
dynamics   
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report  
that  project 
 Ensure 
information  and 
planning  documentation  includes  project 
workforce estimates   
Monitor for change throughout the project 
cycle  on  labour  influx  related  mitigation 
compliance and on mitigation effectiveness 
104 
six 
115,000 
Every 
months 
during 
project 
construction 
phases 
the 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
from projects/ contractors. 
contractor 
obligations 
labor 
to 
Specify 
related 
commitments 
mitigation,  worker  management 
compliance 
documentation 
and 
influx 
and 
contractor 
reporting 
in 
Gender  Base 
Violence 
(GBV) 
SEAH 
and 
Make sure the contractor provides personal 
protection equipment (PPE) to the workers 
engaged  in  accident  prone  construction 
sites 
Make  sure  the  contractor  provides  water, 
food and appropriate shelter with sanitation 
facilities to the work force 
Assign women in works that do not affect 
their biological condition  
Ensure  that  women  construction  workers 
do  not  encounter  any  type  of  GBV  and 
sexual  exploitation,  abuse  and  harassment 
through  extending  monitoring  activities 
and  system  of  the  institution  to  cover 
construction workers 
Ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  women 
construction  workers  and  protect  them 
from  GBV  and  sexual  harassment  in  the 
construction site by establishing a standard 
code  of  conduct  that  will  be  produced  by 
the contractor and signed by all workers  
Incorporate 
measures  against 
administrative 
legal 
those  workers  who 
and 
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
reports  
Every 
months 
six 
115,000 
Stakeholder 
engagement, 
particularly 
women 
labourers  
Awareness  
105 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Child labour 
commit GBV and sexual harassment. 
Targeted  awareness-raising  campaigns, 
especially for those who are most at risk of 
becoming victims of child forced labor and 
inform 
to  protect 
themselves  against  fraudulent  or  abusive 
recruitment and employment practices; 
them  about  how 
Targeted  awareness-raising  campaigns 
the 
regarding  sanctions 
prohibition on child forced lab our; 
for  violating 
Occupational 
and 
Health 
Safety 
Prepare  Contractor’s  Health,  Safety  and 
Environment Management Plan (HSE-MP) 
as  per  the  guidelines  for  construction 
Contractors annexed in the ESCMF) 
Ensure safe work practices and guidelines 
and 
work 
to 
practices/procedures 
adhere 
safe 
 New  workers  must  be  provided  with 
introduction  training/awareness  on  health 
and  safety  features  and  procedures  of  the 
site. In addition, workers must also receive 
tool  box  &  briefings  when  they  move  to 
new sites.  
Conduct  training  on  how  to  prevent  and 
manage 
involve 
incidences.  This  will 
proper  handling  of  electricity,  water, 
machinery  etc.  and  on  various  modes  of 
escape,  conduct  and  responsibility  during 
such incidences. All workers must fully be 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report 
Every 
months 
six 
60,000 
of 
Number 
awareness 
campaigns  
115,000 
six 
Every 
months 
during 
construction 
and  operation 
phases 
the 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Awareness, 
particularly to 
contractors 
and 
labourers  
project 
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
reports 
Number  and 
quality 
of 
PPEs 
106 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
aware and mentally prepared for potential 
emergency. 
Strict instructions on safety must be given 
for  drivers  of  heavy  equipment  to  avoid 
accidents. 
Supervision  of  works  must  be  done 
regularly  to  ensure  that  safety  conditions 
are  met  while  any  deviation  from  safety 
regulations 
reclaimed 
following the best practices of work safety 
immediately 
is 
Provide  adequate  OHS  protective  gear 
(PPEs)  to  construction  workers,  such  as 
hearing  protection;  safety  glasses,  gloves; 
use  body  overall  to  protect  against  dust, 
vapors, splashes; use safety shoe and hard 
helmets  to  prevent  injuries  from  falls  and 
overhead material drop.  
Provide a full first aid kit at the construction 
sites, 
Locate  irrigation  schemes  where  water 
supplies are adequate, and the scheme will 
not  create  conflict  with  existing  human, 
livestock,  wildlife,  or  aquatic  water  uses, 
especially during dry seasons  
Establish 
community 
effective 
organization to equitably administer water 
among the communities. 
Carry  out  assessment  study  on  water 
demand and availability of the project area 
Stakeholder 
engagement, 
particularly 
upper 
downstream 
communities  
and 
Awareness  
use 
Water 
conflict 
between 
upstream  and 
downstream 
users 
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report 
During 
dry 
seasons  every 
year  
115,000 
Reduced 
conflict 
Implementati
on  of  water 
efficient 
107 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
under consideration. 
methods  
Carry  out  community  consultations  to 
and 
reach 
downstream community; 
consensus  with 
upper 
Encourage  crops  with 
demands; 
lower  water 
-Mulch  exposed  soil  surfaces  to  reduce 
evaporation; 
alternatives 
Consider 
when 
constructing  a  new  micro  dams  and 
reservoirs; 
sites 
Give priority to upgrading and renovating 
existing water supply and irrigation system 
instead of constructing new ones; 
Ensure full participation of all water users 
for the purpose of   water supply, irrigation: 
livestock  during  the  planning  of  micro-
dams and small-scale irrigation schemes; 
Provide/ensure  alternate 
for 
domestic water supply; bathing and human 
waste disposal; 
facilities 
Intensificatio
n of malaria 
-Eradicate/disturbing  mosquito  breeding 
sites  such  as  ponds  and  stagnant  water 
bodies 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
and 
Regional 
Woreda levels 
Monitoring 
report 
-Provide impregnated net 
115,000 
Every 
mosquito 
breeding  
season  of  the 
year 
108 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
to 
Exposure 
COVID-19 
infections 
Provide sensitization or awareness creation 
session on COVID-19 for all workers 
Stakeholder 
engagement,  
Engaging  in  frequent  hand  hygiene  using 
appropriate techniques; 
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
Implementing 
cleaning and disinfection practices; 
regular 
environmental 
Every 
months  
six 
115,000 
Monitoring 
report  on  the 
type 
and 
frequency  of 
prevention 
measures  
Keep a distance of minimum 2m between 
workers 
transmission  of 
COVID-19; 
to  minimize 
Body temperature must be measured for all 
persons entering the site; 
Put  educational  posters  and  flyers  on 
COVID-19,  using 
to 
minimize the spread of COVID-19 
languages 
local 
Take  appropriate  measures 
to  ensure 
underserved  and  vulnerable  groups  in  the 
project  areas  are  equally  benefiting  from 
the sub project  
The  risk  of 
exclusion/dis
crimination of 
underserved 
and 
vulnerable 
groups 
other 
Stakeholder 
engagement, 
particularly 
underserved 
and 
vulnerable 
people  
Awareness  
PMU  at  federal, 
Regional 
and 
Woreda levels 
230,000 
year 
the 
Every 
during 
operation 
phases  of  the 
sub project  
Monitoring 
report  on  the 
of 
number 
vulnerable 
people 
targeted 
the project  
by 
Total 
2,702,000 
109 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
110 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
9. 
 Performances Monitoring/auditing  
The safeguard specialist from the PACT-PCU at the zonal level will closely work with the Woreda 
Agriculture Office expert, PACT focal person and the Woreda environmental regulatory body. The 
experts,  either  as  a  team  or  individually,  will  inspect  the  implementation  of  the  mitigation 
measures. During inspections, the expert will verify that the proper procedures are being followed 
in screening the PACT Sub Project activities and in the implementation of the mitigation measures 
in the Woreda. They also make field observations to inspect that no negative environmental impacts 
are taking place anywhere in the project area. Where such impacts may occur, the experts (mainly 
the Woreda environmental regulatory body officer) will provide advice on further actions, and this 
will be communicated to the safeguard specialist at the PACT-PCU. 
The implementation, monitoring, and supervision of the ESCMF, SA, RPF and GRM activities in 
general  is  a  joint  task  of  the  PACT  -PCU  (through  the  safeguard  specialist),  the  BoA  and  the 
regional environmental regulatory body bureaus. The three bodies will jointly monitor the effective 
implementation of the mitigation measures in avoiding or minimizing adverse impacts. The design 
of  the  process  monitoring,  and  reporting  procedures  need  to  be  prepared  in  parallel  with  the 
preparation  of  the  activity  plan  for  the  PACT  Project.  It  should  be  made  ready  before  the 
commencement of the implementation of the project activities. 
Performance monitoring 
The results monitoring plan has two components: i) monitoring of the compliance, effectiveness of 
the  ESCMF,  SA,  RPF  and  GRM  and  application  of  the  recommended  standards;  ii)  impact 
monitoring, i.e., measuring the biophysical and socio-economic impacts of the PACT project. The 
M&E system of the PACT, which will be facilitated by the PACT-PCU, will provide the required 
information  for  results  monitoring.  Purpose  of  result  monitoring  is  to  support  compliance  with 
safeguard  policies,  to  identify  the  occurrence  of  any  unforeseen  safeguard  issues,  to  determine 
lessons learnt during project  implementation,  to provide recommendations for improving future 
performance, and to provide an early warning about potential cumulative impacts. 
Performance monitoring requires that: 
-The various safeguards instruments (ESCMP, ESIA, IPMP, RPF, GMG,) have been prepared to 
the required standard, within the required timelines; 
-The safeguards instruments have been reviewed and approved by the responsible entities. 
-Environmental  and  social  mitigation  measures  have  been/are  being  implemented  and  that 
mitigation measures are effective; 
-The  community  is  participating  in  all  stages  of  the  environmental  and  social  management  and 
monitoring processes; 
-Relevant Federal, Regional, Woreda and Kebele level officers have been trained in accordance 
111 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
with the capacity building proposals; 
-Reports are prepared and delivered as required. 
Environmental and Social Monitoring Indicators 
Several environmental and social monitoring indicators and parameters can be used to track the 
performance of the ESCMF of PACT. The goals of environmental and social monitoring indicators 
include  (i)  to  verify  the  accuracy  of  the  environmental  and  social  impact  predictions;  (b)  to 
determine the effectiveness of measures to mitigate adverse effects of projects on the environment 
and the community; (iii) to determine whether interventions have resulted in dealing with negative 
impacts; (iv) to verify the required capacity building activities have been done in the identification, 
planning and implementation of the environmental and social impacts of the project. Some of these 
indicators and parameters include: 
•  Number, sex and type of target groups participated on the ESCMF, SA, and RPF training and 
awareness creation program; 
Inclusive, free and prior community participation and consultation; 
• 
•  Documentation of community consultation in planning, implementation and monitoring; 
•  Maintaining of ecosystem services through the adoption different afforestation, reforestation 
and rehabilitation of degraded lands and SWC Practices; 
•  Number and percentage of subprojects for which environmental and social issues are 
integrated into the project cycle; 
•  Environmental and social screening checklist filled or not; 
•  Environmental Management Plan (ESCMP) was prepared or not; 
•  Environmental enhancement and adverse impact mitigation measures mentioned in 
Environmental and Social Management Plan have been incorporated and considered during 
project planning, design and site selection; 
•  Social adverse impact identified and mitigation measures mentioned in Environmental and 
Social Management Plan, social management plan within SAR and RPF have been 
incorporated and considered during project planning, design and site selection; 
Implementation of the mitigation measures identified and planned in the ESCMP, SMP, RPF; 
•  Compensation effected according to the agreement made; 
• 
•  Fair benefit share of project investment; 
•  Establishment and functionality of GRM; 
• 
´Environmental consequences as a result of places for collection of construction materials 
(quarry sites, borrow pits); 
Increase in landslide, soil erosion and slope instability due construction of subprojects; 
Impact on water quality and disruption of natural water courses, drainage work and its 
consequences; 
• 
• 
•  Documentation at woreda concerned offices and DA offices; 
• 
Impact on critical natural habitats, forests and ecological sensitive areas; 
112 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
•  Conflict in water use right between the upstream and downstream water user community 
during water source selection (check whether balance is done or not, sufficient water is 
allocated for both community and ecological services); 
•  Conflict in water use with in targeted group for water use; 
•  Developed resource use and management bylaws; 
•  Documentation of community consultation both the upstream and downstream including their 
opinions; 
•  Water quality is suitable or not for irrigation and/or drinking purpose, quantity of water 
supplied as per the demand; regular supply of water as per the capacity of the irrigation 
project; 
•  Water logging and salinity problem because of mis management of irrigation subprojects; 
• 
Impact in the form of pollution to the environment due to PACT interventions (disposal of 
construction materials or wastes and its environmental and social consequences); 
Safeguards Compliance Auditing and Reporting 
In view of the significant nature of the impacts of some of the activities of PACT, a robust system 
of compliance, monitoring and reporting should be in place. Quarter and annual reports should be 
prepared and pass the hierarchy from Woreda, zonal, regional and to federal levels. The Regional 
and Federal PCU Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialists are normally required to report 
quarterly and annually on the performance of the subproject activities on quarterly and yearly basis. 
Procedurally, the report of environmental and social safeguard and other PACT activities sent by 
woreda FPs will be consolidated at regional level by PCU M&E specialists with the support of the 
RPCU safeguard specialists. These quarter and annual reports should capture the experience with 
implementation of the ESCMF, RPF, SA and GMG procedures. The purpose of the reports is to 
provide (i) A record of the subproject transactions; (ii) A record of experience and issues running 
from  quarter-to-quarter/year-to-year  throughout  the  subproject  that  can  be  used  for  identifying 
difficulties and improving performance; and (iii) Practical information for undertaking an annual 
review. 
The  reporting  formats  proposed  to  be  filled  by  Woreda  FP,  zonal  focal  person  and  regional 
Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialists are set out in Annexes 9a, 9b and 9c. At Woreda 
level, quarter and annual report form (Annex 9(c) will be completed by NRM expert and/or WFP 
of  the  project  implementing  body.  The  objective  of  the  report  is  to  provide  feedback  on  the 
activities of and observations on the implemented PACT subprojects and their compliance with the 
environment and social over the review period in the Woredas. Similarly, at regional level, quarter 
and annual report form will be completed by regional M&E and safeguard specialist of PCU to 
provide feedback on the activities of and observations on the implemented PACT subprojects over 
the review period in the region. The regional environmental and social Safeguard Specialist will 
prepare quarter and annual reports based on the Woreda report including his/her accomplishment 
report  by  filling  the  report  format  (Annex  9(b)  and  submit  it  to  the  RPCU  M&E  team  and  a 
113 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
standalone report to federal PACT-PCU. At the federal level, the quarterly and annual report form 
(Annex  9  (a))  will  be  collected  from  the  M&E  team  and  after  completion;  the  Environmental 
Safeguard Specialist and the Social Safeguard Specialists of federal  PACT-PCU will check the 
regional report and submit a consolidated report with the necessary narration to the NPCU-M&E 
Case  team  and  standalone  report  to  IFAD.  The  objectives  of  the  report  is  to  consolidate  and 
summarize the feedback from the regions, assess the overall progress of the PACT subprojects at 
the  national  level  and  see  the  performance  of  regions  and  give  feedback  to  regions  on  their 
performances. 
Environmental and social auditing  
Environmental  and  social  auditing  is  a  process  that  enables  an  organization  to  assess  and 
demonstrate  its  social,  economic,  and  environmental  benefits  and  application  of  appropriate 
mitigation measures. The audit/review involves  evaluation  to  identify  compliance of social  and 
environmental  aspects  of  projects  (to  applicable  compliance  requirements)  and  identify 
implementation gaps, along with related corrective actions. The objectives of environmental and 
social auditing are twofold, firstly to assess the compliance of implementation to project safeguard 
instruments  regarding  the  intermediate  environment  and  social  impacts  of  the  wider  PACT 
interventions, and secondly to assess the occurrence of, and potential for, cumulative impacts due 
to project and other development activities. This enables to improve decision making and ensure 
that the project is environmentally sound, socially acceptable, and economically feasible. 
One of the issues in reviewing is, also reviewing of the performance of environmental and social 
safeguard works annually and quarterly. The annual reviews are intended to be used by project 
management  to  improve  procedures  and  capacity  for  integrating  natural  resources  and 
environmental/social  management  into  project  operations.  The  reviews  will  also  be  a  principal 
source of information to the IFAD supervision missions. Annual reviews of the project and the 
implementation of the ESCMF will be conducted at the end of each year facilitated by the PACT-
PCU. The objectives of the annual reviews include (i) Assess project performance in complying 
with ESCMF procedures, gaps identified, lessons learnt, and improve future performance, and (ii) 
Assess the occurrence of, and potential for, cumulative impacts due to project-funded and other 
development activities. 
It  is  necessary  that  the  audit/review  should  be  conducted  by  an  independent  entity  (local 
consultant). The compliance assessment and performance review reports, which will be produced 
by the independent review body, will be used as a monitoring and review tool to track  ESCMP 
results. The annual review report should be delivered to project management (region and federal), 
to each woreda office responsible for appraisal, approval and implementation of subprojects and to 
IFAD as well. In the review process, the PACT-PCU and the Regional environmental regulatory 
body will play the lead role in coordinating the process with the key stakeholders. The principal 
output  is  a  review  report  that  entails  the  methodology,  summarizes  the  results,  and  provides 
practical recommendations. 
114 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The responsibility to undertake environmental and social audit is the regulatory body which is the 
environmental protection authority/agency at various level. However, it can be carried out by the 
safeguard  specialists  of  the  PCU  and  verification  can  be  done  by  an  independent  local  and/or 
international consultants. For the effective performance, the safeguard specialists of the federal and 
regional  PCU,  Woreda  and  zonal  Focal  persons,  and  other  relevant  exerts  at  woreda  level,  and 
Development  Agents  at  kebele  level  should  receive  relevant  environmental  and  social  auditing 
training. 
115 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
10.  Consultation with the Communities and Major Stakeholders  
(a) Lesson learned from Past Projects 
Public  consultation  and  participation  are  essential  because  they  afford  potentially  affected 
persons the  opportunity to  contribute  to  both  the  design  and  implementation  of the sub-project 
activities. The sub-projects would be initiated, planned, designed, implemented, and operated (i.e., 
demand-driven) by  communities  and/or  farmer  groups, who  by  their  very  nature,  are  members 
of  the  rural community and therefore, are an integral part of and play a crucial role. Furthermore, 
it is the local communities who are to claim ownership of this project for it to be successful, and 
their wealth of knowledge of local conditions are invaluable assets to the project. 
Broad  Community  Support:  The  major  agenda  of  the  discussions  include  interests  of  the 
community in the project, vulnerable and underserved groups, grievance redress mechanisms that 
the  community  uses,  traditional  NRM  knowledge  and  institutions,  traditional  self-help  groups, 
community participation  including  females  and  youth  in development activities, capacity  gaps, 
income  generating  activities,  expectations  from  the  project,  fears,  risks  of  the  project  and 
mitigating measures, and recommendations to the project.  
Community members stressed that the changes brought about by the Project in the  adjacent Project 
woredas under PADEP -II and the benefits delivered in terms of land rehabilitation and involving 
in  different  income  generating  activities  (IGA)  caused  them  to  feel  that  they  missed  the 
opportunity.  They indicated that they gained lessons about the practical value of the Project from 
the successes achieved.   
The public consultations  revealed that the communities were interested  in the project due  to the 
successes  observed  in  adjacent  woredas  where  PASDEP  II  is  under  implementation.  The 
community during the consultation meetings advised t h e   approach  of  the  project  should  be 
based on thorough discussion with community elders, religious leaders/fathers, clan leaders and 
indigenous institutions when the project starts. However,  they  expressed  that they might face loss 
of  access  to  communal  land  which  they  were  using  for  grazing  their  livestock  and  collecting 
firewood. Therefore, they suggested that when the project begins implementation there should be 
participatory community consultation and they expect wood-saving stoves as well as hand tools 
and tree seedlings to establish household woodlots. 
Their  fears  during  project  implementation  include  restriction  of  access  to  resources  ,  wood  for 
house construction, animal grazing and cutting grass, denial of passage of their livestock through 
the parks to water points, displacement from buffer zones, fear of losing part of their farmland due 
to SWC structures, harmful pests and weeds harbored by the SWC structures.  
Generally, during the discussion with community members in the  selected woredas community 
members were not only unanimous in their interest and support for the project, but also are aware 
of  the  potential  impact  of  some  activities  of  the  project  components  in  terms  of  possible  land 
acquisition or restriction of access to communal use natural resources. When compared to the kind 
116 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
of environmental degradation they are facing now, acquisition of small portion of their lands for 
construction of access roads or temporary restriction of access to communal grazing lands is the 
little price they  are more than willing to  pay. However, they said  the approach should be  with 
thorough discussion with community, elders, religious leaders/fathers, clan leaders and indigenous 
institutions  before  starting  implementation  of  such  activities.  In  contrary  when  community 
members asked if they  have  any  concern  about  the  project  implementation,  they expressed  by 
saying we fear  that during implementation,  people who are close to  kebele administration and 
active might benefit from the project by neglecting the majority. In addition, they expressed that 
we  might  face  loss  of  access  to  communal  land  which  we  were  using  for  grazing,  firewood 
that  when  the  project  begins 
collection  or  other  benefits.  Therefore,  they  suggested 
implementation there should be participatory community consultation. 
Land Acquisition:  The subproject/activities need arise from the community  and, during planning, 
the  community  discusses  thoroughly  about  the  location  of  the  activity  and  land  acquisition 
issues,  if  needed.  When  there  is  a  need  for  land  the procedure includes trying to avoid it by 
looking for other alternatives like changing design or location or otherwise if the landholders are 
willing  to  donate  the  land  the  activity  will be implemented as planned. Accordingly,  in  few  of 
the  P A S D E P   I I   watersheds,  communities  agreed  to  voluntarily provide a small piece  of  land 
in  exchange  for  desired  community benefits.  Land acquisition  will  not  take  place unless it is 
on voluntarily bases. Based on this in most cases the donation of the land is with compensation or 
with some benefit arrangements and in rare cases (e.g. access road construction)  while  widening 
the  existing  foot  path  free  donation  occurred  s i n c e     the  size  of  the land will be very small. 
The  data  from  new  woredas  about  land  acquisition  for  development  work  also  show  that 
communities  have  experiences  in  government  initiated/financed  development  works  such  as 
irrigation schemes, farmer training centers (FTCs) construction of health posts, clinics, and access 
road construction which involved some form of land acquisition and restriction of access to natural 
resources. They mentioned cases where people donated land for construction of access roads for 
the common good. Also depending on the size of land to be acquired for road construction or the 
extent of restriction  of access  resulting  from  irrigation scheme, through  rigorous consultations, 
mediated by council of elders and kebele administration. 
(c)  Lessons Learned from PASIDP II 
The demand-driven bottom-up approach adopted under SLMP-I and SLMP-II has proved relevant 
to  natural  resources  management  and  local  development  in  the  rural  context  in  Ethiopia.  This 
development  approach  which  enables  communities  to  have  a  say  in  their  affairs,  determine 
priorities,  actively  participate  in  need  identification,  project  planning,  development  and 
implementation is greatly valued by both beneficiary communities and local authorities. However, 
there still seems to be a great need for enhanced support in the areas of business development and 
planning,  off-farm  income  generation,  market  information,  and  providing  alternatives  for  the 
management of identified development problems. 
117 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The need to build sustainable institutions at grassroots level can never be overemphasized, since 
they are crucial for the delivery of service and the attainment of project objectives. The  Lessons 
from  PASDEP  II  show  that  the  quality  of  project  implementation  and  outcomes  were  highest 
where local implementation structures were established, nurtured, and sustained through targeted 
capacity building work, proper reward and incentive schemes. Moreover, the active engagement 
of woreda leadership in project management was found to be vital to the success of the project in 
many of SLMP- I & II woredas. However, frequent change of woreda leaders is a main challenge 
experienced.  Hence,  there  is  a  serious  need  to  create  a  system  and  institutional  memory  for 
effective knowledge generation and management by woreda leaders and sectoral office heads. It 
is also important to organize regular experience sharing visits between woredas to enable smooth 
transfer of knowledge and skills across project communities. 
-Sustainable land management should be considered an integral part of rural development, and a 
more holistic approach is needed to support livelihood development in rural communities. Rural 
households face various constraints to grow their income and make their livelihoods sustainable. 
The constraints include lack of new ideas and knowledge on income generation; lack of access to 
new  technologies;  absence  of  value  addition  to  increase  the  shelf  life  of  products  for  better 
marketing;  and  limited  access  to  production  inputs  and  markets.  Under  SLMP-I,  sufficient 
attention and financial resource were not devoted to promoting livelihood options and enhancing 
household income. Moreover, savings and credit schemes were not included in SLMP-I. There 
was  improvement  in  SLMP-II  and  in  RLLP  more  emphasis  given  to  livelihood  promotion, 
household income growth, and the investment of savings on productive activities. 
(c) Consultation with the Project Design Team  
The project design team made consultation with the relevant federal institution and the targeted 
regions between June 25 to July 10, 2022. The data generated by the design team revealed that the 
proposed project has broad community support. From the consultations community interest in the 
project  was  ascertained.  The  key  outcomes  of  the  consultations  shared    by  the  design  team  of 
experts is  as follows:  
It was highlighted during the stakeholders’ consultations that the inadequate attention was given 
to the monitoring and evaluation of safeguard instruments in the previous projects and there was   
a serious drawback in this respect. The level of awareness, knowledge and commitment required 
to monitor and evaluate the proper implementation of safeguard instruments was much lower than 
expected. Experience shows that such kinds of gaps make difficult the process of ensuring full 
compliance with the policy standards of the government and the IFAD. In connection with this, 
the  Environment  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESCMF)  will  have  to  encompass 
guidelines, procedures and standards to direct the monitoring and evaluation of safeguard issues 
at operational level. 
In  addition,  stakeholder  consultation  participants  noted  that  external  consultants  deployed  on 
118 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
competitive basis should carry out an assessment of compliance with safeguard issues as part of 
project impact evaluation.  Besides, unannounced random field monitoring visits are important to 
carry out an objective follow-up and observation of project implementation status. Such type of 
field monitoring can inform all those concerned about the facts on the ground that they may not 
always  obtain  in  regular  reporting  formats  that  are  normally  filled  in  and  submitted  to  meet 
reporting requirements.  
Stakeholder consultation participants underscore that there are serious capacity limitations in the 
MoA and other implementing agencies in respect to the management of safeguard issues, assigning 
safeguard  specialists  and  consistently  monitoring  strict  compliance  with  the  safeguard 
policies/standards  of  the  government  and  the  IFAD  SECAP  Guidelines.  In  addition,  major 
concerns were expressed during the stakeholder consultations that the yet-to-be-established PMUs 
would also have similar practical deficiencies. Hence, as a preparatory measure, it was suggested 
that funds be earmark for the recruitment and training of safeguard officers.  
As part of the capacity building component, PACT will need to organize staff trainings in wide 
ranging  aspect  of  environmental  and  social  safeguards,  the  development  of  the  required 
instruments, implementation and monitoring of compliance, and reporting. With the provision of 
such  capacity  building  support,  PCUs  and  the  safeguard  specialists  will  be  better  placed  to 
maintain quality standards of the technical advice they provide, the vetting/screening of proposals, 
as well as in the execution and monitoring of approved sub-projects. Besides, in relation to the 
description of budget allocations and sources, it is necessary to clearly define in the appropriate 
project expenditures for safeguard-related costs for trainings, supervision, and technical assistance, 
the conduct of sub-project specific environment and social assessments, and mitigation measures.    
119 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
11.  ESCMF Implementation Process and Information Disclosure 
11.1  ESCMF Implementation process 
Attention needs to be paid to the use of sound eligibility criteria that meets the IFAD safeguard 
policy in selecting and monitoring PACT Program activities to ensure their operational quality. In 
this regard, one of the important requirements is to ensure the Program activities are in line with 
the legal requirements of the country and the SECAP of IFAD.  
This ESCMF specifies (i) criteria which help avoid activities that might give rise to unacceptable 
or unmanageable environmental impacts, and (ii) procedures for screening that there will be no 
significant impacts and for identifying those that may require ESIA. In case an ESIA is required, 
potential beneficiaries are responsible to undertake such a study and get clearance from the local 
and regional government authorities. In such cases, the PACT Program activities owner to which 
resources of PACT Program is channeled is responsible for identifying activities requiring ESIA 
following  an  initial  screening  process,  while  the  competent  environmental  authorities  at  the 
regional administration level are responsible for advising on the required level of ESIA study and 
for ensuring that it is conducted to an acceptable standard.  
Considering the SECAP of IFAD the following are list of ineligible PACT Program activities that 
encompasses PACT Program activities with any of the attributes listed below:  
•  PACT Program activities with the potential for significant conversion or degradation of 
natural  habitats  if  there  is  not  technically  and  financially  feasible  alternative  and 
appropriate mitigation measures to put in place. 
•  PACT  Program  activities  that  degrades  forest  resources  unless  there  is  no  viable 
alternative, all due processes under international and national law are complied with, the 
adverse impacts will not lead to net reduction in the biodiversity value, the adverse impacts 
will  not  lead  to  net  reduction  on  sensitive  ecological  components,  will  not  lead  to 
significant degradation of the habitat, mitigation plan will be designed to achieve net gains, 
and long-term monitoring and evaluation program is put in place. 
•  Any  PACT  Program  activities  with  the  potential  for  significant  damages  to  cultural 
property  unless  identification,  valuation,  and  protection  of  the  cultural  resources  are 
possible. 
•  Any PACT Program activities or activity that does not meet the legal requirement of the 
country, including gazetted environment, health, and safety legal requirements,  
•  Any  PACT  Program  activities  or  activity  that  is  not  compatible  with  the  international 
convention that Ethiopia has ratified,  
•  Any  PACT  Program  activities  or  activity,  where  children  under  18  years  of  age  are 
employed.  
The  ESCMF  process  starts  with  the  PACT  Program  activities.  This  includes  identification  of 
120 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
PACT Program activities s based on beneficiaries’ demands and subsequent technical support and 
advice  received  from  the  community  to  prepare  their  proposal  documents.  Woreda  offices,  if 
required,  will  conduct  desk  appraisal  of  the  proposed  PACT  Program  activities  s  prior  to 
commencing environmental and social safeguards screening.  
The screening process will be carried out against the pre-set criteria for eligibility of the PACT 
Program  activities  and environmental and social safeguards  at national regional and  Woreda 
level  using  the  screening  checklist.  The  proposed  PACT  Program  activities  plan,  screening 
reports,  and  recommendations  will  be  complied  and  send  to  the  Regional  Environmental 
Office for further review and approval.  
The Environment Office at the regional and woreda level will review the plan of activities, 
screening  results  and  recommendations  and  provide  decisions  of  approval ,  if  any  design 
modifications or additional safeguards instruments are  required.  If  program  activities of  any 
significant  environmental concerns  are included,  then  the  plan  document  will  be directed to 
the attention of the PACT Program activities owner. The final clearance and approval of the plan 
document will be referred to the respective institutions with all the  enclosed  environmental  and 
social screening documents and final decision reports.   
As stated above various  institutions have responsibilities to manage and complete the overall 
process  of  environmental  management  and  implementation  of  this  ESCMF.  In  this  regard, 
relevant regional and woreda bureaus and offices, regional and woreda Environmental offices, 
woreda administrations, other relevant line ministries are major actors for the implementation 
of any proposed PACT Program activities in an environmentally sustainable way.  
The  ESCMF  outlines  that  the  successful  implementation  of  the  PACT Program  activities    will 
require  dynamic  and  multi-disciplinary  professionals.  Therefore,  regular  short  and  tailor-made 
training courses and workshops will be required to reinforce the capacity and skills of the direct 
implementers, stakeholders, and beneficiaries during the entire PACT Program implementation 
period. The existing capacities of the implementing institutions, particularly the woreda level to 
implement the ESCMF and other environmental and social safeguard instruments are low. The 
program  must  therefore  build  the  capacity  and  provide  technical  support  to  all  relevant 
implementing agents from National, Regional and Woreda levels to capacitate and fill the gaps. 
To  implement  the  ESCMF  the  development  and  implementation  of  capacity  development  and 
training plan is inevitable. This includes training on various topics that helps to undertaking annual 
review and end-program-evaluation of the impacts of the ESCMF. Apart from the allocation of 
money, integration, and coordination of various actors both at federal, regional and Woreda levels 
has  of  paramount  importance  for  the  successful  realization  of  the  -  Program  activities  in  an 
environmentally sustainable manner. Timely monitoring, evaluation and follow-up need also be 
considered in an integrated manner in collaboration with the various role players. The following 
steps should be followed to implement the ESCMF.  
121 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The  proposed  ESCMF  process  and  the  procedural  step  are  more  focused  on  PACT  Program 
activities  identification  and  preparation  of  sub-Program  activities  in  addressing  relevant   
environmental and social issues.  
The following steps will be followed in ESCMF implementation process.   
Step 1: Identification and Preparation of - Program activities 
This first step is an important exercise in creating a common understanding and awareness of the 
procedures involved among the key actors in the implementation of the ESCMF. It creates a level 
ground on which effective working relationships could be built in the implementation process.  
First, the PACT Program activities are identified in consultation with the beneficiaries and then 
prepared design documents. 
During the early stages of PACT annual plan preparation process including during PACT Program 
activities selection and prioritization phases, the PACT Program activities focal units and technical 
committees will have to prepare and familiarize themselves with the fundamentals of the ESCMF 
process by: 
a) Reviewing ESCMF and RPF requirements 
The PACT focal units   and relevant REPAs in the regions, zones and woredas will have to obtain 
copies  of  the  ESCMF,  RPF  as  well  as  all  relevant  Federal  and  regional  laws,  guidelines  and 
procedures  relating  to  environmental  protection,  cultural  heritage  and  resettlement  issues. 
Members of the technical committees and REPAs will also have to complete training requirements 
for implementation of the ESCMF and RPF of the proposed - Program activities. This will help to 
ensure  that  there  is  good  knowledge  of  ESCMF  and  RPF  requirements  at  different  levels  of 
administration and at the professional and technical staff level. 
b) Contacting the Regional Environment Office:  
-Provide them with details of the contact of the PACT Office or its parallel and the PCU. 
-Inform the Regional EPA that PACT Program activities are being planned that may be classified 
as being Schedule II or III activities and create awareness on the pertinent environmental issues in 
relation to federal and regional environmental regulations and guidelines. 
c)  Identifying  of  PACT  Program  activities  and  interested  and  affected  communities,  NGOs, 
businesses, etc., and informing them of the identified - Program activities and its potential impacts. 
Step 2: Scoping/Screening, Review, and Approval of Screening Report 
 Environmental scoping/screening will be conducted for each relevant PACT Program activities 
122 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
contained in the endorsed annual plan for PACT Program having specified site location. To fulfill 
the requirements of SECAP, the environmental and social scoping/screening will be conducted in 
two stages. During the first stage, the PACT Program activities will be scoped/screened using the 
scoping/screening form and it will be categorized into one of Substantial, Moderate or Low risk. 
Under the PACT components, it is anticipated that most of the Program activities will fall under 
substantial,  moderate  or  low  risk  and  no  “high  risk”.  Once  the  PACT  Program  activities  are 
scoped/screened  and  confirmed  to  fall  on  or  under  substantial  risk  category,  then  further 
categorization will be carried based on the Federal/Regional ESIA procedural guideline screening 
system  to  identify  the  schedule  of  activities  into  which  this  Program  activities  will  fall  (i.e. 
Schedule I, II & III). Based on the nature and scale of Program activities it is expected that most 
will fall under schedule II or below (by national/regional ESIA procedural guideline) which may 
require partial or no ESIAs. In addition to the national ESIA guidelines, SECAP will also be used 
in categorizing PACT Program activities depending on their level of impact.  
The environment focal person in the PFU initiates the process by completing the form contained 
in environmental Scoping/Screening Form. The aim of the scoping/screening form is to assist in 
identifying  potential  impacts  based  on  field  investigations  in  the  site  where  the  Program  is 
proposed  to  be  implemented.  The  scoping/screening  exercise  should  also  consider  the  cultural 
heritages  and  resettlement  aspects  of  the  Program  activities  before  deciding  the  site.  The 
environment focal person can seek assistance from other members of the Woreda Office technical 
committees while carrying the environmental screening. 
This Scoping/Screening Report will describe the following items: 
•  The proposed Program activities and its potential impacts. 
•  Characteristics of the location (sensitivity of the areas),  
•  Size (small, medium, and large scale), 
•  Degree of public interest, 
•  Institutional requirement, environmental enhancement, and monitoring considerations, 
•  Categorization of the Program activities (Substantial, Moderate, Low risk and schedule 
I, II or III) 
The  outcome  of  environmental  scoping/screening  will  be  classifying  the  proposed  Program 
activities into one of Substantial, Moderate, or low Categories and Schedule 1, 2 or 3 activities. 
The issue of vulnerable groups will be considered when the Program activities are classified as 
Substantial, Moderate, or low risk activities. The completed scoping/screening form will be sent 
to the regional environment office for internal checking and approval. It will then be submitted to 
the Zonal or Woreda office with an official application for review and approval. Scoping/screening 
reports should not have “Conflict of Interest” of communities in the process. 
The Zonal or Woreda offices will review the Scoping/Screening Report and will: 
  Accept the document - with conditions relating to implementation. 
  Accept the documents with recommended amendments. or 
123 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
  Reject  the  document  with  comments  as  to  what  is  required  to  submit  an  acceptable 
Screening Report. 
  Following the approval of the PACT Program activities environmental screening report by 
REPA, the Program activities will be fed into one of the following processes based on its 
approved Categorization. 
  Schedule  1  Program  activities  are  fed  into  the  standard  ESIA  process  and  will  need  to 
prepare full ESIA study report. It is mostly unlikely for PACT Program activities to fall in 
schedule I. 
  Schedule 2 PACT Program activities will require a partial or preliminary ESIA and will 
necessitate  the  inclusion  of  environmental  and  social  mitigation  and  enhancement 
measures in the design and implementation of PACT Program activities. 
  Schedule 3 PACT Program activities are not subject to environmental assessment as no 
potential  impacts  are  anticipated.  Thus,  no  further  action  is  required.  However,  the 
environmental guideline for construction contractors will have to be providing in all cases. 
The results of the Scoping/Screening Report whether a full ESIA, Partial ESIA, RAP   will be 
included in the PACT   Program activities Application Form. Considering the nature, type and 
scale of PACT   Program activities, it is most likely that Program activities will fall under Schedule 
II which require preparation of Partial ESIA. The next step in the ESCMF process is to proceed to 
the next actions to fulfill the requirements based on the screening categorization, which is outlined 
in Step 3 below. 
Step 3:  ES Instruments Preparation, Review, and Approval 
If the Program activities is Schedule I, then it requires a full ESIA which should be prepared by 
independent  consultant.  For  the  Schedule  II  -  Program  activities  Environmental  and  Social 
Assessment could be prepared by PFU or with the help of an independent consultant. Schedule II 
PACT Program activities are required to prepare “Preliminary ESIAs in  which the depth of its 
information  requirement  can be defined in  consultation with  the relevant  regional environment 
office  
Generally, the scope of ESIA for schedule II PACT Program activities may vary, but it is narrower 
than that of Schedule I ESIA that examines the PACT Program activities’ potential negative and 
positive  environmental  impacts  and  recommends  any  measures  needed  to  prevent,  minimize, 
mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts and improve environmental performance.  
Typically,  a  partial  ESIA  doesn’t  require  policy,  legal,  and  institutional  framework  analysis, 
baseline data and analysis of alternatives as a full ESIA. It will, however, assess in detail ES risks 
and impacts, recommend mitigation measures, and include ESCMP and monitoring plan.  
During the study of the full Environmental Impact Assessment and preparation of Environmental 
Management  Plan  the  environment  focal  person  together  with  other  members  of  the  PFU  and 
technical  committees  will  have  to  ensure  the  quality  of  the  assessment  by  conducting  interim 
124 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
review  of  draft  full/partial  ESIA  report.  The  full/  partial  Environmental  and  Social  Impact 
Assessment and Environmental and Social Management Plan will then be presented by the PFU 
for further internal review and approval. The full/Partial ESIA will be submitted to the relevant 
REPA with an official application for review and approval. Finally, the partial ESIA will be send 
to IFAD for no-objection and further disclosures. 
It should be noted that for Substantial-Risk PACT Program activities, as well as situations in which 
the  client  has  limited  capacity,  the  client  will  retain  independent  specialists  to  carry  out  the 
environmental and social assessment. 
The relevant Regional, Zonal, or Woreda Environmental Protection offices will review the partial 
ESIAs and ESCMPs submitted to it by the PFU office. The purpose of review is to examine and 
determine  whether  the  full/partial  ESIA  and  ESCMP  are  based  on  adequate  assessment  of  the 
environmental  effects  of  the  PACT  Program  activities  under  consideration  and  of  sufficient 
relevance and quality for decision-making.  
Reviewing may include considerations of the adequacy of: 
  Compliance with the "approved TOR". 
  Availability of the required information. 
  The  examination  of  alternatives,  assessment  of  impacts,  appropriateness  of  mitigation 
measures and monitoring schemes as well as implementation arrangements. 
  The use of scientific and analytical techniques. 
  The extent of public involvement and reflection of PAPs concerns. and 
 
If the report is presented to decision makers at Regional, Sectoral, and Local levels. 
The Regional, Zonal, Woreda Environmental Protection Authority will review the partial ESIA 
and ESCMP and will: 
  Accept the document - with conditions relating to implementation. 
  Accept the documents with required and/or recommended amendments. or 
  Reject the document with comments as to what is required to submit an acceptable ESIA 
and ESCMP. 
Moreover, it also worth to note that IFAD will review the adequacy of national environmental and 
social requirements relevant to the PACT Program activities and assess the capacity of the client 
to manage the environmental and social risks and impacts. If the IFAD is not satisfied that adequate 
capacity exists on the part of the Client, all Risk and as appropriate, Substantial Risk will be subject 
to prior review and approval by IFAD until it is established that adequate capacity exists with the 
client. On the other hand, if the risk rating of ACT Program activities increases to a higher risk 
rating, IFAD will require the client to apply relevant requirements of the ESSs in a manner agreed 
with the IFAD. The measures and actions agreed will be monitored by IFAD. 
125 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
The review and approval process of full ESIA report of  - Program activities if there exists any 
under  PACT  will  follow  the  same  procedure  with  the  exception  that  the  scope  is  broad 
encompassing broad range of environmental issues that will have significant environmental and 
social impact on the community and the environment.  
Step 4: PACT Program activities Implementation and Supervision 
When approval has been given to the partial ESIA/ESCMP implementation of mitigation measures 
systemic follow-up is needed for the ACT Program activities. Monitoring the compliance of PACT 
Program  activities  implementation  with  the  mitigation  measures  set  out  in  its  ESCMP  will  be 
carried  out  by  the  environment  and  social  focal  person  of  the  PFU  who  is  responsible  for 
environmental and social management. The PFU and the environment focal person will have the 
primary responsibility for carrying out this monitoring by regularly visiting the PACT Program 
activities and advise corrective measures to the contractor as required.  
The  implementation  of  the  recommended  mitigating  measures  will  also  be  monitored  by  the 
Regional and/or Zonal Environmental offices and internal M&E monitoring unit of PACT from 
time to time. The Environment and social focal person will have to collaborate in the planning for 
external compliance monitoring inspections that will be conducted by the relevant Regional and/or 
Zonal environment offices.  
Compliance  monitoring  comprises  on  site-inspection  of  construction  activities  to  verify  that 
measures  identified  in  the  ESCMP  are  included  in  the  clauses  for  contractors  are  being 
implemented. Compliance monitoring and supervision of the ESCMP covers: 
  Determining whether the PACT Program activities is being carried out in conformity with 
environmental safeguards and legal agreements. 
  Ensuring that the anticipated impacts are maintained within the levels predicted. 
 
Identifying problems as they arise during implementation and recommend means to resolve 
them. 
  Seeing that the un-anticipated impacts are managed and or mitigated before they become 
problems. 
  Recommending changes in PACT Program activities concept/design, as appropriate, as the 
PACT Program activities evolves or circumstances change. and 
  Providing  information  for  a  periodic  review  and  alteration  of  the  environmental 
management plan and enhance environmental protection through good practice at all stages 
of the PACT Program activities. 
It is, therefore, necessary that Environmental and Social Management Plan, Cultural Resources 
Management Plan or Resettlement Action Plan is regularly supervised, monitored, and reported to 
regional environment office, to the client and IFAD together with other progresses of the PACT 
Program activities. 
126 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Step 5: Environmental and Social Safeguards Compliance Evaluation Phase 
Once implementation of the PACT Program activities has started, regular supervision missions 
should be carried out by the PCU and the regional environmental offices on a quarterly, biannual 
and annual basis and environmental and social safeguards compliance reports must be prepared 
and submitted to the environment region offices, the client and to IFAD for review and guidance. 
Step 6: Annual Review and Audit Phase 
ESCMF implementation will also be supported by conducting annual environmental and social 
performance audit that will be carried out by a third party. The third-party annual environmental 
and social performance audits will be conducted on the PACT activities  to evaluate the overall 
implementation of the ESCMF. The annual environmental and social performance audits will be 
the  principal  source  of  information  for  improving  environmental  and  social  performance.  It  is 
expected that these reviews will be carried out by an independent local consultant or other service 
provider  that  is  not  earlier  involved  in  the  formulation  of  the  PACT  Program  activities.  The 
purpose of the reviews is of two-fold: 
  To assess compliance with ESCMF procedures, learn lessons, and improve future ESCMF 
performance. and 
  To  assess  the  occurrence  and  potential  for  cumulative  impacts  due  to  PACT  Program 
activities and other development projects. 
11.2  Information Disclosure  
In  compliance  with  the  IFAD  SECAP  guidelines  and  the  Government  of  Ethiopia  EIA 
Proclamation No. 299/2002, public consultation on and disclosure of safeguards instruments are 
mandatory. Before PACT subprojects are approved and before the initiation of physical works, the 
relevant safeguard documents (ESCMP, SEP, LMP, IPMP, ESIA, RAP) need to be finalized as 
required. The documents must then be made available for public review at a place accessible to 
local people and in a form, manner, and language the communities can understand. The general 
public should participate and be consulted at all levels of environmental and social assessments 
including  eligibility  checks,  screening,  scoping, 
identification  and  rating.  The 
environmental and social safeguard instruments will be printed and made available at grassroots 
government offices (woreda Information Centers, and other relevant institution offices). Hard and 
soft copies will be distributed and be publicly disclosed in the MoA  websites and at the IFAD 
website. 
impact 
Ministry of Agriculture which is the implementing agency of the PACT will make copies of the 
ESCMF  available  in  selected  public  places  (possibly  at  National  and  Regional  relevant 
government  offices)  for  information  and  comments.  The  Proposed  project  activities  will  be 
announced through different forms of media. The announcement will include a brief description 
of the project references as to where and when the ESCMF can be viewed, duration of the display 
127 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
period, and contact information for comments. 
For meaningful consultations between the project owner and local NGOs on all Substantial risk 
sub-projects,  Bureau  of  Agriculture  at  the  regional  level  shall  provide  a  relevant  material  in  a 
timely  manner  prior  to  consultation  and  in  a  form  and  language  that  are  understandable  and 
accessible to the groups being consulted.  
Public  Disclosure  Plan:  Following  the  public  consultation,  all  comments  and  briefs  will  be 
analyzed and   report will be published and made available to the relevant stakeholder’s and to 
interested bodies upon request. 
In  line  with  this,  the  ESCMF  will  be  available  at  the  relevant  institutions  at  all  levels  and  be 
publicly  disclosed  both  in  the  relevant  country  offices  and  at  the  IFAD’s  website.  Copies  of 
consultation reports should be made accessible through public relation sections of relevant sectoral 
offices, radio announcement and press releases. 
Any ESCMPs and other safeguards instruments that will be prepared for the proposed project will 
also  needed to  be disclosed to  the public. Copies of the  ESCMPs should be made available to 
communities and interested parties in accessible locations through local government authorities, 
(e.g. Woreda offices) and to local people and in a form, manner and local language the community 
can understand. Similarly, copies of the ESCMPs should also be provided to the implementing 
agencies.  This  will  ensure  record  keeping  of  all  activities  implemented  under  the  ESCMF  and 
ensure  that  third  party  audits,  if  required,  have  adequate  information  when  undertaking  annual 
environmental and social audits at a later stage of project completion. 
Disclosure of Documentation: IFAD policy on the disclosure of documents adopted the principle 
of  “presumption  of  full  disclosure”  The  sharing  of  draft  and  final  ESIAs  and  other  relevant 
documents with project stakeholders and interested parties will be subject to the above-mentioned 
principle. As such, the documents will be disclosed, when available, in a timely manner prior to 
project appraisal at the quality assurance stage on IFAD Website and in an accessible place or at 
the project-affected area, in a form and language understandable to project-affected parties and 
other stakeholders, for the purposes of keeping them informed and providing them   meaningful 
feedback about the sub project. Local disclosure of Project information to the community should 
be in local language that can be easily understood by the community.  
128 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
12.  Grievance Redressing Mechanisms (GRMs) 
Introduction  Project  implementation  may  be  a  source  of  grievance.  Grievance  may  be  during 
construction, operation, compensation payment modality, pollution, resource use conflict etc. The 
government of Ethiopia has a system of addressing grievances using the Ethiopian Ombudsman 
Institution  and  Public  Grievance  Hearing  Offices  (PGHO)  at  all  levels  of  the  decentralized 
administration. A ‘grievance’ is a perceived injustice evoking an individual’s or a group’s sense 
of  entitlement,  which  may  be  based  on  law,  contract,  explicit  or  implicit  promises,  customary 
practice,  or  general  notions  of  fairness  of  aggrieved  communities.  In  effect  it  could  be  either 
perceived or actual issue, concern, problem, or claim that an individual or community group wants 
a  project  or  contractor  to  resolve.  Grievance  related  exercise  include  questions,  requests  for 
information, or general perceptions that may or may not be related to a specific impact or incident. 
If not addressed to the satisfaction of the person or group sensed it, concerns may well become 
complaints, and will lead to a loss in the projects to operate or failure for successful delivery of 
the  intended  development  goal  of  the  project.  Emerging  trends  toward  the  project  shall  be 
identified  and  addressed  through  community  engagement  before  they  escalate.  Complaints  or 
grievances  including  all  allegations  of  specific  incidents  and  of  any  damage,  impact  or 
dissatisfaction resulting from projects or contractor actions, whether perceived or actual should be 
identified,  documented,  and  addressed  properly.  Good  practice  in  environmental  and  social 
performance  of  projects  required  the  implementation  of  feedback  mechanisms  to  enable 
stakeholders to provide input and to make the community being heard for any grievance developed 
during  the  project.  To  materialize  this  project  needs  to  have  participatory  and  culture  friendly 
grievance mechanism. In line with this fact a Grievance Redress Mechanism will be implemented 
to ensure that all complaints from local communities are dealt with appropriately, with corrective 
actions being implemented, and the complainant is informed of the outcome. It will be applied to 
all  complaints  from  affected  parties.  It  will  provide  a  formal  avenue  for  affected  groups  or 
stakeholders  to  engage  with  the  project  implementers  or  owners  on  issues  of  concern  or 
unaddressed  impacts.  Concerns  will  be  addressed  promptly  using  an  understandable  and 
transparent process that is culturally appropriate and readily acceptable to all segments of affected 
communities, at no cost and without retribution. GRM should be appropriate to the scale of impacts 
and risks presented by a project.  
Objectives of GRM  
The  GRM  should  be  culturally  appropriate  and,  as  far  as  possible,  dependable  with  existing 
mechanisms both at  community level  and in the administrative system/contractors. The project 
will establish a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) with the following objectives:  
- To provide project-affected peoples (PAPs) with easily accessible procedures for settlement of 
complaints.  
•  To provide a reliable way for the project to address and resolve disputes. 
129 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
•  To contribute to building trust between the project, PAPs and other stakeholders.  
•  To avoid illegal proceedings. 
•  Ensure transparency and accountability throughout the implementation of project  
•  Resolve any emerging environmental and social grievances in project areas.  
•  To promote relations between the project implementers, executers, and beneficiaries  
Grievance Resolution Committee (GRC) 
 In view of the above, a Grievance Resolution Committee (GRC) shall be set up by the PCU at 
Woreda  level  to  inform  and  coordinate  the  relevant  stakeholders  and  to  provide  resources  for 
resolution. The Committee will maintain all records from complaint to final decision for future 
reference.  It  will  also  ensure  that  public  participation  and  consultation  is  always  a  part  of  the 
process  to  promote understanding  and prevent  unnecessary  complaints  and disputes. The GRC 
will be mandated to deal with all types of grievances arising at the community level due to the 
proposed  project  and  its  subprojects.  The  GRC  members  shall  be  comprise  of  qualified, 
experienced,  and  competent  personnel  who  will  be  able  to  interact  and  gain  the  trust  of  the 
complainants  in  the  local  communities.  The  GRC  should  consist  of  both  male  and  female 
representatives. They should  be able to  accept  complaints, provide relevant  information  on the 
process,  discuss  the  complainants’  situations  with  the  concerned  person,  and  explore  possible 
approaches for resolution. There is a need for clear standard procedure and plan of how to register 
(how,  where,  and  when)  grievance  and  this  GRM  shall  be  disseminated  within  the  project 
implementation  level  with  focuses  to  communities  at  Kebele  and  Woreda  where  for 
concerns/grievances  of the project  are  expected to  be presented due to  its size of the proposed 
intervention and site specificity of the activities. When affected or concerned persons present their 
grievance,  they  expect  to  be  heard  and  taken  seriously  so  Woreda  and  Kebele  level  project 
stakeholders, particularly kebele focal person is required to inform the project GRM system and 
provide adequate information. 
 Grievance Redness Record and procedure 
 The grievance resolution process includes four key stages – (i) Receive: Relevant personnel in 
each  project  site  (SC  and  Contractor)  will  be  required  to  accept  formal  grievances  and  ensure 
avenues for lodging grievances are accessible to  the public and affected persons. Avenues will 
include face to face with the contractor, government representative or community representative, 
by telephone or in writing to the above or via email. (ii) Investigate/Enquire;  information may be 
gathered from any other sources to describe the cause and effects of grievance more clearly, its 
level of urgency or severity and its relationship to subproject. Investigations may include site visits 
and meetings to determine: the scale and impact of the grievance and what options there may be 
for  appropriate  responses  or  resolutions.  (iii)  Respond  and  Resolve:  The  response  should 
communicate findings of the investigation and resolution and seek approval from the Complainant. 
If the Complainant is satisfied with the outcome, then the grievance is closed out and they provide 
their  signature  (or  fingerprint)  on  the  agreement  as  confirmation  (iv)  Follow  up/Close  Out:  A 
130 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
grievance is closed out when no further action can be or needs to be taken. All grievances should 
be closed out within the initial 30 days or as soon as possible thereafter and after all reasonable 
attempts  to  resolve  the  grievance  have  been  attempted.  The  received  complaint  has  to  be 
documented  in  writing  using  a  standard  format  containing  specific  time  plan  for  resolving 
conflict/complaint. After registration using standard format, it should be 26 | P a g e examined; 
investigated  and  remedial  actions  shall  be  taken.  A  GRM  Register  will  be  maintained  at  each 
Regional PCU by  the Regional  Project  Coordinator based on the Complaint Forms, records of 
meetings and decisions and Appeal Forms received from the Woreda FPs will comprise a hard 
copy file and an Excel spreadsheet including the type of complaint, location, date of complaint 
and decision, actions to address the complaint, and outcome.  
The GRM Process  
•  At community level, any person who has complaint regarding the Project activities can raise 
these  issues  with  the  Kebele-level  contact  point  (Focal  Person  (FP),  normally  the  Kebele 
Manager). All received complaints and responses will be documented and copies sent to the 
Kebele administration and Woreda FP. 
If the issue cannot be resolved by informal discussion between the project and the complainant, 
the complaint can be brought to the Kebele Development Committee (KDC). The complaint 
and  decisions  made  will  be  documented  and  copies  sent  to  the  Kebele  administration  and 
Woreda GRC.  
• 
•  Complaints unresolved at Kebele level will be brought to the attention of the Woreda GRC. It 
is recorded in a Logbook for review, further investigation and decision by the GRC. 
•  The  complaint  that  is  beyond  the  Woreda  GRC  is  reported  to  the  Woreda  Project  Steering 
Committee  for  final  decision  and  report  sent  to  the  Regional  Steering  Committee  through 
RPCU.  
Grievance channel for Gender Based Violence (GBV)  
Gender-based violence (GBV) is an attack on the security, voice, and well-being of individuals, 
and  of  whole  communities.  Preventing  GBV  requires  collaboration  and  action  across  different 
groups including contractors, project staff, government partners and communities. In this regard, 
the project will make special focus on ensuring the safety and security of women, children and 
other  vulnerable  groups.  It  also  involves  monitoring  of  regular  and  dynamic  engagement  with 
community leaders and stakeholders at Woreda level. Specific actions may include the following:  
•  Undertake  periodic  awareness  around  GBV  issues  among  staff,  contractors,  and  other 
stakeholders. 
•  Develop a methodology for assessment of risk of GBV in the project;  
•  Build and improve project staff and client capacity to address risks of GBV through the 
development of guidance, training, and continuous learning activities and materials 
•  Develop  a  clear  internal  Reporting  and  Response  Protocol  to  guide  project  staff  and 
supervisors in case of incidents 
131 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
•  Develop Codes of Conduct for contractors and Supervisors with prohibitions against GBV, 
-  Strengthening  consultation  considerations  and  recommendations  for  grievance  redress 
mechanisms.  
•  Ensuring that the project provides help to survivors of GBV 
Traditional Grievance Redness Mechanism  
The unwritten customary law is exercised by the well-experienced elders who transfer the informal 
rules from one generation to another. The elders play the role of mediating, arbitrating, managing 
and resolving the conflict. Thus, the community head allows only wise elders to be involved in the 
resolution process. It would be easier to manage the conflict because the conflicting parties have 
a common cultural background and are governed by the traditional law. The elders that will be 
selected is based on their capacity to present convincing arguments, honesty, their knowledge of 
the values and traditions of the society, neutrality and their personal experience in responding to 
the difficulties they face.  
132 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
13.  ESCMF Implementation Arrangement 
The  Environmental, social and climate risk management is  one  of  the  program  support sections 
of  the P AC T P rogra m   with  the  aim  to  ensure  that Program activities to  be  implemented  are 
not  only  technically,  economically  and  financially viable,  but  are  also environmentally friendly 
and socially acceptable by the community participating in this Program. For the attainment of the 
PACT  Development  objective  and  ensuring  environmental  and  social  sustainability  the 
appropriate  institutional  arrangement  will  need  to  be  e  established.  The  oregano-  gram  below 
shows  the  overall  institutional  arrangements  proposed  to  manage  the  environmental,  social  and 
climate risks and impacts that may result due to the implementation of PACT Program. 
Figure 13. 1 Institutional arrangement for the implementation of PACT Project 
FPMCU= Federal Project Management and Coordination Unit; RPMCU= Regional Project Management 
Coordination Unit 
Federal  Program  Management  C o o r d i n a t i o n   Unit  (FPMCU):  The  main  organization 
responsible for the implementation of the ESCMF at federal level is the Ministry of Agriculture 
(MoA) through its PMU.  MoA, will play a leading role in ensuring the proper implementation of 
the  ESCMF.  It  will  guaranty  that  the  applicable  Government  of  Ethiopia  (GoE)  rules  and 
regulations as well as  IFAD safeguard policy requirements are enforced. At  f ederal  l evel,  the 
client  will  deploy  qualified  environmental  and  social safeguards specialists dedicated for this 
project who will oversee the climate, environmental and social risk management issues.  
The  F P M C U   shall  recruit one  e nvironmental and social safeguard specialist and gender one 
133 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
gender specialist who will work closely with regional safeguard specialists, zonal and woreda focal 
persons  assigned  in  each  of  the  PACT  implementing  regions.  The  environmental  and  social 
safeguard  specialists  and  gender  specialist  shall  consolidate  all  compliance  and  performance 
monitoring reports collected from the regions. They will assist in monitoring and closely following 
up  of  the  effective  implementation  of  the  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Management 
Framework (ESCMF), Social Assessment (SA), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Labour 
Management  plan  (LMP),  Stakeholder  Engagement  Plan  (SEP)  and  Gender  Mainstreaming 
Guideline  (GMG).  Besides,  they  provide  the  required  technical  backstopping; review Program 
activities, project plan, design,  costs and  baseline documents to ensure environmental, climate 
and social factors and mitigation measures are incorporated; prepare monthly and annual work 
plan;  organize  annual  review  programs;  collect  and  consolidate  progress  report  and  send  the 
consolidated report to development partners on a quarter base. 
Environmental  Protection  Authority,  at  federal,  regional  and  Woreda  level,  are  responsible  for 
project screening/approval of categorization as well as approval of relevant studies such as ESIA, 
ESMP.  Therefore,  the  federal  and  regional  PMU  will  collaborate  with  the  environmental 
protection  authority  for  the  smooth  implementation.  The  main  areas  of  collaboration  includes: 
reporting template and periodicity of reporting, compliance monitoring and auditing as well as 
capacity development.   
Regional  Project  Management  Coordination  Unit 
(RPMCU):  The  RPMCU  will 
designate/recruit  one  environmental  and social safeguards specialist and Gender specialist  who 
will follow the overall implementation of the LMP, SEP,  ESCMF, SA,  RPF and GMG at woreda, 
kebele and community level. The regional safeguards team shall undergo training in environmental 
and social safeguards and gender mainstreaming  aspects during Program activities preparations, 
review  and  approval of sub projects.  They will  closely work with the regional infrastructure and 
watershed  specialists  of  the  region  during  the  planning  and  construction  time  to  avoid  the 
occurrence (proactive engagement) of impacts on the environment and the community. They will 
collect the performance of safeguard activities from the woreda; undergo a detail analysis on the 
quality of  reports,  and  the  implementation  of  mitigation  measures  on a specified period. They 
will also review together with the regulatory institution  or delegated  regulatory authority ESIA 
reports referred to the region for ESIA. A consolidated plan will  be sent to the environmental, 
social safeguard specialist and gender specialists to the federal project management coordination 
unit through the M&E unit of the regions. 
Zonal  Focal  Person  of  the  Project:  The  PACT  Program  at  zonal  level  is  led  by  a  steering 
committee. The  Focal  person at  the zonal  level  is  responsible for the overall coordination and 
monitoring of the environmental and social safeguard and gender related activities at woreda level. 
He/she will compile and consolidate quarter and annual implementation progress reports submitted 
by  the  woredas  and  will  send  to  the  RPMCU.  He/she  will  facilitate  the  implementation  of  the 
review process of the ESIA studies of those sub-project activities received from woredas to the 
134 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
zonal environmental regulatory body for further evaluation. Zonal focal persons will also support 
woredas in properly directing the steps that will be followed while conducting the ESIA studies 
by  own  human  resources  at  woreda  level  and/or  by  a  consulting  firm  licensed  by  the  Feral 
environment office or other international entities entrusted for the purpose. 
Woreda Focal Person of the Project: The woreda focal person is responsible for coordinating 
the different stakeholders in the planning and implementation of the PACT Program activities at 
grass root level, kebele and community level. He/she supports kebele Development Agents in the 
identification and screening of Sub program activities. However, for high and medium risk sub-
Project activities he/she should request support from safeguards experts either at Zonal or regional 
levels after screening results. He/she will follow the implementation of mitigation measures that 
are planned in the ESCMP, , LMP, SEP and RPF. Besides, he/she will play a significant role in 
facilitating  the  Woreda  technical  committee  members  to  play  their  respective  roles  in  the 
evaluation of t h e   anticipated  potential  environmental  and social  impacts and implementation 
of  the  mitigation  measures  by  directing  to  their  concerned  sector  offices.  He/she  prepare  and 
submit  a  consolidated  report  on  the  performance  of  the  environmental  and  social  safeguard 
activities  along with the M&E reports. 
Kebele  level  implementation:  identification  and  initial  environmental  and  social  screening  of 
sub-Program activity of  the PACT  starts from  community and  kebele level  which  are  eligible 
to participate in the implementation of sub-project activities. Kebele Watershed Team (KWT) and 
Community Watershed Team (CWT) at kebele and community level, respectively, are responsible 
for  the  follow  up  and  timely  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  site  specific  LMP,  SEP  and 
ESCMF  and,  RPF  and  ESCMP  i f   applicable.  Development  Agents  at  kebele  level  (Natural 
Resource  Management,  Crop  Development,  Livestock  Development,  Irrigation  and/or  others) 
have the responsibility to ensure the overall implementation of the LMP, SEP, ESCMF, SA and 
RPF. 
The table below summarizes the roles of institutions responsible for the implementation ESCMF. 
Table 13.1 Summary of institutions responsible for the implementation ESCMF 
No. 
ESCMF 
Implementation 
Body/Staff 
Role and Responsibility 
Implementation Level 
(Federal/Regional/woreda/ 
kebele)  
1 
Ministry of 
Agriculture 
(MoA/FPM CU 
  Executing PACT Program with 
the 
overall 
coordination, management, and 
supervision. 
functions 
of 
  Ensuring 
proper 
the 
implementation of the ESCMF;  
  Guarantying that the applicable 
GoE  rules  and  regulations  as 
well as IFAD requirements are 
Federal level 
135 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
No. 
ESCMF 
Implementation 
Body/Staff 
Role and Responsibility 
enforced. 
Implementation Level 
(Federal/Regional/woreda/ 
kebele)  
  Oversight 
the 
implementation  of  the  PACT 
Program; 
of 
  Providing  strategic  direction 
and  policy  guidance  in  Project 
implementation; 
  Approving  annual  plans  and 
budgets;  
  Ensuring  high 
level 
inter-
ministerial/agency coordination 
and 
collaboration, 
harmonization  and  alignment 
among donors.  
  Review  the  progress  of  the 
project and evaluate work plans 
on  semi-annual  and  annual 
bases. 
  Oversees  and  executes 
the 
implementation 
project 
activities, including safeguards, 
monitoring  and  evaluation  and 
reporting. 
of 
Federal level. 
Federal level 
Overseeing  the  environmental,  social 
and risk management issues.  
Follow-up the implementation of the 
ESCMF. 
Federal level 
  Overall 
technical 
level 
among 
coordination 
Implementing Agencies (IAs); 
planning; 
activity 
fiduciary  management;  and 
procurement;  
  Annual 
Regional level 
  Safeguard  issues;  liaising  with 
federal stakeholder groups; and 
project communication;  
  Consolidation  of  M&E  and 
other reporting;  
  Strategic 
staff 
capacity-
building and mobilization.  
2 
Federal Steering 
Committee (SC) 
3 
4 
5 
National Project 
Coordinator 
(NPC) 
ES Safeguard 
Specialist 
Regional 
Agricultural 
Bureau/Projects 
Management 
Unit (RPMCU)  
6 
zonal 
Serving as member committees at the 
Zonal level 
136 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
No. 
ESCMF 
Implementation 
Body/Staff 
agricultural 
office/focal 
person  
7 
8 
9 
focal 
Woreda 
person/kebele 
Administration/  
Woreda 
Compensation 
and 
Resettlement 
Committee 
Compensation 
committee at the 
kebele level 
Role and Responsibility 
zonal grass root/community level in 
the supervision and implementation of 
the ESCMF. 
Participate in the implementation of 
ESCMF at the woreda/kebele/ 
community/grass root  levels and in 
the   supervision of the 
implementation of the ESCMF. 
Implementation Level 
(Federal/Regional/woreda/ 
kebele)  
Woreda/ local level. 
Overseeing  proper  implementation  of 
the RPF, RAP  or ARAP  proposed for 
PACT subprojects. 
Woreda level 
Evaluate  compensation  for  the  assets 
lost  during  implementation  of  sub 
projects at the grass root levels 
Kebele level 
137 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
14. 
 Capacity Building  
According to the feedback obtained during the consultation with stakeholders and  communities 
capacity  building  of  experts  is  one  of  the  intervention  areas  that  need  to  be  addressed  for  the 
successful implementation of the PACT Project.  It is crucial to plan and execute general training 
and  awareness/sensitization  programs  and  specific  technical  trainings  for  relevant  stakeholders 
expected to participate at various level of the subproject implementation (from planning through 
implementation to operation and decommissioning phases. According to the feedback   obtained 
from consultation with the major stakeholders there exists capacity gap especially at regional and 
woreda  levels  to  properly  implement  the  ESCMF  of  the  PACT  Project.  Special  initiative  is 
therefore  needed  to  address  the  capacity  issue  to  implement  the  proposed  mitigation  measures 
proposed in the ESCMF Report. To fill such capacity, gap the following technical trainings and 
awareness raising activities are planned to be provided.   
the  procedures 
Technical training on ESCMF and RPF will  mainly  focus  on  the  technical  staffs  that  will  be 
involved in directly applying the ESCMF and RPF procedures. It includes the experts at PACT-
PMU at federal level, member of technical committees, PACT Steering Committee members 
etc. The training will focus in explaining the details of the national and IFAD environmental 
requirements  and 
it. 
Implementation  of  the  ESCMF  and  RPF  including  all  aspects  of  the IFAD DECAP 
environmental  management,  EIA,  public  consultation,  and  integration  of  environmental 
management  into  development  planning  will  be  the  center  topics  for  the  training.  The 
training  would  also  cover  skills  upgrading  refreshment  topics  such  as,  environmental,  and 
social  screening and  categorization  processes,  EIA 
review  and  quality  assurance, 
environmental  audits, and environmental  guidelines.  The  training  can  be offered to the target 
groups at federal, woreda, zonal or community levels. 
to  comply  with 
that  need 
fulfilled 
to  be 
The technical support for the implementation of ESCMF will need the preparation of a detail 
plan and budget estimate to implement the plan.  For effective implementation of the LMP, SEP, 
ESCMF, and RPF it is  necessary to  provide  capacity  building  and technical  backstopping to 
experts at federal, regional and woreda and community levels. Capacity building is critical in 
the  implementation  of  ESCMF  and  environmental  and  social  safeguard  works.  Capacity 
building includes both human and material resources. Human resource capacity building enables 
implementers  and  stakeholders  in  the  regions  and  woredas  to  increase  understanding  of  the 
project  nature,  increase  skills  and  also  access  to  information.  The  technical  backstopping 
includes training and capacity building need assessment, monitoring of the implementation of 
mitigation  measures  and  utilization  of  the  different  tools  and  of  checklists  indicated  in  the 
ESCMF Report 
T e c h n i c a l   t raining  is  proposed  to  be  provided  to  the  experts  participating  in      the 
implementation  of  ESCMF.  The  following  topics  will  be  covered  under  the  proposed 
138 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
technical training. 
• 
Introduction  to  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework.  This 
section  will  introduce  participants  to  the  theory  and  application  of  ESCMF  as  a 
decision-making  tool.  It  will  outline  the  principles  of  ESCMF  and  provide  clear 
definitions  of  terminologies  applied  on  environmental  management  systems 
practice  (e.g.  screening  and  scoping,  impacts  [negative,  positive,  cumulative] 
natural  resource  base  (water,  soil,  land,  biodiversity,  air, etc.),  social  baseline 
(employment,  social,  health,  literacy  etc.)  and  mitigation  and monitoring. It will 
also  provide  guidance  on  the  criteria  required  for  the  development  of  an effective 
ESCMP in practice. 
•  Ethiopian  Environmental  Legislation:  This 
the 
application  of Ethiopian  legislation  in  terms  of  the  relevant  environmental  and 
social  laws  and  policies which apply to activities under the PACT. 
section  will  discuss 
•  Screening  of  PACT  sub-projects:  A  list  of  potential  activities  to  be  financed 
under the projects will be discussed. Application of the screening checklist will be 
explained  using case studies. 
Impact  Identification:  Potential  impacts  related  to  various  types  of  activities 
will  be discussed,  in  terms  of  their  significance  (adverse  or  minimal,  positive 
or  negative), magnitude (long term versus short term), and impact category (localized 
or cumulative). 
• 
•  Mitigation  measures  and  Implementation  Monitoring:  Mitigation  measures 
and  monitoring  as  they  apply  to  various  types  of  project  activities  will  be 
discussed,  in  terms  of  their  application,  cost  and  feasibility.  Training  will  also 
be  provided  on 
importance  of  Monitoring  to  gauge  the  effective 
implementation of the mitigation plans. 
the 
•  Responsibilities  for  Planning  and  Reporting:   For  each  target  audience, 
responsibilities for  environmental  and  social  management  will  be  discussed  as 
they  relate  to  PACT subproject implementation. This will include responsibilities 
for  planning,  management  of  impacts  and  mitigation  measures,  monitoring, 
partnerships  with  NGOs  and  technical  service  providers,  and  the  reporting  of 
outcomes achieved in implementing the mitigations as well as monitoring plans. 
IFAD Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP):  Detailed 
application  of 
the  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedure 
relevant to the PACT; 
• 
There  is  also  the  need  to  create  awareness  among  the  communities  that  will  participate  in  the 
implementation sub projects. During the awareness creation campaign briefing will be done by the 
project owner on the following topics to inform the community about the project. 
  Nature of the sub projects, anticipated impacts and mitigation measures; 
139 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
 Payment of compensation for the lost assets; 
 
  Grievance redress mechanism; 
  Health and safety;  
  Covid 19, GBV and other sexually transmitted diseases; 
The following technical trainings and capacity building to create awareness among the community 
is proposed to be implemented during the life time of the project. 
Table 14.2 Type and duration of trainings 
Types of 
trainings 
Target groups 
Training topics/ aspects 
of safeguard 
Potential 
Trainers 
ToT (federal 
level) 
20 participants 
Staff of PMU at 
Federal level  
ToT  
20 participants  
Technical Staff of 
MOA  
 EA, ESIA 
 OHS 
 Environmental and 
social standards 
 Environmental 
safeguard policies of 
the IFAD and Ethiopia 
 ESCMF, SA including 
social management 
plan and RPF 
implementation 
process 
 Monitoring of 
mitigation measures, 
 Review and reporting 
procedures, 
 Environmental and 
social auditing, 
 Integrated watershed 
and landscape 
management planning, 
 , ESCMP, ESIA, 
Environmental and 
social standards, OHS 
 Environmental 
policies of the country 
 ESCMF, SA including 
Consultants; 
 Consultants  
Duration 
and Time 
of training 
1 week, 
before the 
planning 
period and 
Midterm 
period 
1 week, 
before the 
planning 
period and 
third year 
of the 
project 
lifecycle 
140 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Types of 
trainings 
Target groups 
Training topics/ aspects 
of safeguard 
Potential 
Trainers 
Duration 
and Time 
of training 
social management 
plan and RPF 
implementation 
process 
 Review and Reporting 
procedures 
 Implementation of 
mitigation measures 
 Grievance redress 
mechanism 
 Environmental and 
social auditing  
 Overall program 
objectives and 
activities, 
 EA, ESCMP, ESIA, 
ESSs, 
 Environmental 
policies 
 ESCMF, SA and RPF 
implementation 
process 
 Review and Reporting 
procedures 
 Implementation of 
mitigation measures 
 Grievance redress 
mechanism 
 Environmental and 
social auditing 
 Participatory planning 
 Project identification 
and screening 
 Use of appropriate 
tools and formats for 
screening 
 ESCMF, SA, ESSs 
and RPF 
ToT training 
(Woreda level) 
10 participants 
 MOA staff, 
 Grassroots 
steering 
Committee 
members, 
Skill 
development 
(on 
environmental 
and social 
safeguard) 
training, 
15 participants 
 PACT Steering 
Committee 
members, 
 Woreda/Kebele 
cabinet 
members, 
 communities 
, 
MoA experts 
1 week and 
before the 
planning 
period 
 Regional 
experts  
1 week 
before the 
planning 
period 
141 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Types of 
trainings 
Target groups 
Training topics/ aspects 
of safeguard 
Potential 
Trainers 
implementation 
 Implementation of 
mitigation measures 
 Grievance redress 
mechanism 
 EA concepts 
 ESSs, 
 Environmental 
policies and guidelines  
 Consultants  
Duration 
and Time 
of training 
3 days 
before the 
planning 
period 
Awareness 
creation 
training/ 
workshop 
20 participants 
Monitoring and 
evaluation 
training 
50 participants 
Awareness 
creation 
training 
20 participants 
Monitoring 
visits and 
supervision 
follow up by 
ESCMF PMU, 
- office 
Steering 
Committee  
10 participants 
 PMU members 
 Decision 
makers,  
 Technical Staff 
of MoA, PMU 
members 
  woreda 
Steering 
Committee 
 Local 
Community 
members 
 Federal 
steering 
committee, 
Federal 
technical 
committee,  
 ESCMF 
implementation and 
monitoring 
 Monitoring and 
evaluation skills  
 Monitoring and 
evaluation guidelines 
 Participatory M &E 
 Participatory planning, 
Environmental and 
social issues, and 
Monitoring of 
implementation 
 Backstopping support 
on various issues to 
regional and woreda 
level experts 
 Field visits. 
 M & E 
expert 
(consultant) 
Every year 
 Woreda  
experts 
- 
3 days 
before the 
planning 
period 
At least 
twice in 
the project 
lifecycle 
142 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
15.  Budget Estimated for the implementation of ESCMF  
(a) Budget Estimate for Capacity Building  
PACT Program is planned to be completed in 7 years.  The table below shows budget estimate for 
capacity building during the 7 years project life. This section is consisting of capacity development 
and consultancy fee. 
Table 15. 1 Budget Estimated for capacity building in US Dollars 
No 
List of activities 
Yr 1 
Yr 2 
Yr 3 
Yr 4 
Yr 5 
Yr 6 
Yr 7 
1 
Awareness creation, 
launching workshop at 
federal, regional and 
woreda level 
1.1  Awareness raising, 
launching workshop and 
ToT at federal level 
50,000 
1.2  Awareness raising and 
40,000 
ToT/region 
1.3  Awareness raising at 
60,000 
2 
Woreda level/sub project 
Subtotal 
Technical training 
workshop on the national 
and IFAD safeguard 
policies and guidelines 
150,000 
3 
2.1  Federal 
2.2  Regional 
2.3  Woreda 
Subtotal  
Overall monitoring and 
supervision of the 
ESCMF implementation  
Annual Review 
Workshops, 
 and annual audit   
Salary of social and 
environmental safeguard 
specialist   
5 
4 
50,000 
80,000 
80,000 
210,000 
40,000  40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000  50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
143 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
No 
List of activities 
Yr 1 
Yr 2 
Yr 3 
Yr 4 
Yr 5 
Yr 6 
Yr 7 
7 
8 
Cost of Pre diem and 
transport during the field 
work for monitoring and 
supervision  
Private consultancy fee 
Total 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000  25,0000 
25,000 
25,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
510,000  150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
Budget estimate for Capacity Building is 1,410,000 USD 
(b) Budge estimate for the implementation of Mitigation measures 
At this stage sites and scope of the sub projects are not yet precisely defined. The budget estimated 
to  implement  the  proposed  mitigation  measures  is  therefore  rough  estimate  subject  to  further 
refinement  and  adjustment  during  project 
the 
implementation  of  the  proposed  mitigation  measures  is  estimated  to  $  USD  2,702,000.  Detail 
mitigation  measures  and  budget  requirement  for  implementation  are  presented  in  the  ESCMP: 
chapter 8, table 8.1.  
  Budget  estimate  for 
implementation. 
Overall cost estimate for the implementation of ESCMF for the 7-year period = $ USD 4,112,000 
144 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Appendix  
Annex 1: Environmental and Social Safeguards Screening Checklist (Online 
SECAP tool used to screen and categorize PACT) 
Note: Guidance note, including screening questions for the nine standards, are detailed in annex 4.  
Environmental and Social Category: Substantial 
Biodiversity conservation 
Yes/No  Likelihood  Consequence 
Yes 
Possible 
Minor 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
1.1 Could the project potentially involve 
or lead to conversion or degradation of 
biodiversity, habitats (including 
modified habitat, natural habitat and 
critical natural habitat) and/or 
ecosystems and ecosystem services? 
1.2 Could the project involve or 
potentially lead to activities involving 
habitats that are legally protected, 
officially proposed for protection, or 
recognized as protected by traditional 
local communities and/or authoritative 
sources (e.g. National Park, Nature 
Conservancy, Indigenous Community 
Conserved Area, ICCA, etc.)? 
1.3 Could the project potentially involve 
or lead to an increase in the chance of 
human-wildlife encounters/conflict? 
Yes 
Possible 
Minor 
Moderate 
Yes 
Possible 
Minor 
Moderate 
1.4 Could the project potentially involve 
or lead to risks to endangered species 
(e.g. reduction, encroachment on 
habitat)? 
No 
1.5 Could the project potentially involve 
or lead to impacts/risks to migratory 
wildlife? 
No 
Low 
Low 
145 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
1.6 Could the project potentially involve 
or lead to introduction or utilization of 
any invasive alien species of flora and 
fauna, whether accidental or 
intentional? 
No 
1.7 Could the project involve or lead to 
the handling or utilization of genetically 
modified organisms? 
No 
Low 
Low 
1.8 Could the project involve or lead to 
procurement through primary suppliers 
of natural resource materials? 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
Moderate 
Poject requires procurement of natural 
resources through primary suppliers, and 
resource extraction is tightly regulated 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution 
Prevention 
Yes/No  Likelihood  Consequence 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
Yes 
Possible 
Minor  
Pollutants may possibly be released, 
either routinely or by accident, but 
treatment systems are proven and 
verified. Receiving environment has 
absorptive capacity. 
2.1 Could the project involve or lead to 
the release of pollutants to the 
environment due to routine or non-
routine circumstances with the potential 
for adverse local, regional, and/or 
transboundary impacts? 
2.2 Could the project involve or lead to 
primary not environmentally sustainable 
production of living natural resources? 
(Note: this includes the cultivation or 
rearing of plants or animals, including 
annual and perennial crop farming, 
animal husbandry (including livestock), 
aquaculture, plantation forestry, etc ) 
2.3 Could the project involve or lead to 
engagement in areas of forestry, 
including the harvesting of natural 
forests, plantation development, and/or 
reforestation?  
2.4 Could the project involve or lead to 
significant consumption of raw 
materials, energy, and/or water?  
Yes 
Unlikely  Moderate  
Moderate 
Project is fully dependent on production 
of living natural resources. Project is 
sited in an existing agricultural area, with 
low environmental and/or social 
sensitivity. 
Yes 
Likely 
Minor  
Moderate 
Only a small component of the project is 
focused on forestry, and this aspect is 
well regulated. 
Yes 
Likely 
Moderate  
Substantial 
The project will require consumption of 
raw materias, energy, and/or water. This 
will be a significant component of the 
project, but impacts can be appropriately 
managed. 
146 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
2.5 Could the project involve or lead to 
significant extraction, diversion or 
containment of surface or ground water 
(e.g. construction of dams, reservoirs, 
river basin developments, groundwater 
extraction)? 
Yes 
Almost 
certain 
Moderate  
Substantial 
The project needs a considerable amount 
of groundwater or surface water. Ths will 
require a minor extension of existing 
sources. It includes construction of large-
scale irrigation schemes 
rehabilitation/development – below 300 
ha per scheme 
2.6 Could the project involve inputs of 
fertilizers and other modifying agents? 
Yes 
Almost 
certain 
Moderate  
Substantial 
The project requires use of fertilizers, but 
options are available to replace polluting 
fertilizers with alternatives. 
Yes 
Likely 
Minor  
Moderate 
The project only requires minimal 
amounts of pesticide. 
Low 
2.7 Could the project involve or lead to 
procurement, supply and/or result in the 
use of pesticides on crops, livestock, 
aquaculture or forestry? 
2.8 Could the project be located in an 
area which is being, or has been, 
polluted by an external source (e.g. a 
mine, smelter, industry)? 
No 
2.9 Could the project involve livestock 
– extensive and intensive systems and 
animal products (dairy, skins, meat, 
etc.)? 
Yes 
Possible 
Minor  
Moderate 
The project involves livestock or 
fisheries, but not in extensive or intensive 
systems. 
Cultural Heritage 
Yes/No  Likelihood  Consequence 
No 
3.1 Could the project be located in areas 
that are considered to have 
archaeological (prehistoric), 
paleontological, historical, cultural, 
artistic, and religious values or contains 
features considered as critical cultural 
heritage? 
Risk 
Rating 
Low 
3.2 Could the project directly or 
indirectly affect indigenous peoples’ 
rights, lands, natural resources, 
territories, livelihoods, knowledge, 
social fabric, traditions, governance 
systems, and culture or heritage 
(tangible and intangible)? 
Yes 
Likely 
Minor  
Moderate 
Minor impact to indigenous population. 
No damage to/or loss of access to 
indigenous land, assets, resources, and/or 
cultural heritage. 
147 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
3.3 Could the project involve or lead to 
significant excavations, demolitions, 
movement of earth, flooding or other 
environmental changes? 
3.4 Could the project involve or lead to 
adverse impacts to sites, structures, or 
objects with historical, cultural, artistic, 
traditional or religious values or 
intangible forms of culture (e.g. 
knowledge, innovations, practices)? 
(Note: projects intended to protect and 
conserve Cultural Heritage may also 
have inadvertent adverse impacts) 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
Moderate 
Moderate impact on land. Some short-
term earth moving and environmental 
changes required. Rehabilitation is 
straightfoward. 
Yes 
Unlikely  Moderate  
Moderate 
The project is thought to be close to an 
area that is considered to have 
archaeological (prehistoric), 
paleontological, historical, cultural, 
artistic, and religious values or contains 
features considered as critical cultural 
heritage. The site has not been surveyed, 
and so the presence of cultural heritage is 
not well known. 
3.5 Could the project involve or lead to 
alterations to landscapes and natural 
features with cultural significance? 
3.6 Could the project involve or lead to 
utilization of tangible and/or intangible 
forms (e.g. practices, traditional 
knowledge) of Cultural Heritage for 
commercial or other purposes? 
No 
No 
indigenous peoples 
Yes/No  Likelihood  Consequence 
4.1 Could the project be sited in areas 
where indigenous peoples are present 
(including the project area of 
influence)? 
4.2 Could the project result in activities 
located on lands and territories claimed 
by indigenous peoples? 
4.3 Could the project result in impacts 
on the rights of indigenous peoples or to 
the lands, territories and resources 
claimed by them? 
No 
No 
No 
Low 
Low 
Risk 
Rating 
Low 
Low 
Low 
148 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
4.4 Could the project result in the 
utilization and/or commercial 
development of natural resources on 
lands and territories claimed by 
indigenous peoples? 
4.5 Could the project lead to impacts on 
the Cultural Heritage of indigenous 
peoples, including through the 
commercialization or use of their 
traditional knowledge and practices? 
No 
No 
Labour and Working Conditions 
Yes/No  Likelihood  Consequence 
Low 
Low 
Risk 
Rating 
5.1 Could the project operate in sectors 
or value chains that are characterized by 
working conditions that do not meet 
national labour laws or international 
commitments? (Note: this may include 
discriminatory practices, high gender 
inequality and the lack of equal 
opportunities, denial of freedom of 
association and collective bargaining, 
labour migrants) 
5.2 Could the project use or operate in a 
value chain where there have been 
reports of forced labour? (Note: Risks of 
forced labour may be increased for 
projects located in remote places or 
where the status of migrant workers is 
uncertain) 
5.3 Could the project involve children 
(a) below the nationally-defined 
minimum employment age (usually 15 
years old) or (b) above the nationally-
defined minimum employment age but 
below the age of 18 in supported 
activities or in value chains? 
Yes 
Likely 
Moderate  
Substantial 
The project operates in sectors or value 
chains that have, in the past, not met 
national labour laws, or international 
commitments, but is now adequately 
nationally regulated. However, 
international value chains are not 
regularly audited for environmental or 
social performance. 
Yes 
Unlikely  Moderate  
Moderate 
The project does not operate in sectors or 
value chains where forced labour was 
evident in the past. The status of forced 
labour regulation is currently unclear. 
Yes 
Likely 
Moderate  
Substantial 
The project does not operate in sectors or 
value chains where child labour was 
evident in the past. The status of forced 
labour regulation is currently unclear. 
149 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
Moderate 
The project operates in a sector, area, or 
value chain where workers are 
occasionally exposed to significant OSH 
risks, and where regulation is known to 
be weak or non-existent. 
5.4 Could the project: (a) operate in a 
sector, area or value chain where 
producers and other agricultural workers 
are typically exposed to significant 
occupational and safety risks, and/or (b) 
promote or use technologies or practices 
that pose occupational safety and health 
(OSH) risks for farmers, other rural 
workers or rural populations in general? 
(Note: OSH risks in agriculture might 
include: dangerous machinery and tools; 
hazardous chemicals; toxic or allergenic 
agents; carcinogenic substances or 
agents; parasitic diseases; transmissible 
animal diseases; confined spaces; 
ergonomic hazards; extreme 
temperatures; and contact with 
dangerous and poisonous animals, 
reptiles and insects. Psychosocial 
hazards might include violence and 
harassment.) 
Community Health, Safety and Security  Yes/No  Likelihood  Consequence 
6.1 Could the project be at risk from 
water-borne or other vector-borne 
diseases (e.g. temporary breeding 
habitats), and/or communicable and 
non-communicable diseases? 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
The project is situated in an area where 
there is past evidence of negative impacts 
from water-borne or other vector-borne 
diseases, or communicable/non-
communicable diseases, but where 
regulation or containment of these 
impacts has been shown to be effective. 
Risk 
Rating 
Moderate 
6.2 Could the project lead to unintended 
negative impacts on nutrition? 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
Moderate 
6.3 Is there a possibility of harm or 
losses due to failure of structural 
elements of the project (e.g. collapse of 
buildings or infrastructure)? 
Moderate impact on customary or 
traditional diet, resulting in occasional 
individual health problems. 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
Moderate 
The project has significant reliance on 
buildings or infrastructure. Risk of failure 
is unlikely to lead to loss of life or 
significant environmental damage. The 
structural integrity of the required 
infrastructure has been independently 
verified. 
150 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
No 
No 
Low 
Low 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
Moderate 
Moderate adverse impacts to ecosystems 
and their services that could negatively 
affect the health of communities in the 
direct vicinity of the project are possible, 
but similar projects have shown that 
Impacts can be mitigated or offset 
through schemes such as Payment for 
Ecosystem Services. 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
Moderate 
Moderate changes to community 
dynamics may result in increased 
potential for gender-based violence or 
sexual exploitation. Gender-based 
violence interventions are integrated into 
project design. 
6.4 Could the project involve or lead to 
the construction or rehabilitation of 
dams? 
6.5 Could the project involve or lead to 
transport, storage, and use and/or 
disposal of hazardous or dangerous 
materials (e.g. explosives, fuel and other 
chemicals during construction and 
operation)? 
6.6 Could the project lead to adverse 
impacts on ecosystems and ecosystem 
services relevant to communities’ health 
(e.g. food, surface water purification, 
natural buffers from flooding)? 
6.7 Could the project lead to the 
potential for gender-based violence, 
including sexual harassment, 
exploitation and abuse, as a result of 
labour influx, land redistribution, or 
other actions that alter community 
dynamics? 
6.8 Could the project lead to increases 
in traffic or alteration in traffic flow? 
6.9 Could the project lead to an influx 
of project workers? 
6.10 Could the project involve or lead to 
the engagement of security personnel to 
protect facilities and property or to 
support project activities? 
No 
No 
No 
Physical and economic resettlement 
Yes/No  Likelihood  Consequence 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Risk 
Rating 
151 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
7.1 Could the project result in 
temporary or permanent and full or 
partial physical displacement (including 
people without legally recognizable 
claims to land)? 
7.2 Could the project result in economic 
displacement (e.g. loss of assets or 
access to resources due to land 
acquisition or access restrictions – even 
in the absence of physical relocation)? 
Yes 
Possible 
Minor  
Moderate 
>5 households/ businesses displaced. 
Yes 
Possible 
Minor  
Moderate 
Minor possible negative impact on either 
community assets or individual farmer 
assets. 
7.3 Could the project present a risk of 
forced evictions? 
No 
Low 
7.4 Could the project result in impacts 
on or changes to land tenure 
arrangements and/or community-based 
property rights/customary rights to land, 
territories and/or resources? 
Yes 
Possible 
Moderate  
Moderate 
The project will result in moderate 
changes to land tenure arrangements 
and/or community-based property 
rights/customary rights. Legal recourse 
and other forms of arbitration/conflct 
resolution are available. 
Financial intermediaries and direct 
investments 
Yes/No  Likelihood  Consequence 
No 
8.1 Could the investment be granted to 
an institution that does not have an 
environmental and social policies and 
an associated environmental and social 
management system (ESMS) in place 
(transparent, publicly available)? 
8.2 Could the investment be granted to 
an institution with insufficient capacities 
(i.e. unqualified personnel e.g. ES 
Officer) to implement the ESMS? 
No 
8.3 Could the investment be granted to 
an institution that does not have an 
Exclusion List? 
8.4 According to the institution's 
portfolio classification: Could the 
institution have potential high-risk 
projects in their portfolio? 
No 
No 
Risk 
Rating 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
152 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
8.5 Is there evidence that the institution 
does not comply with the local legal 
framework? 
8.6 Does the institution provide a stable 
communication channel with 
stakeholders and local communities 
(e.g. a Grievance Redress Mechanism)? 
8.7 Does the organization provide 
auxiliary or capacity building support 
services. 
No 
No 
No 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Annex 2: Climate Risk Screening following IFAD SECAP 2021 
Climate Risk Classification: Substantial  
Step 1: Hazard identification  
What are the expected hazards in the project intervention area? 
No, Yes, TBD 
River flood 
Costal Flood 
Urban Flood 
Landslide 
Cyclone 
Water Scarcity (agricultural droughts and/or dry spells) 
Extreme Heat 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
153 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Wildfires 
Yes 
Future climate scenarios foreseen (period 2040-2059) - Change in frequency and intensity 
No, Yes, TBD 
Change in temperature (increase or decrease) 
Change in rainfall (increase or decrease) 
Climate variability (larger or smaller) 
Intensity and frequency of extreme events (larger or smaller) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Is the project expected to have an impact on climate? 
No, Yes, TBD 
Is the project expected to be a significant emitter of greenhouse gases? 
No 
Step 2: Exposure Assessment  
Is the project located in exposed areas to weather-related natural hazards? 
No, Yes, TBD 
Low-lying areas (valleys, coastal zones, and small islands) 
Very warm areas (subtropical) 
Tropical areas (rainforests) 
Arid and semi-arid areas (deserts) 
Mountains zones and permafrost areas (tundra) 
River banks 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Does the project target agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods exposed to weather-related 
hazards? 
No, Yes, TBD 
154 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Is crop production frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in 
temperature or pests and diseases? 
Is livestock productivity frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in 
temperature or diseases? 
Are fisheries frequently affected by ocean acidification, water salinity and changes in sea surface 
temperature due to ocean-atmospheric oscillations or climate change? 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Is forest productivity frequently affected by wildfires, diseases, rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, 
or changes in temperature? 
Yes 
Is the biodiversity in the project area likely to be affected by changes in climate variables? 
Is any stage of the agricultural value chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) exposed to 
climate related hazards? 
Is any rural infrastructure likely to be affected by flooding, landslides, changes in temperatures, and 
extreme winds. 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Step 3: Sensitivity Assessment  
What are key sensitivities for the populations in the project’s areas of intervention? 
No, Yes, TBD 
Is conflict exacerbating the population's sensitivity to weather related hazards? 
Is population displacement being exacerbated by climate change impacts? 
No 
Yes 
Are diseases (e.g. COVID-19, malaria, cholera) increasing the population´s vulnerability and affecting 
their capacity to address potential weather-related hazards? 
No 
Is the income of the target population predominately coming from agriculture? 
Yes 
Are social inequalities (e.g. based on gender, youth, indigenous persons and other marginalized groups) 
being exacerbated by climate change? 
No 
Is the Human Development Index (HDI) equal to or below 0.6? 
Yes 
155 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Is the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) equal to or above 0.1? 
Yes 
Step 4: Adaptive capacity and climate resilience  
What are key adaptive capacities in the areas of project intervention? 
No, Yes, TBD 
Is the country well ranked in the Disaster risk reduction progress score? 
Are climate and weather information services (real-time weather data, seasonal forecasts etc.) 
effectively being delivered (through radio, TV, SMS, extension services etc.) to farmers, rural dwellers, 
and end users? 
Yes 
Yes 
Does the project country have an early action plan (preparedness and emergency response) to mitigate 
the impacts of weather-related hazards once the shock occurs? 
Yes 
Does the government or other institutions support the target population/communities with the necessary 
social and economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events? 
Yes 
Is the target community carrying out (using their own means) agricultural adaptation? 
Does the target population have the economic means or support to adjust or adapt their activities in 
response to weather related shocks? 
Yes 
No 
Do policies/mechanisms exist that make financial credit, loans, and agricultural insurance available? 
Yes 
Are rural infrastructures effectively delivering services to farmers and rural dwellers? 
No 
156 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 3: Project Screening and Environmental Social Safeguard Classification   
Project Screening 
The  screening  is  aimed  at  identifying  the  major  social,  environmental  and  climate  impacts  and  risks 
associated  with  a  project,  defining  the  necessary  steps  for  further  analysis  and  identifying  measures  to 
enhance  development  opportunities  and  minimize  risks  and  negative  impacts.  The  preliminary  SECAP 
review note and completed screening provide a justification for the preliminary category and classification 
assigned. 
GUIDANCE NOTE 1 Biodiversity Conservation 
SECAP biodiversity conservation screening questions and standard 1 requirement 
Screening 
The  requirements  of  standard  1  are  to  be  considered  and  addressed  in  an  integrated  manner  during  the 
screening  process,  utilizing  the  screening  questions  to  identify  if  the  project  presents  any  potential 
significant impacts and risks related to biodiversity and ecosystem services. If substantial or high risks are 
identified during screening, then relevant standard 1 requirement need to be addressed in project design and 
implementation, including as part of overall impact assessment, management and mitigation and monitoring 
activities. 
SECAP biodiversity conservation screening questions 
Would the project potentially involve or lead to:  
1.  Conversion  or  degradation  of  biodiversity,  habitats  (including  modified  habitat,  natural  habitat  and 
critical natural habitat) and/or ecosystems and ecosystem services? 
2. Activities involving habitats that are legally protected, officially proposed for protection or recognized 
as protected by traditional local communities and/or authoritative sources (e.g. national park, The Nature 
Conservancy, indigenous community conserved area, etc.)? 
3. An increase in the change of human-wildlife encounters/conflict? 
4. Risks to endangered species (e.g. reduction, encroachment on habitat)?  
5. Any impacts/risks to migratory wildlife? 
6.  Introduction  or  utilization  of  any  invasive  alien  species  of  flora  and  fauna,  whether  accidental  or 
intentional? 
7. Handling or utilization of genetically modified organisms? 
8.  Procurement through primary suppliers of natural resource materials?  
GUIDANCE NOTE 2 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
157 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Screening 
Screening helps to determine whether impacts and issues concerning resource efficiency and pollution will 
be a major project issue and, if so, what features require studying and assessment. Project location and types 
of activity need to be clearly described. Sectors that typically make significant use of energy include, for 
example,  industrial  production,  resource  extraction,  water  pumping  and  transport.  However,  projects  in 
other sectors may also be significant users of energy; these include waste management, agriculture and 
large-scale fisheries. 
If moderate, substantial or high risks are identified during screening, then relevant standard 2 requirements 
may  need  to  be  addressed  in  project  design  and  implementation,  including  as  part  of  overall  impact 
assessment, management and mitigation and monitoring activities. 
SECAP resource-efficiency and pollution-prevention screening questions and standard 2 requirements 
1. The release of pollutants to the environment due to routine or non- 
routine circumstances, with the potential for adverse local, regional and/or transboundary impacts? 
2.  Primary  production  of  living  natural resources? (This  includes the  cultivation  or  rearing  of  plants  or 
animals,  including  annual  and  perennial  crops,  animal  husbandry  (including  livestock),  aquaculture, 
plantation forestry, etc.)  
3.  Engagement  in  areas  of  forestry,  including  the  harvesting  of  natural  forests,  plantation  development 
and/or reforestation? 
4. Significant consumption of raw materials, energy and/or water?  
5. Significant extraction, diversion or containment of surface or groundwater? For example, construction 
of dams, reservoirs, river basin developments, groundwater extraction 
6. Inputs of fertilizers and other modifying agents?  
7. Procurement, supply and/or use of pesticides on crops, livestock, aquaculture or forestry? 
8. Is the project located in an area which is being, or has been, polluted by an external source (e.g. a mine, 
smelter, industry)?  
 9. Will the project involve livestock/fisheries – extensive and intensive systems and animal products (dairy, 
skins, meat, etc.)?  
Would the project potentially involve or lead to:  
1. The release of pollutants to the environment due to routine or non- 
routine circumstances, with the potential for adverse local, regional and/or transboundary impacts? 
158 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
2.  Primary  production  of  living  natural resources? (This  includes the  cultivation  or  rearing  of  plants  or 
animals,  including  annual  and  perennial  crops,  animal  husbandry  (including  livestock),  aquaculture, 
plantation forestry, etc.)  
3.  Engagement  in  areas  of  forestry,  including  the  harvesting  of  natural  forests,  plantation  development 
and/or reforestation? 
4. Significant consumption of raw materials, energy and/or water? 
5. Significant extraction, diversion or containment of surface or groundwater? For example, construction 
of dams, reservoirs, river basin developments, groundwater extraction 
6. Inputs of fertilizers and other modifying agents?  
7. Procurement, supply and/or use of pesticides on crops, livestock, aquaculture or forestry 
8. Is the project located in an area which is being, or has been, polluted by an external source (e.g. a mine, 
smelter, industry)? 
GUIDANCE NOTE 3 Cultural heritages 
Screening 
PDTs  should  consider  and  address  the  requirements  of  Standard  3  in  an  integrated  manner  during  the 
screening  process  for  all  IFAD-supported  projects  or  programs.  This  should  be  done  using  the  SECAP 
screening questions to determine whether there are potential significant impacts and risks related to cultural 
heritage. An initial “trigger question” will determine whether the PDT will be required to answer/assess 
further aspects of standard 3 requirements and the corresponding risk screening questions. 
If moderate, substantial or high risks are identified during screening, then relevant standard 3 requirements 
may  need  to  be  addressed  in  project  design  and  implementation,  including  as  part  of  overall  impact 
assessment, management, mitigation and monitoring activities. 
SECAP cultural heritage screening questions and standard 3 requirements 
1. Be located in areas that are considered to have archaeological (prehistoric), palaeontological, historical, 
cultural, artistic or religious values or that contain features considered as critical cultural heritage?  
2. Directly or indirectly affect indigenous peoples’ rights, lands, natural resources, territories, livelihoods, 
knowledge, social fabric, traditions, governance systems, culture or heritage (tangible and intangible)?  
3.  Involve  significant  excavations,  demolitions,  movement  of  earth,  flooding  or  other  environmental 
changes? 
4. Result in adverse impacts to sites, structures or objects with historical, cultural, artistic, traditional or 
religious  values  or intangible  forms  of  culture  (e.g.  knowledge,  innovations,  practices)? (Note:  projects 
intended to protect and conserve cultural heritage may also have inadvertent adverse impacts.)  
5. Alter landscapes or natural features with cultural significance?  
159 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
6. Utilize tangible and/or intangible forms (e.g. practices, traditional knowledge) of cultural heritage for 
commercial or other purposes? 
GUIDANCE NOTE 4 Indigenous peoples 
Screening 
The requirements of Standard 4 should be considered and addressed in an integrated manner during the 
screening process, using the SECAP screening questions to identify if there are potential significant impacts 
and risks related to indigenous peoples. 
If moderate, substantial or high risks are identified during screening, then relevant standard 4 requirements 
need to be addressed in project design and implementation, including as part of overall impact assessment, 
management, and mitigation and monitoring activities. However, even for projects categorized as low risk, 
IFAD’s commitments to partnership and respect for the right to FPIC apply. 
Screening helps to determine whether risks to indigenous peoples will be a major project issue and, if so, 
what features of the project require further study and assessment. This process can be complex and therefore 
often requires the judgement of qualified and experienced social experts with direct knowledge of project-
affected indigenous peoples and their lands, territories and resources. Location and types of activities need 
to be carefully reviewed. 
Questions to strengthen project design for projects that target or affect indigenous peoples 
1. The project design report is in line with IFAD’s Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples and 
takes  into  account  the  socio-economic  and  cultural  specificities  of  the  indigenous  peoples  living  in  the 
project area. It provides information on their demographic, social, cultural and political characteristics; the 
land and territories that they have traditionally owned or customarily used or occupied; and the natural 
resources they manage or depend upon.   
2. The project design report includes disaggregated data by indigenous group and geographical location. 
3. The project design report identifies interventions that respond to the needs and priorities as expressed by 
the targeted indigenous peoples and that build on their knowledge, cultural systems and institutions.  
 Yes/No Proposal to enhance project design 
4.  The  design  document  describes  –  and  the  project/programme  implements  –operational  measures  to 
ensure  indigenous  peoples’  equitable  participation  in,  and  benefit  from,  project  activities.  These  will 
generally include: 
4.1 Ensuring that representatives of the indigenous peoples, partners of the project, are present at all stages 
of  the  project  cycle  and  that  a  consultation  plan  leading  to  their  free,  prior  and  informed  consent  is 
embedded in the project design and the consultation and participation process is documented 
4.2 Ensuring that project/programme activities are co-created and co-managed by the indigenous peoples   
160 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
4.3 Ensuring the service providers and extension workers used by the project (public or private) have the 
capacity and are trained to reach out to indigenous peoples 
4.4 
Ensuring that the project design report includes measures to strengthen 
(a) 
the  social,  legal  and  technical  capacity  of  the  government  institutions  to  address  indigenous 
peoples’ issues in the project area; (b) indigenous peoples’ institutions and organizations in the project area
4.5 Ensuring that information disclosure on the project is in accordance with prevailing indigenous peoples’ 
customs and traditions and printed material is written in the indigenous peoples’ language. 
5.  M&E  mechanisms  are  participatory  and  adapted  to  capture  indigenous  peoples’  perceptions  and 
perspectives. M&E systems include specific indicators to measure well-being, poverty and sustainability in 
a way that is relevant to indigenous peoples. 
GUIDANCE NOTE 5 Labor and working conditions 
Screening 
The requirements of standard 5 should be considered and addressed in an integrated manner during the 
screening process, using the SECAP screening questions to determine whether project activities may pose 
risks related to labour and working conditions. If moderate, substantial or high risks are identified during 
screening, then relevant standard 5 requirements need to be addressed in project design and implementation, 
including as part of the overall impact assessment and management, mitigation and monitoring activities. 
Screening helps to determine whether risks associated with labour and working conditions will be a major 
project issue and, if so, what features of the project require further study and assessment. This process can 
be complex and therefore often requires the judgement of qualified and experienced social experts with 
direct knowledge of local conditions and national labour and employment regulations. 
SECAP labor and working conditions screening questions and standard 5 requirements 
Would the project potentially: 
1. Operate in sectors or value chains that are characterized by working conditions that do not meet national 
labor laws or international commitments?  
Note: this may include discriminatory practices, high gender inequality and the lack of equal opportunity, 
denial of freedom of association and collective bargaining, and labor migrants.  
2. Use or operate in a value chain where there have been reports of forced labor? Note: Risks of forced 
labor  may  be  increased for  projects  located  in  remote  places  or  where  the  status  of  migrant  workers is 
uncertain. 
3. Involve children (a) below the nationally defined minimum employment age (usually 15 years old) or 
(b) above the nationally defined minimum employment age but below the age of 18 years in supported 
activities or in value chains? 
161 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
4. (a) operate in a sector, area or value chain where producers and other agricultural workers are typically 
exposed to significant occupational and safety risks and/or (b) promote or use technologies or practices that 
pose occupational safety and health risks for farmers, other rural workers or rural populations in general? 
GUIDANCE NOTE 6 Community health and safety 
Screening 
The requirements of standard 6 should be considered and addressed in an integrated manner during the 
screening process using IFAD’s screening questions, to identify if there are potential significant impacts 
and risks related to community health, safety and security. This should focus on people or groups of people 
who, because of their social and economic circumstances, are particularly vulnerable. If substantial, high 
or moderate risks are identified during screening, then relevant standard 6 requirements should be addressed 
in  project  design  and  implementation,  including  as  part  of  overall  impact  assessment,  management, 
mitigation and monitoring activities. 
Screening  helps  to  determine  whether  threats  to  community  health,  safety  and  security  will  be  a  major 
project issue and, if so, what features require studying and assessment. This process can be complex and 
therefore often requires the judgement of qualified and experienced experts. Project location and types of 
activities  should  be  carefully  reviewed.  Examples  of  red  flags  that  may  indicate  potential  major  issues 
include influx of project/migrant workers; transport, storage, use and/or disposal of hazardous materials; 
significant disturbance to ecosystems and their services; increases in traffic; and engagement of security 
personnel. 
SECAP community health and safety screening questions and standard 6 requirements 
Would the project potentially involve or lead to:  
1. Risks of waterborne or other vector-borne diseases (e.g. temporary breeding habitats), communicable 
and non-communicable diseases?  
2. Unintended negative impacts on nutrition? 
3.  Harm  or  losses  due  to  failure  of  structural  elements  of  the  project  (e.g.  collapse  of  buildings  or 
infrastructure)? 
4. The construction or rehabilitation of dams? 
5. Transport, storage and use and/or disposal of hazardous or dangerous materials (e.g. explosives, fuel and 
other chemicals during construction and operation)? 
6.  Adverse  impacts  on  ecosystems  and  ecosystem  services  relevant  to  communities’  health  (e.g.  food, 
surface-water purification, natural buffers from flooding)?  
7. The potential for gender-based violence, including sexual abuse, sexual harassment or sexual exploitation 
as a result of labor influx, land redistribution or other actions that alter community dynamics?  
 8. Increases in traffic or alteration in traffic flow?  
162 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
9. An influx of project workers?  
10. Engagement of security personnel to protect facilities and property or to support project activities? 
GUIDANCE NOTE 7 Physical and economic resettlements 
Screening 
The requirements of  standard 7 should be considered and addressed in an integrated manner during the 
screening process, using the SECAP screening questions to determine whether project activities may pose 
displacement  risks.  If  moderate,  substantial  or  high  risks  are  identified  during  screening,  then  relevant 
standard 7 requirements should be addressed in project design and implementation, including as part of the 
overall impact assessment, management and mitigation, and monitoring activities. 
Screening helps to determine whether potential displacement risks related to land acquisition and use will 
be a major project issue and, if so, what features of the project require further study and assessment. This 
process can  be  complex  and  therefore  often  requires  the judgement  of  qualified and  experienced social 
experts with direct experience and knowledge on land acquisition, resettlement of communities, gender, 
social inclusion, social impact assessment, etc. in the project country and region. 
SECAP physical and economic displacement screening questions and standard 7 requirements 
Would the project potentially involve or lead to: 
Temporary or permanent and full or partial physical displacement (including people without legally 
1. 
recognizable claims to land)? See section 7.4, and all requirement paragraphs 
Economic displacement (e.g., loss of assets or access to resources due to land acquisition or access 
 2. 
restrictions – even in the absence of physical relocation)? See section 7.4, and all requirement paragraphs 
 3. 
Risk of forced evictions?  
4. 
Impacts  on  or  changes  to  land-tenure  arrangements  and/or  community-based  property 
rights/customary rights to land, territories and/or resources? See section 7.4, and all requirement paragraphs.  
GUIDANCE NOTE 8 Financial intermediaries and direct investments 
Screening 
The requirements of standard 8 should be considered and addressed in an integrated manner during the 
screening  process,  using  the  SECAP  screening  tool  to  (i)  help  select  the  right  partners  by  identifying 
strengths and weaknesses of the ESG policy of the organization, and (ii) evaluate the needs for capacity 
building support. 
SECAP NSO screening questions 
1. Will the investment be granted to an institution that does not have an environmental and social policy 
and an associated environmental and social management system (ESMS) in place (transparent, publicly 
available)? 
163 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
2. Will the investment be granted to an institution with insufficient capacities (e.g. unqualified personnel)? 
3. Will the investment be granted to an institution that does not have an Exclusion List? 
4. According to the institution’s portfolio classification: does the institution have potential high-risk projects 
in their portfolio?  
5. Is there evidence that the institution does not comply with the local legal framework? 
6.  The  institution  does  not  provide  a  stable  communication  channel  with  stakeholders  and  local 
communities (e.g., a grievance redress mechanism). 
7. The institution does not provide auxiliary or capacity building support services. 
GUIDANCE NOTE 9 Climate change 
Screening 
Good risk screening is the first step in designing an efficient and effective assessment and risk mitigation 
process.  It  should  aim  to  inform  project  avoidance  and  minimization  of  impacts  at  an  early  stage.  The 
screening for climate risk takes place separately from screening for environmental and social impacts; PDTs 
should take account of the outcomes of climate screening in the design of projects. 
Classification of climate risk 
Screening questions for hazard identification 
What are the expected hazards in the project intervention area? 
1.  The project area is affected by River Floods 
2.  The project area is affected by Costal Floods   
3.  The project area is affected by Urban Floods 
4.  The project area is affected by Landslides 
5.  The project area is affected by Cyclones 
6.  The project area is affected by Water Scarcity  
7.  The project area is affected by Extreme Heat   
8.  The project area is affected by Wildfires 
9. 
Change in temperature   
10. Change in rainfall (increase or decrease) 
11. Climate variability (larger or smaller) 
164 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
12. Intensity and frequency of extreme events (larger or smaller)   
Is the project expected to have an impact on climate? 
13. Is the project expected to be a significant emitter of Greenhouse Gasses? 
Screening questions for exposure determination 
Is the project located in exposed areas to weather-related natural hazards? 
14. Low-lying areas (valleys, coastal zones, and small islands, coastal zones, and small islands) 
15. Very warm areas (subtropical) 
16. Tropical areas (rainforests) 
17. Arid and semi-arid areas (deserts) 
18. Mountains zones and permafrost areas (tundra) 
19. River banks  
Are project target agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods exposed to weather-related hazards? 
20. Is crop production unduly affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature 
or pests and diseases?  
21.  Is  livestock  productivity  frequently  affected  by  rainfall  variability,  prolonged  droughts,  changes  in 
temperature or diseases?  
22.  Are  fisheries  frequently  affected  by  ocean  acidification,  water  salinity  and  changes  in  sea  surface 
temperature due to ocean-atmospheric oscillations or climate change? 
23. Is Forest productivity frequently affected by wildfires, diseases, rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, 
or changes in temperature? 
24. Is biodiversity in the project area affected by changes in climate variables? 
25. Is any stage of the agricultural value chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) exposed to 
climate related hazards? 
26. Is any rural infrastructure affected by flooding, landslides, changes in temperatures, and extreme winds?
Screening questions for sensitivity determination 
27. Is conflict exacerbating population’s sensitivity to weather related hazards? 
28. Is population displacement being exacerbated by climate change impacts? 
165 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
29. Are diseases (e.g. COVID-19, malaria, cholera) increasing the population’s vulnerability and affecting 
their capacity to address potential weather-related hazards? 
30. Is the income of the target population predominately coming from agriculture? 
31. Are social inequalities (e.g. based on gender, youth, indigenous persons and other marginalized groups) 
being exacerbated by climate change? 
32. Is the Human Development Index (HDI) equal or below 0.6?  
33. Is the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) equal or above 0.1? 
Screening questions for adaptive capacity determination 
34. Is the country well ranked in the Disaster risk reduction progress score? 
35.  Are  climate  and  weather  information  services  (real-time  weather  data,  seasonal  forecasts  etc.) 
effectively being delivered (through radio, TV, SMS, extension services etc.) to the farmers, rural dwellers, 
and end users?   
36.  Does  the  country  have  an  early  action  plan  (preparedness  and  emergency  response)  to  mitigate  the 
impacts of weather-related hazards once the shock occurs? 
37. Does the government or other institutions support the target population/ communities with the necessary 
social and economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events? 
38. Is the target community carrying out (by own means) agricultural adaptation?  
39. Does the target population have the economic means or support to adjust or adapt their activities in 
response to weather related shocks? 
40. Do policies/mechanisms exist that make financial credit, loans, and agricultural insurance available? 
41. Are rural infrastructures effectively delivering services to farmers and rural dwellers?  
ANNEX 4 IFAD environmental and social exclusion list 
IFAD will not knowingly finance, directly or indirectly, projects involving the following: 
Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor, or practices which 
(i) 
prevent employees from lawfully exercising their rights of association and collective bargaining; 
(ii) 
Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of child labour; 
Production  or  activities  that  impinge  on  the  lands  owned,  or  claimed  under  adjudication,  by 
(iii) 
indigenous peoples, without full documented consent of such peoples; 
166 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Activities  prohibited  by  host-country  legislation  or  international  conventions  relating  to  the 
(iv) 
protection of biodiversity resources, cultural heritage or other legally protected areas; 
(v) 
The production, trade in or use of any product or activity deemed illegal under host country (i.e. 
national) laws or regulations, international conventions and agreements, or subject to international phase-
out or bans, such as: 
(a) 
Products containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs); 
Pharmaceuticals,  pesticides,  herbicides  and  other  hazardous  substances  subject  to  international 
(b) 
phase-outs or bans; 
(c) 
Ozone-depleting substances subject to international phase-outs regulated by the Montreal Protocol; 
(d)  Wildlife products regulated under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES); 
(e) 
Transboundary trade in waste or waste products, as defined by the Basel Convention; 
Commercial logging operations or the purchase of logging equipment for use in primary tropical 
(vi) 
moist forests or old-growth forests; 
(vii) 
Production or trade in wood or other forestry products other than from sustainably managed forests; 
(viii)  Production or trade in alcoholic beverages (excluding beer and wine), tobacco or drugs; 
(ix)  Marine and coastal fishing practices such as blast fishing, large-scale pelagic drift net fishing using 
nets in excess of 2.5 km in length or fine mesh net fishing harmful to vulnerable and protected species in 
large numbers and damaging to marine biodiversity and habitats; 
Trade in goods without required export or import licenses or other evidence of authorization of 
(x) 
transit from the relevant countries of export, import and, if applicable, transit; 
(xi) 
Production of, trade in or use of unbounded asbestos fibers;  
(xii)  All mining, mineral processing and extraction activities; 
(xiii)  Production or trade in radioactive materials;123 
(xiv)  Gambling, casinos and equivalent enterprises, trade related to pornography or prostitution; 
(xv)  Money laundering, terrorism financing, tax avoidance, tax fraud and tax evasion;  
(xvi)  Production and distribution, or investment in media that are racist, antidemocratic or that advocate 
discrimination against an individual, group or part of the population; 
(xvii)  Activities  prohibited  by  host  country  legislation  or  other  legally  binding  agreements  regarding 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs); 
167 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
(xviii)  Production  of  or  trade  in  palm  oil,  unless  from  growers  and  companies  with  internationally 
recognised certification124, or undergoing certification; 
(xix)  Production of soy in the Amazon region or trade in soy produced in the Amazon region, unless 
from growers with internationally recognized certification. 
168 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 5: Suggested Environmental and Social Field Appraisal Form  
Name of the Program: 
Name of the proposed Project Activity: 
Application Number:  
Part 1: Identification 
1. Name: (……………….) 
2. Location: (…………………) 
3. Reason for Field Appraisal:  
4. Date(s) of Field Appraisal: 
5. Field Appraisal Officer and Address: 
6. Extension Team Representative and Address: 
7. Community Representative and Address: 
Part 2: Description of the Proposed Project Activity 
8. Details: 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
Part 3: Environmental and Social issues 
9. Will the Proposed project activity: 
  Need to acquire land? 
Yes       No 
  Affect an individual or the community's access to land or available resources?  
  Displace or result in the involuntary resettlement of an individual or family? 
If "Yes", tick one of the following boxes: 
  The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP/ARAP) included in the allocation is adequate. No further action required.  
  The RAP/ARAP included in the application must be improved before the application can be considered further.  
  An RAP/ARAP must be prepared and approved before the application can be considered further. 
10. Will the subproject: 
Yes  
No 
* Encroach onto an important natural habitat? 
* Negatively affect ecologically sensitive ecosystems? 
If "Yes", tick one of the following boxes: 
  The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESCMP) included in the application is adequate. No further 
action required. 
  The ESCMP included in the application must be improved before the application can be considered further. 
  An ESCMP must be prepared and approved before the application can be considered further. 
11. Will this proposed project activity involve or result in:  
       Yes               No 
169 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
  Diversion or use of surface waters? 
  Production of waste? 
  New or rebuilt irrigation or drainage systems? 
If "Yes", tick one of the following boxes: 
  The application describes suitable measures for managing the potential adverse environmental effects of these 
activities. No further action required. 
  The application does not describe suitable measures for managing the potential adverse environmental effects of 
these activities. An ESCMP must be prepared and approved before the application is considered further. 
12. Will this Proposed project activity impact on   water supplied from an existing reservoirs or weir?  
                                        Yes                   No 
If "Yes", tick one of the following boxes: 
  The application demonstrates that a dam safety report has been prepared, the dam is safe, and no remedial work 
is required. No further action is required. 
  The application does not demonstrate that a dam safety report has been prepared, the dam is safe, and no remedial 
work is required. A dam safety report must be prepared and approved before the application is considered further. 
15. Are there any other environmental or social issues that have not been adequately addressed?  
If "Yes", summarize them: 
......................................................................................................................................................... 
And tick one of the following boxes: 
Yes  
                   No 
  Before it is considered further, the application needs to be amended to include suitable measures for addressing 
these environmental or social issues. 
  An ESCMP needs to be prepared and approved before the application is considered further. 
Part 4: Field Appraisal Decision 
  The Proposed project activity can be considered for approval. Based on a site visit and consultations with both 
interested  and  affected  parties,  the  field  appraisal  determined  that  the  community  and  its  proposed  project 
adequately address environmental and/or social issues as required by the ESCMF. 
 
 If  the  field  appraisal  identify  environmental  and/or  social  issues  have  not  been  adequately  addressed,  then 
recommendation will be made to amend the application.  
  All required documentation such as an amended application, ESCMP, RAP/ARAP, will be added to the proposed 
project activity file for further consideration. 
Name of field appraisal officer (print): ..................................................................... 
Signature: ................................................Date: ………………………………… 
170 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 6: Guideline for the preparation of site specific ESCMP 
ESCMPs  should  demonstrate  that  proposed  environmental  and  social  management  and  monitoring  activities  will 
encompass  all  major  impacts  and  how  they  will  be  integrated  into  supervision.  The  ESCMP  should  also  describe 
proposed measures, methods, and actions to facilitate public consultation. It is important that the  ESCMP identify 
linkages to other social and environmental safeguards plans relating to the proposed project activities such as plans 
dealing with resettlement issues. ESCMPs should be finalized and approved after taking into account comments from 
Woreda Environmental offices. The IFAD safeguards team will review and provide comments on draft site-specific 
instruments  (if  required)  and  monitor  the  safeguards  compliance.  Given  below  are  the  important  elements  that 
constitute an ESCMP: 
i)  Description  of  the  subproject:  Scale  nature  and  type  of  proposed  project  activity  implemented  under  the 
proposed programs are summarized. 
ii)  Description  of  Proposed  project  area:  The  Biophysical  and  social  environmental  setting  of  the  specific 
Proposed project activity  are summarized  
iii)  Impacts:  Predicted  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts  (and  any  uncertainties  about  their  effects)  for 
which mitigation is necessary should be identified and summarized. 
iv)  Description of Mitigation Measures: Each measure should be briefly described in relation to the impact(s) and 
conditions  under  which  it  is  required.  These  should  be  accompanied  by  and/or  referenced  to  designs, 
development  activities,  operating  procedures,  and  implementation  responsibilities.  Proposed  measures  and 
actions to facilitate  public consultations should be  clearly described and justified.  Feasible and cost-effective 
measures to minimize adverse impacts to acceptable levels should be specified with reference to each impact 
identified. Further, the  ESCMP should provide details on the conditions  under  which the  mitigation  measure 
should  be  implemented.  The  ESCMP  should  also  indicate  the  various  practicable  measures  applicable  to  the 
proposed project activity at each project phases (design, construction and/or operation). Efforts should also be 
made to mainstream environmental aspects wherever possible. 
v)  Description of monitoring program: The ESCMP identifies monitoring objectives and specifies the type of 
monitoring  required;  it  also  describes  performance  indicators  which  provide  linkages  between  impacts  and 
mitigation measures identified in the ESA report, parameters to be measured (for example: national standards, 
extent  of  impacted  area  to  be  considered,  etc.),  methods  to  be  used,  sampling  location  and  frequency  of 
measurements, and definition of thresholds to signal the need for corrective actions. Monitoring and supervision 
arrangements should be agreed by IFAD and the client to ensure timely detection of conditions requiring remedial 
measures  in  keeping  with  best  practice;  provide  information  and  the  progress  and  results  of  mitigation  and 
institutional strengthening measures; and, assess compliance with National and IFAD environmental safeguard 
policies  
vi)  Institutional arrangements: Institutions responsible for implementing mitigation measures and for monitoring 
their  performance  should  be  clearly  identified.  Where  necessary,  mechanisms  for  institutional  coordination 
should be identified, as often, monitoring tends to involve more than one institution. This is especially important 
for requiring cross-sectoral integration. In particular, the ESCMP specifies who is responsible for undertaking 
the  mitigation  and  monitoring  measures,  e.g.,  for  enforcement  of  remedial  actions,  monitoring  of 
implementation, training, financing, and reporting. Institutional arrangements should also be crafted to maintain 
support for agreed enforcement measures for environmental protection. Where necessary, the ESCMP should 
propose strengthening the relevant agencies through such actions as establishment of appropriate organizational 
arrangements; appointment of key staff and consultants. 
vii)  Implementing schedules: The timing, frequency and duration of mitigation measures and monitoring should be 
included  in  an  implementation  schedule,  showing  phasing  and  coordination  with  procedures  in  the  overall 
implementation/operations manual. Linkages should be specified where implementation of mitigation measures 
is tied to institutional strengthening and to the legal agreements. 
viii)  Reporting procedures: Feedback mechanisms to inform the relevant parties on the progress and effectiveness 
of  the  mitigation  measures  and  monitoring  itself  should  be  specified.  Guidelines  on  the  type  of  information 
required and the presentation of feedback information should also be highlighted. 
171 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
ix)  Cost estimates and sources of funds: Implementation of mitigation measures mentioned in the ESCMP will 
involve an initial investment cost as well as recurrent costs. The ESCMP should include cost estimates into the 
design, bidding and contract documents to ensure that the contractors will comply with the mitigation measures. 
The costs for implementing the ESCMP will be included in the design, as well as in the bidding and contract 
documents. It is important to capture all costs – including administrative, design and consultancy, and operational 
and maintenance costs – resulting from meeting required standards or modifying design. 
For each potential impacts of the proposed project activity, corresponding mitigation measures, and who is responsible 
for  implementation  is  indicated.  For  each  potential  environmental  and  social  impact,  there  can  be  more  than  one 
mitigation measure. Responsibility for implementation of mitigation measures will typically rest with the contractor 
or beneficiary during construction and operation of the proposed activities. 
The monitoring section of the ESCMP prescribes indicators for monitoring the environmental and social impact and 
the effects of mitigation measures. The responsibility for this will typically rest with the DBE in collaboration with 
the respective pertinent institutions. A template for ESCMP is depicted in annex 5. 
172 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 7: Suggested Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESCMP) 
Template for the proposed project activities 
identification  
Name  
Region 
Zone 
Wereda 
Kebele/community 
Location GPS coordinates 
Description of the Proposed project activity 
Description of potential environmental and social impacts;  
Description  of  planned  mitigation  measures  and  monitoring  along  with  institutional  responsibilities  and 
capacity/training requirements 
Environmental and Social Management Plan-Mitigation 
Project Phase 
Project activity  Environmental Impacts  Mitigation/ 
enhancement 
measures 
Institutional 
responsibilitie
s 
Cost  
Pre-construction 
Construction 
Operation 
maintenance 
and 
Total mitigation costs 
Environmental and Social Management Plan-Monitoring 
Project Phase 
Pre-construction/ 
activities 
Mitigation 
measures 
Parameters 
to be 
monitored 
location 
measurem
ents 
freque
ncy 
Cost 
Institutional 
responsibilit
ies 
173 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Construction/ 
activities 
Operation 
maintenance/ 
activities 
and 
Total monitoring costs 
174 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 8: Procedures for Chance Find of Physical Cultural Resources 
 Any Proposed project activities within the scope of the proposed Program, that will impact the cultural resources are 
not eligible for funding (Refer to Annex 1). In case of any possibility of chance find of physical cultural resources, 
most  notably  during  excavation  as  part  of  construction  activity  the  contractor  should  report  to  the  responsible 
institutions for further guidance.  
Such  physical  cultural  resources  may  take  the  form  of  work  of  art,  building  structures,  graves  or  other  sites  of 
importance, including sites of archaeological, historical or religious significance. 
All chance finds of such physical cultural resources will lead to temporary suspension of all activity that will adversely 
impact  the  cultural  resource.  Contracts/Masons  will  include  detailed procedures  for  ensuring  the  protection  of  the 
cultural resources, including cessation of activities until the significance of the find has been determined and until 
appropriate mitigating measures has been implemented. This  Annex contains standard provisions to be included in 
the  contract    that  potentially  will  lead  to  chance  finds  of  physical  cultural  resources,  as  required  .in  the  contract 
document  
The  attachments  outlined  below  will  be  annexed  to  the  contract  in  case  there  is  the  possibility  of  chance  find  of 
physical cultural resources.  
Attachment to contracts in case of potential chance find of physical cultural resources 
If the Contractor discovers archaeological sites, historical sites, remains and objects, including graveyards and/or 
individual graves during excavation or construction, the Contractor/Masons shall: 
1:  Excavation in sites of known archaeological interest should be avoided as stated in annex 1 since; such  project 
activities are not eligible for funding. Where historical remains, antiquity or any other object of cultural, historical 
or archaeological importance (including graveyards) are unexpectedly discovered during construction in an area 
not previously known for its archaeological interest, the following procedures should be applied:  
a)  Stop the construction activities in the area of the chance find. 
b)  Delineate the discovered area. 
c)  Secure  the  area  to  prevent  any  damage  or  loss  of  removable  objects.    In  cases  of  removable  antiquities  or 
sensitive remains, a night guard shall be present until the responsible Regional authorities and the Ministry of 
Culture and Tourism take over. 
d)  Notify  to  DBE  and  the  respective  relevant  institutions  to  contact  the  responsible  local  authorities  and  the 
Ministry of Culture and Tourism immediately (less than 24 hours). 
e)  The Ministry of Culture and Tourism will be in charge of protecting and preserving the area until deciding on 
the proper procedures to be carried out. This might require an evaluation of the findings to be performed by 
the archaeologists of the relevant Ministry Culture, and Tourism (within 1 week). The evaluation of the findings 
will  take  in  consideration  various  criteria  relevant  to  cultural  heritage,  including  the  aesthetic,  historic, 
scientific or research, social and economic values as decided by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. 
f)  Decisions on how to handle the finding are taken by the responsible authorities and the Ministry of Culture and 
Tourism (within 2 weeks). This could include changes in the location of the Proposed project activity layout 
(such  as  when  the  finding  is  irremovable  remains  of  cultural  or  archaeological  importance),  conservation, 
preservation, restoration and salvage. 
g)  Construction or rehabilitation work will resume only after authorization is provided  by the responsible local 
authorities and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism concerning the safeguard of the heritage. 
h)  Authorization to resume work shall be communicated to the contractor  in writing by the Ministry of Culture 
and Tourism. 
2:  In case of delays incurred indirect relation to any physical cultural resources findings not stipulated in the contract 
(and affecting the overall schedule of works), the contractor/masons may apply for an extension of time. However, 
the contractor/masons will not be entitled to any kind of compensation or claim other than what is directly related 
to the execution of the physical cultural resources findings works and protections. 
175 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 9: Guidelines for Annual Reviews 
Objectives: 
The objectives of annual reviews of ESCMF implementation are two-fold: 
a)  To assess the program performance in complying with ESCMF procedures, learn lessons, and improve future 
performance; and, 
b)  To assess the occurrence of, and potential for, cumulative impacts of the proposed project activities 
The program management is expected to use the annual reviews to improve on procedures and capacity for integrating 
natural resources and environmental/social management into proposed program operations.  
Scope of Work:  
ESCMF Performance Assessment  
The overall scope of the performance assessment work is to: 
a)  Assess the adequacy of the  process and procedures based on interviews with Project participants, Project records, 
and the environmental and social performance of a sample of approved project activities;  
b)  Assess  the  adequacy  of  ESCMF  roles  and  responsibilities,  procedures,  forms,  information  resource  materials, 
etc.; 
c)  Assess the needs for further training and capacity building; 
d) 
Identify key risks to the environmental and social sustainability of the proposed project activities; and, 
e)  Recommend appropriate measures for improving ESCMF performance. 
The following tasks will be typical: 
a)  Review national, regional and Woreda records of proposed project preparation and approval (e.g. applications; 
management in the region and Wereda; screening checklists; EMPs, appraisal forms; approval documents), as 
well  as  related  studies  or  reports  on  wider  issues  of  natural  resources  and  environmental  management  in  the 
country; 
b)  On the basis of this review, conduct field visits to assess the completeness of planning and implementation work, 
the adequacy of environmental/social design, and compliance with  proposed mitigation measures. The sample 
should be large enough to be representative and include a substantial proportion that had (or should have had) a 
field appraisal according to established ESCMF criteria. Proposed project activities in sensitive natural or social 
environments should especially be included; 
c) 
Interview  national,  regional  and  Woreda  officials  responsible  for  appraisal  and  approval  to  determine  their 
experience with ESCMF implementation, their views on the strengths and weaknesses of the  ESCMF process, 
and what should be done to improve performance. Improvements may concern, for example, the process itself, 
the available tools (e.g. guidelines, forms, information sheets), the extent and kind of training available, and the 
amount of financial resources available; and, 
d)  Develop recommendations for improving ESCMF performance. 
Cumulative Impacts Assessment 
This part of the annual review assesses the actual or potential cumulative impacts of proposed project activity with 
other development initiatives on the environment, natural resources and community groups, if applicable. Cumulative 
impacts result from a number of individual small-scale activities that, on their own, have minimal impacts, but over 
time and in combination generate a significant impact. For example:  
176 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
a)  Decline in groundwater levels or quality due to the abstraction of waters from limited natural water sources or 
wells and the introduction of numerous other small scale  project activities affecting the available water potential 
in the area; 
b)  Overwhelmed or illegal waste and dumping sites due to the inappropriate disposal of increasing amounts of waste 
materials; and, 
c)  Attraction of migrant populations to communities that have successfully introduced improved social infrastructure 
(such as schools, health facilities or water sources) resulting in depletion of resources (e.g., supplies, water), etc. 
The function of this assessment is primarily as an "early warning" system for potential cumulative impacts that might 
otherwise go undetected and unattended to. It will be largely based on the observations of people interviewed during 
the fieldwork, and trends that may be noticed by regional or Woreda officials. Where cumulative impacts are detected 
or  suspected,  recommendations  will  be  made  to  address  the  issue,  perhaps  through  more  detailed  study  to  clarify 
matters and what should or can be done about them. 
Qualifications for Undertaking Annual Reviews: 
The annual reviews shall be undertaken by an individual or small team, with experience relevant to the likely issues 
to be encountered (e.g. environmental and natural resources management, land acquisition and resettlement, livelihood 
restoration). They should also be familiar with the methods and practices of effective community consultation, and 
with typical methods and processes for preparing, appraising, approving and implementing small-scale community 
development projects. 
Timing:  
Annual reviews should be undertaken after the annual ESCMF report has been prepared and before IFAD supervision 
of the Project, at the closing of each year of the programs. It is expected that each review would require 3 to 4 weeks 
of work and that the review report would be completed within 2 weeks of completing the fieldwork. 
Outputs: 
The principal output is an annual review report that documents the review methodology, summarizes the results, and 
provides practical recommendations. Distinct sections should address; 
a) ESCMF performance;  
b) Cumulative impacts; and,  
C) Measures to be taken. 
Annexes should provide the detailed results of the fieldwork, arid summarize the number of approved proposed project 
activities and their characteristics according to the annual report format.  
Copies of the annual review report should be delivered to the Programs management, to each national and regional 
office responsible for appraisal, approval and implementation of the proposed project activities, and to the IFAD. The 
project management (national or regional) may also want to host national or regional workshops to review and discuss 
the review findings and recommendations. 
177 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 10: Suggested Forms for ESCMF Reporting, Training and Follow-up 
This annex contains three templates to be used in conjunction with monitoring and reporting and follow for ESCMF 
implementation. 
ESCMF reporting form 
Title  of  the 
Proposed 
project 
activity 
Application 
received (date) 
Field 
undertaken  
appraisal 
Application 
approved  
(date if undertaken) 
(date 
approved) 
if 
ESCMP 
developed 
(yes or no) 
Written 
of 
warnings 
violation 
of 
ESCMP  issued 
(yes/no) 
find 
Chance 
procedures 
invoked  
(yes or no) 
ESCMF training form 
Personnel 
No. of people trained 
Training received 
Safeguard specialist/officer 
Zonal focal points 
Woreda staff 
Community members etc. 
Follow up on previous recommendations 
Recommendation  Date of recommendation 
Action taken 
Recommendation 
implemented (yes/no) 
178 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 11: Sample Terms of Reference (ToR) for ESIA Preparation  
Based on the screening and scoping results, ESIA terms of reference will be prepared. The terms   
of    reference    will    have    the    following   contents.   Please refer  to the Guideline Series 
Documents  for  Reviewing  Environmental  Impacts  Study  Reports  (EPA,  2003) 
for  detail 
information on contents and descriptions of ESIA report (EPA, 2003). 
I.  Objective  of  the  TOR:  This  section  should  state  the  scope  of  the  ESIA  in  relation  to  the 
screening category and the proposed program activities. It needs to stipulate the process and 
the timing of the ESIA preparation and implementation stages in order to adequately address 
the safeguards requirements of the GoE and the IFAD. 
II.  Introduction  and  Context:  The  ToR  needs  to  provide  information  on  program  activity 
objective, the name of the program activity proponent, the rational for conducting the ESIA, 
specific  components  of  the  program  activity,  program  activity  area  with  location map, 
short briefing of social and environment of settings and applicable national and international 
safeguard policies. 
III. Location  of  the  study  area  and  likely  major  impacts:  State  the  area  involved  and  the 
boundaries of the study area for the assessment. Identify adjacent or remote areas which should  
be  considered  with  respect  to  impacts  of  particular  aspects  of  the  program activity. 
IV. Mission/Tasks:   The  ESIA study team/consultant should clearly execute the following 
tasks. 
Task A:   Description of the proposed program activity:   Describe the location, size and 
nature  of  the  program  activity,  environmental  assessment  category,  brief  description  of 
program    activity    alternatives,    time    schedule    for    phasing    of    development    (i.e. 
preconstruction,  construction,  operation/maintenance,  decommissioning),  and  resources 
(finance, human, material and technology) required for the program activity, among others. 
Task B: Baseline information/Biophysical and social-economic description: Describe the 
baseline/biophysical  and  socio-economic  characteristics  of  the  environment  where  the 
program  activity  will  be  implemented;  and  area  of  influence.  Include  information  on  any 
changes anticipated before the program activity commences. 
Task  C:  Administrative  and  legal  Policy  framework:  In  addition    to    the  required 
administrative and institutional setup for the implementation of the program activity, this part 
needs  to  identify  pertinent  policies,  regulations  and  guidelines  pertinent  to  the  study  that 
include: 
  National laws and/or regulations on environmental and social assessments; 
  Regional environmental and social assessment regulations; 
  Environmental and social assessment regulations of any other financing 
organizations involved in the program activity; 
179 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
  Relevant international environmental and social agreements/conventions to which 
  Ethiopia is a party; and, 
  IFAD safeguards policies. 
Task D: Identification of potential impacts of the program activity: Identify all potential 
significant  impacts that  the  program  activity  is  likely  to  generate. Assess  the impacts from 
changes  brought  about  by  the  program  activity  on  baseline  environmental  conditions  as 
described under Task B. The analysis should address both the positive and negative impacts 
of  the  program  activity.  Wherever  possible,  describe  impacts  quantitatively,  in  terms  of 
environmental and social costs and benefits. 
Task  E:  Propose  Program  activity  alternatives:  Alternatives  extend  to  site,  design, 
technology  selection,  construction  techniques  and  phasing,  and  operating  and  maintenance 
procedures.  Compare  alternatives  in  terms  of  potential  environmental  and  social  impacts; 
capital and operating costs; suitability under local conditions; and institutional, training, and 
monitoring requirements. 
Task  F:  Preparation  of  an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESCMP): 
impacts, 
the  mitigation  measures  for  adverse  environmental  and  social 
Describe 
staffing/institutional  and  training  requirements,  schedules,  and  other  necessary  support 
services  to  implement the mitigating measures. Provide environmental and social protection 
clauses for application by contractors and consultants, if any. The ToR should state that the 
concerned and affected parties should agree on the proposed mitigating measures before they 
are included in the ESCMP. 
Task  G:  Monitoring  Plan:  This  organizes  a  comprehensive  plan  to  monitor  the 
implementation of mitigating measures and the impacts of the program activities.   It should 
also  address  an  estimate  of  capital  and  operating  costs  and  a  description  of  other  inputs 
(such as training and institutional strengthening) needed to implement the plan. 
V.  Qualification  of  the  ESIA  study  team/Consultant:  The  ToR  should  provide  clear 
guidance on the qualification of the ESIA study team. 
VI. Duration of the ESIA Study: This should be determined according to the type of the 
program activity. 
VII. Preparation of the final Report: The ESIA study team/consultant will produce the 
final report one week after receiving comments from program activity proponent and 
concerned stakeholders. The final report will include comments from these institutions. 
VIII. Suggested Contents of the ESIA Report: Please refer to the “Guideline Series Documents 
for Reviewing Environmental Impacts Study Reports” (EPA, 2003) to get detail information on 
the contents of ESIA report (EPA, 2003). The contents of the ESIA report should contain the 
following elements. 
  Executive Summary; 
180 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
 
Introduction; 
  Methodology; 
  Administrative, legal and policy requirements; 
  Description of program activity (need, objectives, technical details, size, location 
input and other relevant requirements); 
  An outline of the main development alternatives; 
  Description of baseline information/environmental and socio-economic conditions; 
  An  account of the prediction and assessment of each impact at all stages of  the 
program activity cycle for each alternative; 
  Description of the methodology and techniques used in assessment and analysis of the 
program activity impacts; 
  Description of environmental and social impacts for program activity; 
  Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESCMP) for the project including the 
proposed mitigation measures; 
  Institutional responsibilities for monitoring and implementation; Summarized table for 
ESCMP; 
  Conclusions and recommendations; 
  References; and, 
  Annexes: 
  List of Persons/Institutions met; 
  List of the ESIA study team members; and, 
  Minutes of consultations. 
181 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 12: Grievance Redress Mechanism 
IFAD has introduced a Grievance Redress Service (GRS) requiring the Borrower to provide a grievance mechanism, 
process,  or  procedure  to  receive  and  facilitate  resolution  of  stakeholders’  concerns  and  grievances  arising  in 
connection with the project and the Borrower’s environmental and social performance. According to the GRS project-
affected communities and individuals may submit complaints regarding IFAD financed project to the appropriate local 
grievance mechanism, or the IFAD’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS).  
The table depicted below shows a generic grievance redress mechanism that can be applied to the proposed project 
activities. 
Steps   Process  
Description  
Identification  of 
grievance   
Face  to  face;  phone;  letter,  e-mail;  recorded 
during public/community interaction;   
Grievance 
assessed 
logged   
Significance assessed and grievance recorded 
or logged (i.e. in a log book)   
 4-7 
Days   
and 
Time 
frame  
 1 Day   
Other information  
 Email 
number   
address; 
hotline 
Significance criteria Level 1 –
one  off  event;  Level  2–
complaint  is  widespread  or 
repeated;  Level 
any 
complaint (one off or repeated) 
that indicates breach of law or 
policy  or  this  ESCMF/RPF 
provisions 
3- 
Grievance 
acknowledged   
is 
 Acknowledgement  of  grievance 
appropriate medium   
through 
Development  of 
response   
  Grievance assigned to appropriate party for 
resolution  
  Response  development  with  input  from 
management/ relevant stakeholders 
 7-14 
Days   
 4-7 
Days 
10-14 
Days   
Response  signed 
off   
Implementation 
and 
communication of 
response   
Complaints 
Response  
Redress action approved at appropriate levels   
 4-7 
Days   
Senior  management  staff  of 
DBE should sign   
Redress  action  implemented  and  update  of 
to 
progress  on  resolution  communicated 
complainant   
 10-14 
Days   
Redress action recorded in grievance log book 
Confirm  with complainant that grievance can 
be  closed  or  determine  what  follow  up  is 
necessary 
 4-7 
Days 
Close grievance    Record final sign off of grievance. If grievance 
cannot  be  closed,  return  to  step  2  or  refer  to 
sector  minister  or  recommend  third-party 
arbitration or resort to court of law 
 4-7 
Days   
Final  sign  off 
management of DBE 
  by  Senior 
182 
1   
2   
3   
4   
5   
6   
7 
8 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 13:  Stakeholder’s Database 
NO.  Name & Surname  Department  Designation 
Email Address  Phone No. 
Signature 
1 
2 
3 
4 
183 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 14: 
Issue and Response Table  
Issue 
Sub Issue as Perceived by 
Potentially Affected 
Populations 
Questions/Comments from Stakeholders 
Response/Feedback 
184 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex 15: Grievance Resolution Form 
GRIEVANCES REGISTER / GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION FORM 
About the PAP 
Name & Surname 
District 
Community 
(type of sub projects) 
council/village 
Stakeholder 
community) 
(employee,  PAP, 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
About the Complaint 
Reporting method 
(F2F, suggestion box, 
online, social media, 
email, in writing, 
feedback forms) 
Type of 
grievance  
(administrative or 
operational) 
Root cause of the grievance (see 
also Explanations tab and List 
of Root Causes) 
Outcome 
If a resolution 
was offered 
please indicate 
'accepted' or 'not 
accepted'. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
185 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Method of Resolution 
Escalation 
Notes 
Methods of resolution  (optional)  
eg: negotiated, mediated, apology 
Escalation of grievance  
1. 
2. 
186 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
Annex: Terms of Reference (ToR) for Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) 
An  ARAP  has  been  triggered  following  the  substantial  categorization  of  PACT.  Therefore,  the 
ARAP  will  be  prepared  based  on  the  guidance  of  the  Resettlement  Action  Framework  (RAF) 
during early implementation phase. The expected contents of the ARAP report include:  
1.  Introduction 
This section should explain the main purpose, scope and content of the plan, methodologies used 
to prepare the plan. The plan may not be approved by any institution in the country, but relevant 
institutions such as the Ministry of Irrigation and Low Lands (MILL) and ots structure at region 
and Woreda level, should be engaged.   
2.  Project description  
General description of the project and description of the project components and activities that will 
require land acquisition and cause physical/economic displacement should be included in this section.  
3.  Project impacts 
Projects activities that will result in the permanent/temporary displacement of communities will be 
identified. Impact descriptions such as nature and frequency of impact, duration etc will also be 
included. Furthermore, this section will explanation of all activities and alternatives considered to avoid 
or minimize displacement.  
4.  Legal Framework 
An assessment of national and international policy and legal frameworks on displacement and 
resettlement. In addition, gap analysis that might not be touched in the Resettlement Action Framework 
(RAF) will be done.  
5.  Affected People and assets  
 
The  following  information  should  be  collected  once  the  target  communities  are  known  and 
project activities that will actually affect pastoral communities are identified; (i) People/households who 
will  be  physically  displaced  because  of  project  activities,  including    their  land-ownership  status,  (ii) 
people/households/businesses that will be economically displaced and their land-ownership status, (iii) 
standard characteristics of displaced people/households, (iv) social networks and social support systems, 
and  how  they  will  be  affected  by  the  project  and  (v)  description  of  affected  assets,  including  natural 
resources, public infrastructure and services  
6.  Key compensation and assistance principles  
Key government principles of compensation, resettlement and livelihood restoration that the client is 
committed to implementing  
7.  Eligibility 
A survey/census should be carried out following targeting of communities and detailed information on; 
description and results of the census, cut-off date for eligibility and eligibility of categories of displaced 
persons for compensation and other resettlement assistance should be documented.  
187 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
8.  Entitlements matrix  
Entitlements matrix addressing categories of losses and entitlements pertaining to the project 
components/phases in question  
9.  Compensation and assistance 
The following activities will be included under this section; (i) description of the methodology/models 
for valuing losses to determine their replacement cost, (ii) description of compensation and assistance 
measures, (iii) description of process for executing compensation and assistance, (iv) description of 
organized resettlement programme (selection of locations, design of housing, planned infrastructure, 
improvements for host community). As part of the assistance, this section will also include livelihood 
restoration mechanism and measures.  
10. Organizational arrangements 
Procedures  for  the  delivery  of  entitlements  and  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  all  involved 
agencies/organizations 
including  coordination 
(client,  authorities,  various  service  providers), 
arrangements  
11. Time frame 
Implementation time frame covering all activities from preparation of the plan through implementation, 
including monitoring and evaluation 
12. Disclosure of information and consultations  
Description of engagement activities undertaken as part of developing the plan, summary of the views 
expressed  and  how  these  were  considered  in  preparing  the  plan,  description  of  planned  stakeholder 
engagement  during  implementation.  The  stakeholder  engagement  will  be  contextualized  from  the 
stakeholder engagement plan prepared for PACT.   
13. Grievance mechanism  
The grievance redress mechanism of the PACT programme will be mentioned here.  
14. Monitoring and reporting  
Besides the programme and SECAP/ESCMP monitoring and reporting, ARAP specific monitoring and 
reporting systems will be described. Specifically, description of the internal and external monitoring and 
evaluation arrangements as well as monitoring indicators to measure inputs, outputs and outcomes for 
resettlement/ livelihood-restoration activities and reporting on implementation of the plan will be 
included.  
15. Implementation costs 
Tables presenting expected costs for all resettlement activities and sources of funds.   
188 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
ANNEX. Terms of Reference for Social Development Plan  
This  plan  will  be  prepared  to  ensure  that  vulnerable  peoples  such  as  the  pastoral  and  agro-
pastoral communities are benefited from the programme. The plan will focus target communities 
in the low land areas such as Oromia, SNNPR and Somali regions. The main contents are: 
1.  Executive summary of the Social Development Plan  
Concisely describes the critical facts, significant findings and recommended actions  
2.  Description of the project  
General description of the project, the project area and components/activities that may lead to 
impacts on vulnerable people  
3.  Description of vulnerable peoples (pastoral and agropastoral communities)   
A description of affected vulnerable people and their locations, including: (i) description of the 
community  or  communities  constituting  the  affected peoples  (e.g. names,  dialects, estimated 
numbers,  etc.);  (ii)  description  of  the  resources,  lands  and  territories  to  be  affected  and  the 
affected peoples’ connections/relationship with those resources, lands and territories; and (iii) 
an identification of more vulnerable groups within the affected peoples (e.g. uncontacted and 
voluntarily isolated peoples, women and girls, the disabled and elderly, others).  
4.  Summary of substantive rights and legal framework  
A description of the substantive rights of vulnerable peoples and the applicable legal framework, 
including:  (i) an analysis of applicable national and international laws affirming and protecting 
the  rights  of  vulnerable/pastoral  and  agropastoral  peoples  (include  general  assessment  of 
government implementation of the same); and (ii) analysis as to whether the project involves 
activities  that  are  contingent  on  establishing  legally  recognized  rights  to  lands,  resources  or 
territories  that  vulnerable  people  have  traditionally  owned,  occupied  or  otherwise  used  or 
acquired.  
5.  Summary of social and environmental assessment and mitigation measures  
A summary of the findings and recommendations of the required prior social and environmental 
impact  studies  and  mitigation  measures  specifically  those  related to  vulnerable  peoples,  their 
rights, lands, territories, resources, traditional livelihoods and cultural heritage. Reference can be 
made to ESCMF and ESCMP.  
6.  Participation, consultation and FPIC processes 
 A summary of results of the culturally appropriate consultation and FPIC processes undertaken 
with  the  affected  peoples  which  led  to  the  social  development  support  for  the  project.  This 
section will also include a description of the mechanisms to conduct iterative consultation and 
consent processes throughout implementation of the project. Identify particular project activities 
and circumstances that require consultation and FPIC.  
189 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework 
7.  Appropriate benefits  
An identification of the measures to be taken to ensure that vulnerable people receive equitable 
social  and  economic  benefits  that  are  culturally  appropriate,  including  a  description  of  the 
consultation and consent processes that led to the determined benefit-sharing arrangements.  
8.  Capacity support  
Description of measures to support social, legal and technical capabilities of vulnerable people 
organizations in the project area to enable them to better represent the affected peoples more 
effectively.  
9.  Grievance redress  
A description of the Grievance Redress Mechanism for the programme with some specific issues 
applicable to the vulnerable people.  
10. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation  
Besides  the  programme and  SECAP/ESCMP monitoring  and  reporting,  specific  monitoring and 
reporting issues relevant to social development plan will be described.  
11. Institutional arrangements  
Describes  institutional  arrangement  responsibilities  and  mechanisms  for  carrying  out  the 
measures contained in the social development plan, including mechanisms for participation of 
affected  vulnerable  peoples.  Describes  role  of  independent,  impartial  entities  to  audit  and 
conduct social and environmental assessments, as required, and/or to conduct oversight of the 
project.  
12. Budget and financing  
An  appropriately  costed  plan,  with  itemized  budget  sufficient  to  satisfactorily  undertake  the 
activities.  
190 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: 05 Annex Secap Review Note Appendix 3 Final Fpic Plan
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex  
FREE, PRIOR, AND INFORMED CONSENT (FPIC) PLAN 
For Implementing the Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation (PACT) 
program in regions inhabited by pastoralists in Ethiopia 
A.  Executive summary  
PACT  Project  Design  Report  (PDR)  provides  that  the  project  will  be  implemented  in 
Ethiopia’s regions that are inhabited by pastoralists. The Social, Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedure (SECAP) requires development of a framework and process to manage 
risks and impacts for all IFAD funded projects. In the context of pastoralists, a Free, Prior and 
Informed  Consent  (FPIC)  Plan  embodies  the  framework  and  process  that  SECAP  requires. 
FPIC triggers when IFAD-funded project activities are likely to affect the land access and use 
rights of local communities.  On its part, the Green Climate Fund (GCF) requires application 
of FPIC when planning  GCF-financed activities that will affect lands, territories, resources, 
livelihoods, and culture and when relocation is envisioned. Since PACT is co-financed by the 
Inclusive Green Financing Initiative (IGREENFIN) which is a GCG funding mechanism, GCF 
requirements apply in the case at hand.  
Based on the consultants’ participation in the PACT Design mission, including findings of 
a field visit Somali region and analysis review from other project target regions such as Oromia, 
combined with the consultants long-standing experience we can confirm that FPIC-triggering 
requirements  by  IFAD  and  GCF  are  present  in  the  case  at  hand,  meaning  namely  PACT 
implementation in Ethiopia, and this FPIC implementation plan is framed based on SECAP 
requirements.  The  FPIC  plan  is  aimed  at  ensuring  that  pastoralists  in  all  regions  are  fully 
participate in and shape PACT implementation, in addition to ensuring that adverse impacts 
are avoided or minimized.  
For example, a key finding of the design mission is that while PACT will have enormous 
value-addition in terms of building climate-resilience, key pastoral-livelihood enhancing assets 
notably traditional livestock routes for accessing water, pastures, and salt resources may be 
fragmented  by  activities  relating  to  fodder  cultivation  and  construction  of  irrigation 
infrastructure. Ensuring that pastoralists are fully consulted on where project activities can be 
implemented by way of FPIC implementation will thus mitigate adverse impacts.  
This FPIC plan therefore details preliminary actions to avert, minimize and/or compensate 
for adverse social and economic impacts. The plan also identifies opportunities and actions to 
benefit  and  improve  the  livelihoods  of  pastoralists  communities  who  will  benefit  from  the 
project. Thirdly the Plan includes measures to support pastoralists to engagement and full and 
effective participation in the conservation and sustainable management of the natural resources 
and  biodiversity  on  which  they  depend  or  measures  by  the  project  to  manage  land  use. 
Furthermore, the plan includes a) detailed roadmap on how to seek FPIC once project areas are 
identified (including budget needs) b) a plan of monitoring the FPIC process throughout the 
project cycle, including with adequate financial and human resources provided in the project 
budget allocation. 
B.  Description of the project  
According to PACT concept note, the PACT programme will be implemented over a 
period of seven years, and its goal is to ‘contribute to poverty reduction and climate resilience 
of  the  target  rural  livelihoods.’  The  program  development  objective  is  to  achieve  ‘enable 
150,000 rural households (men, women, youth and PWDs) in selected kebeles to sustainably 
improve incomes, food and nutrition security and build resilience to shocks’ While the project 
areas are yet to be conclusively determined, PACT will be implemented in areas inhabited by 
pastoralists who self-identify as Pastoralist peoples.  
In  terms  of  component  activities,  Sub-component  1.3:  Climate  Resilient  Water-
Development for Households, PACT (taking a landscape approach) envisions supporting, “a) 
solar  small-scale  farmer-led  irrigation  related  infrastructures,  b)  multipurpose  water 
infrastructure;  and  c)  rehabilitation  of  irrigation  schemes  damaged  due  to  the  conflicts.” 
Additionally, one of a key entry point discussed during the design mission was cultivation of 
fodder crops such as alfalfa and Sudan grass. Broadly, PACT envisions contributing to poverty 
reduction and improving resilience of the target rural households, and pastoralists stand very 
high chance of benefiting enormously.  
However, conducting the above activities in a pastoral setting requires additional levels of 
consultations. Specifically, the activities above are likely to adversely impact on key pastoral-
livelihood enhancing assets notably traditional livestock routes for accessing water, pastures, 
and salt resources. This is because, construction of irrigation related infrastructures combined 
with  fodder  cultivation  may  fragment  grazing  lands.  Ensuring  that  pastoralists  are  fully 
consulted before decision such as determining where project activities can be implemented will 
2 
thus mitigate adverse impacts. Methodologically, the consultation can be achieved by way of 
FPIC implementation. Specifically, the consent of pastoralists must be obtained unequivocally 
before a decision on the location of some irrigation schemes within the rangeland is reached.  
C.  Description the local communities  
1.  Pastoralists of Ethiopia  
Ethiopia is one of the most ethnically heterogeneous countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. It is 
home  to  many  ethnic  groups.  Several  predominantly  practice  pastoralism  as  the  main 
livelihood system. They include The Somali (Somali Region); The Afars (Afar Region); the 
Borana, one of two branches of the Oromo people and the Barentu Oromo peoples (Oromiya 
Region),  The  Kereyu,  an  Oromo  Borana  pastoralist  sub-group  (Awash  Valley,  Oromiya 
Region), and the Nuer (Gambella Region). Others include:  
  The Majangir (Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples' Region) 
  The Mursi (Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples' Region) 
  The Berta (Benishangul-Gumuz Region) 
  The Gumuz, Mao, Komo and Opo (Benishangul-Gumuz and Gambela Regions) 
  The Anuak or Anywa (Gambela Region) 
  The Shinasha or Boro (Benishangul-Gumuz Region) 
  The Ari and Himra of the Agaw peoples (Benishangul-Gumuz and Amhara Regions) 
  The Irob (Tigray Region) 
  The Kunama (Tigray Region) 
3 
A map of the regions of Ethiopia 
2.  The Somali Region: A predominantly pastoral region  
The Somali Regional State or the Ogaden was incorporated into the Ethiopian empire in 
early  20th  century.1  The  Somali  people  today,  numbering  over  4.5  million  in  Ethiopia, 
dominate the population of Somali Region, and local social, cultural, and political structures 
remain  strong,  as  does  the  usage  of  Somali  language.  While  significant  investment  in  the 
region, and interest in its natural resources, and government and NGO development activities 
have somewhat diversified opportunities, pastoralism remains widespread. Its noteworthy that 
as a livelihood system differs significantly from mere livestock production. The former is a 
totality of the peoples’ existence and identity, including the cultural significance attached to 
the livelihood. Alongside the Ethiopian state, which tends to promote sedentary livelihoods, 
extreme droughts and rangeland degradation have negatively impacted pastoralist livelihoods 
in the region, and vulnerability in the region remains high.  
According to the regional officials interviewed during PACT Design Mission, the livestock 
population in the region is 45 million (all species combined). In recent  years, the frequency 
and severity of drought  has increased significantly. Previously, drought  used to  recur every 
after 5-7  years but  now  it occurs every after 2-3  years. This  increase of  drought  cycles has 
1 Eshete, T. (1994). Towards a History of The Incorporation of The Ogaden: 1887-1935. Journal of Ethiopian 
Studies, 27(2), 69-87. 
4 
created tremendous pressure on the lives and livelihood of the pastoralists. This is because, 
after keeping their precious animals for 2 years, drought comes and snatches what they have 
toiled to produce. One of the coping strategies is to sell animals with long/harsh drought periods 
or move to other grazing areas. PACT activities will be supporting pastoralists with increased 
fodder availability, better rangeland management, and drought tolerant varieties as enhanced 
coping strategy. These activities should be spelled out in the plan 
The 2021/22 drought alone killed 1.5million heads of livestock belonging to the pastoralists 
and  more  than  3.5  million  people  were  severely  affected  and  some  of  them  have  been 
permanently  displaced  from  their  traditional  settlements.  Instead,  they  have  been  forced  to 
relocate closer to townships where they can get food and water assistances. In the region, the 
group of destitute pastoralists internally displaced are referred to as “Pastoralists Dropouts” 
because  they  no  longer  practice  pastoralism  the  way  they  used  to.  It  was  clear  during  the 
briefings that most inhabitants of the region, still rely on pastoralism as the main livelihood 
system.  
However, not enough protection and support is being provided to the Somali pastoralists 
who largely depend on their livestock as their sole source of food and income. Therefore, PACT 
implementation in the region is a highly needed and a timely intervention. It will potentially 
support  the  pastoralists  by  making  adequate  planning  and  implementation  of  development 
works to  make sure the  livelihoods of the pastoralists are safeguarded  from  the pressure of 
climate induced and other shocks and risks. Loss of livestock after every drought circle reveals 
that not enough investment has so far been made to protect and support development of the 
pastoralists in the past. This is notwithstanding the presence of some NGO-funded projects and 
the government’s regular development works.  
PACT should therefore be implemented in the region proactively by identifying potential 
risks of climatic shocks on the people, their livelihood, and the environment in which they live.  
Significantly, since the vulnerability of the pastoral livelihoods to drought and other climatic 
shocks  increased  over  the  years  due  to  lack  of  water  and  pastures,  consultants  recommend 
fodder  production  as  a  key  entry  point,  complemented  by  drilling  of  water  for  human  and 
livestock consumption. Its noteworthy as indicated above that pastoral herd size in the region 
is  fast  depleting,  making  pastoralists  poorer  and  more  destitute  as  time  progresses.  Left 
untamed, these undesirable conditions will reduce pastoralists to dependents on food aid. This 
is partly already the reality on the ground. It is also noteworthy that Pastoralism also provides 
essential ecosystem services. They include carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation, 
5 
which are central to securing both livelihood resilience and sustainable development in most 
drylands and mountain regions.  
D.  Summary of substantive rights and legal framework  
The Federal Constitution of Ethiopia guarantees the right of pastoralists not to be displaced 
from their own lands. Article 40 (5) is reproduced below:  
Ethiopian Pastoralists have the right to free land for grazing and cultivation as well 
as the right not to be displaced from their own land.  The implementation shall be 
specified by law. 
Equally  important,  the  Constitution  guarantees  the  rights  to  fair  price  to  pastoralists’ 
products  (Art.  41(8)),  and  right  for  participation  (Art.  89(6)  and  (7)  which  are  reproduced 
below:  
6.  Government  shall,  at  all  times  promote  the  participation  of  the  people  in  the 
formulation of national development policies and programmes; it shall also have the 
duty to support the initiative of the people in their development endeavors.   
7. Government shall ensure the participation of women in equality with men in all 
economic and social development endeavors.  
Considering the above, the Ethiopia Federal Constitution 1994 thus sets a firm foundation 
for  community  participation  and  stakeholder  engagement  upon  which  FPIC  can  be 
conveniently implemented. Similarly, the flagship program among pastoralists -the Lowlands 
Resilience Program (LLRP) exemplifies a case of robust community participation in project 
implementation. Cumulatively, the Federal Constitution and the LLRP experience prove that 
favorable conditions are replete for FPIC implementation in Ethiopia to maximize PACT value 
added for pastoralists.  
E.  Anticipated potential adverse social and environmental impacts  
The most likely unintended adverse social and economic impact of PACT is blocking of 
stock routes because of construction of irrigation infrastructures and growing fodder crops. For 
6 
pastoralists however, mobility is the central pillar of their livelihoods, allowing pastoralists to 
freely  move  from  a  point  of  resource  scarcity  to  a  point  of  resource  abundance  within  the 
rangelands. However, as land and other natural resources that support pastoralism are getting 
scarcer due to among other things, climate change and its impacts, the following actions are 
suggested for averting or minimizing/compensating for likely impacts. 
  Protecting pastoralists routes by participatory mapping 
  Promoting  mobility  which  is  considered  a  lifeline  of  pastoralism  by  avoiding 
growing  fodder  crops  or  construction  of  water/irrigation  infrastructures  in 
traditional stock routes and  
  Conducting more consultations during implementation in an inclusive manner for 
all stakeholders especially pastoral women and youth.  
  Ensuring  that  pastoralist  households  and  individuals  are  not  left  out  in  benefit 
schemes including access to jobs. Technically, benefit sharing such as preferential 
consideration for jobs within Pastoralist peoples’ lands, is an important indicator of 
compliance of trust and effective prior consultation among Pastoralist peoples. 
  Avoiding damages to physical sacred sites or medicinal plants or compensate them 
in a culturally appropriate manner.  
  Supporting  the  access  to  resilience-building  coping  mechanisms  such  as  quality 
inputs (fodder) veterinary services, technical assistance 
  Translating relevant documents in pastoralists’ languages to allow all segments of 
the community to be fully informed about the PACT project.  
F.  Participation, consultation and FPIC process  
1.  Detailed Roadmap on how to seek FPIC 
1.1 Introduction 
Implementation of this FPIC plan should enable pastoralists to be meaningfully consulted 
and hence be able to participate in the PACT project in the pastoralists’ Woredas. In line with 
IFAD’s How to Do Note on FPIC, it is proposed that the FPIC process begins by a Start-Up 
workshop  (which  takes  place  prior  to  the  commencement  of  project  implementation  at  the 
country  level).  The  workshop  at  hand  will  provide  the  opportunity  for  capacity  building. 
Additionally,  it  is  recommended  that  a  joint  review  mission  takes  place  one  year  after  the 
commencement of the project to fact-check compliance with FPIC principles.  
7 
1.2 Scope:  
The scope for consultation and FPIC process described in this FPIC plan, is not limited to 
the Somali region. This is because there are groups of pastoralists self-identifying as Pastoralist 
peoples  in  other  regions  where  PACT  will  be  implemented.  As  indicated  above,  most 
pastoralists are considered Pastoralist peoples pursuant to the African Commission on Human 
and Peoples Rights (ACHPR)-the regional inter-governmental institution mandated to protect 
and promote human rights in the continent. Similarly, SECAP provides that FPIC is applicable 
to  non-Pastoralist local  communities when the project  impacts  on their access  and  land-use 
rights.  
Significantly, principles of meaningful consultation require good faith as demonstrated by 
involving other integral actors. In the case at hand, it is noteworthy that Pastoralist peoples are 
organized along the lines of national and regional networks of civil society organizations that 
should  also  be  consulted.  Contemporary  literatures  on  pastoralist  peoples  refer  to  non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) as “supportive external parties” whose works support and 
further  empowers  communities.  Additionally,  welcoming  opinions  of  some  independent 
experts and academics with interest in pastoralists’ rights are key demonstrators of good faith, 
as  the  operational  principle  of  consultation  requires.  They  too  should  be  invited  during  the 
FPIC consultation process.   
1.3 Methods and approaches  
1.3.1  Culturally appropriate approached  
Culturally appropriate consultation among most Pastoralist peoples revolves around the 
practice of open-ended meetings. These dialogues illustrate the importance of frank exchanges 
of information because everyone is invited to attend, and there is no undue sticking to agenda 
or  rules  of  protocols.  The  dialogues  will  provide  space  for  introducing  key  concepts  and 
offering explanations regarding the Project activities. It is proposed that there should be two 
dialogues in each Woreda.  
The dialogues will be free and open to all community members and will focus on the 
project more broadly, including what has been done and what remains to be done.  For example, 
the dialogue may touch on the following aspects, in one-way or the other. Objectives of the 
Project; Project implementers and their roles; Information on benefits and risks of the Project; 
Findings of environmental and social impact assessment and other reports. As indicated above 
the community should feel free to invite any independent experts they may wish to.  Since the 
aim is to reach the largest possible number of community members, consideration should be 
8 
made to the rhythms of daily community life and responsibilities as well as gender, cultural 
and age-set norms.  
1.3.2  Additional field research tools  
Based  on  appropriate  customization  to  suit  cultural  norms,  the  following  additional 
field  research  tools  can  be  used  throughout  the  lifeline  of  the  Project  for  the  purpose  of 
engaging Pastoralist pastoralists as described below.  
  Focus Group Discussions (FGD)  
In  addition  to  the  open-ended  dialogues  approach  described  above,  Focus  Group 
Discussions  (FGD)  should  be  employed  to  understand  at  a  deeper  level,  the  pastoralists' 
perspective  narratives  on  the  Project  in  relation  to  their  livelihoods.  Accordingly  detailed 
information and deep insights should be sought from randomly selected pastoralists in each 
project  Woreda.  To  make  respondents  feel  natural  and  comfortable  talking  to  consultants 
conducting the FPIC process, prior planning should be made for rapport creation, particularly 
by using traditional leaders as well as local government authorities at the Woreda level. 
Co-opting credible elites from the community (preferably those who are based in the 
Woreda) would add enormous value.  By encouraging participatory methods, the goals should 
be to seek maximum number of different ideas and opinions within the available time.  
  Key Informant Interviews (KII) 
Based  on  the  face-to-face  meetings,  comprehensive  interviews  should  be  conducted 
through asking questions that will elicit broad insights. Key Informants (KI) should be drawn 
from among traditional leaders and Woreda authorities such as the chair, the executive officer, 
and available members of the Woreda council. Additionally, consultants should identify some 
opinion leaders, influential elders, women, and youths. It is recommended that KIs should be 
recommended the open-ended dialogue. This means consultants should make it clear during 
the open-ended dialogues that a group of KI should be proposed for a deeper consultation. In 
addition, members of the academia, independent experts, and individuals working with civil 
society organizations and NGOs on issues of Pastoralist pastoralists can be consulted through 
the KII method. 
G.  Appropriate benefits  
9 
During the field visit to Somali region, it was clear that the LLRP meticulously integrates 
pastor-livelihood enhancement works in its implementation, and this is an appropriate benefit 
or value addition. This means project implementation is done in a way that further enhances 
pastoralism  as  opposed  to  undermining  it.  For  example,  construction  of  water  structures 
ensures  multi-purpose  water  use  for  both  human  and  livestock.  This  is  due  to  water  being 
overly  scarce  in  this  region,  hence  whenever  an  opportunity  ensues  for  constructing  water 
structures,  multiple  needs  such  as  human  consumption,  crops  production  and  livestock 
consumption  should  ideally  be  taken  care  of.  Consultants  thus  propose  that  PACT 
implementation  in  the  region  should  replicate  the  LLRP  model  by  addressing  stressors  of 
pastoralism. Here is list of other culturally appropriate benefits:  
  Construction of water ponds especially in areas that may be affected to compensate 
for natural water bodies.   
  Ensuring  that  benefits  are  channeled  to  pastoralists  through  their  representative 
traditional institutions  
  Offering employment (unskilled labour) as much as possible to pastoralists youths 
for activities that are implemented in their lands and territories.   
H.  Capacity support  
While  the  legal  framework  in  Ethiopia  provides  for  a  firm  foundation  for  conducting 
meaningful  consultation  as  exemplified  by  the  LLRP  experience,  the  jurisdiction  is    not 
familiar with the concept of FPIC as outlined and required by SECAP, and has no experience 
applying it.  Accordingly, it is recommended that the project implementation team at the federal 
level receive the appropriate training / capacity building. They will in turn cascade the trainings 
in the regional levels. It is envisaged that the intensive training in ‘FPIC and Pastoralist peoples 
rights’ would allow parties to correctly deal with the Pastoralist communities in terms of groups 
with group rights rather than as individuals entitled to individual rights.  
I.  Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Based  on  our  assessment  of  Ethiopia’s  access  to  justice,  it  is  evidence  that  grievance 
mechanisms  are easily accessible by pastoralists. However, we recommend  effective use of 
PACT proposed Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) which build on PASIDP, LLRP and 
RUFIP experiences, and customized to the specific needs of pastoralists. This can be done at 
each Woreda by including a council of elders-maximum seven in total (both women and men) 
10 
as  well  as  a  representative  of  the  project  implementation  team  to  jointly  advice  on  how  to 
handle conflicts as they arise at every Woreda.  
J.  Monitoring, Reporting, and evaluation  
To ensure that pastoralists are appropriately consulted throughout the life of the Project and 
in  line  with  SECAP  and  GCF’s  Pastoralist  Peoples’  Policy,  it  is  recommended  that  PACT 
engages a local IP specialist as a consultant for the Project. The IP specialist will, among other 
things,  provide  timely  advice  and  counsel  to  PACT  on  how  to  monitor  FPIC  Plan 
implementation.  Additionally,  the  local  IP  specialist  will  work  with  PACT  to  monitor 
implementation of key performance indicators (KPIs) for each activity conducted among IPs, 
and advice on how to assess the KPIs and report accordingly. It is recommended that the IP 
consultant work closely with gender and inclusion officers during monitoring, reporting and 
evaluation.  
K.  Implementation arrangement  
The implementation arrangement for seeking FPIC should begin with a training of trainers 
at the Federal level, directed to project implementing team. Once trained they can train PACT 
implementors at the regional levels. It is proposed that FPIC should be sought at every Woreda.  
L.  Budget and financing  
Detailed budget is indicated in the table below 
11 
Budget for Participatory Pastoralists Development (FPIC) Plan of PACT Programme 
N
o 
Description 
unit 
cost 
(USD) 
qty/frequenc
y 
total 
cost 
(USD) 
unit 
1  National Pastoralism consultant  month 
2500 
24 
 60,000  
National Training Workshop on 
Facilitation of Participatory 
Pastoralists Development Plan 
of PACT programme 
International consultant fee for 
preparing for, delivering the 
training and reporting 
DSA of International consultant 
for coming to Ethiopia and 
delivering the training 
flight and miscellanous cost for 
int'l consultant 
DSA of 30 participants from 3 
regions for 5 days (including 
travel days) 
travel cost of RPMU 
Hotel lunch, refreshment and 
related cost 
stationery & training material 
printing cost 
Training cascading to project 
woredas on Facilitation of 
Participatory Pastoralists 
Development Training to Pilot 
project woredas at regional 
2 
3 
 28,043  
days 
440 
14 
 6,160  
days 
lumpsu
m 
persons 
persons 
persons 
lumpsu
m 
209 
4 
 836  
444 
91 
80 
30 
30 
35 
 1,200  
 13,320  
 2,727  
 2,800  
 1,000  
 15,670  
capitals of the 3 regions - 
Somali, SNNPR and Oromia 
DSA of 2 project personnel per 
woreda from 5 woredas 
hotel lunch+refreshment cost 
transportation/fuel cost for 
woreda training participants 
stationery & training material 
printing cost 
cost of preparing Pastoralists 
Development Plan (FPIC) at 5 
pilot woredas each of 3 regions 
(@1000 USD per woreda for fuel 
cost for woreda project staff 
travel to project kebeles, 
stationery and community 
consultation events) 
Total 
4 
persons 
persons 
persons 
300 
20 
91 
30 
56 
50 
 9,000  
 1,120  
 4,550  
 1,000  
woreda 
1000 
15 
 15,000  
 118,713  
13 
Ethiopia
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: 05 Annex Secap Review Note Appendix 4 Stakeholder Engagement Plan
Mission Dates:
13/06/2022 - 01/07/2022
Document Date:
25/01/2023
Project No.
Report No.
2000003447
6204-ET
DSF Grant ID
2000004457
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (FDRE)  
Ministry of Agriculture 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) 
for the  
Participatory Agriculture and Climate transformation Program 
                                                                                      October 2022 
                                                                                         Addis Ababa 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Table of Content 
List of ables ................................................................................................................................................... ii 
List of Figures ................................................................................................................................................ ii 
Acronyms ..................................................................................................................................................... iii 
1 Brief Description of PACT Project .............................................................................................................. 1 
2 Objective of Stakeholder Engagement Plan .............................................................................................. 1 
3 Scope of Application of SEP ....................................................................................................................... 2 
4 Stakeholder Engagement Principles .......................................................................................................... 3 
5 Key Elements of SEP ................................................................................................................................... 4 
5.1   Stakeholders Identification and Analysis .......................................................................................... 4 
(a) Identifying Stakeholders ...................................................................................................................... 4 
(b)Potential Project stakeholders ............................................................................................................. 6 
(c)  Stakeholder Engagement Considerations ........................................................................................... 7 
(d) Stakeholders Analysis .......................................................................................................................... 8 
6 Grievance Redress Mechanisms .............................................................................................................. 13 
6.1 Institutional Setup of the GRM for PACT Project .............................................................................. 13 
6.2 Grievance Redress Hierarchy ............................................................................................................ 13 
6.3 Grievance Redress Process ............................................................................................................... 14 
6.4 Complaints Uptake ............................................................................................................................ 14 
6.5 Complaint Assessment and Analysis ................................................................................................. 15 
6. 6 Resolution and Closure .................................................................................................................... 15 
6.7 GRM Registry, Reporting and Follow up ........................................................................................... 15 
6.8   provisions for Management of GBV/SEA ........................................................................................ 16 
7 Monitoring and Reporting ....................................................................................................................... 17 
8 Stakeholders Engagement Planning ........................................................................................................ 18 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page i 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
List of Tables 
Table 5.1: Identified Key Stakeholders  
Table 5.2: Level of impacts, influence and Interest of stakeholders at the federal, regional and 
sub project levels, 
     Table 10.1: Stakeholders Engagement Techniques 
Table 10.2: Preliminary Stakeholder Engagement Plan at the sub project level 
List of Figures 
Figure 5.1: Basic Stakeholder Influence and Interest Chart 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page ii 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Environmental and Social Review Summary 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan 
Free Prior Informed Consent 
Free Prior and Informed Consent  
Grievance Redress   Mechanism 
Grievance redress Mechanism Committee 
International Food Agricultural Development 
Gender Based Violence 
Growth  and transformation Plan 
Participatory Agriculture and Climate Transformation 
Project Management Unit 
Project Affected Population 
Acronyms 
ESMP 
ESRS 
ESCP 
FPIC 
FCRP 
GRM 
GRMC 
IFAD 
GBV 
GTP 
PACT 
PMU 
PAP 
SHGRM 
WGRMC 
Sexual Harassment Grievance Redress mechanism 
Woreda Redress Mechanism Committee 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page iii 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
1 Brief Description of PACT Project   
The  PACT  Project’s  Development  Objective  will  be  achieved 
the  effective 
implementation  of  two  technical  components  and  a  third  component  that  will  focus  on 
augmenting  the  capacity  of  communities,  institutions,  and  contributing  to  a  conducive  policy 
environment  towards  programme  implementation.  Job  creation  for  young  women  and  men 
including persons with disabilities will be main focus of all investments under this Project. 
through 
The  PACT  Project  has  three  components  and  has  also  sub  components  under  each  of  the 
components.   
Component 1: Community-Led Climate-Smart Productive Landscapes:- Component 1 will 
support:  a)  community  led  equitable  access  and  sustainable  use  of  natural  resources;  b) 
participatory  promotion  of  technological  change  for  smallholder  production  systems  for 
improved  production  and  productivity  of  target  crop  and  livestock  commodities;  c)  improve 
inclusive and equitable adaptation to climate change  to  reduce vulnerability to shocks; and d) 
improve nutrition. The outcome of this component will be enhanced conservation, productivity 
and sustainable utilization of water and other natural resources.  
Component 2: Inclusive Market Access:  The outcome of interventions under this component 
will be enhanced access to remunerative markets for small-scale women and men farmers in the 
project areas. Focus will be on linking smallholder women and men farmers to the private sector 
on a business-to-business linkage, which will strengthen the capacity of producer organisations 
and  improve  access  to  reliable  remunerative  markets.  A  market  based  and  private  sector  led 
approach  will  be  promoted  for  improved  provision  of  services,  increased  private  sector 
investments and building capacities for smallholder farmers and their organisations.  
Component  3:  Community,  Institutional  and  Policy  Strengthening:  This  will  be  a  cross-
cutting component servicing the technical components and facilitating pathways for the effective 
and inclusive functioning of the target value chains, from production to consumption.  
2 Objective of Stakeholder Engagement Plan  
The  overall  objective  of  this  Stakeholders  Management  plan  (SEP)  is  to  define  a  plan  of  action  for 
stakeholder  engagement,  including  technically  and  culturally  appropriate  approach  to  public 
consultation  and  information  disclosure, throughout  the  entire  project  cycle.  The  SEP  outlines  the 
ways in  which the project  team  will communicate with stakeholders and includes a mechanism by 
which people/ communities can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project 
activities. The involvement of different stakeholders, including the local community is essential to 
the  success  of  the  project  in  order  to  ensure  smooth  collaboration  between  project  staff  and  local 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 1 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
communities. These will help   to minimize and mitigate environmental, social and climate impacts 
and  risks  related  to  the  PACT  Project.  In  the  context  of  this  Project,  culturally  appropriate  and 
adapted awareness raising activities are particularly important to properly sensitize the communities 
to the potential benefits and risks on human health and the environment including the precautionary 
measures, roles and responsibilities of stakeholders. 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan is an inclusive process that will be conducted throughout the project life 
cycle. Communicating early and clarifying issues with stakeholders helps manage expectations and 
avoid  risks,  potential  conflict,  and  project  delays.  In  addition,  the  plan  assists  in  managing 
stakeholder expectations which will have a bearing throughout the lifespan of     the project.  
The SEP seeks to define a technically and culturally appropriate approach to consultation, decision 
making and disclosure.  The specific objectives of the SEP are to:  
  Provide  guidance  for  stakeholder  engagement  such  that  it  meets  the  standards  of 
 
International Best Practice;  
Identify  key  stakeholders  that  are  affected,  and/or  able  to  influence  the  Project  and  its 
activities;  
Identify  the  most  effective  methods  and  timing  through  which  to  share  project 
information, and to ensure regular, accessible, transparent and appropriate consultation;  
  Develop  a  stakeholders’  engagement  process  that  provides  stakeholders  with  sufficient 
opportunity to voice their opinions and concerns and be able to influence the project;  
 
  Establish formal grievance redress mechanisms disclosure;  
  Define roles and responsibilities for the implementation of the SEP; and 
  Define  reporting  and  monitoring  measures  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  the  SEP  and 
periodical reviews of the SEP based on findings; 
 SEP prepared for the PACT t Project is aimed for achieving effective stakeholder involvement and 
promoting greater awareness and understanding of issues so that the project is carried out effectively 
within  budget  and  on-time  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  concerned.  Effective  stakeholder  engagement 
develops  a  “social  licence”  to  operate  and  depends  on  mutual  trust,  respect  and  transparent 
communication between PMU and its stakeholders thereby improving its decision-making. 
3 Scope of Application of SEP  
 Stakeholder  Engagement  at  the  Federal  Level:  PMU  at  the  federal  level,  in  this  case  the 
Ministry of Agriculture, will prepare stakeholder’s engagement strategy of the PACT Project.  
Stakeholder Engagement at the Regional Level: Prior to the commencement of stakeholder’s 
engagement  activities,  meetings  shall  be  scheduled  with  relevant  Traditional  Authorities, 
Community Representatives, and local administration at the regional level. The purpose of these 
meetings  will  be  to  refine  the  stakeholder’s  engagement  strategy  to  ensure  that  future 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 2 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
communication  is  effective  between  the  PMUs  at  federal,  regional  and  woreda/community 
levels.   
Engagement  at  Sub  project  Level:  Prior  to  the  commencement  of  stakeholder’s  engagement 
activities  at  the  sub  project  level,  meetings  shall  be  scheduled  with  relevant  Community 
Representatives, and local administration at the sub project site. The purpose of these meetings 
shall be to ensure that future communication is effective and cognizant of all social sensitivities.  
After  commencement  of  the  sub  project,  meeting  will  be  conducted  with  relevant  Community 
Representatives  and  local  administration  at  the  sub  project  site  to  resolve  grievances  that  may 
arise by the community during sub project implementation.   
 4 Stakeholder Engagement Principles 
Stakeholder analysis helps to know the perceptions, interests, need, and influence of actors on the 
project. Identifying the appropriate consultation methodology for each stakeholder throughout the 
project  lifecycle  is  necessary.  The  project  will  apply  the  following  principles  for       stakeholder 
engagement: 
-Openness  and life-cycle approach:  public consultations for the project will continue during 
the whole project lifecycle from preparation through implementation. Stakeholder engagement 
will be free of manipulation, interface, coercion, and intimidation; 
-Informed  participation  and  feedback:  information will be provided and widely distributed 
among  all  stakeholders  in  an  appropriate  format;  conducted  based  on  timely,  relevant, 
understandable  and  accessible  information  related  to  the  project;  opportunities  provided  to 
raise concerns and assure that stakeholder feedback is taken into consideration during decision 
making; 
-Inclusiveness  and  sensitivity:  Identification  of  stakeholders  is  very  sensitive  and  effort 
should  be  made  to  make  it  all  inclusive.    This  effort  will  build  effective  relationships  and 
communication  between  the  project  owner  and  the  project  stakeholders  by  smoothening  the 
participation process. All stakeholders are always encouraged to be involved in the consultation 
process and equal access to information is provided to all stakeholders.  
 Sensitivity  to  stakeholders’  needs  is  the  key  principle  in  the  selection  of  engagement 
stakeholders.   Special attention will be given to  vulnerable  groups, particularly women headed 
households, youth, persons with disability, elderly and ethnic groups with cultural sensitivities 
to ensure project inclusiveness. 
The  project’s  Stakeholder  Engagement  Plan  (SEP)  will  follow  a  set  of  principles  defining  core 
values  underpinning  interactions  with  identified  stakeholders.  Common  principles  based  on 
“International Best Practice” include the following: 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 3 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
  Commitment is demonstrated when the need to understand, engage and identify the 
 
community is recognized and acted upon early in the process; 
Integrity occurs when engagement is conducted in a manner that fosters mutual respect and 
trust; 
  Respect is created when the rights, cultural beliefs, values and interests of stakeholders and 
affected communities are recognized; 
  Transparency is demonstrated when community concerns are responded to in a timely, 
 
open and effective manner; 
Inclusiveness is achieved when broad participation is encouraged and supported by 
appropriate participation opportunities; and 
  Trust is achieved through open and meaningful dialogue that respects and upholds a 
community’s beliefs, values and opinions 
5 Key Elements of SEP  
The key elements of the SEP are: 
  Stakeholder identification and analysis 
  Grievance Redress Mechanism  
  Monitoring and Reporting 
  Stakeholders Engagement Planning 
5.1   Stakeholders Identification and Analysis 
(a) Identifying Stakeholders 
In order to develop an effective SEP, it is necessary to determine who the stakeholders are and 
understand  their  needs  and  expectations  for  engagement,  and  their  priorities  and  objectives  in 
relation  to  the  Project.  This  information  is  then  used  to  tailor  engagement  to  each  type  of 
stakeholder. As part of this process it is particularly important to identify individuals and groups 
who  may  find  it  more  difficult  to  participate  and  those  who  may  be  differentially  or 
disproportionately affected by the project because of their marginalized or vulnerable status. 
Stakeholders for the purpose of this project have been and will continue to be identified on a 
continuous basis by identifying those people and institutions that have an interest in the 
successful planning and execution of the project. These include those;  
High  interest  and  high  influence  stakeholders:  The  plan  should  fully  engage  this  group  and 
apply all effort to ensure that they are satisfied and fully informed of the project at all times. This 
can  be  done  by  focusing  efforts  on  these  groups  of  stakeholders  throughout  the  project  cycle, 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 4 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
giving them the importance they deserve, involving them in project governance decision making 
bodies and engaging them and consulting them regularly as well as providing timely feedback.  
The engagement  plan targeting these stakeholders  shall be incorporated into  the project  annual 
work plan. 
High  interest  and  medium/low  influence  stakeholders:  The  high  interest  and  low  influence 
stakeholders should be kept informed, ensuring that no major issues arise because of the project.  
Engagement  is  directly  proportional  to  impact  and  influence,  and  as  the  extent  of  impact  of  a 
project on a stakeholder group increases, or the extent of influence of a particular stakeholder on 
a  project  increases,  engagement  with  that  particular  stakeholder  group  should  intensify  and 
deepen in terms of the frequency and the intensity of the engagement method used. 
Affected Groups 
Affected  Parties  are  those  groups  of  people  and/or  institutions  that  are  directly  influenced 
(actually  or  potentially)  by  the  project  and/or  have  been  identified  as  most  susceptible  to 
potential  risks  and  impacts  associated  with  project  and  who  need  to  be  closely  engaged  in 
project implementation.  
 Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups 
Disadvantaged  or  vulnerable  individuals  or  groups  are  those  peoples  or  groups  highly 
vulnerable to potential project impacts and often do not have a voice to express their concerns 
or understand the impact and risk of the project. They may be disproportionately be impacted 
or  further  disadvantaged  by  the  project  as  compared  with  any  other  groups  due  to  their 
vulnerable status, and  usually require special arrangement to ensure their equal representation 
in  the  consultation  and  decision-making  process  associated  with  the  project.  Their 
vulnerability  may  stem  from  person’s  origin,  gender,  age,  health  condition,  including 
HIV/AIDS  status,  disability,  economic  deficiency  and  financial  insecurity,  lack  of  assets, 
disadvantaged status in the community (e.g. minority groups), dependence on other individuals 
or  natural  resources,  etc.  Furthermore,  Key  focus  of the  project  is  to  ensure  that  vulnerable 
groups including historically underserved people can access project benefits. The stakeholder 
engagement  process  shall  ensure  that  their  views  are  incorporated  in  project  design  and 
implementation, and those risks particularly affecting women and girls are adequately assessed 
and mitigated.  
Awareness raising and stakeholder engagement with disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals 
or groups on the project must consider such groups’ or individuals’ sensitivities, concerns and 
cultural        differences to ensure a full understanding of project activities and benefits. Engagement 
with  these  vulnerable  groups  and  individuals  often  requires  the  application  of  specific 
measures  and  assistance  aimed  at  the  facilitation  of  their  participation  in  the  project  related 
decision making so that their awareness and input to the overall process are commensurate to 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 5 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
those of the other stakeholders.  
Measures that should be taken to handle issues related to vulnerable group Include:  
  Support for vulnerable groups to restore and rebuild their lives through improved 
access to food and primary health care; this activity will provide family food rations 
and encourage pregnant and lactating women and malnourished children under 5 to 
access health care;  
  School feeding as a safety net to restore attendance and learning, which have been 
adversely affected by the project t, and to reduce drop-outs among primary 
schoolchildren; 
  Ensure that persons belonging to vulnerable groups have, on an equal footing with 
others, effective access to healthcare; 
  Offer free basic services to low-income workers and their families; 
Special  consideration  should  be  made  to  handle  issues  related  to  the  elderly  and  disabled 
persons.  The  elderly  and  disabled  persons  have  no  strength  in  the  community  consultation 
meetings and their voices and concerns are not normally heard. Therefore there will be no body 
that will attend their concerns. These groups of people do not have influence over the project but 
could be high risk and high impact receptors of the project. To address the concerns of this group 
of people there will be the need to  make  special  arrangement to  manage the risks they  will be 
encountered.  Their  concerns  should  be  handled  and  addressed  by  independent  entity  such  as 
NGO  and  other  humanitarian  organizations.  Vulnerable  people  such  as  these  ones  are  weak  to 
work  and  sustain  their  life.  Free  housing  and  pension  should  therefore  be  provided  to  sustain 
their life.      
(b)Potential Project stakeholders 
Key stakeholders of the PACT Project are shown in the table below. 
Table 5.1:  Key Stakeholders 
Category/Level  
Stakeholder 
Rationale for Engagement  
Officials in the 
relevant federal/ 
regional  
Government offices 
IFAD 
Project Steering Committee  
Ministry of Agriculture 
Funding Agency, to be engaged for 
policy direction, need to be informed 
on project progress  
Overall strategic direction and 
governance of the project  
Information on project policy 
guidelines, financing issues from lead 
agency, progress update from 
implementing partners  
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 6 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
National Meteorology institute  
Relevant regional government 
offices 
Community Representatives 
- Individual 
Farmers/Entrepreneurs  
- Farmer groups/associations 
Potential project 
beneficiaries/Project 
affected population  
Other 
providers  
Service 
Temporary construction workers 
and subcontractors  
Technical guidance on climatic and 
weather information including 
prevailing and long term forecasting 
Provide  support in the implementation 
of project activities 
To be engaged as the key stakeholder 
of the project and make sure their 
voice is heard and concerns 
incorporated into the project design 
Information related the project  
contract,  workers health and safety  
issues, training, grievance procedure, 
code of conduct 
The  above  list  is  not  exhaustive.  As  the  Programme  gets  underway,  the  PMU  will  develop  a 
detailed SEP identifying emerging and all possible stakeholders, their specific information needs 
and  the  appropriate  modes  of  consultation  as  well  as  feedback  mechanisms.  The  consultation 
process  shall  ensure  that  all  those  identified  as  stakeholders  are  conferred  with.  Active 
engagement  of  all  stakeholders  will  facilitate  a  common  understanding  of  the  specific 
opportunities  and  constraints  which  can  be  the  foundation  for  deeper  harmonization  and 
coordination of the various support services.    
(c)  Stakeholder Engagement Considerations 
The following considerations should be made when planning for stakeholder engagement:  
Resourcing  Stakeholder  Engagement:  Stakeholder  engagement  requires  resources  as  it  takes 
time  to  develop  and  build  trust  based  relationships  with  stakeholders.  Relationships  with 
stakeholders  should  develop  and  grow,  and  that  these  relationships  should  be  sustained. 
Additional stakeholders might be identified that also want to be engaged. Some stakeholders will 
need  to  be  educated  about  the  concept  of  engagement  itself,  as  well  as  on  the  complex  issues 
requiring  specialised  and  technical  knowledge.  These  demands  can  increase  the  cost  of 
consultation required to meet external expectations.    
Managing expectations: Stakeholders can have unrealistically high expectations of benefits that 
may  accrue  to  them  from  a  project  and  as  such  the  PMU  must  be  clear  on  what  they  can  and 
cannot do, establishing a clear understanding of their roles and responsibilities. The engagement 
processes  should  provide  PMU  with  an  opportunity  to  develop  relationships  with  stakeholders 
and potential project partners.  
Securing  stakeholder  participation:  Cultural  norms  and  values  can  prevent  stakeholders  from 
freely participating in meetings. Often there are conflicting demands within a community, and it 
can  be  challenging  for  a  project  to  identify  stakeholders  who  are  representative  of  common 
interests. There may be need to employ local officers who are sensitive to local power dynamics.   
Consultation fatigue: Stakeholders can easily get tired of consultation processes especially when 
promises are unfulfilled, and their opinions and concerns are not taken into consideration. Often 
stakeholders  feel  their  lives  are  not  improving  as  a  result  of  a  project  and  this  can  lead  to 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 7 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
consultation meetings being used as an area to voice complaints and grievances about the lack of 
development.  Implementing  Partners  must  not  make  promises  to  stakeholders;  expectations 
should  be  managed  through  dissemination  of  accurate  information.    Opinions  for  stakeholders 
should be treated as feedback to the project and other project partners and specialists.  
(d) Stakeholders Analysis 
Once  stakeholders  are  identified  by  directly  and/or  indirectly  project-affected  parties  the  next 
step will be to assess the level of stakeholder interest and support for the project. The assessment 
shall  be  geared  toward  identifying:  I)  stakeholders'  interests,  ii)  areas  of  potential  risks  and 
misunderstandings, iii) mechanisms to positively influence other stakeholders, iv) key people to 
be  informed  about  the  project  during  the  preparation  and  implementation  phases  and,  v) 
negatively impacted stakeholders as well as their adverse effects on the project. 
The PMU through its implementation partners shall continuously classify stakeholders based on: 
I) their power to influence and their interest on the project, ii) the legitimacy of each 
stakeholder’s relationship with the project, and iii) the urgency of the stakeholder’s claim on the 
project activities, potential risks and impacts. 
On the basis of this analysis, the communication strategy and the coordination mechanism to be 
developed  by  the  PMU  shall  incorporate  strategies  to  engage  the  ‘High  Interest  and  High 
Influence stakeholders ‘and the ‘high Interest and Low Influence’ stakeholders.   
High interest  and high influence stakeholders: The plan should be to  fully engage this group 
and apply all effort to ensure that they are satisfied and fully informed of the project at all times. 
This  can  be  done  by  focusing  efforts  on  these  groups  of  stakeholders  throughout  the  project 
cycle, giving them the importance they deserve, involving them in project governance decision 
making  bodies  and  engaging  them  and  consulting  them  regularly  as  well  as  providing  timely 
feedback.    The  engagement  plan  targeting  these  stakeholders  shall  be  incorporated  into  the 
project annual work plan. 
High  interest  and  medium/low  influence  stakeholders:  The  high  interest  and  low  influence 
stakeholders should be kept informed, ensuring that no major issues arise because of the project.  
Figure5.1: Basic Stakeholder Influence and Interest Chart 
f
o
e
c
n
e
u
l
f
n
i
/
r
e
w
o
P
r
e
d
l
o
h
e
k
a
t
S
Keep satisfied 
Closely engage 
Consider 
Keep informed  
Level of Interest of stakeholder 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 8 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
The  project  will  maintain  this  group’s  interest  involving  them  in  the  implementation 
arrangements, tapping into their interest and keep them in the loop. 
(e)  Level  of  Impact,  Influence  and  Interest  of  Stakeholders  at  the  Federal 
Regional and Sub project levels 
The table below indicates level of Impacts, influence and Interest of stakeholders at the federal, 
regional and subproject levels 
Table 5.2: Level of Impacts, influence and Interest of stakeholders at the federal, regional and 
subproject levels.
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 9 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
What is 
important to the 
stakeholder? 
How could the 
stakeholder 
contribute to 
the project? 
How could the 
stakeholder 
block the 
project? 
Strategy for engaging 
the stakeholder 
Stakeholder 
Name 
Impacts 
Influence 
To what 
degree How 
much does the 
project impact 
them? (Low, 
Medium, 
High) 
How 
much 
influence 
do they 
have over 
the 
project? 
(Low, 
Medium, 
High) 
Ministry of 
Agriculture 
High 
High 
Successful 
implementation and 
development  of the 
PACT Project  
Timely availing  
the necessary 
resources and 
social, 
environmental 
and climate  
safeguard 
experts   to the 
PACT Project 
As project 
proponent and 
owner has  all the 
leverage to modify  
or delete sub 
projects in case there 
will be  serious 
environmental and 
social issues as a 
result of the  
implementation of 
the subproject 
Oversee to ensure 
continuous consultation is  
carried out  with the 
project affected 
population and proper  
implementation of the 
LIP, SEP, ESIA and RAP 
of the sub projects 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 10 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
High 
High 
Federal 
Environmental 
Protection 
Authority 
Ensuring sub project 
is Implemented in 
an environmentally 
sound and socially 
sustainable way. 
Supervise 
climate issues 
related to the 
PACT project 
are properly 
addressed. 
Regional States   High 
High 
Job creation and 
improved standard of  
the project affected 
population of the 
regions  
In cooperation 
with the 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  
Facilitate the 
smooth 
implementation  
of  PACT  sub 
projects by 
allocating 
budget for 
resettlers 
As regulatory body 
it has all the 
mandate to stop the 
sub project in case 
it is implemented 
in environmentally  
and socially  
unsustainable way 
Continued reporting to 
the project owner and 
the IFADduring 
planning and  
implementation of sub 
projects for further 
correction and 
amendment of project 
Continuous  reporting and 
consultation on 
implementation  of the 
ESIA and RAP of sub 
projects 
As regulatory body it 
has all the mandate 
to stop the sub 
project in case 
Project  is 
implemented 
contradicting 
regional plan 
Regional 
Environmental 
Offices 
High  
High 
Supervise PACT sub 
projects are 
implemented  in an  
environmentally and 
socially sustainable 
way 
The regional 
regulatory body 
will allocate 
budget to 
supervise  
social and 
environmental 
compliance of 
the sub projects 
As regulatory body it 
has the  mandate to 
stop  subprojects  in 
case the project is 
implemented 
contradicting the 
federal/regional 
environmental 
management 
Continued reporting and 
consultation on 
implementation issues of 
the ESIA and RAP 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 11 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
at the regional 
level 
guidelines  
High 
High 
Project 
affected 
population 
(PAPs) at  
(Sub Project 
level 
Medium 
Medium 
Community 
Representatives, 
including the 
vulnerable group   
such as the 
elderly, 
handicap, 
women, youth 
and PAPs 
Proper 
compensation  and 
livelihood 
restoration 
Delivering positive 
impacts of the project 
such as job 
creation, enhanced 
commercial and 
economic activities, 
livelihood restoration 
and well being of the  
community  
Cooperate to 
sub projects 
are 
implemented 
according to 
project plan 
The community 
representatives 
can create a 
bridge of 
communication 
with the 
community to 
positively 
contribute 
towards the 
project 
Can resist 
displacement 
from the project 
site 
Continuous 
consultation and 
engagement during the 
project cycle 
Negative attitude of 
the community in 
the project area can 
hamper the 
construction and 
operation of the 
Proposed sub project  
Active and contentious 
engagement with 
community 
representatives 
During all stages of the 
project development 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 12 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
6 Grievance Redress Mechanisms 
6.1 Institutional Setup of the GRM for PACT Project  
 GRM  provides  forum  to  discuss  grievances  by  the  PAPs      and  attempt  will  be  made  to 
reach  to  a  consensus  between  the  project  owner  and  the  PAPs.  It  is  essential  to  establish 
committee  composed  of  local  Kebele  administration  or  council  member;  persons 
represented  from  the  subproject  beneficiaries,  community  elders,  members  of  local  youth 
and  women  groups.  This  committee  will  help  to  resolve  issues  and  complaints  of  the 
project  affected  persons  and  make  the  process  faster  and  cost  effective.  If  the  complaint 
could  not  be resolved through  this   means the project  affected person shall be advised to 
present complaint to the formal Grievance Redress and Management Committee (GRMC), 
which operates at the Woreda/kebele Level. 
The  Woreda/Kebele  Level  GRMC  shall  be  composed  of  representative  of 
the 
Woreda/Kebele  Council,  the  project  focal  person,  reprehensive  from  the  project 
beneficiaries,  representatives  from  the  elder  groups  and  religious  institutions  and 
representatives from  youth,  women group and from  the Woreda/Kebele Labor and Social 
Affair office. If the person or group who file the grievance is not satisfied by decision made 
by Woreda/Kebele Grievance Redress Management Committee (GRMC), the cases shall be 
referred  for  review  and  reconsideration  to  Grievance  Redress  Committees  that  will  be 
established  at  the  highest  level.  The    GRMC  at  the  higher  level  (may  be  at  the  regional 
level)shall  be  composed  of  representative  from  the  project,  representatives  from 
beneficiaries,  elders,  traditional  and  religious  institutions,  youth,  women  group  and  
representative from   Labor and Social  Affair office at  the regional  level.  If the  grievance 
could  not  be  resolved  at  the  second  highest  level,  then  affected  party  shall  be  advised  to 
take the cases to the regular court for final decision. 
Grievances  can  also  be  resolved  through  other  means  using  the  existing  l e g a l   and 
administrative  structures C o u r t s ,  Police,  Anti  -Corruption  Office and H u m a n   Rights 
Commission if it is the choice of the affected individual to resolve the grievance that way. 
Project  affected  parties  shall  also  be  informed  about  the  existing  legal  and  formal 
mechanisms  and  be  allowed  to  make  use  of  them  when  and  wherever  they  find  it 
necessary.  
6.2 Grievance Redress Hierarchy 
Sub-project Committee Level 
a) 
The GRM committee at the woreda level shall record compliments and hear cases as soon 
as complaints are submitted to them by project-affected groups/individuals. After recording 
and hearing the complaint, the committee may offer proposal to settle grievance. If project 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 13 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
affected party agreed with proposed resolution mechanism and satisfied with the resolution, 
the case will be closed at this level. If not, the case will be referred to the Woreda/Kebele 
Grievance Redress and Management Committee (WRMC) for resolution. 
b)Woreda/Kebele level. 
The  Woreda/Kebele  Grievance  Redress  and  Management  Committee  (WGRMC)  shall 
hear,  record,  and  investigate  complaint  cases  as  submitted  by  project  affected  person  as 
well as referrals from the subproject implementation committees. If project affected person 
is satisfied with the resolution, the case will be closed. If not, the case shall be referred to 
the  next  higher  level  grievance  redress  and  management  committee.  Members  of  the 
WGRMC will include representatives of women, youth groups, elected PAPs, Community 
Based  Organization  /Faith  Based  Organization  representative,  Representative  of  the 
community  social  support  committee,  and  Member  of  the  area  land  management 
committee.  
c)   Court  
If the complaint could not be resolved by the WGRMC the person affected has the right to 
establish  his  case  at  the  court.  If  the  project-affected  households/person  accepts  the 
resolution the case will be closed at this level. The decision made by the Court of Law will 
be final. Cases of  e criminal in nature, such as physical abuse,  GBV, sexual exploitation; 
child  labor,  theft  and  corruption  are  different  from  the  other  project  related  complaints. 
Complains of this nature shall be handled in a special way within the GRM to ensure that 
the  information  is  treated  separately  and  shall  be  immediately  reported  to  the  police  for 
further actions. Communities shall also be sensitized to report criminal cases directly to the 
police. 
6.3 Grievance Redress Process 
The  GRM  process  of the PACT Project will c o n s i s t   of  five  key  activities,  which 
will  be  performed  in managing the grievances forwarded by PAPs. These key activities 
include: 
a)  Complaint uptake 
b)  Complaint assessment and 
analysis 
c)  Resolution and closure 
d)  Grievance Registry, Reporting and Follow-up   
6.4 Complaints Uptake 
The proposed GRM for the PACT Project will provide multiple options for submission 
of grievances by project-affected persons in order to minimize barriers from the project 
owner from forwarding their cases. These options include the following: 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 14 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
(a) Face to face: This may be verbal or written submissions done at any time through 
face to face interactions with members of committees, program officials, local 
administration structures. 
(b) Grievance box: Grievance boxes placed in strategic places of project implementation 
sites or communities where project affected parties would drop in their grievances at any 
time.  
(c) Phone Call or SMS: This will be at project affected party’s own discretion and 
capability. Where possible, details of relevant immediate contact persons in the project 
area shall be made available. 
6.5 Complaint Assessment and Analysis 
When a complaint is received, a maximum of fifteen Days (15) days will be provided for 
the GRMC to access, analyze and respond to the affected person. This is so to make sure 
that grievances/complaints are resolved as early as possible. 
Once complaints received, the GRM committees  shall assess the issues to ascertain the 
following: 
•  Whether the complaint or grievance is related to the project or not,  
•  Whether the case can be ably handled at their level or another, 
•  Whether  the  case  can  effectively  be  handled  through  the  project  GRM  or 
alternative mechanisms, 
Where possible, provision of instant feedback will be made depending on the nature of 
the cases. If for whatever reason the committee determines that it cannot ably handle the 
complaint,  PAPs  shall  be  advised  to  channel  their  complaints  to  the  right  alternative 
grievance redress options or institutions. Otherwise, it will proceed to hear the cases and 
make necessary investigations to establish the truth of the matter. 
6. 6 Resolution and Closure 
Where  a  resolution  has  been  reached  and  the  affected  party  accepts  the  resolution,  the 
affected  party  along  with  two  members  of  the  GRMC  members  should  to  sign  the 
resolution  and  closure  section  in  the  Grievance  Log  and  Resolution  Form...  This  shall 
signify that the complaint or grievance that has been presented has been fully discussed 
and closed. 
6.7 GRM Registry, Reporting and Follow up  
All  grievances  received  will  be  publicly  entered  into  an  accessible  recording  system 
known as the GRM registry  that shall be  maintained  at  all the  GRM  committee levels. 
The log and resolution form shall be in triplicate. For any case heard, closed or referred, 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 15 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
a copy of the case shall be sent to the upper and lower levels for records.  
If the case is handled and resolved at the project level, a copy of the resolution shall be 
sent  to  the  Woreda  and  another  copy  shall  be  sent  to  woreda  level  Grievance  Redress 
Committee to notify them how the referred case is handled and resolved. This will enable 
Woreda/Kebele level committees to keep a registry of all cases recorded and handled by 
any GRM committee at  that level. Using this information, the GRM monitoring officer 
will  be  able  to  generate  a  matrix  of  cases  and  agreed  resolutions  for  follow-ups  and 
monitor if the resolutions is properly implemented. 
6.8   provisions for Management of GBV/SEA 
SEA/SH  GM  Need  to  be  separately  treated  from  the  GRM  of  the  other  project  affected 
community. When attempting to redress grievance of GRV/SEA confidentiality creating specific 
referral networks or a survivor centered approach is very important.  Only grievances related to 
SEA/SH allegedly committed by any “individual fall under the mandate of a SEA/SH GM. The 
mandate of a SEA/SH GM is limited to: (i) referring , any survivor who has filed a complaint to 
relevant  services,  (ii)  determining  whether  the  allegation  falls  within  the  IFAD  definition  of 
SEA/SH, and (iii) noting whether the complainant  alleges the  grievance  was perpetrated by an 
individual associated with IFAD project.  
Guiding Principles for the Management of SEA/SH GM 
1. Accessibility, transparency, and non-discrimination:  A SEA/SH GM must be accessible to 
all  potential  complainants  and  its  existence  and  operation  should  be  transparent  to  the 
community in which it is situated. SEA/SH GM accessibility should be sensitive to gender, age, 
disability, and other potential contextual barriers. Adequate information about the existence and 
operation  of  the  SEA/SH  GM  must  be  provided  in  a  language  and  manner  accessible  to  any 
potential project-affected person. The principle of non-discrimination should be respected when 
receiving, processing, and referring the allegation.  
2.  Survivor-centered  approach: All prevention and response actions must balance the respect 
for  due  process  with  the  requirements  of  a  survivor-centered  approach  under  which  the 
survivor’s  safety,  confidentiality,  choices,  needs,  and  well-being  remain  central.  The  SEA/SH 
GM  should  also  include  processes  that  protect  the  rights  of  the  alleged  perpetrator,  including 
confidentiality.  
3.  Safety:  The  survivor’s  physical  and  psychological  safety  as  well  as  that  of  their  family 
remains a priority at all times.  
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 16 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
4. Confidentiality: Confidentiality should cover all information in a complaint that may lead to 
the  identification  of  a  specific  incident  or  those  affected  by  the  allegation.  This  applies  to  the 
survivor and witnesses, but also the identity of the alleged perpetrator. Confidentiality is a key to 
protecting  survivor’s  and  witnesses’  safety.  Confidentiality  requires  that  information  gathered 
about  the  allegation  not  be  shared  with  persons  or  entities  unless  there  is  explicit  permission 
granted by the complainant. Even in such cases, information-sharing should take place on a strict 
need-to-know  basis,  limited  to  essential  information,  and  based  on  pre-established  information 
sharing protocols which are in line with best practices for the handling of SEA/SH cases. Reports 
of  grievances  to  the  Bank  and  PIU  shall  only  include  summary  of  allegations  based  on  pre-
established information sharing protocols. 
7 Monitoring and Reporting 
Monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  SEP  process  is  vital  as  it  ensures  that  the  PMU  is  able  to 
respond to identified issues and alter the schedule and nature of engagement activities to make 
them more effective. As part of the SEP, a mechanism for providing feedback to the stakeholders 
on  their  particular  information  needs  to  be  set  up.  In  addition,  the  SEP  will  include  means  for 
monitoring  the  effectiveness  of  the  public  consultation  processes  and  outcomes  from 
consultations,  and  for  determining  where  further  action  may  be  necessary  in  regard  to 
engagement.  
The  environmental  and  social  safeguards  specialists  in  the  PMU  will  be  responsible  to  ensure 
that the SEP is implemented throughout the life of the project. They will also be responsible for 
communicating and reporting on all stakeholder matters to the Project Director.  
Monitoring  of  the  stakeholder  engagement  process  allows  the  efficacy  of  the  process  to  be 
evaluated. Amongst others the following monitoring activities will be implemented: 
  During 
the 
engagement 
activities: 
short-term  monitoring 
to 
allow 
for 
adjustments/improvements to be made during engagement; and 
  Following  completion  of  all  engagement  activities:  review  of  outputs  at  the  end  of 
engagement to evaluate the effectiveness of the SEP as implemented. 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 17 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
8 Stakeholders Engagement Planning 
Prior  to  the  commencement  of  stakeholder’s  engagement  activities,  meetings  shall  be  scheduled 
with  relevant  Traditional Authorities, Community Representatives, and local administration  at  the 
sub project site. The purpose of these meetings shall be to refine stakeholder’s engagement strategy 
and ensure that future communication is effective and cognizant of all social sensitivities.  
The  PMU  will  establish  an  operational  plan  in  line  with  proposed  project  activities  to  ensure  the 
participation and engagement of the stakeholders, ensuring that each group gets involved as defined 
and receive the agreed information.  The plan must ensure a balance in the involvement and benefits 
between  different  gender  segments  and  the  participation  of  vulnerable  groups.    Regular  meetings 
will  be  scheduled  with  the  representatives  of  the  groups  of  actors  involved  in  the  project,  for  the 
revision  of  the  plan,  activity  progress  and  necessary  adjustments  according  changes  during  the 
execution of the project.  
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 18 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Table 8.1: Preliminary Stakeholder Engagement Plan at the Sub project Level 
Objective 
Target Stakeholders 
Engagement 
Technique 
When 
Notification of forthcoming public events or 
commencement of specific activities. General description 
of the Project and its benefits to the stakeholders. 
To brief key stakeholders and introduce them to the  
purpose, nature, scale and duration of the project  and 
define the roles they should play during the 
implementation of the project and how these relate to the 
community terms of opportunities and threats 
-  All projected affected 
parties 
-  Other potential 
stakeholders such as 
NGOs, offices 
responsible for 
environment; 
-  Concerned Individuals 
; 
Media; 
Community meeting/ 
Notification letter at 
the worked notice 
board, 
Planning 
stage 
-  Steering Committee 
members 
Sharing Project 
Design Documents 
Planning 
stage  
-  Implementing 
Government Partners 
-  PMU Staff 
-  Coordinators 
-  NGOs 
Group physical and 
virtual social 
meetings 
WhatsApp group 
meetings 
News brief on social 
media, 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 19 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Local traditional and 
political leaders, Local 
district offices, 
beneficiary community 
representatives, Farmer 
groups/associations 
Planning 
stage  
Community Meeting;  
Use of National 
media, 
Use church /mosque 
leaders for 
information  
dissemination  
To consult key  stakeholders on the next steps in relation 
to project activity work plan 
Implementing Partners 
Commodity coordinators 
Group physical and 
virtual meetings 
Throughout 
the project 
To create mechanism for smooth communication with 
project implementers, stakeholders and with the project 
affected parties to inform time and venue of any 
proposed public consultation meetings 
Environmental and 
Social specialists 
-  Steering Committee 
-  Implementing 
WhatsApp groups 
Project Information 
brochure;, 
Throughout 
the project 
Government Partners 
-Project brochure; 
-  Political and 
Traditional Leadership 
-email; 
-flyers, 
-  Community 
representatives, 
Farmer 
groups/associations, 
project Beneficiaries 
-announcement 
through radios 
-through tribe chiefs, 
churches and  
mosques leaders;  
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 20 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Information on the process and means by which 
grievances can be raised and will be addressed. 
To create awareness on the Potential  risks and impacts 
of the project on local communities  
To allow the communities to provide feedback (views 
and opinions) 
Steering Committee, 
Implementing Partners, 
Financial Institutions 
Traditional and Political 
leadership, beneficiary 
community  
-  Project affected 
parties(PAPs 
-  Present information 
on GRM and other 
project specific 
reports 
Planning  
Throughout 
the project  
Technical Fact 
Sheets,   project 
website,  emails, 
bulletins, training 
participating 
Institutions’ staff,  
-  Farmers Groups, 
Project Beneficiaries 
-  Affected community 
Throughout 
the project 
Public consultations, 
focal group 
discussions, social 
media 
     subsequent 
surveys to monitor 
impacts,  Training/ 
awareness creation 
and education for the 
specific members of 
the communities,  
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 21 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Cluster Coordinators 
Commodity coordinators 
Environmental and 
Social specialists 
Traditional leaders 
Affected community  
Women and Youth  
Detailed and careful identification of additional project 
affected people/HH with special attention on vulnerable 
people  
Guidance on how to handle issues related to special 
target 
Groups especially the vulnerable parties likely to be 
affected. 
Information on Occupational Health & Safety regulations  Staff / workers at project 
sites and infrastructure 
Information on emerging health issues e.g. Covid-19 new 
variant, vaccines etc.  
Staff / workers at project 
sites , Implementing 
Partners 
Field visits, 
community meetings, 
Analysis and 
adoption of 
beneficiary database  
Meetings, Expert 
lectures, Reports, 
visit similar project 
sites  to share 
experience on how to  
handle  especial target 
groups  
Staff newsletters, 
bulletin boards, signs 
in offices; email, 
website, meetings 
with management, 
staff sensitization & 
training 
Staff newsletters, 
bulletin boards, signs 
in offices; email, 
website, meetings 
Planning 
stage  
Throughout 
the project  
Throughout 
the project  
Throughout 
the project  
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 22 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Community  
Disseminate information on emerging climatic conditions 
(floods and cyclones etc.) 
Implementing Partners  
Local traditional and 
political leaders, Local 
district offices, 
beneficiary community 
representatives, Farmer 
groups/associations 
Sharing Implementation progress/milestones, experience, 
lessons learnt  
 Lead Agency, 
Implementing Partners  
Project beneficiaries  
with management, 
staff sensitization & 
training  
Seminars, Training 
Workshops, News 
Briefs, Technical 
Working papers, 
Technical Fact Sheets 
District Extension 
services,  workshops, 
Training of 
Representatives, One-
on-One mentorship  
Reports, Project 
Tracker, Emails, 
Intergovernmental 
meetings and 
consultations  
Build partnerships 
through meetings, 
seminars, workshops 
Throughout 
the project  
Throughout 
the project  
Periodically  
Periodically 
Monitoring multi-level impacts of the project  
All stakeholders  
Participatory Surveys, 
FGDs, field visits 
Periodically 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 23 
Second Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Employment opportunities for women and youths in 
different agro commodity value chains  
Women, Youths 
Distribute  non-technical  awareness  raising  and  publicity 
information 
Media 
District Agricultural 
Offices Website, 
public media, bulletin 
boards, public 
consultations, phone 
messages 
When 
available  
Press Statements 
Periodically 
                                                                      Integrated Disaster Risk Management Plan 
Page 24 
