Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
1D1F
One District One Factory
AAFORD
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development Project
ASWG
Agricultural Sector Working Group
AU
BAC
BoG
BP
BRC
CAADP
CHRAJ
DA
DAES
DDA
DSF
EFA
ESRF
ESS
FARA
FI
FMA
FNS
FSRP
FY
GADP
GAIP
GASIP
GBV
GCF
GCX
GEA
GEWE
GFD
African Union
Business Advisory Centre
Bank of Ghana
Business Plan
Business Resource Centre
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme
(Ghana) Commission on Human Rights and Justice
District Assembly
Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services
District Department of Agriculture
District Stakeholder Forum
Economic and Financial Analysis
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems Exposed to COVID 19
Environmental and Social Safeguards
Agribusiness Learning Alliance
Financing Institution
Financial Management Assessment
Food and Nutrition Security
West Africa Food Systems Resilience Programme
Financial Year
Ghana Agricultural Development Plan
Ghana Agricultural Investment Programme
Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme
Gender Based Violence
Green Climate Fund
Ghana Commodities Exchange
Ghana Enterprises Agency
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment
Ghana Federation of the Disabled
GGWUP
GCF Great Green Wall Umbrella Programme (GGWUP).
GHG
greenhouse gas
GIRSAL
Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing Agricultural Lending
GJSP
GoG
GRM
GSIVS
HH
HHM
ICO
IFAD
IFR
Ghana Jobs and Skills Project
Government of Ghana
Grievance Redress Mechanism
Gender, Social Inclusion and Vulnerability Specialist
household
household methodologies
IFAD Country Office
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Interim Financial Report
IGREENFIN
Inclusive Green Financing Initiative
IPRM
KAP
Integrated Project Risk Matrix
Knowledge Attitude Practice
LCU
LEAP
LF
Local Currency Unit
Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty
Logical Framework Matrix
LULUCF
Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry
MDDW
MESTI
MIYCN
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women
Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation
maternal, infant, and young child nutrition
MLGDRD
Ministry of Local Government, Decentralisation and Rural Development
MNDPF
Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework
MOA
Memorandum of Agreement
MOAP-NW
Market Oriented Agriculture Project
MoF
MoFA
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Food and Agriculture
MoGCSP
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection
MoTI
MOU
MPI
MSME
MSP
MTEF
NBSSI
NCD
Ministry of Trade and Industry
Memorandum of Understanding
Multidimensional Poverty Index
Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise
multi-stakeholder platform
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
National Board for Small Scale Industries
non-communicable disease
NCSPG
Nutrition Cross-Sectoral Planning Group
NDC
NFIDS
NNP
NOTUS
NRGP
NRM
PAP
PERD
PFI
PFJ
PIP
PPA
PRM
Nationally Determined Contribution
National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy
National Nutrition Policy
No Objection Tracking and Utilities System
Northern Rural Growth Programme
Natural Resource Management
project affected person
Planting for Export and Rural Development
Participating Financial Institutions
Planting for Foods and Jobs
Productive Investments Project
Public Procurement Authority
Procurement Risk Matrix
PROSPER
Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
PWD
RAFIP
RCB
Person with Disability
Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme
Rural Commercial Bank
REACH
Resilience Against Climate Change
REP
RFSP
RI
RTIMP
SBCC
SCF
SCGV
Rural Enterprises Programme
Rural Financial Services Project
Rural Institution
Roots and Tubers Improvement & Marketing Programme
Social Behaviour Change Communication
Standard Conversion Factor
Safeguards, Climate, Gender and Vulnerability
SDSN
SFEA
Sustainable Development Solutions Network (UN)
Smallholder Farmer E-Commerce Access
UNSDP
UN Sustainable Development Partnership
VAC
WEF
Violence Against Children
World Economic Forum
WSMT
Water and Sanitation Management Team
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/15
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
1 Strategic context
$14,964,000
N/A
$14,964,000
National context. Ghana is a lower-middle-income country in a relatively strong economic state despite dependence on the export of a limited number of commodities and vulnerability to commodity price
shocks and climate change. As for all countries, the impact of COVID-19 has resulted in economic slowdown and socioeconomic challenges. Performance towards the achievement of the 17 SDGs,
particularly SDG 1 (No poverty) and SDG 2 (Zero hunger), is still lagging although some improvement is registered; the country is rated 114th among the 165 UN Member States (SDSN Sustainable
Development Report 2021). Poverty, food insecurity and nutrition insecurity rates remain high; 23% of Ghana’s population are monetary poor and 8.2% live in extreme poverty. The regions of the Northern
Belt (and some in the Middle Belt) have the highest prevalence of poverty, up to 62% in the rural areas. There are persistent pockets of poverty, food insecurity, undernourishment, malnutrition, and
vulnerability to climate change. Ghana has a prevalence of undernourishment of 7%. Moderate or severe food insecurity stands at 49.6%. Persons with disabilities represent 3% of the total population. Most
small-scale farming communities are operating low input-low output rainfed farming systems with small ruminants on a heavily depleted natural resource base, effectively cut off from the national economy.
Constraints on the sector are compounded by the negative effects of climate change, such as increasing dry spells and rising temperatures. The prevailing systems are neither financially nor environmentally
sustainable, leaving many communities trapped in poverty. GoG is highly supportive of agricultural development with increasing policy emphasis on private sector approaches at all levels including strategic
investments in value chain structures.
IFAD mainstreaming priorities. (1) Gender. Women constitute 58% of the rural labour force. Ghana is ranked 117 out of 156 countries in the WEF Global Gender Gap Report. Traditional culture and
entrenched gender inequality limit women’s access to resources and participation in community decision-making. GoG adopted the National Gender Policy (2015) to mainstream gender, women‘s
empowerment and social protection concerns into national development processes. A Gender and Agricultural Development Strategy was developed in 2015. (2) Youth. The country has a youth bulge
(15‑35 years of age) with 57% of the total population being below the age of 25. The rural community comprises 56% youth compared to 44% in urban contexts. Youth unemployment and underemployment
reached 12% and 50% respectively by 2020, resulting in growing youth migration from rural areas to urban centres. Despite initiatives to provide jobs, capacity-building and opportunities for youth from GoG
and development partners, the outreach to youth from semi-subsistence smallholder families remains limited. (3) People with disabilities. Statistically, people with disabilities (PWDs) make up 3% of the
population. The Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715) protects and guarantees the rights of PWDs to education, healthcare, employment and movement. Despite efforts to educate the public, PWDs are still
stigmatized, discriminated against and socially excluded. There is strong correlation between disability, poverty and the socioeconomic status of affected households. (4) Nutrition. Nationally, stunting (chronic
undernutrition) affects 17.5% of children under 5‑years and wasting (acute undernutrition) affects 6.8% of children under 5‑years. The National Nutrition Policy aims to address persistent nutrition‑related
challenges of feeding practices for infants and young children, nutrition among women of reproductive age and the promotion of nutritionally adequate safe diets. Ghana joined the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN)
Movement in 2011 and has established national, regional and district level multi-sectoral nutrition coordination mechanisms. (5) Climate and environment. Climate change is projected to affect vital water
resources, energy supplies, crop production and food security, with the Northern Belt the most vulnerable. Energy production meets demand but rural communities continue to rely on fuelwood, resulting in
forest depletion estimated at 2% loss per annum. Agriculture is estimated to be the second largest contributor (10.05 MtCO2e) to GHG emissions after the energy sector (15.02 MtCO2e). Ghana is committed
to implementing its National Climate Adaptation Policy, as highlighted in the National Climate Change Communication to the UNFCCC and its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Paris
Agreement.
Rationale for IFAD involvement. The underlying issue flagged is the persistence of intractable poverty in rural communities dependent on rainfed agriculture in the drier Northern parts of the country. The
prevailing farming systems in the Northern and Middle Belts are suboptimal and, with a long history of over-exploitation, the economic carrying capacity of the heavily depleted productive NR base is declining
whilst the number of dependents is increasing. The negative effects of rapid climate change are making bad conditions worse. The remedy is to uplift rural economies by transforming the bedrock of small-
scale farming from predominantly subsistence to financially and environmentally sustainable systems tied into functioning markets. This rationale focuses on both supply – the scale and technical
transformation of production – and a marked increase in real demand for the produce, whilst ensuring that the most vulnerable people are not left behind in poverty. The producers need to progress to
climate-resilient “farming as a profitable business” linked into value chains and to transition to agricultural and land management practices that lower emissions and reverse the depletion of the NR base. The
development challenge for PROSPER is to broaden, deepen and extend the reach of key commodity VCs to engage with significant numbers of primary producer groups as the resulting “demand pull” is
much stronger than “supply push” in driving local economic growth. The increased volume of business is expected to create opportunities for enterprises in agro‑processing and value addition at all scales, to
fuel employment and incomes within local economies through a multiplier effect, and thereby raise the food security and nutrition security of whole communities in the context of the changing climate.
IFAD’s comparative advantage and lessons learned. The Fund has a wealth of technical expertise in addressing rural poverty combined with the capacity to mobilise resources at a scale that can make a
lasting impact on the lives of vulnerable people. IFAD has a strong record in Ghana in working with poor rural communities in the food and agriculture sector in the Northern and Middle Belts, and has learned
lessons from the experience. Corporate country-specific knowledge of direct relevance to the PROSPER design concerns: capacity of rural institutions; resilience building and the sustainable use of NRs;
functional capacity of extension services to support VC producers and actors; creation of market linkages; capacity of BACs/BRCs to provide business development training; affordable loans in a market
segment where FIs are absent; partnerships with FIs to promote inclusive rural financial services; innovative cashless credit model; and one-time matching grants for beneficiary groups.
2 Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits & Environmental Resilience (PROSPER)
Objectives, geographic area, targeting. The PROSPER Project Development Objective is: Strengthen the integration, climate resilience and environmental sustainability of smallholders and businesses in
priority VCs in the Northern and Middle Ecological Belts taking advantage of the increased demand created by the national agro-processing strategy. The geographic area of intervention extends to eight
regions in the North of and three neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, Bono and Oti). The targeting strategy considers (i) high rural population, (ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food
and nutrition insecurity, (iv) strong concentration of female and male youth, (v) presence of relevant economic opportunities, (vi) the level of degradation of the productive NR base (particularly soil, water and
trees) and (vii) indicators of climate vulnerability. PROSPER’s primary target groups will be the poorest households (landless or holding not more than 1 ha of cultivable land) or poor households, (holding less
than 2 ha of cultivable land) and vulnerable people within the poor rural population who have little access to assets and economic opportunities due to social exclusion, marginalization and the negative impact
of climate change, including women (40%), unemployed female and male youth between 18‑35 years (30%) and persons with disability who are economically active (5%).
Components/Outcomes and activities. PROSPER comprises two mutually supportive components concentrated on increasing the real demand for sustainably grown produce by significant numbers of
people living in poor rural communities while enhancing their capacity to meet this demand through more efficient climate-resilient agricultural practices and natural resource management to mitigate the
negative impact of climate change. The intended outcomes are increased incomes, greater food and nutrition security, and improved health status.
C1 Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure. The expected outcome is: Improved and sustainable livelihoods in target areas supported by strengthened rural institutions and
improved socioeconomic infrastructures. These actions are concentrated on investing in “public goods” within and for the benefit of the targeted 100,000 beneficiaries in the project areas. C1.1 Capacity
building of rural institutions, enterprises and households (USD 11.8 m, 8.0% of total project costs) comprises a range of institution-building and skills development activities to enable target communities to
take ownership of and accountability for their own development initiatives, to promote sustainable community-based NR management, to strengthen their ability to implement modern sustainable and climate
resilient farming, and to adopt healthier diets.
C1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure (USD 24.3 m, 16.5%) seeks to realize some of the “public goods” investments prioritized and chosen by local communities through the Cluster Planning
process. Three complementary types of climate-resilient infrastructure will be eligible: Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation measures; Feeder roads and farm tracks; and Communal social
infrastructure. These investments aim to improve the sustainability of NR-related livelihoods and to stimulate socioeconomic advancements in the participating clusters.
C2 Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators around selected agricultural value chains. The expected outcome is: Smallholders and small businesses draw greater
benefits from the increasing market outlets for agricultural produce through comprehensive financial, capacity and marketing support. Whereas the first component will invest in the human, physical and
natural resources of the target communities, the second component is concentrated on investing in the “private goods” of the population to bring about a sustained uplift in the earning capacity of agricultural
producer groups and related enterprises.
C2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development (USD 13.0 m, 8.8%) comprises three activities. In Value chain analysis, PROSPER will examine in depth the status and characteristics of each
selected national value chain and map the VC actors located close to the target communities, particularly the first stage market linkages between producers and others in the chains. The developmental
activity Promotion of linkages between producers and value chain actors is aimed at generating enduring partnerships between producers engaged in climate-resilient farming and larger-scale agribusinesses
within locally appropriate forms of robust and equitable contract relationships in the private sector. This action will concentrate on those eligible RIs and MSMEs that demonstrated interest and potential in the
capacity building interventions and meet membership criteria regarding the minimum proportion of specified disadvantaged groups. Under the activity Development of business plans, the project will generate
a sound, achievable and fully costed Business Plan which is appropriate to the resources and prospects of each concerned entity, is green in design and addresses effectively climate and NR degradation
risks and impacts.
C2.2 Access to rural financial services (USD 85.8 m, 58.2%). The objective is to promote a savings culture among beneficiaries, facilitate realization of the Business Plans and improve enduring access to
suitable financial resources. Expected outcomes: farmers through RIs and related local MSMEs are integrated step-by-step into the formal financial system and have lasting access to adapted and affordable
financial services to develop their agribusinesses, including green investments. Such access is a necessary though not sufficient condition for rapid sectoral development. PROSPER financial services are
structured around three instruments appropriate to the various situations prevailing in rural areas as regard capacities and professionalization: (1) Saving and Loan Groups for sparking the saving habit within
communities; (2) a Matching Grants fund for capitalizing emergent RIs along with crowding-in private capital from matching contributions to engage in commercial agriculture and smaller MSMEs around the
selected VCs, and for supporting food and nutrition security promotion schemes for the most vulnerable groups; and (3) a Blended Finance Facility (BFF) operated as a refinancing facility by PFIs to ensure
sustainable access to financial services for growing FIs and MSMEs. These three financial instruments form a global graduation process by which beneficiaries will be able to increase their access to
financing solutions over time as they build their financial and management capacities and develop their business relationships with other VC actors. The BFF will develop, test and rollout green financial
products to finance advanced BPs by the more developed RIs and MSMEs that have the potential to undertake commercial agriculture with climate mitigation and adaptation interventions in VC partnerships.
The Facility is set up to contribute to the opening of the climate finance market in Ghana. Under the condition of being linked formally with VC actors under contract arrangements, qualified RIs and MSMEs
will gain access to BFF credit at an affordable blended on-lending rate (below 10%) for financing a more sophisticated BP that has a strong focus on adaptation and mitigation in the face of climate change
impacts on small-scale agriculture.
C3 Project management and Policy engagement. The expected outcome of the support component: Efficient and timely delivery of PROSPER development results and support to evidence-based sectoral
policy formulation.C3.1Project management USD 12.2 m, (8.3%). PROSPER will be facilitated by an implementation support structure embedded in the host GoG agency providing liaison, physical and
financial project management, reporting and accounting, proactive knowledge management and learning activities, and monitoring and evaluation functions. C3.2 Policy engagement USD 0.3 m, (0.2%).
PROSPER will promote an enabling policy environment to achieve the project’s goals and objectives through technical assistance, high-level round table discussions, policy dialogue fora, conferences and
advocacy as appropriate, underpinned by analytical work and knowledge management products from IFAD and other development partners
Theory of Change. PROSPER investments in the technical and business capacities of small-scale producers, with a shift to climate-friendly farming systems, are intended to enable whole communities to
progress from subsistence-consumption to financially and environmentally sustainable production linked into expanded national value chains. The project will work to close the present gaps between the
remote producers and markets to expedite contract arrangements and introduce innovative green financing modalities to make credit affordable to the beneficiary groups and other VC actors. The rise in
profitable primary production and related services is expected to result in a broad economic uplift of the rural communities, with greater inclusion of marginalised and vulnerable groups.
2/15
Alignment, ownership and partnerships. PROSPER is closely aligned with the SDGs, the UN Sustainable Development Partnership Framework for Ghana and GoG’s current development policy
framework. The project is congruent with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016‑25 and will contribute to the strategic objectives identified in IFAD’s COSOP for Ghana. PROSPER will collaborate with
development partners with substantial active or pipeline projects in the sector, including FAO, WFP, World Bank, EU and Global Affairs Canada.
Project costs, financing and returns.The total project costs of USD 147.3 m will be financed by (i) IFAD 11 USD 52.5 m (35.6%); (ii) IFAD 12 USD 22.7 m (15.4%); (iii) Green Climate Fund USD 25.4 m
(17.3%) (GCF Adaptation USD 13.8 m, GCF Mitigation USD 6.9 m and GCF Grant USD 4.7 m); (iii) Participating Financial Institutions USD 2.3 m (1.6%); (iv) Private Sector USD 2.5 m (1.6%);
(v) Beneficiaries USD 19.3 m (13.1%); and (vi) Government of Ghana USD 22.5 m (15.3%). The Net Present Value is positive (USD 207 m).  Economic Internal Rate of Return is 21.4%.
Exit strategy and sustainability. PROSPER is driven by the imperative to achieve both financial and environmental sustainability in the small-scale agriculture sector in the context of climate change. The
project concentrates on investing in the skills, productive assets, structures and institutional development needed to remediate the NR base, transition to appropriate agricultural practices that reduce
emissions and engage in enduring business relationships within major value chains. The exit strategy comprises a natural and sequential phasing out from supported activities to linkages with the private
sector. The exit strategy comprises a natural and sequential phasing over, phasing down or phasing out from supported activities as linkages with the private sector are consolidated. A high level of
participation from the host agency, beneficiaries and partner institutions is planned from the outset to ensure the effectiveness and leadership of local stakeholders to continue, scale-up and monitor activities
after completion
3 Risks
Risks and mitigation. The main risks and corresponding mitigation measures for the project are presented in the Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM) which touches on all aspects of the initiative to
anticipate possible barriers to achieving the Project Development Objective. At inception, the PROSPER management team will be trained to refine the matrix and set up a Risk Log including tools for the
identification, analysis, prevention, monitoring and management of risks. The log will be updated regularly and integrated into the AWPBs and the M&E dashboard to inform decision-making.
Environment and Social Category. The screening of proposed PROSPER activities indicates the potential environmental and social risks rating is medium/moderate to low. The main risks relate to value
chain activities, predominantly rainfed agriculture primary production and value addition, and socioeconomic infrastructure including NR remediation works, feeder road rehabilitation and farm access tracks,
and shared social infrastructure including human water supply systems, green energy and sanitation facilities. Most of the impacts are small in scale, very limited, site-specific and avoidable or reduced with
mitigation plans, as stated in the ESMF. As a Category B operation, a formal Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) is required. Further analysis of the conflict dimensions and site-specific
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) will be mainstreamed throughout implementation and a Gender, Social Inclusion and Vulnerability Specialist engaged to ensure safeguards compliance
and project sustainability.
Climate Risk Classification. From a Climate Change Risk Assessment standpoint, the project is classified as High. The target communities are dependent largely on climate-sensitive natural resources,
especially rainfed agricultural plots and tree crops, and the project area is exposed increasingly to droughts and flash-flooding. GHG emissions through increased production and processing and climate
variability, including unexpected dry spells, unpredictable rainfall and low/high temperatures, can affect the project risks, impacts, sustainability and returns on investments. Systematic climate risk analysis will
be undertaken throughout implementation to ensure adequate and timely monitoring and management of climate change risks.
4 Implementation
Management and Coordination. MoFA is designated as the Lead Project Agency and will host PROSPER. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will provide overall oversight of implementation. A Project
Coordination Unit (PCU) will be responsible for the coordination of project activities and for fiduciary, climate change and environmental and social safeguards, including gender and vulnerability. Technical
specialists will work with the appropriate GoG cadre. The PCU will be based in the project area to ensure effective management and coordination. A dedicated team reporting to the PCU will be anchored in
APEX Bank to manage the BFF.
Financial Management, Procurement and Governance . The PCU will be responsible for the financial management (FM) aspects of PROSPER, including budgeting, accounting, preparing Withdrawal
Applications, monitoring implementing partners, preparing consolidated financial reports, and arranging internal and external audits. The FM system will meet the fiduciary requirements of IFAD, GoG and other
stakeholders. The PCU will be responsible for overseeing and implementing all PROSPER procurement transactions including procurement carried out by GCF. IFAD will provide technical assistance and
training in procurement at early stages of the project to familiarise implementing agencies with PROSPER/IFAD Guidelines on procurement and contract management. IFAD's anticorruption policies and
whistle blowing procedures will be mainstreamed in the Project Implementation Manual. IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in all projects financed
through its loans and grants.
Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication, Innovation and Scaling Up.Planning will follow current practices for IFAD-funded projects in Ghana. The main planning tool will be the Annual Work
Plan and Budget (AWPB), prepared annually using a participatory bottom-up approach after consultation with the implementing partners of the various activities and based on the investment forecasts agreed
and validated during the preparation processes. M&E is an essential function to support management decision-making, the main objective being to inform stakeholders and the PCU on the performance and
effectiveness of implementation. A results-based approach will be adopted setting progress against AWPB targets. Learning, KM and Communication: the project will develop a KM and Communication
Strategy to capture and disseminate knowledge gained on critical issues during implementation. There are multiple benefits from communicating effectively how the project is addressing target population
needs. Innovation and Scaling Up: the web-based M&E system designed by REP and the use of digital tools such as mobile money transfers, transmission of weather and price information, and dissemination
of technologies through mobile phones can be scaled up under PROSPER.
Target group engagement and feedback, grievances. PROSPER strategy relating to transparency and citizen participation will include: transparent access to information and reporting; monitoring and
evaluation of service providers, implementing partners, beneficiaries and the performance of projects by third parties; active engagement of civil society; creation of a complaints and grievances mechanism
and a feedback mechanism on beneficiary satisfaction; and transparent selection of service providers in procurement. the ESMF will include the IFAD complaints procedure as a Grievance Redress
Mechanism that will guide the project through implementation and align with national and/or IFADwhistle blower protection procedures that aim to better protect project staff, community members and any
other stakeholders from potential threats or reprisals they may suffer for having reported, in good faith, reprehensible conduct, abuse and abusive acts, alleged professional misconduct or acts of corruption.
Implementation readiness and reviews. The IFAD Country Office (ICO) will  coordinate with the implementing agency to ensure PROSPER readiness for implementation, including: preliminary mapping
and identification of target communities; Offtakers, financial institutions, RIs and BACs/BRCs with a good track record with GASIP and REP identified, oriented and prepared for partnership; existing
partnership through REP with the BoG and ARB Apex Bank, will support the swift initiation of the PROSPER BFF; MoFA has experience of partnering with donor projects including IFAD; sensitize the donor
community and prepare them for PROSPER partnership in relevant areas; work with authorities to fulfil conditions prior to Board approval; and ensure that the budget for year one is available by the
effectiveness date and set up the team prior to the start-up. PROSPER Supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD, focusing on planning, gender, vulnerability and targeting, procurement, financial
management, safeguards and climate change risks management, M&E, partnerships and the integration of activities within the governance framework. A Mid-term Review will be conductedat the end of
Project Year 4, based on, inter alia, a dedicated Mid-term evaluation study, and a timely Project Completion Review based on an independent completion evaluation.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.  Economic context. Ghana is a lower-middle-income country with an estimated per capita GDP of USD 2,221 (2019). In 2019, GDP grew by 6.5%, up from 6.3% in 2018 – one of the highest rates in
the world. Ghana’s economy is dependent on the export of a limited number of commodities such as gold, cocoa and oil, and remains vulnerable to commodity price shocks and climate change. In
2020, the inflation rate was 9.2%, unemployment 4.53% and the national debt 78% of GDP (64% in 2019).[1] The impact of COVID-19 has resulted in economic slowdown and exacerbated the
socioeconomic challenges that detailed below.
2.  Ghana’s performance towards the achievement of the SDGs is still lagging although some improvement is registered. The country is rated 114 among the 165 UN Member States on the 17 SDG in the
2021 SDSN Sustainable Development Report. The achievement of SDG 1 (No poverty) and SDG 2 (Zero hunger) still faces important challenges, while performance on SDG 5 (Gender equality),
SDG 6 (Clean water and sanitation) and SDG 8 (Decent work and economic growth) is slightly improving. It is worth noting, however, that significant achievements were made on SDG 12
(Responsible consumption and production) and SDG 13 (Climate Action).[2] Further, the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) priorities are also in line with the 2003 Maputo Declaration, ratified by
Ghana in 2007. Key commitments of the declaration include increased investment finance in agriculture, reducing postharvest losses and boosting intra Africa trade.[3]
3.  Poverty and food insecurity. 23% of Ghana’s population are monetary poor and 8.2% live in extreme poverty.[4] The level of multidimensional poverty (across the dimensions of education, health,
and living standards), is 45.6%, especially in rural areas, where it is far higher (64.6%) than urban areas (27.0%).[5] Wealth distribution is biased towards men: 62% of female-headed households fall
into the two poorest quintiles – compared to 39% of male-headed households. The regions of the Northern Belt have the highest prevalence of poverty, up to 62% in the rural areas, and are the most
vulnerable to climate change. The highest concentration of extreme poor (49%) lives in the Savannah region.[6] Poverty, in the Middle Belt and other areas is still considerable in some regions, such
as in Oti (45%), Bono East (36%) and Bono (28%). While poverty in some regions are generally low, there are poverty pocket in these regions that suffer from persistent food insecurity,
undernourishment, malnutrition, and are vulnerable to climate change. Ghana has a prevalence of undernourishment of 7%. Moderate or severe food insecurity stands at 49.6%. Persons with
disabilities (PWD) represent 3% of the total population, with more than half concentrated in the Middle Belt and almost a quarter in the Northern Belt.[7]
4.  Agricultural and rural development context. Agriculture accounts for 21% of Ghana’s total GDP, 71% of employment in rural areas, and over 40% of export earnings. Agricultural imports are
substantial, reaching GHS 13.2 billion in 2017 mainly through the imports of wheat, rice, chicken (frozen), milk and fish. Rain fed agriculture prevails in 96% of arable land. Around 85% of farming
households own less than 10 ha and more than two-thirds own less than 2 ha of cultivable land. Factors contributing to rural poverty include underdeveloped agricultural technologies that damage the
environment, poor access to financial services (especially among women) including green finance for adaptation and mitigation, lack of secured market linkages, inadequate marketing infrastructure,
post-harvest losses, lack of advisory services and cumulative environmental degradation. Only 37% of the rural population has access to accounts in formal financial Institutions. Rural institutions are
generally weak with limited capacity to support small-scale production. These challenges are compounded by the negative effects of climate change, such as increasing dry spells and rising
temperatures, and the degradation of arable land and critical infrastructure.
5.  Most of the Northern Belt falls within the Guinea Savannah Ecological Zone, where smallholders grow mainly soya, maize, sorghum, rice, millet and vegetables. Rice cultivation in the valley bottoms
has great potential to reduce poverty levels. Dry season vegetable production is significant at irrigation sites. Productivity remains below potential due to lack of inputs, mechanization and extension
outreach. Shea trees cover around 77,670 square kilometres in the Northern Belt and support the livelihood of approximately 900,000 rural women. Trade in shea butter has been rising with strong
export demand.
3/15
6.  The Middle Belt falls within the Transition Ecological Zone, where smallholders grow mainly cassava, plantain, maize, yam and soya, with rice cultivation in valley bottoms. The cashew value chain
(VC) generates income for about 350,000 smallholders. Cashews can grow on marginal lands, stabilize the soil in which it grows and serve as a carbon sink. However, production remains below 50%
of potential with multiple constraints including difficulty in accessing improved planting materials and farm inputs, inadequate extension services, access to credit, lack of effective pricing and marketing
mechanisms, bush fires, loss of soil nutrients and inadequate soil moisture.
7.  Vegetables such as tomato, pepper, okra, garden eggs and cabbage are grown mostly under rainfed conditions as backyard production for subsistence and commercial purposes in both the Northern
and Middle Belts. Availability is highly seasonal, peaking from June-September. Productivity is usually less than 50% of potential due to traditional cultivation practices, the lack of irrigation systems,
limited use of improved inputs and high post-harvest losses. The livestock sector is an important component of Ghana’s agriculture. In 2019, the sector contributed about 13.3% of agricultural GDP in
direct products and had a growth rate of 5.4%, (SRID, 2020). Most rural households (41.5%) keep some form of livestock as an adjunct to crop farming. Small and large ruminants are kept as a form of
security and not as a source of protein, so the direct contribution to household food and nutrition security is low.
8.  The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in GDP growth of 1.1% in 2020 down from the pr‑pandemic level of 4.8% in 2020. Petroleum receipts, import duties and other tax revenues were affected negatively,
reducing the fiscal space for the GoG. 77.4% of households in Ghana have experienced declines in income. Reduced remittances to rural areas contributed to food insecurity. The country’s average
monthly food inflation recorded an increase from 8.4% in March 2020 to 13.7% in July 2020. While food prices continued to rise in 2021, the overall economic crisis is easing.
9.  To mitigate the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, the GoG took measures including: the Coronavirus Alleviation Programme (CAP), starting with a USD 219 million contribution from the Ministry of
Finance (MoF); a reduction in the inter-bank policy rate from 15.5% to 14% by the Central Bank of Ghana; and lowering reserve requirements from 10% to 8% to increase credit availability and
affordability. MoFA launched an Agricultural Response Plan increasing the supply of subsidized seeds and fertilizers to poor smallholders. IFAD’s Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food
Systems Exposed to COVID 19 (ESRF) supported the GoG efforts in this area. Ghana’s economy showed signs of recovery in the second half of 2020 and is projected to grow by 4.2% in 2021 and
5.2% in 2022. [8], [9] Volatile commodity prices uncertainty over the COVID-19 pandemic still present downside risks.[10]
10.  National strategies, policies and lead institutions. The Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021) recognizes the growth of agriculture as the driving force for
rural development and transformation. The Ghana Agricultural Development Plan (GADP) focuses on the development of the agricultural sector from 2018 to 2021 through modernization and
transformation. MoFA has increased support to the production of field crops through the Planting for Foods and Jobs (PFJ) initiative for farmers in the Northern and Middle Belts with 2‑3 acres land to
access improved seeds and fertilizers, with a 50% subsidy, extension services and marketing opportunities. GoG is implementing the PERD (2019-2023) programme for job creation and export
diversification through tree-crops and established the Tree Crops Development Authority. MoFA chairs the Agricultural Sector Working Group (ASWG) comprising GoG and development partners
including IFAD to ensure coordination and policy dialogue.
11.  The One District One Factory (1D1F) programme led by the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI) aims at establishing at least one medium-to-large-scale industrial enterprise in every district to create
quality jobs and achieve a balanced spread of industries. The programme established 104 companies so far, of which 68 were existing companies and 36 newly built, employing 150,975 people) As
part of 1D1F, the IFAD-supported Rural Enterprises Programme (REP) established 58 ENABLE Youth factories as a vehicle for employment creation for tertiary level graduates. In 2020, an MSME
and Entrepreneurship Policy was approved, which led to the transformation of the NBSSI into the Ghana Enterprises Agency (GEA). A network of 166 Business Advisory Centres (BACs) and
57 Business Resource Centres (BRCs) has been established across the country under an arrangement among REP, GEA and participating District Assemblies, to provide high-value business
development services to the business community.
[1] Statisa, 2021.
[2] SDSN Sustainable Development Report, Sustainable Development Solutions Network 2021.
[3] Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) For 2020-2023, Ministry of Food and Agriculture in Ghana, Programme Based Budget Estimates, 2020.
[4] Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018.
[5] Ghana’s Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Report, UNDP, 2020. The indicators that contribute most to multidimensional poverty in Ghana are lack of health insurance coverage, undernutrition,
school lag and households with members without any educational qualification.
[6] Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018.
[7] 2010 Population and Household Census.
[8] Ghana Economic Outlook, African Development Bank, https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/west-africa/ghana/ghana-economic-outlook
[9]https://www.focus-economics.com/countries/ghana
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
[10] https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/ghana/overview.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
1.  Gender. Women constitute 58% of the rural labour force. Despite Ghana ranking second in the ECOWAS Gender Inequality Index, the country is ranked 117 out of 156 countries in the 2021 WEF
Global Gender Gap Report. Traditional culture and entrenched gender inequality limit women’s access to education, healthcare, good nutrition, credit, extension services, new technologies, inputs and
output markets, and participation in the public sphere and community decision-making, particularly in the rural areas. Female-headed households have limited access to land for farming and are more
likely to be smallholders (87% compared with 60% of male-headed households). GoG adopted the National Gender Policy (2015) to mainstream gender, women‘s empowerment and social protection
concerns into national development processes, natural resources and agriculture. A Gender and Agricultural Development Strategy (GAD II) was developed in 2015 by the MoFA Women in
Agriculture.
2.  Youth. The country has a youth bulge (15‑35 years of age[1]) with 57% of the total population being below the age of 25. The rural community comprises 56% youth compared to 44% in urban
contexts. Youth contribute to family labour for agricultural production and engage in other activities such as processing, warehousing and transportation, but are unable to pursue farming
independently due to limited access to land, credit, quality inputs and sustainable profitable output markets. Due to limited access to jobs, inadequate training and illiteracy, youth unemployment and
underemployment in Ghana reached 12% and 50% respectively by 2020, resulting in growing youth migration from rural areas to urban centres.[2] Initiatives to provide jobs, capacity-building and
opportunities for youth include: the MNDPF (2018-2021); the PFJ in agriculture and related sectors; the Initiative for Sustainability, Stability and Security (3S) under the IFAD managed Rural
Resilience Trust fund (focused on the Northern Belt); the IFAD‑supported REP; and the Youth Agripreneurship Development Programme, run jointly by AGRA and Nestle. Despite these initiatives from
GoG and development partners, the outreach to youth from semi-subsistence smallholder families remains limited. In 2016, it was projected that, due to the country’s growing youth population,
300,000 new jobs would have to be created each year to absorb the increasing number of unemployed young people. Yet the structure of the Ghanaian economy in terms of employment has not
changed much from several decades ago. Most jobs are low-skilled, requiring limited cognitive or technology know-how. The quality of these jobs is reflected in low earnings and less decent work.
Although Ghana has launched a number of initiatives in response to this challenge, the lack of coordination among stakeholders in the sector has led to duplication. Key stakeholders on youth
employment, including those in the private sector, currently have limited interaction. Regular exchanges are important for promoting synergies and reducing duplication of programs, and for sharing
knowledge. Furthermore, Ghana lacks a comprehensive database on the characteristics of various categories of youth information—a database that is essential for the design and implementation of
effective programs. Without transformation of the current Ghanaian economic structure, employment opportunities will remain limited. Most existing government-led youth employment programs lack
adequate systems for monitoring and evaluation and for impact measurement. Few programs include clear indicators that measure performance, and most do not carry out tracer studies to assess their
effectiveness and what happens to beneficiaries once they have exited the programs. Without such systems and data, policy makers and other stakeholders find it difficult to make informed decisions
on whether to fund or scale up a program or make changes for improvement.
3.  People with Disabilities. Statistically, people with disabilities make up 3% of the population. Disability in Ghana is considered both a human rights concern and a developmental issue due to its
strong links to exclusion, discrimination and poverty. In 2006, Parliament passed the Persons with Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715) protecting the rights of PWDs and guaranteeing their rights to
education, healthcare, employment and movement. The Act established the National Council on Persons with Disability charged with the responsibility of proposing and evolving policies and strategies
to enable PWDs to integrate and participate fully in national development. However, despite efforts being made to educate the public, PWDs are still stigmatized, discriminated against and socially
excluded. There is strong correlation between disability and poverty. Poor health, limited schooling and employment opportunities impact negatively on the socioeconomic status of affected
households. Households with disabled members may be vulnerable to poverty due to extra costs of living with a disability.
4.  Nutrition. Ghana is 'on course' to meet two Global Nutrition Targets for Maternal, Infant and Young Child Nutrition (MIYCN) reducing anaemia among women of reproductive age (46.4% of women
aged 15 to 49 years are still affected) and achieving the low-birth-weight target (14.2% of infants have a low weight at birth). No progress has been made towards achieving the exclusive breastfeeding
target, with just 42.9% of infants aged 0‑5 months exclusively breastfed. Ghana is 'on course' to meet the target for stunting (chronic undernutrition), with 17.5% of children under 5‑years affected but
the proportion rises to 33% in the Northern Region. Some progress has been made towards achieving the target for wasting (acute undernutrition) but 6.8% of children under 5‑years are still affected.
The prevalence of overweight children under 5‑years is 1.4% and the country is 'on course' to prevent the figure from increasing.[3] Ghana has shown limited progress towards achieving the diet-
related non-communicable disease (NCD) targets. However, the country has shown no progress towards achieving the target for obesity, with an estimated 16.6% of adult women and 4.5% of adult
men living with obesity. Diabetes is estimated to affect 6.6% of adult women and 6.4% of adult men. The diet mainly on starchy roots, fruit and cereals. Dietary diversity remains low with limited intake
of protein and a general reluctance to consume fruits and vegetables, causing stunting in preschool-aged children and anaemia amongst pregnant women. A long-term Food and Nutrition Security
(FNS) Strategy has been developed and used to review the National Nutrition Policy (NNP).
5.  The NNP aims to address nutrition‑related challenges of feeding practices for infants and young children, nutrition among women of reproductive age and the promotion of nutritionally adequate safe
diets. Ghana joined the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement in 2011 and has established national, regional and district level multi-sectoral nutrition coordination mechanisms. Ghana’s multi-
stakeholder platform (MSP), the Nutrition Cross-Sectoral Planning Group (NCSPG), continues to expand, bringing together ten sectors; all five Northern regions have nutrition MSPs.
6.  Climate and environment. Climate change is projected to affect vital water resources, energy supplies, crop production and food security, with the Northern Belt the most vulnerable. Ghana is
experiencing increased extreme weather conditions with higher incidences and prolonged periods of flooding and droughts. The country’s dependence on the production of crops that are sensitive to
climate change (cassava, cocoa, shea) and lack of agricultural diversification exacerbate the vulnerability. Energy production meets demand, but rural communities continue to rely on fuelwood,
resulting in forest depletion estimated at 2% loss per annum. Rural credit is a crucial factor in building climate resilience and improving productivity and lack of access remains a key constraint for
producers and MSMEs, particularly in COVID-19 recovery efforts and for rural women and youth. Agriculture is estimated to be the second largest contributor (10.05 MtCO2e) to Ghana’s greenhouse
gas emissions after the energy sector (15.02 MtCO2e). Ghana is committed to implementing its National Climate Adaptation Policy, as highlighted in the National Climate Change Communication to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement.
11.
[1] The National Youth Policy in Ghana (2010).
12.
[2] Youth Employment Programmes in Ghana: Options for Effective Policy Making and Implementation, World Bank, 2020.
4/15
13.
[3] https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/africa/western-africa/ghana/.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
1.  The development challenge and prognosis . The persistence of intractable poverty in many rural communities dependent on agriculture in the drier Northern parts of the country highlights the need
for continued support for and investment in GoG’s initiatives to address structural challenges . The prevailing low input-low output rainfed farming systems in the Northern and Middle Belts are
suboptimal and, with a long history of over-exploitation, the economic carrying capacity of the heavily depleted productive NR base is declining whilst the number of dependents is increasing. The
negative effects of rapid climate change are making bad conditions worse. The remedy is to uplift rural economies by transforming small-scale farming from predominantly subsistence to financially
and environmentally sustainable systems tied into functioning markets. This rationale focuses on both the supply side – the scale and technical transformation of production – and a marked increase in
real demand for the produce, whilst ensuring that the most vulnerable people are not left behind in poverty.
2.  For the producers, individually and in groups, the imperative is the technical and organisational skills needed to progress to climate-resilient “farming as a profitable business” and to transition to
agricultural and land management practices that lower emissions and reverse the depletion of the NR base (soil, water and trees), both on- and off-farm. A key mindset change for producers is to
engage proactively with other private sector operators to build collaborations that are mutually beneficial and with balanced bargaining power. To this end, the critical linkage in the VC is the first, that
between producers and agribusinesses.
3.  On the demand side, the agricultural market prospects in the Northern and Middle Belts are promising, with strong global demand for maize, shea and cashew and rapidly increasing domestic demand
and import substitution possibilities for rice, soya and poultry. GoG is investing heavily in the scale and capacity of “upstream” VC actors through 1D1F and other programmes. However, the mass of
rural producers is not able to capitalise on the growth in demand, being effectively outside the mainstream economy. The development challenge for PROSPER is to broaden, deepen and extend the
reach of these commodity VCs to engage with significant numbers of primary producer groups. The resulting “demand pull” is much stronger than “supply push” in driving local economic growth. The
increased volume of business is expected to create opportunities for enterprises in agro‑processing and value addition at all scales, fuel employment and incomes within local economies through a
multiplier effect, and thereby raise the food security and nutrition security of whole communities in the context of the changing climate. PROSPER will focus on climate-sensitive and nutrition-sensitive
value chains, and will include training and awareness-raising activities promoting behavioural changes. The project will also introduce matching grants activities devoted to nutrition interventions. The
project will have dedicated technical support in the form of TA and will partner with nutritionists from line departments for capacity-building, training on food preparation and consumption and so forth.
4.  IFAD’s comparative advantage. The Fund has a wealth of technical expertise to offer in addressing intractable rural poverty combined with the capacity to mobilise resources at a scale that can
make a lasting impact on the lives of vulnerable people. IFAD has a strong record in Ghana in working with poor rural communities in the food and agriculture sector in the Northern and Middle Belts. A
portfolio of IFAD funded projects has focused on various closely related aspects relevant to the design of PROSPER. Roots and Tubers Improvement & Marketing Programme (RTIMP) took an
integrated commodity chain approach. Northern Rural Growth Programme (NRGP) combined commodity chain and rural infrastructure development with access to financial services. Rural and
Agricultural Finance Programme (RAFIP) followed by Rural Financial Services Project (RFSP) have built up the microfinance subsector. Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (GASIP) is
concentrated on agribusiness linkages and VC development, with measures to promote climate change resilience. Rural Enterprises Programme (REP) seeks to promote rural business, many of which
are based on agriculture and NRs. The Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development Project (AAFORD) focuses on smallholder access to formal credit. Emergency Support to
Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems exposed to COVID 19 (ESRF) was a rapid response to support smallholders coping with the pandemic.
5.  PROSPER will scale up and build on the broad and deep experience, lessons learned, fruitful partnerships and cumulative development achievements of these initiatives
6.  Concessional resources for green finance are beneficial in supporting smallholder producers and processors to adopt climate resilient agricultural and agribusiness practices. With its first successful
experience in Niger, the Inclusive Green Financing for Low Emission and Climate Resilient Agriculture (IGREENFIN) initiative is stimulating a paradigm shift within the country’s financial system. IFAD
is expanding this business model in thirteen countries of the Great Green Wall Initiative area, including Ghana. It will support local financial institutions, one in each country, in setting up green credit
lines to finance green agricultural investments and align their portfolio towards meeting Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) targets in the Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF)
sector. PROSPER will leverage IGREENFIN to promote green investments by smallholder farmers and related enterprises.
B. Lessons learned
1.  The foregoing development interventions have yielded a range of pertinent lessons for the design of PROSPER, including the following.
Rural institution capacity building (training and skills transfer) is a priority from the outset to support enduring agribusiness partnerships and the creation of internal capital through savings. Many of the
RIs supported by RTIMP, NRGP and GASIP were assessed as institutionally weak at completion, (lacking financial resources or bank linkages and requiring capacity support). For example, in NRGP,
only 1,625 of the 8,127 farmer-based organisations established (20%) were assessed to be functional and only 4% were considered to be a Mature Cooperative. Following this lesson, PROSPER will
provide relevant training and capacity building of sufficient quality to enable beneficiaries to enter and progress within the VCs.
RI/MSME internal financial assets, such as the creation of internal capital from savings mobilisation and retained earnings, is a necessary condition for RIs and MSMEs to engage with VCs. Many
existing groups remain chronically undercapitalised as they lack the culture, orientation or assets to retain a part of current profits to finance inputs for the following year. Ghana has had success in the
establishment of member-based savings common interest groups. Variations of the Village Saving and Loan Association model have proved effective in a group setting, particularly for women and
PROSPER will build on this experience.
RI integration in value chains to facilitate farmers’ access to markets. PROSPER will learn from and build on the experience of previous projects with the common aim of integrating farmers into VCs
and facilitating their access to markets. The District Value Chain Committees model of NRGP will be supported as a potentially valuable discussion medium for producers and other VC actors in each
district. The Cluster Driver Approach of GASIP and the Anchor Agribusiness concept piloted under the PFJ initiative are reflected in the PROSPER design with the creation and expansion of stable
agribusinesses linking medium-scale entrepreneurs with multiple smallholder producer groups. PROSPER will support market linkages between these initiatives and the Ghana Commodity Exchange
(GCX).[1] This is a big step up from enhanced subsistence farming.
Need to combine production, marketing and credit support to ensure maximum returns to developing producer groups. While the cashless credit model of NRGP was a successful innovation, the
initiative was not integrated with marketing support. A total of 20,000 households benefitted from credit linkages to increase production, but only half participated in marketing groups and many farmers
had to revert to traditional and less profitable marketing practices after one season, affecting their creditworthiness. The District Stakeholder Fora (DSF) developed under RTIMP were organized
around supply chain leaders and facilitated business linkages for smallholders, but no formal credit linkages were established. GASIP demonstrated excellent integration between production support
and marketing linkages for beneficiaries but was less successful in developing credit linkages for farmers already linked to the market. Consequently, PROSPER will build up the capacities of FIs both
to increase the quantity, quality and profitability of production and to link into markets, negotiate prices and bargain for better services. The project is focused on the establishment of enduring contracts
between producers and agribusinesses.
Need to develop functional capacity of PFIs through capacity building. The bottlenecks in extending access to finance include the risk-averse attitude of PFIs, limited outreach, lack of liquidity in rural
banks, high interest rates and inadequate capacity for monitoring. The experience from credit lines for agricultural VCs and rural MSMEs financing since 2005 shows that PFIs will not be financially
stable unless credit is backed by capacity building to undertake properly due diligence on loan requests and access to offtaker markets in long-lasting agreements with producers, loan and risk
management, pragmatic scheduling of loan repayments linked to borrower business cashflows and the monitoring and recovery in full of due loans so that funds revolve. The project will collaborate
with AAFORD to provide such PFI capacity building with adequate TA on financial literacy, productivity enhancement and responsible borrowing by servicing loans due. Ghana Incentive Based Risk
Sharing Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) has designed a special training programme for banks and PROSPER will encourage all participating PFIs to enrol in the training.
Affordable financing modalities for RIs/MSMEs to ensure access to finance for smallholders. Lack of access to finance at affordable interest rates is a constant issue for smallholders wanting to
progress. In NRGP’s innovative cashless credit model, financial institutions provided USD 4,861,625 worth of credit from their own funds to 21,349 smallholders, but necessarily at market interest rates
which proved unsustainable for the borrowers. Concessional lines of credit have been recognised as an important tool of support to smallholder farmers in Ghana, who have difficulty accessing formal
market-priced financial services. In July 2021, thirteen key lines of credits (launched since 2010) were operational for agricultural value chain and rural SMEs financing. However the supply of funds at
affordable on-lending rates remains below the volume needed to build the capacity of the target group to address concerns. None of the above is factoring into consideration adaptation to climate risks.
Provision of a line of credit for climate mitigation as well as adaptation will be a forward leap in Ghana’s efforts to meet its Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement. PROSPER
will facilitate the development of a blended agricultural refinancing facility to provide FIs with additional resources to offer affordable credit to poor and very poor producers. The project will also
contribute to mitigating the inherent financial risks associated with lending to smallholders facing escalating climate change by promoting linkages between (i) PFIs and GIRSAL’s partial credit
guarantee scheme, and (ii) producers and the smallholder agricultural insurance scheme at GAIP. The GCF lines of credit are designed to counter such risks and invest in mitigation and adaptation
actions. PROSPER will thus support interest rate flexibility to achieve sustainability for PFIs while ensuring profitability and positive livelihood changes to its beneficiaries.[2]
One-off Matching Grants. Experience reveals that Matching Grants (MGs) for financing capital investments and (mainly) variable costs such as inputs have delivered mixed results in IFAD-supported
projects in Ghana. The GASIP one-off MG support for seasonal inputs produced encouraging short-term results, particularly for maize and soybean, but revealed the need to support beneficiaries over
more than a single cropping cycle to ensure mastery of the technical capacity and skills acquired, which would undermine IFAD’s policy to use a MG as a one-off support. . The current context and
GoG practice warrants the use of matching grants for both working and investment capital. This approach is delivering excellent results in the WCA region, for example; in Nigeria with VCDP.
PROSPER will implement a phased financing protocol and sequencing, starting with mobilizing savings for securing a beneficiary contribution.
Climate change adaptation and mitigation measures have high levels of adoption when included in production packages linked to markets and financial instruments. PROSPER will integrate NRM and
climate resilient agricultural practices into all interventions and build explicit green criteria into business plans, in particular the larger schemes considered for the Blended Finance Facility funding.
Vulnerable beneficiary targeting. PROSPER is committed to identifying the poorest people living in very poor communities, including specific vulnerable groups: women, youth (18‑35 years) and
people with disabilities. The cumulative experience of projects suggests that the effectiveness of direct targeting is increased greatly by authentic participatory consultations. Special attention must be
paid to the constraints on smallholder farming, particularly women and youth access financial institutions.
14.
[1] https://gcx.com.gh/.
15.
[2] The new inclusive rural finance policy (IRF) passed by IFAD’s EB on 14 September 2021 underscores the need to “improve use of subsidies to foster long term sustainable outcomes of IRF activities
and to attract investment capital”. In lieu of market-priced on-lending interest rates, IRF 2021 stipulates, “IFAD will employ asset subsidies, matching grants, production and market access TA, value chain
development, public and private infrastructure development, and other interventions to help develop sustainable climate IRF markets in developing member states”.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
1.  The PROSPER Project Development Objective is: Strengthen the integration, climate resilience and environmental sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority VCs in the Northern and
Middle Ecological Belts taking advantage of the increased demand created by the Government’s efforts to strengthen agro-processing. PROSPER aims to provide a framework for the long-term
engagement with and financing for private sector-led, pro-poor agricultural VC development tailored to the specific needs and potential of small-scale producers and operators in targeted regions of
Ghana.
2.  In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, PROSPER qualifies as:
5/15
16.
☒ Climate finance: PROSPER will integrate adaptation and mitigation measures in the value chain packages, supported by special financial mechanisms promoted by the project.
17.
☒ Nutrition sensitive: PROSPER will select nutrition sensitive VCs, increase production of highly nutritious crops and animal sourced foods, promote food conservation, post-harvest processing and
value addition, and promote better dietary patterns by providing nutrition education and Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC).
18.
☒ Youth sensitive: PROSPER will target male and female youth (each group with a minimum of 50% eligible youth), adding their access to land as a precondition for community participation in the
project. PROSPER will support the establishment of youth-led enterprises along the selected VCs and will provide targeted financial inclusion, skills development and capacity building.
1.  Geographical targeting. The geographical targeting strategy of PROSPER considers (i) high rural population, (ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food and nutrition insecurity, (iv) strong
concentration of female and male youth, (v) presence of economic opportunities relevant to the project, (vi) the level of cumulative degradation of the productive NR base (particularly soil, water and
trees) and (vii) indicators of climate vulnerability including evidence on the historical and projected impact of changes in temperature and precipitation.
2.  Based on these criteria, the geographic area of intervention of PROSPER extends to five regions in the Northern Belt, (Upper West, Upper East, North East, Savannah and Northern) and three
neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, Bono and Oti). Key challenges facing the targeted regions include:
19.
20.
- Poverty: All five targeted regions in the Northern Belt have high poverty head count (up to 92% in Wa, West District, Upper West. The Middle Belt regions are relatively less poverty stricken but contain
pockets with a markedly high poverty head count peaking at 78% for Kintampo South District, Bono East. Poverty is progressively deeper from South to North given the drier climate and increasingly
challenging setting for agriculture with the negative impact of climate change. The poverty analysis underpinning the geographical targeting of PROSPER is presented in the PIM.
- Food security and nutrition: Food insecurity prevalence as reported is not necessarily corresponding to the poverty head count. WFP food security and nutrition monitoring updates (June 2020) show
high levels of moderate and severe food insecurity in the target regions, including the worst-off districts in the nation in terms of food insecure households. Main barriers to food security are food
availability and accessibility. This affects access to micronutrients, especially for women and children. There are significant regional disparities concerning nutrition security in Ghana. Northern Region is
worst off when it comes to rural (extreme) poverty, rural child stunting (chronic undernutrition) and the prevalence of anaemia among women and children. The national child wasting (acute
undernutrition) rate stands at 7%, with the highest prevalence reported for Northern Region (10.9%). The presence of persons with disabilities also has marked regional differences. The Ghana
Micronutrient Survey (2017) reports that the proportion of women (15 to 49 years) not meeting the Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) score ranged from 37.9% to 42.4% in the target regions,
with a high national average of 40.2%[1].
21.
- The prevalence of PWDs: The prevalence of PWDs by district ranges from 3.0% to 8.3% in the Northern Belt and from 7.3% to 12.4% in the Middle Belt.
1.  Target groups. PROSPER’s primary target groups will be: (1) the poorest and poor households, identified at inception through participatory methodologies appropriate to their circumstances; and (2)
vulnerable people who have little access to assets and economic opportunities due to social exclusion, marginalization and the negative impact of climate change, targeted for participation in economic
groups (RIs and MSMEs) promoted by the project.[2]
2.  The poorest households hold not more than 1 ha cultivable land or are landless whilst poor households comprise smallholders with less than 2 ha cultivable land whose livelihoods are vulnerable to
NR degradation and climate change risks. Vulnerable people within the poor rural population include women (40%), unemployed female and male youth between 18-35 years (30%) and persons with
disability who are economically active (5%), many being part of the poor/poorest households. Market-oriented farmers with 2‑10 ha cultivable land will also benefit from project support as minority
members of the eligible groups and enterprises. The combined total number is estimated at 100,000 beneficiaries. Market-oriented-farming households with more than 10 ha of arable land and larger
private sector entities may participate in project activities such as capacity-building if they offer employment or business opportunities to the primary target group. In line with IFAD’s targeting
guidelines, PROSPER will reach the target group through a combination of geographical targeting, community targeting (PWDs), self-targeting and direct targeting mechanisms. More details on the
targeting approach are provided in the PIM.
3.  The primary safeguards against elite capture will be the self-targeting plus the participatory identification of the poor and priority households and rigorous screening to ensure the inclusion of these
households as beneficiaries, in the group level business plans implemented with project support. Detailed screening of business plan proposals on commercial viability, conflicts of interest and
corruption will be undertaken. Compliance with pre-approved, objective selection criteria and transparent information-sharing and decision-making will be ensured.
4.  PROSPER is gender sensitive. Overall, 40% women outreach will be targeted. PROSPER will address the barriers to women’s participation and empowerment prevalent in the geographical context of
the project. Involvement in training, educational and income generating activities will be promoted by ensuring there is enough time to reach everybody through community meetings and that activities
are arranged in a way convenient to women’s lives. PROSPER will include activities expected to attract women’s participation, such as shea and savings and credit groups. Gender targeting in
PROSPER includes the inclusion of young women (youth) and women with disabilities (PWDs).
5.  Both male and female unemployed youth (18‑35 years) will be targeted, particularly for off-farm opportunities in MSMEs related to primary production along the selected value chains, such as the
provision of mechanised land preparation services, the use of by-products for animal feed, and crop aggregation. For selected interventions, MSMEs would have a 60% minimum membership
requirement of eligible youth. PROSPER will concentrate on potential vulnerabilities affecting specific sections within the youth category, for examples: ensuring that young women have the same
opportunities as their male counterparts to participate in and benefit from the project; and inclusion of female and male youth with disabilities. The steady migration of youth from the rural areas to
towns, observed in many countries, is a rationale response to the lack of earning opportunities. The country cannot afford to waste the resource of unemployed young people. A key part of the remedy
is supporting individual entrepreneurs in setting up businesses they choose, thereby creating authentic local employment. PROSPER is designed to be as flexible as possible in responding to the
energy and aspirations of youth in setting up enterprises from the bottom up.
6.  In sensitizing communities about the project, PROSPER will create awareness about PWDs and the differing nature of impairments. The participatory identification of households with PWDs will be
carried out while developing Cluster Plans. The needs assessment of the PWDs will follow tailored approaches for capacity building, economic engagement and social protection depending on the
nature of impairment. PROSPER will aim to mainstream women, youth and PWDs through their inclusion in the project-supported RIs, MSMEs and other activities.
7.  Phased approach. Selection of the proposed PROSPER regions is based on exhaustive analysis of available poverty, food insecurity and socioeconomic data in the Northern and Middle Belts. The
plan is to start with three of the poorest regions to conduct the various project-wide inception activities without over-extending Government and management resources and to align with the pattern of
project financing. The original concept envisaged this cautious approach, with all project activities tried from inception and scaled up when modalities are shown to be effective. The project structure is
flexible and phasing can and should be adjusted in the light of experience gained in the first years, particularly with lessons learned from piloting the innovative Blended Finance Facility (BFF):
8.  a. Calibration phase: The project will start implementation in three adjacent regions in the Northern Zone: Northern, Upper West and either Savannah or North East.
9.  b. Replication and scalability phase: The project will be scaled up to the remaining five target regions by the middle of the third year of implementation, according to four trigger conditions: (i) filling the
financing gap (currently estimated at USD 22.7 million), in part or in full from IFAD-12 (IFAD); (ii) Government meeting its PROSPER cofinancing commitments during the Calibration Phase (GoG); (iii)
MoUs with implementing partners established and progressing well (PROSPER management); and (iv) satisfactory arrangements in place with regard to the operation of the Matching Grants and
Blended Finance Facility (PROSPER management).
10.  If one or more of the above conditions are not met, this could lead to restructuring of the project or any other possible remedies to address underlying issues through the mechanism of an early mid-
term review. Examples of measures that could be taken for restructuring include reducing the size of the project, reconfiguring implementation arrangements to address performance shortfalls,
reducing the scope of components facing challenges and increasing the size of those that are performing better, and /or partial cancellation.
22.
[1] Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) is an indicator for the dietary diversity in households.
23.
[2] The socially sensitive household methodologies to be employed, as recommended strongly by GASIP supervision missions, are mentioned in the Household nutrition and healthy diet campaign
section under Subcomponent 1.1 below and in detail in the PIM.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
1.  PROSPER comprises two mutually supportive components. . By (1) Developing rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure, and (2) Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and
small operators around selected agricultural value chains, PROSPER aims at increasing the real demand for sustainably grown produce by significant numbers of people living in poor rural
communities while enhancing their capacity to meet this demand through more efficient climate-resilient agricultural practices and natural resource management to mitigate the negative impact of
climate change. The intended outcomes are increased incomes, greater food and nutrition security, and improved health status.
2.  Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure. This component is concentrated on investing in the human, physical and natural resources of the target
communities – the “public goods” – for the benefit of the targeted 100,000 beneficiaries in the project areas. Expected component outcome: Improved and sustainable livelihoods in target areas
supported by strengthened rural institutions and improved socioeconomic infrastructures.
3.  Subcomponent 1.1 Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households comprises a range of institution-building and skills development activities to enable target communities to
take ownership of and accountability for their own development initiatives, to promote sustainable community-based NR management, to strengthen their ability to implement modern sustainable and
climate resilient farming, and to adopt healthier diets.
4.  Community mobilisation, cluster identification and planning. The project will seek to secure community interest in PROSPER and the approaches it is promoting with a series of interactive
workshops and consultations at regional and district levels, starting with three regions in the first phase. The list of districts for project engagement will be finalized in discussions with local and national
authorities. In each selected district, the project will identify and form clusters of neighbouring communities through a screening of NRM and socioeconomic conditions and mobilisation meetings at
village level.[1] Where interest is strong, the community leadership decides to commit to PROSPER and opportunities exist around the target value chains, a Cluster Committee will be established to
interact with the project and manage implementation.
5.  Cluster Planning. For each participating cluster, PROSPER will facilitate the collaborative development of a bespoke community-driven Cluster Plan (CP). Each CP will set out local priorities for
communal socioeconomic investments and identify potential production and related business opportunities that may be realized by RIs and MSMEs under Component 2 and/or with community
resources. The CP will inform the agenda for PROSPER action in each location, concentrating on investments responding directly to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and supplementing any
existing development plans of local authorities or other development partners. The CP will underpin the local PROSPER-community partnership and remain with the cluster leaders and Local
Authorities as a live document to guide development planning during and after implementation.
6.  Capacitation of rural institutions and enterprises. This action entails bolstering both the governance and management structures and the technical capacities of active rural institutions, (including
farmer/producer-based organisations and other economic interest groups such as VSLAs) and MSMEs, and thereby their capacity to function as effective VC partners. It is envisaged as a purposeful
major investment in human resource capital to develop a more conducive environment for the economic activities of the rural population. Within this drive to grow the rural economies by expanding
business activity for groups, the poverty focus of PROSPER entails extending the group-based opportunities to substantial numbers of vulnerable and economically marginalised people.
7.  The programme of training, skills development and related demonstrations will be delivered by district extension services backed up by MoFA technical departments and other line ministries as well as
PROSPER technical assistance. In preparation for the work, the project will reinforce the technical skills of public service frontline field staff, reorientated to a modern business approach to farming
including the adoption of climate-friendly agronomic practices and natural resource remediation. The action will be launched with an awareness-raising workshop in each district on opportunities for
youth in and around the smallholder agriculture sector and the PROSPER value chains. Cluster-level surveys will identify groups and MSMEs, both pre‑existing and potential, interested in and likely to
benefit from capacity building. The group identification process will be gender sensitive with a special focus on women, youth and PWDs.
8.  The District Departments of Agriculture (DDAs) will lead an extension campaign organised around group organisational skills, climate-smart demonstrations and practical training sessions on topics
such as conservation agriculture, agronomical practices and “farming as a business” tailored to the local agroecological conditions and main VCs in the cluster. Financial literacy (Subcomponent 2.2),
orderly record keeping and the basics of business conduct will be addressed to complement instruction on the technical aspects of sustainable production. Emphasis will be placed on the need for a
marketing plan for every planting: “production with a purpose”. An estimated 4,500 RIs and 800 MSMEs will be trained over the life of PROSPER. Off-farm, the training will centre on the remediation
and proper management of the depleted shared NRs which are key to the livelihoods of farming communities. Best practices in soil and water conservation, tree planting and NRM, (to be supported in
many target clusters with remedial works under subcomponent 1.2 below), will be shown to be beneficial to all the present and future users of the landscape. The capacity-building campaign will extend
to non-producer economic interest groups who will be given training on enterprise development, particularly value addition and support services. Many will be Youth-based and start-ups stimulated by
the project.
6/15
9.  Household nutrition and healthy diet. Alongside the measures to capacitate target groups to generate and sustain income and to manage and remediate their NRs, PROSPER will deliver an
inclusive community-wide nutrition and healthy diet agenda to benefit all households, in synergy with the promotion of climate and nutrition-sensitive farming and vegetable cultivation. This initiative
will promote dietary changes on the ground as a counterbalance to the drive to produce food for sale, shifting attention to the nutritional value of the food consumed. The action will start with a
Participatory Needs Assessment in each target community and entail training on household methodologies (HHM) and domestic financial literacy for up to 2,400 selected households. The Gender
Action Learning System (GALS) as part of HHM will be introduced to enhance Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment (GEWE) in PROSPER. GALS will create the togetherness in self-selected
families to develop a vision and strategy to get themselves out of poverty. A Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) study will be conducted to understand better local issues around nutrition and diet,
and to serve as a baseline for specific trainings and the Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) strategy. At the centre of nutrition activities will be a household education programme
delivered through care groups by peers comprising demonstration nutrition gardens for healthy diversified diets, dedicated training on post-harvest management, nutrition education and SBCC for
communities.
10.  Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. This development activity seeks to realize some of the “public goods” investments prioritized and chosen by local communities
through the Cluster Planning process. Three complementary types of climate-resilient infrastructure will be eligible: i) Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation measures; ii) Feeder roads and
farm tracks; and iii) Communal social infrastructure. These investments aim to improve the sustainability of NR-related livelihoods and to stimulate socioeconomic advancements in the participating
clusters. The NR remediation infrastructures may comprise soil and water conservation structures, such as contour bunds, reforestation and shelterbelts, bench terraces, tied ridges, water harvesting
and storage ponds, as well as climate resilience measures in line with local conditions. The District Assembly will undertake all procedures as appropriate to acquire/lease any land needed for
construction. PROSPER envisages expanding and rehabilitating road networks (feeder roads and farm tracks, culverts and small bridges), as well as shared domestic water supply structures
(boreholes with hand or solar pumps), sanitation facilities and waste management systems, and alternative/green energy schemes (including resource and energy recovery from waste).
11.  Each capital investment plan will include appropriate management, operation, maintenance and ongoing financing arrangements, with overall responsibility resting with the community where relevant.
In each case, agreement will be reached between the District Assembly and the community leadership on the post-construction asset management by various community gender-balanced committees,
building on previous local norms and the organisational training delivered under Subcomponent 1.1. The off‑farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation infrastructure and the Feeder roads/Farm
tracks will be funded 100% by the project. For water supply, the current national practice is for communities to make a cash contribution equivalent to one-year facility maintenance costs that shall be
deposited in a bank account to demonstrate commitment towards long-term sustainability of the installation. For household toilet systems, the project will pay for the core element of the facility, such as
the concrete slab or digni-loo unit, while the beneficiaries excavate the pit and build the superstructure with their own resources.
12.  Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation infrastructure will be community-managed. The infrastructure for NR remediation and environmental protection will be maintained by a Natural
Resources and Environmental Management Committee to be established under the project at the community level. Feeder roads and farm tracks will be maintained by the Department of Feeder
Roads, who will be involved in implementation to enable them to take over post-construction maintenance. Water harvesting, water supply and waste systems will be managed by a Water and
Sanitation Management Team (WSMT), a statutorily recognised body operating under the auspices of the District Assembly Works Department. Water will be sold at the tap and revenue raised used to
maintain the supply systems. Sanitation and waste management systems will be maintained by the concerned households. Environmental sanitation and waste disposal and recovery systems will be
coordinated by the WSMT and supervised by the District Assembly Works Department. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which is prepared as part of the PROSPER
design, will identify potential impacts of the infrastructure elements under the subcomponent and will integrate measures for addressing them.
13.  Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators around selected agricultural value chains. The expected outcome is: Smallholders and small
businesses draw greater benefits from the increasing market outlets for agricultural produce through comprehensive financial, capacity and marketing support.[2]
14.  The second component is concentrated on investing in the “private goods” of the population to bring about a sustained uplift the earning capacity of agricultural producer groups and related
enterprises. The aim is to expand business activity both within the target communities and in lasting agreements with other actors in the selected VCs. The project is realistic in recognising the differing
prospects of the targeted beneficiary groups and the extent to which access to finance is the main constraint they face. In this context, the PROSPER emphasis on climate-friendly business
development, both on- and off-farm, must be balanced with social and welfare considerations for the most-disadvantaged households.
15.  The distinction between smallholders and small operators in this analysis is important. The project’s drive to modernise agriculture in and extend the reach of the key value chains to economically
marginalised communities is centred on the small-scale farmers but intended to reduce the poverty of the whole population. Alongside the capacity building of smallholders, PROSPER is geared to
promote real economic opportunities for the substantial numbers of underutilised people in the same population, particularly the youth, not all of whom want to be in farming anyway. PROSPER is not
intended to create jobs directly, but it is capacitated to help entrepreneurs to set up enterprises and to facilitate access to appropriate finance, providing regular income for the “small operators”, the
growing number of rural people not directly dependent on primary production. The project will make existing smallholders better off and at the same time create new jobs and enduring earning
opportunities for presently unemployed youth and other marginalised.
16.  Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development.  This subcomponent comprises actions to enable poor rural people, with little or no land, to transition from
inadequate subsistence livelihoods to regular earning from agriculture and related support services. The development framework is a market approach, linking increasingly proficient producers with
other actors in key value chains, with due regard for the equitable sharing of benefits from the local economic uplift. It is axiomatic in sustainable VC development that all the actors make a profit or
none; the producers, service providers and offtakers have a common interest in success.
17.  Value chain analysis. As an essential preliminary to the investment, PROSPER will build on the value chain analysis conducted during project design and assess further the potential for increasing
the real demand for the produce from areas remote from the main markets. It will examine in depth the status and characteristics of selected national value chains (soya, rice maize, cashew, shea and
poultry) and map the VC actors located close to the target communities, particularly the first stage market linkages between producers and others in the chains. The general presumption is that most
smallholder farmers and their groups have no established marketing arrangements and interact opportunistically with buyers and middlemen only as and when they harvest a surplus. The number and
location of private sector operators in the project area, including larger agribusinesses working with contracted outgrowers, is not well documented. PROSPER will commission a detailed structural
examination of each VC, including an estimation of the value added at each link, to provide a sound platform for project interventions.
18.  Promotion of linkages between producers and value chain actors. This practical and intensive developmental activity is aimed at generating enduring partnerships between producers engaged in
climate-resilient farming and larger-scale agribusinesses within locally appropriate forms of robust and equitable contract relationships in the private sector. PROSPER itself will not enter business
relations with the parties at any stage. The project will concentrate on those eligible RIs and MSMEs that demonstrated interest and potential in the Component 1 capacity building interventions. Group
eligibility for different windows of PROSPER support centres on meeting membership criteria regarding the minimum proportion of specified disadvantaged groups: women, female and male youth,
PWDs and landless or near-landless households. These criteria allow for and, for practical reasons, encourage a minority of non-eligible members with productive land holdings of up to 10 ha in each
group.[3]
19.  With the support of the Business Advisory Centres (BACs)/Business Resource Centres (BRCs) and DDAs, the project will engage with VC actors in each participating district with an information-
gathering and analysis exercise. An initial assessment will be conducted of the organisational status and maturity of the targeted groups (RIs and MSME), building on the cluster profiling at project
inception, (Component 1.1), in terms of their organisational proficiency, level of capitalization, acquired skills in financial management and potential to establish business agreements with VC actors
such as traders and processors.
Entry level
Maturity indicators
(all groups passed this level to benefit from sub-component 2-
1)
Less-mature RIs/MSMEs
More-mature RIs/MSMEs
Organisational skills
New / inexperienced group
Loose organisation, some evidence of joint activity.
Experienced and structured group.
Level of capitalization
No internal capital
Less than 500 cedis per member on average.
500‑1,500 cedis per member in average. Regular
saving practices.
Skills in financial
management
No skill
Potential to establish
business agreements
No experience
Groups with internal small loan system, little/no experience
with formal financial system
Group with a bank account, some experience in
credit management.
Some experience with difficulty to develop partnership
Regular and successful partnerships.
1.  The groups will be categorized broadly into two streams going forward with project support: those needing more time and coaching to consolidate their organisational and financial capacity to engage
in business; and those deemed ready to advance to formal business arrangements with larger VC actors and external financial services. This objective evaluation will be instrumental in proper
targeting and sequencing to access further project support and appropriate financial services.
2.  It is expected that 50% of the total number of beneficiaries targeted under Component 1 (50,000 people) by PROSPER will qualify for assistance under this Subcomponent. Among those, the
marginalised, poorer and most vulnerable RIs (composed of more than 50% members with access to land of 1 ha or less and 50% women, 60% youth and 10% people with disability) and smaller
MSMEs (fewer than 9 employees) progressing from Component 1 and meeting organisational proficiency requirements, minimum level of internal savings and acquired skills in financial management
will be offered training sessions backed up by demonstrations and events at the cluster level on climate risk mitigation, resilience and integration into value. Particular attention will be paid to potential
MSMEs dedicated to women, youth and PWDs. Meetings will be organized to raise awareness, share information, bring together potential partners, and seek to conclude RI and MSME agreements
with VC actors. These beneficiaries will be assisted later in the preparation of a basic climate-friendly Business Plan (BP) to aid the consolidation of their income-generating activities and consideration
for financing, (see below).
3.  The relatively better-off RIs that: (i) have a larger proportion of well-off beneficiaries (less than 50% of the members have access to an area of 1 ha of land and no more than 10% have access to 5-10
ha of land) and a lesser proportion of vulnerable people (40% women, 30% youth and 5% PWDs); and (ii) meet the organisational and financial literacy requirements, (including a bank account with an
adequate level of savings), will be offered a more advanced version of the trainings and demonstrations leading towards the establishment of business partnerships in each target district. MSMEs (with
up to 29 employees) will be engaged in the same developmental processes if their business can be shown to contribute to increasing the offtake from the primary target group and extending the reach
of the VCs in remote locations. These beneficiaries will be assisted later in the preparation of a more advanced version of a BP to support an application for external commercial credit. Those less-
mature RIs and MSMEs that perform well in the entry level scheme are able and encouraged to progress to this advanced level activity.
4.  The outcome of this activity is the establishment of formal market linkages between group of capacitated RIs and standalone MSMEs and offtakers, value adders, aggregators, etc.
5.  Development of business plans. The centerpiece of the third activity is the generation of a sound, achievable and fully costed plan appropriate to the resources and realistic prospects of each
concerned entity. For the less-mature RIs and MSMEs, which meets the poverty criteria referred to above, a simple but achievable BP will be prepared with the support of BRCs, BACs, DDAs and
PFIs as available. The Cluster Committees from Component 1.1 will be strengthened and upgraded to include PFIs and other VC actors to participate in BP development and realisation. BPs can be
developed by multiple RIs and standalone MSMEs with the prerequisites of potential formal market linkages (supported by the project or pre-existing), proper organisational skills and an adequate
level of internal capital. Each basic BP should include inputs, simple tools and equipment, and whatever other cost items are required, set against a realistic estimate of returns. For individual MSMEs,
the BP will centre on income-generating services and activities related to primary production, such as land preparation, simple value addition or crop aggregation, and may include limited working
capital. All BPs should be green in design and address effectively climate and NR degradation risks and impacts. The BPs will be evaluated by an independent agent/service provider (to avoid elite
capture or any risk of political interference) and, if acceptable, used to advance a request for support through a Matching Grant window, (detailed under Subcomponent 2.2). Access to the MG window
will be limited to the very poor group and MSMEs with less than nine employees and meeting the targeting criteria and as referred in the PIM.
7/15
6.  For stronger RIs and MSMEs, the project will provide the opportunity for professional support by technical assistance and the BACs/BRCs in close collaboration with the PFIs in preparing a fully-
fledged BP and facilitating access to affordable finance, (see Subcomponent 2.2 below).[4] The strengthened Cluster Committees will support the process. The PFIs themselves will be receiving
capacity building and mentoring support from PROSPER to extend their outreach and are expected to engage fully with their potential customers early in the Business Planning stage. The first
category of advanced BPs will include groups of RIs partnering with an agribusiness/value chain actor. It may include inputs and simple tools for the participating RIs as well as working capital and
elements such as mills, machinery, vehicles, equipment and minor infrastructure for the agribusiness. Another category of advanced BPs will include individual MSMEs with up to 29 employees. The
advanced BP for MSMEs will be larger and more sophisticated than those under the basic ones and would similarly cover working capital requirements. Each BP should be green in design and
address effectively the climate change adaptation and mitigation challenges and NR degradation risks. The successful advanced BPs will be eligible for support by the Blended Finance Facility,
(detailed under Subcomponent 2.2).
7.  For PROSPER, the imperative is to promote and expand businesses operating an aggregator-primary producer model that is prepared to engage with the IFAD target RIs and related enterprises to
become their interface with the market. This VC chain development is key to moving the sector on from the failing unsustainable smallholder farming systems.
8.  Subcomponent 2.2 Access to rural financial services. The main objective is to promote a savings culture among PROSPER’s beneficiaries, facilitate realization of the cluster-level Business Plans
and improve enduring access to suitable financial resources for the beneficiaries to engage in profitable agribusiness. Through RIs and local MSMEs, farmers will be integrated step-by-step into the
formal financial system and have lasting access to adapted and affordable financial services to develop their agribusinesses, including green investments, recognising that such access is a necessary
though not sufficient condition for rapid sectoral development. Alongside the full-scale project support to the growth of the six key value chains, PROSPER will assist beneficiary groups concentrating
on other food crops primarily for consumption, nutrition and poverty reduction purposes, such as micro-scale vegetable production.
9.  PROSPER financial services are structured around three financial instruments appropriate to the various situations prevailing in rural areas as regard capacities and professionalization: (1) Saving and
Loan Groups (VSLA model) for sparking the saving habit within communities; (2) a  Matching Grants fund for capitalizing emergent RIs to engage in commercial agriculture and smaller MSMEs around
the selected VCs and supporting food and nutrition security promotion schemes for the most vulnerable groups; and (3) a Blended Finance Facility operated as a refinancing facility (RF) by PFIs to
ensure sustainable access to financial services for growing FIs and MSMEs, (see details in respective sections below). These instruments form a sequential process by which beneficiaries will be able
to increase their access to financing solutions over time as they build their financial and management capacities and develop their business relationships with other VC actors.
10.  Savings mobilisation/Saving and Loan Groups. Within the array of institution building activities under Component 1 concentrated on promoting income generating activities for RIs and MSMEs, the
project will emphasise the need for savings mobilisation and internal capital formation by all beneficiary groups as a prerequisite for forming sustainable businesses and, as and when appropriate,
accessing external financial services.
11.  In that context, PROSPER will support the creation and strengthening of savings and credit groups, building on the proven VSLA model that various IFAD-funded projects have been using with
success.[5] The objectives are: to promote the saving habit and culture as a way to increase self-financing capacities for farmers and other service providers, thus reducing their dependency on
external resources; and to build internal capital in order to reduce the need for and cost of credit in the longer term. Savings and credit groups will be identified through the initial profiling process,
preferably with all the members of a single group engaged in the same activity, such as trading or processing.
12.  As they form the group and start transactions, members will be trained in financial literacy and banking activity management. Savings deposited will constitute initial capital that will be leveraged in
subsequent investment in equipment on credit with project support. Through the financial education programme, PROSPER will encourage groups to save for future needs, such as raising their
counterpart contribution to access Matching Grant funding. Participating PFIs will be trained in product development to incentivise saving. The project will help all interested beneficiaries to create or
strengthen 5,300 savings and loans groups in the targeted regions. MSMEs and RFIs will be assisted by the same programme. After one year in operation, Savings and loan groups will be assessed
on their level of savings, member participation and commitment to developing business activities. The best rated groups will qualify to apply for and benefit from the Matching Grant (MG) fund or
Blended Finance Facility (BFF).
13.  Matching Grants. As a second stage, PROSPER will operate a MG fund to capitalize the poorer (and probably less mature) RFIs and MSMEs (less than 9 employees) toward raising their production
and output as part of simple business agreements that link groups of RIs with VC actors, including nucleus farmers, offtakers, processors, traders and aggregators, and establish MSMEs in
business.[6] Eligibility for a MG will entail more demanding performance criteria. It is expected that participating groups will enhance their business proficiency and become more reliable in the eyes of
potential VC partners. PROSPER will promote the adoption of innovative, green, climate smart and resilient technologies and practices to achieve financial and environmental sustainability in the
context of climate change and NR depletion. The MG as a one-off support will help RIs and MSMEs to finance the investments described in their BP. Poverty and targeting criteria for the MG is listed
above and in the PIM.
14.  Three MG funding channels are proposed: i) for RIs, ii) for MSMEs and iii) for nutrition and other poverty initiatives. The level of grant/contribution required will vary according to each specific VC and
the profile of the beneficiaries targeted, (details can be found in Annex 8.) A dedicated category of the matching grants activities will be devoted to nutrition related activities for women groups, youth
groups and PWD eligible for the Nutrition and other poverty initiatives funding channel. No BP will be required for small income-generating schemes focused on promoting diversification towards
nutrition and food security (for example, year-round vegetable production schemes). RIs will be assessed against the realization of their BPs and capacity to expand business with their offtaker partner.
Similarly, stand-alone MSMEs will be rated on their performance against their BP. The best rated RIs and MSMEs will qualify to prepare an advanced BP with project assistance (under Subcomponent
2.1) and to access an affordable loan from PFIs through the BFF. It is expected that 30% of MG recipients will graduate to BFF financing during the project timeline. Levels of the MG per RI/MSME and
beneficiary, and of the contributions from beneficiaries are listed in the PIM[7].
15.  Blended Finance Facility (BFF). The BFF will develop, test and rollout green financial products to finance advanced BPs by the more developed RIs and MSMEs that have the potential to undertake
commercial agriculture with climate mitigation and adaptation interventions in partnership with other VC actors.[8] The Facility is set up to contribute to the opening up of the climate finance market in
Ghana.[9] The BFF will be made available as the third financial product for eligible groups - some of whom may not have accessed a MG. BFF will direct the financing only to qualified PROSPER RIs
and MSMEs who present bankable BPs with climate mitigation and adaptation interventions. Number of qualified RIs (joined together) and linked formally to VC actors under contract arrangements
and standalone MSMEs will gain access to BFF credit at a blended on-lending rate for financing a more sophisticated BP that has a strong focus on adaptation and mitigation in the face of climate
change impacts on small-scale agriculture. Selected RIs within the same geographical cluster and along the same VC will be helped to come together to develop and finance an advanced BP, which
could include support to the VC actor as needed, provided that the BP show clear benefits of such support to the IFAD target group taking part. Another BFF funding category will be made available to
BPs developed by small enterprises, (up to 29 employees).
16.  The project will provide this affordable financing solution to the best RIs and MSMEs capacitated to invest on a larger scale (equipment, working capital, inputs, TA) and to grasp other business
opportunities. The BFF will continue to operate as a refinancing facility beyond PROSPER closure to provide sustainable access to affordable finance for groups to maintain and develop their business
activities with focus on climate mitigation and adaptation.
17.  The BFF will be developed through combining/blending at least five different loanable resources with the objective to foster the development of a climate lending market.[10] The BFF will mix
concessional funds from development institutions with commercial private resources. The five resources are: two lines of credit from the Green Climate Fund (GCF)/ Inclusive Green Finance Initiative
(IGREENFIN) Phase I, with both lines at highly concessional cost of funds (0% for climate mitigation and 1% for climate adaptation activities); one line of credit from IFAD resources at a concessional
cost of funds of 2%; the Association of Rural Banks (ARB) Apex Bank of Ghana and its Rural Commercial Bank (RCB) members, who will engage their own resources at a Treasury Bond rate
(reference cost of funds) of 12%; and resources from other private sector investors and/or other development agencies, at a market cost of funds of at least 20%.[11]  Due diligence efforts of the APEX
Bank and its network of 56 rural and community banks will continue to be made during implementation. The successful operation of the BFF is expected to incentivise the APEX Bank and its network
to provide more resources and to crowd in additional resources from the private sector.
18.  PROSPER will support access by the above-mentioned groups to credit lines for green agricultural investments, leveraging the IGREENFIN under the GCF Great Green Wall Umbrella Programme
(GGWUP). IGREENFIN will support (i) Mitigationmeasures for reducing/mitigating GHG emissions and (ii) Adaptationactivities to strengthen climate resilience of the Project beneficiaries. Through
IGREENFIN, PROSPER will build RIs and MSMEs’ capacities to understand climate threats, identify and implement adaptation and mitigation solutions, design viable/profitable business plans,
improve financial education, business management and development, and access green loans from banks and MFIs.[12] IGREENFIN will also: strengthen the commitment to green and inclusive
financing by financial intermediaries, MSMEs and others; contribute to climate resilience-strengthening activities in production and processing in addition to those activities required by SECAP for
climate proofing; and support adaptation and mitigation activities included in beneficiaries’ BPs through IGREENFIN- adaptation Window I and IGREENFIN mitigation Window II
19.  The BFF will be established at and managed by the ARB Apex Bank. The Apex Bank, as the Investment Fund Manager, will provide wholesale liquidity on blended terms to its RCB members and
other interested retail financial institutions operating with reasonable outreach in the PROSPER project area, for on-lending for smallholder agricultural production and MSMEs development.[13] The
Apex Bank relies on its due diligence processes to select its partner retail RCBs and other qualified FIs. This blended financing arrangement will leverage existing derisking tools, including GIRSAL’s
partial credit guarantee scheme, GAIP’s smallholder insurance scheme and GCX market access and warehouse receipt systems.
20.  To contribute to mitigating the risk averseness of participating RCBs and other FIs, PROSPER will contribute 50% of the premium to be paid by these FIs to the GIRSAL partial credit guarantee fund for
a coverage of up to 70% loss.[14] In addition, to encourage beneficiaries to take up high value but risky climate mitigation and adaptation interventions, PROSPER will contribute 50% of the insurance
premium paid by clients to GAIP.[15] To ensure optimal participation from the clients, the agricultural insurance product solicited (weather index insurance and/or area yield index insurance) will be
bundled with the credit requested from the PFIs. Among the multiple uses of the TA associated with the BFF, part will be used to address key bottlenecks, including the risk averse nature of FIs in
Ghana to finance smallholder agriculture, lack of affordable liquidity in the banks and unaffordable interest rates for smallholder producers. The BFF will be developed and set up at the Apex Bank by
an external expert sourced by PROSPER. At inception, BFF PROSPER will be linked with BFF AAFORD.
21.  Partner RCBs and other retail FIs selected to channel BFF financing to beneficiaries will have to commit to offering the predetermined single digit on-lending interest rate negotiated between the Apex
Bank and the project, while ensuring a reasonable return and sustainability to the participating RCBs and FIs. In addition to contributing to the credit guarantee fund and the agricultural insurance, a
cash contribution of around 25% of the cost of the BP will be required from the RIs, including a contribution from the partner offtaker, the loan being limited to the remaining amount. IGREENFIN
technical assistance to RCB staff will be deployed towards climate change capacity building and financial product development. The BFF will have a dedicated unit in the ARB Apex Bank specialized
in climate finance safeguards to run the day-to-day activities of the BFF in coordination with PROSPER and utmost attention will be placed on these aspects during supervision. The BFF will be
supported by the project’s M&E core team, which will report on the number and amounts of loans that are verified as “green” against the GCF criteria in the GCF Logframe on a yearly basis.
22.  Levels of BFF loans per RI/MSME and beneficiary and of the participating VC actors, and of the contributions from beneficiaries are listed in the PIM[16].
23.  Green loans and grants.  To ensure that the MG Fund and the BFF will provide Green loans and loans and to avoid “greenwashing” risks. The eligibility criteria in the IGREENFIN operational manual
for green investments will be applied to all BFF and MG fund financing. The Operational Manual of IGREENFIN will be considered part of PROSPER PIM and its provisions will apply to GCF and IFAD
investments in the BFF and MG fund. The PROSPER unit in APEX Bank and PROSPER PCU, which include climate and safeguards specialists along with PROSPER M&E team will verify adherence
to the provisions of the PIM and the Operational Manual of the IGREENFIN. Additionally; the GCF Logframe includes an indicator on the number and amounts of investments that are verified as “green”
against the GCF criteria, and data will be reported on a yearly basis. Supervision missions will follow up adherence of the loans and grants provided by IFAD to the same criteria and will report on the
adherence in the supervision report.
24.  Component 3. Project management and Policy engagement. Expected outcome: Efficient and timely delivery of PROSPER development results and support to evidence-based sectoral policy
formulation.
25.  Subcomponent 3.1Project management. PROSPER will be facilitated by an implementation support structure embedded in the host GoG agency providing liaison, physical and financial project
management, reporting and accounting, proactive knowledge management and learning activities, and monitoring and evaluation functions. Details are set out in the Project Management and
Coordination section below and in the PIM.
26.  Subcomponent 3.2 Policy engagement. The GoG policy environment for rural economic development (which is broader than agricultural sector development) advances incrementally, but still
8/15
contains operational contradictions such as the simultaneous provision of both commercial agricultural credit and highly subsidised inputs. Evidence-based policy dialogue and evolution is by nature a
long-term process and even the eight-year time frame of PROSPER may be regarded as too short to make much progress. However, the project is being launched in the context of a global climate
emergency and environmental catastrophe; “business as usual” is not an option. PROSPER is de facto a full-scale trial of green/climate finance and it is expected that much will be learned about this
novel instrument. It is highly likely that the knowledge gained will influence policy development during and long after implementation.
27.  IFAD brings considerable knowledge to the development partnership from a long-term constructive presence in the country and region. The Fund is an active participant in the Agricultural Sector
Working Group (ASWG) established between the GoG, development partners and other key stakeholders such as businesses, financial institutions, NGOs and farmers. The ASWG is chaired by
MoFA, to exchange knowledge and identify issues requiring policy refinement and decision-making to improve programme implementation and sectoral development. It has proven an effective
instrument for cooperation with previous developmental initiatives. The GoG organizes an annual Joint Sector Review under the auspices of the ASWG. PROSPER through this subcomponent will
continue to support the GoG to drive agriculture and rural development. 
28.  PROSPER will promote an enabling policy environment that will help achieve the project’s goals and objectives through the provision of technical assistance, high-level round-table discussions, policy
dialogue fora, conferences and advocacy as appropriate, underpinned by analytical work and knowledge management products from the experience of IFAD and other development partners. The
project will commission ad hoc studies on policy issues related to the IFAD Ghana COSOP and the scope of PROSPER. South-South Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) instruments will be used as a tool
for advancing the policy agenda and for the dissemination of the results.
29.  The intention is to provide GoG with a high-quality policy support facility on salient issues, starting with the policy ramifications of PROSPER’s large-scale trial of the new financial sector product
“climate/green finance” as a potentially important development instrument in Ghana in coping with climate change. Creating incentives for FIs and private sector to invest in green and climate resilient
agricultural value chains, without which the private sector is unlikely to borrow at scale to remediate NRs at landscape level that have long been neglected, under-invested, over-exploited and regarded
as “free goods” by traditional agriculturalists and pastoralists.
30.  Other topics of policy engagement would include: (i) barriers to private investment in the value chains, such as domestic value addition of cashew nuts, and regulation of domestic and international
trade in agricultural commodities; (ii) support ongoing efforts for public expenditure review in the rural economy and effectiveness of subsidy schemes; (iii) access to productive land for women and
youth; and (iv) availability of financial services for smallholders and MSMEs.
24.
[1] In this document, a “cluster” is a term for several neighbouring settlements sharing natural resources. It has no administrative significance but locates the combined population in the specific land area
upon which they depend and provides the project with a convenient unit for planning and operational purposes. Each cluster will include various common economic interest groups, such as Farmer Based
Organisations and VSLAs, alongside non-profit community structures. To avoid confusion and excessive use of acronyms, the term Rural Institution (RI) is used here for a production-related group and
Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise (MSME) for any business set up for other purposes.
25.
[2] Small businesses comprise enterprises and organised groups engaged in income generating activities other than primary production. The members are drawn from the same population.
26.
[3]   However, for reasons of equity and to avoid any elite capture of benefits, strict rules will limit any material provision of inputs to RIs members to a standard package sufficient to cultivate 1 ha
(Matching Grants) and 2 ha (BFF loans).
27.
[4] The concept of supporting “flexibility to achieve sustainability” in financing rural poor people is central to IFAD’s new Inclusive Rural Finance Policy, with less emphasis on commercial (market-priced)
finance at the entry level.
28.
[5] CARE has also had successful experience in developing the concept for women in Ghana.
29.
[6] This systematic objective selection approach and self-targeting mitigate potential elite capture of the MG fund.
30.
[7] The matching grants ranges for groups of RIs are based on specific assumptions with regard to total number of beneficiaries, no of Rural Institutions participating in the Business Plan, area to be
cultivated. During implementation, the tables in the PIM should be used as guidance regarding the maximum amount per single beneficiary to guide the process and not as guidance regarding the limit of
matching grant regardless of number of beneficiaries per Business Plan. Additionally, it is strongly recommended to limit the upper limit amount of MG per beneficiary (for group of RIs receiving MG for
production) to equivalent of MG share per one hectare. The limits for MSMEs (9 employees and less) are based on examples and should be used as guidance for the process.
31.
[8] Only for the six main VCs: rice, maize, soya, poultry, cashew and shea.
32.
[9] Currently, there is almost no demand for climate finance in Ghana because uptake of climate mitigation and adaptation technologies is still in its very early stages. BFF will be one of the very first
funds set up in Ghana to contribute to climate finance market development.
33.
34.
[10] A dedicated technical team of IFAD experts, private sector independent consultants and Apex Bank bankers and economists carried out a joint exercise to determine the blended affordable on-
lending rate. Details of the adopted approach to the interest rate determination are documented in a “Technical guidance note on determining the on-lending rate from blending and structuring a mixture
of highly concessional and commercially-priced loans”.
[11] The ARB Apex Bank in collaboration with PROSPER will look for investors and other development partners. A technical guidance note (in the PIM) shows that the average cost (wholesale rate) of the
blended funds will be in the single digits (less than 10%) and the average structured interest rate applied to the clients (on-lending or retail rate) will also be in single digits. This latter is compared to the
current market rate of between 26% and 28% applied by Apex Bank’s network of RCBs.
35.
[12] To ensure that green loans are validated and to avoid greenwashing risks, the eligibility criteria of the green loans are clearly defined in the GCF’s project Operational Manual, which is the equivalent
of the PIM.
36.
[13] For purposes of flexibility to achieve sustainability (IRF Policy 2021), the evolution and performance of the innovative blended fund will be closely monitored by a dedicated GCF/IGREENFIN TA-
supported M&E Unit lodged at the Apex Bank. The dedicated M&E team will collect and analyse data that will be used to inform recommendations and/or decisions to be taken at midterm (MTR) on
whether to make any adjustments to the blended fund and its operations.
37.
[14] The premium is currently estimated at 1% of loan portfolio to PROSPER clients.
38.
[15] Details of the premium determination will be worked out with GAIP in time for the beneficiaries to access BFF.
39.
[16] The BFF loans ranges for the VC actors and groups of RIs (coming under the same BP) are based on specific assumptions with regard to total number of beneficiaries, no of Rural Institutions
participating in the Business Plan, area to be cultivated. Same principles applies for other BFF windows; e,g. for MSMEs. During implementation, the tables in the PIM should be used as guidance
regarding the maximum amount per single beneficiary to guide the process and not as guidance regarding the limit of BFF loans regardless of number of beneficiaries per Business Plan. Additionally, it is
strongly recommended to limit the amount of BFF loan share per beneficiary (for group of RIs receiving loan for production) to an equivalent of loan share of two hectares. The limits for MSMEs (29
employees and less) are based on examples and should be used as guidance for the process.
E. Theory of Change
1.  Developmental challenges. The main development challenges in the project area are high levels of rural poverty, youth and women unemployment, food insecurity, malnutrition in all forms, climate
change and accelerating environmental degradation. Most poor farmers are engaged in low input-low output production in the small-scale rainfed field-crop sector, which is neither financially nor
environmentally sustainable. In the absence of linkages to VCs, marketing tends to be haphazard even in good years. There are significant numbers of vulnerable people – women, youth, and people
with disabilities –excluded from the rural agricultural economy.
2.  These challenges are compounded by accelerating NR scarcity and degradation exacerbated by climate change and a growing rural population. Traditional farming systems and diminishing access to
energy in rural areas leads to soil erosion, deforestation and loss of command over water; the productive land becomes progressively less fertile and yields decrease. These factors expose rural
livelihoods to external shocks, limiting the ability of households to meet their basic needs. The lack of access to healthy and diversified diets leads to compromised diets, particularly for
pregnant/lactating women and children under two years.
3.  On the demand side, VCs are suboptimal with progressively less market offtake in remote areas. Farmers sell any surplus produce in local markets or to traders and middlemen straight after harvest
when prices are low. In these circumstances, there are few opportunities for individual households and whole communities to accumulate the human, physical and financial resources needed to
modernize production and progress from subsistence. Women and youth are most affected due to many factors including socio-cultural exclusion. The absence of public investment over many years
has resulted in a lack of basic infrastructure, such as reliable potable water supplies, which places constraints on both livelihoods and living standards.
4.  Opportunities. PROSPER will tackle these formidable challenges with a market approach. Recognizing the importance of strong Rural Institutions to support farmers’ access to the VCs, on the
supply side the project will invest not only in the technical capabilities of primary producers and processors but also in the organisational and business skills required to enter lasting commercial
arrangements. The risk is the farmers are not able to link effectively to the market / meet market demands due to poor capacity, non-access to proper inputs and technologies, limited financial
resources. PROSPER will strongly work to prevent this risk. Climate change has drawn attention to the cumulative depletion of the NR base, with much formerly productive land and forest already
beyond the point of no return. Based on the assumption that the new farming technologies, training and access to finance will increase yield/production and farmers will encounter no barriers for
adoption of climate resilient technologies and practices, the aim of PROSPER’s work with smallholders will be to increase productivity and profitability rather than short-term production, in ways that
slow and then reverse the rapid deterioration of the productive land, both on- and off‑farm. Advice and demonstrations of climate-resilient farming practices such Conservation Agriculture will be
supported by purposeful remediation works in the wider landscape after years of neglect. The key success factor in this regard is progress towards proactive NR management arrangements, with
acceptance of community responsibility for the fragile land. Environmental sustainability is a necessary condition for successful “farming as a business”. Even limited additional profit coming into a poor
community can trigger growth in the local economy, including opportunities for new enterprises to provide support services to the farmers. This requires access to rural climate finance to incentivize the
sector to adopt best adaptation and mitigation practices.
5.  The underlying risk is that farmers will not meet the market demand (quality and quantity wise) or that there will be a slowing down in market demand. The project recognises fully that stimulating field
and tree crop production alone, however well the agronomy is adjusted to the environment, will not benefit the target population without a substantial increase in the real demand for the produce, in
terms of volume, prices that at least cover production costs and access to the multi-step markets. The argument hinges on the efficacy of demand pull rather than supply push. PROSPER takes a VC
approach for the selected commodities, in which the smallholders are linked into the existing private sector VCs. The key link for a primary producer group is a contract arrangement with an
agribusiness or aggregator. On the assumption that the private sector actors are interested in creating linkages with smallholders, PROSPER is oriented to facilitate such private sector arrangements
by guiding and coaching the emergent RIs and MSMEs, developing business plans as appropriate for groups with differing levels of maturity, engaging with larger-scale VC actors (“drivers”) and
arranging access to affordable financial services as needed. These mainstream business interventions are complemented with measures to include marginalised and vulnerable people and to invest in
shared public socioeconomic infrastructure to improve the living conditions of whole communities.
6.  Success with the growth in agricultural production in the framework of rapidly expanded value chains will drive up the incomes of the whole economy in the target rural communities and stimulate local
demand for increased and additional support services both in the sector and in the wider population. It is this secondary demand that will provide opportunities for youth to escape from the under- and
unemployment prevalent in the project area. Major constraints regard the lack of opportunities in the rural setting and the desire to migrate to urban areas; working in agriculture is not considered
attractive or remunerative enough. PROSPER is designed to help youth along an authentic pathway from poverty by providing general training on running a business, helping to set up micro-
enterprises of all types (related to the six PROSPER value chains) and linking the emergent MSMEs to affordable finance. The new enterprises then contribute themselves to the recovery of the local
economy.
9/15
7.  PROSPER will promote women’s participation and empowerment by addressing barriers prevalent in the geographical context of the project. Major constraints are represented by low level of
education among poor women, already existing workload, and lack of willingness of spouses and other family members to support full participation of women in project activities. PROSPER will
mitigate these constraints by increased participation in training (e.g. Financial Literacy) and promotion of educational and income generation activities; labour - saving and women-friendly technologies
to address workload; community awareness on gender equality as a vehicle for prosperity and the introduction of GALS approach. PROSPER will advocate for different male role models by
encouraging men to support women’s participation through guarantee of land and other resources required. Gender targeting in PROSPER will include the inclusion of young women (youth) and
women with disabilities (PWDs). Training and meetings with PWDs will be organized in close-by locations in the communities, in sensitive teaching and learning environments. To cater to the special
needs of the PWDs with visual, hearing, physical and speech impairments, PROSPER will train them in braille, sign and audio languages.
8.  In PROSPER nutrition and health will be promoted through several pathways, including selection of value chains that are nutrition and climate sensitive or that will make a high contribution to nutrition;
food conservation, post-harvest processing and value addition; promotion of vegetable gardens; and nutrition education. Specific trainings and a Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC)
strategy will be developed to promote non-discriminatory intra-household food distribution, adequate diets for adolescent girls, consumption of diversified diets, food hygiene and safety, and improved
WASH practices as well as the discrimination of negative socio-cultural habits like teenage marriages and early pregnancies resulting in low-birth weight babies as major risk factors for malnutrition.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
1.  Alignment with SDGs:[1]PROSPER will contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals, primarily: SDG 1 (No poverty), in particular to the indicators 1.1: Eradicate extreme poverty, 1.2: Reduce
poverty by at least 50%, and 1.5: Build the resilience of the poor and vulnerable to climate, economic and environmental shocks and events; SDG2 (Zero hunger), in particular to the indicators 2.3:
Double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers and 2.4: Ensure sustainable food production systems and resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and
production; SDG 5 (Gender equality), in particular to the indicators 5.5.a: Women’s equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to ownership and control over land; SDG 8 (Decent work and
economic growth), SDG 10 (Reduced inequalities) and SDG 13 (Climate action). PROSPER is aligned to the UN Sustainable Development Partnership Framework (UNSDP) for Ghana, specifically
Outcome 1 under Results Area 1 (“Productive agriculture drives sustainable industrialization, improves livelihoods and ensures a hunger- and malnutrition-free nation”) and Outcome 6 under Results
Area 3 (“Urban and rural communities have access to affordable services, knowledge and tools to increase their resilience”).
2.  Country ownership and alignment with national priorities: PROSPER is aligned with the development strategies set out in the Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework (MNDPF
2018-2021) and priorities set by MoF in the National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy (NFIDS 2017-23). MoFA's Ghana Agriculture Investment Plan (2018-2021) – Investing for Food and
Jobs, Gender and Agricultural Development Strategy (2015), is aligned with the international development framework including the UN 2030 SDGs (2015), AU Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme (CAADP)-Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for Shared Prosperity and Improved Livelihoods (2014) and the ECOWAS Vision 2050
(2021 in draft). PROSPER aligns with the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection’s National Gender Policy (2015), the Agenda for Jobs (2018-21) policy framework, National Youth Policy
(2010) and Nutrition Policy (2014), while considering changes in the socioeconomic landscape of the country and recent developments at the international level.
3.  Alignment with IFAD corporate priorities and the COSOP. PROSPER is in line with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s mainstreaming areas (gender and social inclusion,
youth, nutrition, environment and climate). PROSPER will also contribute to the strategic objectives identified in IFAD’s COSOP for Ghana, specifically SO1, SO2 and SO3, by initiating new activities
or building on activities of IFAD projects at a nascent stage. For example, PROSPER will support the development of tree crop VCs, poultry and small ruminants as well as including a particular focus
on persons with disabilities. These areas are currently not addressed by ongoing IFAD projects except on an emergency basis due to COVID.
4.  Potential synergies and partnerships: PROSPER will develop synergies with other initiatives that support smallholders’ access to markets, inputs and affordable agricultural finance. It will
collaborate with other IFAD ongoing projects such as GASIP, AAFORD and REP and selected PFIs, particularly ARB Apex Bank. The project will collaborate with several development partners with
substantial active or pipeline projects in the sector, as follow.
5.  PROSPER will coordinate with upcoming FAO projects on: e-systems development for early warning, market surveillance and e-extension; smallholders’ livelihoods diversification through poultry and
small ruminants’ production; and improved nutrition through backyard gardening and healthy nutrition education. The WFP pipeline project Ghana Smallholder Farmer E-Commerce Access (SFEA)
overlaps with several core PROSPER activities: improving smallholder and rural actor livelihoods by participation in organized value chains and structured markets through e-commerce; promoting
demand from agro-processors, commercial and institutional buyers for smallholder produce; and increasing access to agricultural finance, insurance and price risk management tools. The World
Bank’s pipeline West Africa Food Systems Resilience Programme (FSRP) entails collaboration opportunities in sustainability and adaptive capacity of food production systems, modernization of
national extension services, integrated landscape management, market integration and strategic regional value chains.
6.  The EU programme Productive Investment for Agriculture in Savanah Ecological Zones  is under implementation in selected districts in Upper West, Savannah and North East Regions and comprises
three elements: Resilience Against Climate Change (REACH) project; Market Oriented Agriculture Project (MOAP-NW); and Productive Investments Project (PIP). REACH activities include assisting
district teams to draw up climate-smart development plans contributing to the NDCs, equipping extension services with Conservation Agriculture best practices, standardising the production of
Community Action Plans that focus on climate change adaptation, and grant funding identified mitigation activities. PROSPER will collaborate with REACH in districts where both projects are active,
learning lessons, leveraging on RIs that have already built their capacity in climate resilience, and orienting such clients to benefit from the BFF to develop their enterprises. PROSPER will also benefit
directly from the ongoing Global Affairs Canada-funded programme Modernising Agriculture of Ghana, which has been building the capacity of district and regional agricultural services with retraining,
transport and other resources to deliver digital and traditional extension services – including the cadres working in the PROSPER target area.
7.  IFAD and AfDB have long standing history of collaboration and partnerships through the cofinancinfg of IFAD funded projects, such as NRGP, REP and AFFORD – the latter through the de-risking
instrument Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing Agricultural Lending Scheme. AfDB is currently implementing the Savannah Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAPIP) and the Savannah
Investment Project (SIP) in the Savannah region. SAPIP began in 2018 to support the PFJ programme and aims to transform agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job and wealth
creation. SIP began in 2019 to support the RFJ programme and aims at improving production, develop agribusiness and value chain and facilitate access to finance. PROSPER will leverage on
SAPIP’s work of strengthening linkages between value chain actors and productivity enhancing interventions using climate resilient technologies, as well as the introduction of nutrition sensitization
activities into communities through cultivation of vegetables and dietary education. PROSPER will explore partnerships with SIP through the district stakeholder value chain meetings, to promote the
development of maize, soya and poultry VCs, as well as learn from SIP’s financing instruments developed during implementation. Opportunities for collaboration and co-financing with the AfDB
pipeline project titled the Savana Agriculture Value Chain Development Project will be pursued. The project will focus on integrating maize, soya and poultry value chain and building on the strengths of
SAPIP and SIP. The project timeline will be confirmed soon.
8.  PROSPER will explore synergies with government programmes with similar objectives, for examples: Ghana's Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) to identify project beneficiaries in
chosen geographical regions based on poverty and vulnerability; and the World Bank’s supported Ghana Jobs and Skills Project (GJSP) and Ghana Federation of the Disabled (GFD) regarding
targeting of PWDs. REP’s BACs/BRCs will provide skill training and business development services. PROSPER will partner with the private sector for mutual benefits, leveraging on the FARA
(Agribusiness Learning Alliance), Crop Research Institute (cashew) and private Agribusinesses (Yedent, Premium Foods, Vesta Soya processing and others) for business linkages with smallholders
40.
[1] The Ghana SDGs Baseline Indicator Report was published in June 2018. No data yet available on progress.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
1.  The total project costs, for eight-years, are estimated at USD 147.3 million or GHS 1.2 billion. The base cost amount to USD 133.1 million or GHS 827.6 million, equivalent to 90,3% of total costs.
Physical and price contingencies at USD 14.2 million account for about 11% of base costs or 9.7% of total costs. Investment costs of USD 135.1 million represent 91.7% of total project costs; and
recurrent costs of USD12.3 representing 8.3% (Table 1 and Annex 3).
2.  PROSPER Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure totals USD 30.9 million or 23% of base costs and comprises two subcomponents: (i) Capacity building of
rural institutions, enterprises and households; and (ii) Development of socio-economic infrastructure. Component 2: Strengthening the benefits for smallholders and small operators around agricultural
value chains totals USD 90.8 million or 68% of base costs and comprises two subcomponents: (i) Sustainable marketing linkages and business development; and (ii) Access to rural financial services
(including the green finance through IGREENFIN I). The third support component is related to Project Management and Policy engagement at USD 11.4 million (9% of total base cost) and comprises
two subcomponents: (i) Project Management; and (ii) Policy engagement. The total project cost is divided into USD 46.4 million in foreign currency, USD 84.7 million in local currency (excluding taxes)
and USD 16.2 million of taxes.
Table 1: Components Project Cost Summary
(GHS M and US$ ‘000)
Republic of Ghana
PROSPER
Components Project Cost Summary
A. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic
Infrastructure
1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and
Households
2. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure
Subtotal
(GHS
Million)
%
% Total
Foreign
Base
(US$ '000)
%
% Total
Foreign
Base
Local
Foreign
Total
Exchange Costs
Local
Foreign
Total
Exchange
Costs
61.7
98.7
160.4
1.7
31.0
32.7
63.4
129.7
193.1
3
24
17
8
16
23
9 878.6
267.8
10 146.4
15 794.2
4 959.8
25 672.8
5 227.5
20 753.9
30 900.3
3
24
17
8
16
23
B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small
Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains
1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development
2. Access to Rural Financial Services
Subtotal
C. Project Management and Policy Engagement
1. Project Management
2. Policy Engagement
Subtotal
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
72.8
10/15
1.9
267.9
340.7
220.5
222.4
60.6
1.9
62.5
8.6
-
8.6
74.7
488.4
563.1
69.2
1.9
71.1
563.6
263.7
827.3
5.4
305.0
874.0
1.9
108.1
373.7
7.2
413.2
1 247.7
3
45
39
12
-
12
32
26
26
30
9
59
68
8
-
9
100
1
50
151
11 649.9
306.0
43 066.3
35 757.6
54 716.2
36 063.6
11 955.9
78 823.9
90 779.8
9 701.3
1 377.4
11 078.7
306.0
-
306.0
10 007.3
1 377.4
11 384.7
90 396.3
42 668.5
133 064.9
860.5
297.4
9 690.5
3 432.7
1 157.9
13 123.3
100 947.3
46 398.6
147 346.0
3
45
40
12
-
12
32
26
26
31
9
59
68
8
-
9
100
1
10
111
1.  The financiers/co-financiers of PROSPER are Government, IFAD (IFAD 11 and potentially IFAD 12), Green Climate Fund (GCF) (Grant, Adaptation and Mitigation), participating financial institutions
(PFIs), private sector and beneficiaries (RIs, MSMEs and local communities). The financing plan by component is summarized in Table 2 below. PROSPER will be financed from IFAD 11 (USD 52.5
million, 35.6% of project total cost) in addition to a financing gap that will be potentially covered from IFAD 12 (USD 22.7 millions of financing gap, 4% of the total). The IFAD share of project costs will
relate to: works; equipment and materials, goods, services and inputs; consultancies; training and workshops; grants and subsidies, salaries and allowances. The contribution of GCF is as follows:
GCF adaptation is USD 13.8 million (9.3% of the total); GCF mitigation is USD 6.9 million (4.7%); and GCF grant is USD 4.7 million (3.2%).
2.  Government of Ghana’s contribution is estimated at USD 22.5 million (15.3% of total costs) mainly in the form of tax exemptions and GoG staff costs. Beneficiaries’ in-kind and cash contribution is
estimated at USD 19.3 million (13.1% of total costs), mainly through Business Plans. PFIs and the private sector represent USD 4.9 million or 3.3 % of total costs.
41.
Table 2:PROSPER project costs by component and financier
42.
(Millions of United States dollars)
PROSPER
Components by
Financiers
Local
(US$ Million)
IFAD 11
IFAD 12
GCF
Adaptation
GCF
Mitigation
GCF
Grant
PFIs
Beneficiaries
Private
Sector
The
Government
Total
For.
(Excl.
Duties
&
Amount % Amount % Amount
% Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
% Amount % Amount
% Amount %
Exch. Taxes) Taxes
A. Development
of Rural
Institutions and
Socioeconomic
Infrastructure
1. Capacity
Building of Rural
Institutions,
Enterprises and
Households
2. Development
of
Socioeconomic
Infrastructure
4.8
42.6 2.5
22.0 -
-
-
-
0.5
4.8 -
-
-
-
-
-
3.5
30.6 11.3
7.7
0.3
10.3
0.7
17.4
71.9 3.2
13.1 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.5
1.5 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3.6
15.0 24.3
16.5 5.8
14.8
3.6
7.1
19.9 35.6
24.1 6.1
25.1
4.3
Subtotal
22.3
62.6 5.7
15.9 -
B. Strengthening
the Economic
Benefits for
Smallholders and
Small Operators
Around Selected
Agricultural value
Chains
1. Sustainable
Marketing
Linkages and
Business
Development
2. Access to
Rural Financial
Services
1.5
11.0 6.5
48.8 -
-
-
-
1.4
10.3 -
-
-
-
-
-
4.0
29.9 13.3
9.0
0.4
12.0
1.0
25.7
29.9 4.3
5.0 13.8
16.1 6.9
8.1 1.1
1.3 2.3
2.7 19.3
22.5 2.5
3.0 9.8
11.4 85.8
58.2 38.4 37.6
9.8
Subtotal
27.2
27.4 10.8
10.9 13.8
13.9 6.9
7.0 2.5
2.5 2.3
2.4 19.3
19.5 2.5
2.6 13.8
13.9 99.1
67.2 38.7 49.5
10.8
C. Project
Management and
Policy
Engagement
1. Project
Management
2. Policy
Engagement
Subtotal
3.0
24.5 6.1
49.3 -
0.0
3.1
14.7 0.2
50.7 -
24.2 6.3
49.4 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1.6
13.3 -
0.1
1.7
19.5 -
13.5 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1.6
0.1
1.6
12.8 12.4
8.4
1.5
9.8
1.0
15.0 0.3
0.2
-
0.3
0.1
12.9 12.7
8.6
1.5
10.1
1.1
Total PROJECT
COSTS
52.5
35.6 22.7
15.4 13.8
9.3 6.9
4.7 4.7
3.2 2.3
1.6 19.3
13.1 2.5
1.7 22.5
15.3 147.3
100.0 46.4 84.7
16.2
1.  Expenditure categories. The most important investment expenditure categories are Credit, Guarantee Funds (USD 62.1 million, 42.2% of total costs) and Civil Works (USD 23.4 million, 15.9 % of
total costs). Grants and subsidies stand at USD 19.3 million (13.1% of total costs), Equipment and goods, including vehicles USD 3.6 million (2.5%), Consultancies USD 12.4 million (8.4%) and
Training and workshops at 14.2% of the total. In terms of recurring costs, Salaries and allowances constitute USD 10.1 million (6.8% of total costs and 82.1% of recurrent costs), with a significant
portion as an in-kind contribution from the GoG. Table 3 summarizes the project expenditure accounts.
11/15
Table 3: PROSPER expenditure accounts by financiers
(Millions of United States dollars)
2. 
Disbursement
Accounts by
Financiers
(US$ Million)
IFAD
11
IFAD
12
GCF
Adaptation
GCF
Mitigation
GCF
Grant
PFIs
Beneficiaries
Private
Sector
The
Government
Total
For.
(Excl.
Duties
&
Amount % Amount % Amount
% Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
% Amount % Amount
% Amount %
Exch. Taxes) Taxes
Local
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2.0
2.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
16.1 0.0
0.3 -
-
-
-
6.7
14.4 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
35.0 -
-
-
-
-
-
3.5
1.1
1.8
0.7
0.0
15.0 23.4
15.9 5.9
14.0
3.5
30.2 3.6
2.5
1.1
2.0
0.5
14.6 12.4
5.0 14.2
8.4
9.6
-
-
10.6
1.8
13.5
0.7
-
19.3
13.1 13.5 5.8
-
12.2
19.7 2.5
4.0 13.8
22.2 6.9
11.1 -
2.3
3.7 12.6
20.2 2.5
4.1 9.3
15.0 62.1
42.2 24.9 28.0
9.3
1. Civil works
16.9
72.2 3.0
12.8 -
1.0
3.1
5.6
27.9 1.5
41.9 -
25.1 5.5
43.9 -
39.6 5.8
40.9 -
11.6
60.0 1.0
5.0 -
2.
Equipments,Goods
and Vehicles
3. Consultancies
4. Training and
Workshops
5. Grants and
Subsidies
6. Credit,Gurantee
Funds
7. Salaries and
allowances
0.7
7.1 2.9
28.9 -
8. Operating costs
1.3
60.3 0.5
24.7 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.7
7.0 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5.7
0.3
57.0 10.1
6.8
-
10.1
-
15.0 2.2
1.5
1.1
0.8
0.3
Total PROJECT
COSTS
52.5
35.6 22.7
15.4 13.8
9.3 6.9
4.7 4.7
3.2 2.3
1.6 19.3
13.1 2.5
1.7 22.5
15.3 147.3
100.0 46.4 84.7
16.2
Table 4: PROSPER project costs by component and year
(Millions of United States dollars)
3. 
(US$ '000)
A. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic Infrastructure
1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households
2. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure
Subtotal
B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small
Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains
1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development
2. Access to Rural Financial Services
Subtotal
C. Project Management and Policy Engagement
1. Project Management
2. Policy Engagement
Subtotal
Total PROJECT COSTS
c. Disbursement
Totals
Including
Contingencies
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Total
786.3
26.5
812.8
924.6
465.9
1 211.1
2 321.3
3 532.4
1 615.5
4 561.1
6 176.6
2 769.0
4 942.0
7 710.9
2 162.4
5 040.8
7 203.2
1 172.9
3 634.7
4 807.6
958.4
3 707.4
4 665.9
622.0
30.7
652.7
11 297.6
24 264.5
35 562.1
1 548.9
2 082.7
2 613.7
2 544.8
1 889.2
1 043.4
11 483.9
13 402.8
15 149.0
16 792.2
15 285.4
12 229.6
663.9
954.1
13 311.1
85 762.8
1 390.5
13 032.8
15 485.4
17 762.6
19 337.0
17 174.6
13 273.0
1 617.9
99 073.9
1 814.3
1 074.6
1 779.4
1 625.5
1 759.4
1 523.4
1 392.0
1 402.8
12 371.3
23.6
72.7
35.9
36.6
77.5
38.1
26.9
27.4
338.7
1 837.9
1 147.3
1 815.2
1 662.1
1 836.9
1 561.5
1 418.9
1 430.2
12 710.0
4 041.2
17 712.5
23 477.2
27 135.7
28 377.1
23 543.7
19 357.7
3 700.8
147 346.0
1.  The proceeds of the financing will be used for eligible expenditures as defined in the Financing Agreement and in line with the disbursement allocations specified in the relevant section of the
Financing Agreement. IFAD will make an initial deposit to the Designated Account (Authorized Allocation). The ceiling for the Authorised Allocation will be specified in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB)
issued for PROSPER. The funds will be disbursed into a US Dollars Account at the Central Bank of Ghana and will be operated by the PCU.
2.  The proceeds from the Designated Account shall be used exclusively to finance the Project’s eligible expenditures as will be stipulated in Schedule 2 of the Project Loan Agreement. The ceiling for the
Authorised Allocation will be specified in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB) issued for PROSPER. The funds will be disbursed into US Dollars Account at the Central Bank of Ghana and will be operated
by the PCU. Funds shall be periodically transferred from the Designated Account to the Programme Operational Account (GHS) for the purpose of financing the Programme’s eligible expenditures
financed by IFAD.
3.  Funds shall be periodically transferred from the Designated Account to the Programme Operational Account (GHS) for the purpose of financing the Programme’s eligible expenditures financed by
IFAD. The regular signatories to the Designated and Programme Accounts will be the Project Coordinator and the Finance Manager as Cat A and B signatories respectively. However, Chief Director of
MoFA and the Director of Finance (MoFA) will be the alternate Cat A and B signatories respectively in the absence of the regular signatories. The same arrangements will be applicable to funds
allocated by co-financiers. Government approved fund-flow processing would be used to accelerate cash-flow.
4.  Report based disbursement method will apply for the project. Other methods of disbursement will include advances, direct payments, and reimbursements. Payments made against advances would be
secured against bank guarantees by a commercial bank and or bonds acceptable to IFAD. Training will be provided to accounts staff on IFAD procedures and all processes documented as part of the
PIM and outlined in MOUs with districts and other implementing partners.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
1.  The PROSPER target beneficiaries are producers, investors, MSMEs and households located in the project area. Farmers were expected to benefit directly from the project, including women and
youth. In addition, MSMEs and RIs will take advantage of positive externalities brought by the project. Indirect beneficiaries will include local institutions and the families of workers employed directly
by the project. Finally, the targeted areas will benefit from a general uplift in the local economy driven by the growth in activities. It is important to note that the PROSPER targeted population lives in
precarious and relatively disadvantaged conditions in areas with high levels of transaction costs and limited market access. They are highly exposed to the negative impacts of climate change.
2.  The main benefit stream analysed is the income and profits derived from business activity in the three principal commodity value chains: soya, rice and maize. Other significant non-financial benefits
include improved access with feeder roads and farm tracks, enhanced productive potential from on- and off-farm and watershed work and natural resource remediation, secure drinking water supplies
and other communal assets, increased tax revenues and enhanced nutrition security. These benefits, which are not included in the calculation of the ERR, consolidate the economic profitability of the
PROSPER and contribute to the justification of the investments made.
3.  Economic analysis based on ten models elaborated for the principal production modes funded by PROSPER, under very moderate assumptions, yields an economic rate of return (ERR) of 21.4%,
(see Annex 4). Sensitivity analysis shows this ERR to be robust under different adverse scenarios. A simultaneous increase in costs of between 10% and 60% combined with a decrease in benefits of
10% yields an ERR greater than or equal to the Opportunity Cost of Capital (assumed to be 12.25%). This is an acceptable level given the analysis does not consider other direct and indirect benefits
including such significant environmental benefits as improved soil fertility, reduced erosion, tree cover and better long-term management of the NR
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
1.  The design of PROSPER is driven by the imperative to achieve both environmental and financial sustainability in the smallholder agriculture sector in the context of rapid climate change. The project
concentrates on investing in the skills, productive assets and institutional development needed to remediate the NR base, transition to appropriate agricultural practices that reduce emissions and
engage in enduring business relationships within major value chains.
2.  The exit strategy designed for the project comes as a natural and sequential phasing out from supported activities. A high level of participation from the host agency, beneficiaries and partner
institutions is planned from the onset of implementation, to ensure effectiveness and leadership from local stakeholders who will be able to continue, scale-up, guide and monitor planned activities after
project completion. The analysis of the factors for sustainability presented in Annex 10 shows the progression for each of the major activities at scale, with a phasing over, phasing down or phasing out
as appropriate and well within the allotted time frame. The exit strategy as formulated is to sustain the impact of all activities after closure even if the scope of the project is curtailed in Year 3. An
example of a key activities under the exit strategy, is following up with APEX Bank and its network of rural banks to incentivise them to provide more resources and to crowd in additional resources from
the private sector.
12/15
3.  During project implementation, this Exit Strategy will be revisited regularly to test the underlying assumptions and continuing validity in the light of progress. If major restructuring is required, such as
reduced size of the replication phase, changing implementation arrangements, reducing and/or increase of scope of components, cancellation, the Exit Strategy will be redesigned in line of the
changing context.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
1.  The main risks and corresponding mitigation measures for the project are presented in the Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM, Annex 9). The IPRM touches on all aspects of the initiative to
anticipate possible barriers to achieving the Project Development Objective. At inception, the PROSPER coordination and management team will be trained to refine the matrix and set up a Risk Log.
This Log will include tools for the identification, analysis, prevention, monitoring and management of risks. It will be updated regularly and integrated into the AWPBs and the M&E dashboard to help
decision-making. In summary, the main project risks are as follow.
2.  Country context. Whilst Ghana is a safe and peaceful country, the project will monitor any possible cross-border effects of conflicts and political unrest in fragile neighbouring countries. The
prolongation or return of Covid would constrain implementation massively, although the pandemic’s science and response management protocols are now far better understood.Macroeconomic
policies relating to financial services continue to constrain the development of agricultural VCs, with poor access to affordable seasonal lending for the mass of smallholders. In mitigation, the project
will encourage farmers to adopt a business approach to production, with access to financial services as appropriate at each stage.
3.  Environmental and climate change challenges. Smallholder agriculture in Ghana is mainly rainfed, so farmers are dependent on weather conditions and vulnerable to climate change. PROSPER is
resilience-oriented and designed to respond to the growing environmental challenges to the rural economy with practical mitigation and adaptation measures, both on- and off-farm, to promote
technically feasible and financially affordable soil and water management practices. The NR remediation works are intended to counter and reverse the cumulative deterioration of the productive land.
4.  There are risks that endemic social challenges, such as the marginalisation of women, youth and people with disabilities in rural society, suboptimal dietary patterns and persistent rural poverty will
undermine project purposes. In mitigation, PROSPER will tailor interventions to involve vulnerable groups and advocate for inclusive policies through dialogue with Government.
5.  The technical risks to PROSPER stem from current weaknesses, in both the public sector and the private sector, of rural technical and financial service providers. Strong institutions are essential for
the efficient implementation of the innovative aspects of the project, in particular the transition to climate-smart agronomy, business planning and the linking of poor farmers and enterprises into
functioning VCs. Private sector engagement on the demand side in the project areas could be insufficient to drive the expansion of contract arrangements with the primary target group if there is a
weakening of the country's business environment. The project design responds with a programme of technical and institutional capacity building, including affirmative action for women, youth and
PWDs. PROSPER will promote alternative financing mechanisms and interventions to improve the business setting and attract private investment into the target VCs.
6.  Procurement. The overall risk is rated medium in the PROSPER Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM), reflecting ongoing issues in the regulatory framework and in the application of standard procedures
for procurement methods and the evaluation process. Government and project procurement staff will receive advanced training to ensure compliance with guidelines.
7.  Debt sustainability: The WB-IMF debt sustainability analysis index since 2015 annually to date has rated Ghana’s debt sustainability as very high. The Executive Board of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Ghana on July 19, 2021.
8.  According to the report by the IMF Executive Directors, Ghana was hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic. The government’s response helped contain the pandemic and support the economy, but at the
cost of a record fiscal deficit. The economic outlook is improving, even though risks remain, including from the evolution of the pandemic and rising debt vulnerabilities. The pandemic had a severe
impact on economic activity. Growth slowed to 0.4 percent in 2020 from 6.5 percent in 2019, food prices spiked, and poverty increased. The fiscal deficit including energy and financial sector costs
worsened to 15.2 percent of GDP, with a further 2.1 percent of GDP in additional spending financed through the accumulation of domestic arrears. Public debt rose to 79 percent of GDP.
9.  While there are encouraging signs of an economic recovery, they noted that it remains uneven across sectors. In this context, Directors stressed the importance of entrenching prudent macroeconomic
policies, ensuring debt sustainability, and pressing ahead with structural reforms to deliver a sustainable, inclusive, and green economic recovery.
10.  While noting that risks to Ghana’s capacity to repay have increased, the Directors concurred that they are still manageable and that Ghana’s capacity to repay the Fund, and by extension other IFIs,
remains adequate.
43.
44.
Financial management. The inherent Financial Management Risk of the project at design is rated as moderate, while the residual risk is rated as The main FM risks concern project disbursement
performance linked to the IFAD disbursement caps and to the project capacity to obtain timely justifications of expenditures from implementing partners and guarantee an effective cash turnover through
the revolving fund mechanism. Also, the inexperience of project staff with the use country systems and especially GIFMIS poses a risk to the project capacity to maintain their accounting and produce
quality financial reports. All the risk and mitigating measures identified during design are captured in the project risk matrix.  
Agribusiness Finance. The inherent risk for the agribusiness finance is rated as substantial, while the residual risk is rated as moderate. The main agribusiness risks are related to: (i) rural smallholder
farmers’ perception that loan funds are government money which they consider fungible, leading to default in repayments; (ii) untimely disbursement of credit and guarantee funds, and grants and
subsidies to match the appropriate crop season; and (iii) production risks due to drought, bush fires, pests and diseases. All the risks and mitigating measures is annexed to the Chapter Six of the PIM
(Financial Management).
I. Environment and Social category
1.  The initial screening of proposed PROSPER activities indicates the potential environmental and social risks rating is medium/moderate to low. The main risks relate to (i) value chain activities,
predominantly rainfed agriculture, cashew cultivation, shea nuts collection, harvesting and processing, rain/stormwater harvesting and income generation related poultry and (ii) socioeconomic
infrastructure including NR remediation works, feeder road rehabilitation and farm access tracks, and shared social infrastructure including human water supply systems, green energy and sanitation
facilities. Most of the impacts are small in scale, very limited, site-specific and avoidable or reduced with mitigation plans, as stated in the ESMF.
2.  From a social safeguards standpoint, as all agricultural lands are community owned there will be no land acquisition aside from land left as fallow so the project does not foresee any negative social
and environmental impacts such as the involuntary taking of lands or restrictions on access to and/or use of assets resulting in the physical and/or economic displacement of project affected persons
(PAP). PROSPER is not expected to affect negatively local pastoral communities or sites of historic, religious or cultural significance, land development beyond 100 ha, feeder roads with a length of
less than 10 km linking communities or farm tracks.
3.  As a Category B operation, a formal Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) is required. Further analysis of the conflict dimensions and site-specific Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMP) will be mainstreamed throughout PROSPER implementation lifecycle and, to ensure safeguards compliance and project sustainability, a Gender, Social Inclusion and
Vulnerability Specialist (GBV/EASH/VAC) will work from the PCU. Quarterly safeguards and climate compliance reports summarizing the level of project compliance and performance will be prepared
and shared to inform IFAD and stakeholders.
J. Climate Risk classification
1.  From a Climate Change Risk Assessment standpoint, the project is classified as High. The target communities are largely dependent on climate-sensitive natural resources, especially rainfed
agricultural plots and tree crops such as shea and cashew. Large parts of the project area are increasingly exposed to droughts and flash-flooding. GHG emissions through increased production and
processing and climate variability, including unexpected dry spells, unpredictable rainfall and low/high temperatures, can affect the project risks, impacts, sustainability and returns on investments.
PROSPER has the potential to integrate climate resilience measures, such as improved techniques of growing and processing of tree crops (cashew and shea) and in the fight against deforestation
through the systematic use of integrated agroforestry systems, solar panels and green energy alternatives. Such mitigation measure will be introduced through awareness raising campaigns and
capacity building programmes in climate smart agricultural strategies, climate finance and strong collaboration with extension services, weather and climate monitoring agencies to receive timely
agroclimatic information, and the adoption of appropriate unmechanized cultivation technologies, crops varieties, and climate resilient and low emissions practices. Systematic climate risk analysis will
be undertaken throughout implementation to ensure adequate and timely monitoring and management of climate change risks.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
1.  MoFA is designated as the Lead Project Agency. The ministry will have the overall responsibility for the implementation of PROSPER and will ensure linkages to other relevant Ministries,
Departments and Agencies, such as MoF, MESTI, MoTI, MLGDRD, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Local Government Service. PROSPER implementation will involve private sector
and community level technical service providers and will leverage on-going projects implemented by public sector and NGOs. Key project staff will be following on progress of meeting the triggers for
the replication phase, including Government meeting co-financing commitments and timely recording of inkind contribution, filling of the financing gap, Government and beneficiary contributions are
met and recorded timely, key MoUs with implementing partners established and progressing well, and satisfactory arrangements in place with regard to the operation of the Matching Grants and
Blended Finance Facility.. The PCU and PROSPER team at APEX Bank will be responsible for following up on the compliance with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual regarding investments to be
supported by the Matching Grant Fund and the BFF. These tasks will be reflected in the ToRs of the key project staff.
2.  MoFA will establish a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to provide overall oversight of project implementation. It will be chaired by the Chief Director of MoFA and include representatives of all
relevant ministries and agencies, Bank of Ghana, ARB Apex Bank and regional coordinating councils from the project area. Members shall include private sector non-state actors (such as NGOs) and
youth and women who operate along the relevant agricultural VCs as practitioners or advocates. The PSC will meet at least twice a year, and as necessary. The main responsibilities of the PSC will
include: (i) providing strategic and policy guidance to the Project Coordination Unit (PCU); (ii) ensuring overall conformity with government policies and strategies; (iii) reviewing project progress and
performance; (iv) approving the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB); (v) resolving implementation problems or conflicts; and (vi) assisting the PCU in obtaining government assistance for the
project when needed. A Project Technical Committee (PTC) will be constituted comprising members drawn from the PSC. The PTC will serve as a standing committee empowered to meet whenever
needed to resolve implementation bottlenecks that require immediate attention.
3.  PROSPER’s Project Coordination Unit will be responsible for implementation and will be based in the project area to ensure effective management and coordination. The PCU will operate within the
supervision of the Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services DAES, which will provide direct oversight. A Project Coordinator will head the PCU’s day to day operations, assisted by central technical
and operations support teams as defined in the PIM. The responsibilities of the PCU will include the overall coordination of Project activities and direct implementation of specific actions, and overall
responsibility for fiduciary, climate change and environmental and social safeguards, including gender and vulnerability. Key activities will include consolidation of project accounts, preparation of
annual financial statements, disbursements, consolidation of AWPB and procurement plans; quarterly financial and comprehensive safeguards and climate change reports; consolidation of progress
reports; organization of annual audits in line with IFAD’s guidelines; assistance for supervision and other missions, including mid-term review; promotion of cross-cutting themes such as gender, youth
and vulnerability; and preparation and updating of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and other required manuals.
13/15
4.  Key implementation partners will include selected MoFA departments, DDAs, Regional Departments of Agriculture (RDAs), ARB-APEX Bank, MoTI, GEA including BRCs and BACs, MESTI, GCX,
GIRSAL and GAIP. PROSPER will enter MoUs with the above entities that will outline implementation modalities and the role of each of these partners. From a safeguards and climate change
standpoint, the PCU will embed a Gender, Social Inclusion and Vulnerability Specialist (GSIVS) to work with EPA to ensure consistency and compliance of project implementation with national
regulations and the SECAP guidelines.
5.  A dedicated team will be anchored in APEX Bank to manage the BFF. The BFF team will report to the PROSPER PCU. This team will comprise a Coordinator and two field officers supported by the
GSIVS funded from the IGREENFIN-I Grant.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
1.  The GASIP Finance Unit will be responsible for the financial management (FM) aspects of PROSPER, including budgeting, accounting, preparing Withdrawal Applications, monitoring implementing
partners, preparing consolidated financial reports, and arranging internal and external audits. The proposed FM system will ensure a proper segregation of duties and will be capable of meeting the
fiduciary requirements of IFAD, GoG and other stakeholders.
2.  In line with IFAD and GoG objectives to enhance the use of country systems, PROSPER will use the Government’s electronic platform and enterprise resource programme (GIFMIS) for capturing
financial data, in line with the IPSAS cash basis of accounting and prepare periodic financial reports in formats agreed with IFAD. To this end, GASIP will migrate onto the GIFMIS in early 2022 with
support from the GIFMIS Secretariat who will provide sensitization and training to the GASIP FM team during the last quarter of 2021 for GIFMIS implementation readiness for both GASIP and
PROSPER. The finance team would include a dedicated Project Accountant and an Accounts Assistant working under the supervision the projects Financial Manager for the accounting management
and reporting of GCF and IFAD funds.
3.  The Finance Manager will be responsible for preparing the project’s interim financial reports (IFRs) on a quarterly basis. The IFRs will be submitted to the Fund 30 days after the end of each quarter
and will constitute the main supporting document for withdrawal applications submitted to IFAD. The Financial Manager and M&E Specialist will lead the preparation of AWPB and procurement plan by
September of each year to ensure that the AWPB is approved by the National Steering Committee and IFAD for incorporation into the national budget for approval by the Parliament of Ghana. The
PCU’s financial management manual, the provisions of the Public Financial Management Regulations (2019) and the Public Financial Management Law (Act 921 of 2016) will govern the project’s
internal controls. The Internal Auditors of the lead implementing agency shall conduct ex-post review of PROSPER at least twice a year, and each expenditure will be validated by the internal audit
system of GIFMIS. The project's financial statements will be audited annually by the Ghana Audit Service (GAS), in line with international standards (ISA) and IFAD Guidelines and based on the
agreed TORs that will receive IFAD non-objection. As per IFAD rules and regulations, local VAT and import taxes will be considered as a contribution to project costs by the Government of Ghana.
Thus, IFAD funds will not be used to pay VAT, duties or other taxes imposed on the project.
4.  The closing date of the IFAD-funded GASIP has been extended to 31 December 2023, offering potential FM assistance and economies in the start-up and first two years of PROSPER. Serviceable
GASIP assets will be transferred to PROSPER upon completion and closure and financial staff reconducted based on their performance and recruitment arrangements.
1.  Procurement: The PCU will be responsible for overseeing and implementing all PROSPER procurement transactions including procurement carried out by GCF (located in ARB Apex Bank). To lead
the management and execution of procurement activities under PROSPER, a Procurement Officer will be recruited competitively in the PCU at start-up, (detailed Terms of Reference in the PIM). IFAD
will provide technical assistance and training in procurement at early stages of the project to familiarise implementing agencies with PROSPER/IFAD Guidelines on procurement and contract
management.
2.  PRM Assessment. As part of the PROSPER design process, a Project Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM) was developed for MoFA, the designated Lead Project Agency. Ghana ranks 75 out of 180
countries in the 2020 Corruption Perception Index according to Transparency International. It scored 43 out of 100. The findings indicate that integrity and ethical values still require strengthening.
Risks related to Accountability and Transparency include slow decision making with potential implementation delays and increased risk of Fraud and Corruption, (abuse of simplified procurement
procedures). The overall PRM rating is rated Medium. The detailed schedule of risks identified and mitigation measures to address procurement capacity gaps, including recommended procurement
thresholds in line with the results of the procurement risks matrix rating, are presented in detail in the procurement section of the PIM.
3.  Procurement regulations applicable to PROSPER. Procurement under the Project will be done in compliance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and IFAD Procurement Handbook. It is recommended
that IFAD Procurement Guidelines will be followed both at the PCU and by all implementing entities (GCF). The PIM will detail procurement procedures, processes and management arrangements.
4.  All procurement requiring IFAD prior review will be uploaded in IFAD No Objection Tracking and Utilities System (NOTUS) portal. The prior review thresholds for different categories will be included in
the Letter to the Borrower. All procurements with costs above the threshold for National Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be undertaken according to the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. All contracts
below the threshold for ICB, such as NCB, Restricted Bidding and Shopping (Request for Quotations), will follow the Ghana Public Procurement Act, 2003 as Amended Act 2016 (Act 914) and its
attendant regulations to the extent that they are in conformity with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. These procedures have been reviewed by IFAD and found to be satisfactory, except for
the following provisions, which will not be applicable under this project: (a) domestic preferences shall not apply under NCB; (b) the charging of fees for dealing with bidder complaints at procuring
entity level shall not be permitted; and (c) foreign Bidders shall have the opportunity to bid for NCB procurement.
5.  Governance. The project’s procurements will follow IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines under the responsibility of MoFA as Lead Implementing Agency and the oversight of the PROSPER Steering
Committee. IFAD's anticorruption policies and whistle blowing procedures will be mainstreamed in the Project Implementation Manual.
6.  IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in all projects financed through its loans and grants. The project will be subjected to the revised IFAD
Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations, dated December 2018; the IFAD Policy on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse; and Environmental, Social, Health and Safety and Anti-money laundering provisions. All bidding documents shall include clauses referring to these regulations.
7.  In addition to IFAD policies on anti-corruption and best practice in financial management, the project shall also be subject to the policies, guidelines and operational procedures required by  the use
country systems to support implementation which are consistent with the Government of Ghana’s financial procedures governed by Public Financial Management Regulations 2019 (L.I. 2378), Public
Financial Management Act 2016 (Act 921), the Public Procurement (Amendment) Act 2016 (Act 914), Public Procurement (Amendment) Act 2016 (Act 914), and Public Procurement Act 2003 (663),
Public Financial Management (Public Investment Management) Regulations, 2020 (L.I. 2411),  and Public Private Partnership Act, 2020 (Act 1039).
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
1.  Planning. Planning will follow current practices for the IFAD-funded projects in Ghana. The main tool for PROSPER will be the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), prepared annually using a
participatory bottom-up approach which include a consultation with the implementing partners of the various activities and based on the investment forecasts agreed and validated during the
preparation processes.
2.  The AWPB will include, among other things, a detailed description of the planned activities and required budget, specifying implementation responsibilities, required inputs, expected outputs,
performance indicators and corresponding targets. It will also entail a procurement plan and a narrative explaining the implementation of project activities against predefined targets (refer to the PIM for
specific content of the AWPB). The AWPB will be in line with the Logical Framework (LF).
3.  The PCU will ensure overall coordination and efficiency of the planning process. Once the priorities have been set at the regional level and activities defined, the AWPB will be compiled and submitted
to the PSC for review and approval. The PSC will ensure the inclusion of PROSPER under the national budget. It will be sent to IFAD for review and no-objection 60 days prior to the start of each
implementation year.
4.  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). M&E is an essential function to support project management’s decision-making, the main objective being to inform stakeholders and the PCU on the performance
and effectiveness of project implementation. A results-based approach will be adopted by accounting for progress against AWPB targets.
5.  The key responsibilities of the M&E system will rely on the M&E Unit at the PCU, composed of a KM/M&E Manager, Officers and Assistant. All other implementation agencies at regional level will play
important roles in collecting and analysing data to assess the outputs, outcomes and impact of project activities. Local talent will be trained in M&E activities yearly to ensure that the project remains on
track and achieves its strategic objectives. MOFA participated to the Advancing Knowledge for Agricultural Impact (AVANTI) initiative to analyse Ghana’s agricultural and rural development sectors'
capacities for Results -Based Management (RBM) and to measure the sectors' achievements against the SDGs. Moreover, the M&E staff in MOFA participated to the Program in Rural Monitoring and
Evaluation (PRiME) training, organised by IFAD and the Centres for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR). Lastly, IFAD has supported the establishment of a Programme Delivery Unit at
MoFA to build capacity for M&E, improve learning and sharing, coordination and reporting among all sector programmes in the Ministry, strengthen the oversight responsibility of its on-going
development Programmes for impacts, including PFJ. Capacities built by the AVANTI and PRIME initiatives, as well as through the Delivery Unit, will benefit PROSPER and the overall quality of M&E.
The KM/M&E manager and officer will be supporting the Project coordinator in following up on progress toward meeting the triggers for the replication phase. They will also follow up the compliance by
the MG Funds and BFF with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual guidelines regarding green investments.
6.  The M&E Unit will set up an M&E manual and a computerized M&E data system to provide periodic, complete and reliable data. Several M&E tools and guidelines will be incorporated in the M&E
system along with the Core Outcome Indicators (COI) Survey, which would permit effective monitoring of the project situation at baseline, mid-term and completion. The project completion survey will
repeat the questionnaires used for the baseline survey, to allow the comparability of results and analysis (by beneficiary status, region and household head's gender) of project impact. The baseline,
mid-term and completion surveys will be conducted by a specialized consulting firm through quantitative and qualitative assessment of beneficiaries. Specific thematic surveys/studies will be
conducted as needed to measure performance on different project outcomes.
7.  The outputs, outcomes and impacts to be achieved by the Project will be defined in the LF; review and internalisation by the various actors will be included in the start-up workshop to be organised at
Project commencement. The PCU will also monitor the efficiency of targeting, and the poverty, gender and youth focuses.
8.  M&E activities will consider the following:(i) the M&E Unit will prepare a beneficiaries database, including detailed information on sex, age, region, targeting group and project activity in which they
have participated. The database will serve different purposes, including sampling for surveys, tracking outreach as well as selection of beneficiaries to visit during missions; (ii) the PCU will send IFAD
semi-annual and annual progress reports on physical and financial progress against the AWPB and LF targets; (iii) the M&E Unit will conduct regular field visits to collect data and validate data
collected; (iv) the M&E Unit will document stories from the field on beneficiaries per project component and report on lessons learned, best practices and scaling-up works; (v) the PCU will conduct
monthly meetings with field M&E focal points to discuss implementation progress versus targets; and (vi) Georeferencing will support implementation and M&E processes.
9.  Learning, Knowledge Management (KM) and Communication. The project will develop a KM and Communication Strategy to capture and disseminate knowledge gained on critical issues during
implementation. There are multiple benefits from communicating effectively how the project is addressing target population needs. Strategic communication to stakeholders will promote dialogue,
participation and a regular two-way flow of information, thereby enhancing project transparency, recognition and effectiveness.
10.  PROSPER KM strategy aims at capturing and disseminating lessons obtained from implementation progress for the purposes of programme maturation, sustainability and creating awareness on
project activities and services. Targeted audiences will include potential beneficiaries in selected districts, collaborating institutions, the wider donor community in Ghana, the Private Sector Working
Group and political dialogue platforms such as the ASWG. Government staff, the private sector, FIs and civil society will be target audiences for knowledge-sharing events and products.
11.  Areas of knowledge defined as priority for this project include good practices on climate adaptation and mitigation, farming as a business, green sustainable infrastructure interventions and natural
resource remediation, practical/achievable green business plans, green/climate finance, access of producers and MSMEs to rural financial services, and effective M&E tools for project staff.
Knowledge products from earlier stages of implementation will support the transition to the upscaled later stages of PROSPER.
12.  These products will include, for example, brochures, reports, seminars and other knowledge sharing events. Mechanisms include: the use of surveys and green/climate reporting defined as part of the
M&E system with information collected from the field; and the identification and selection of project “champions”/most successful cases to share their experience "in first person" with others. After the
MTR/towards project completion, PROSPER will promote beneficiary knowledge and experience sharing events with other groups in similar value chains and focus on identifying potential activities for
scaling-up.
14/15
13.  In addition to refining and carrying out the KM strategy, the project managers will ensure: (i) PROSPER’s visibility; (ii) the inclusion of KM indicators in the M&E system; (iii) inclusion of KM-related
activities in the AWPB; (iv) integrated information management systems set-up, for example, electronic archives; (v) clarity of KM-related roles and responsibilities in the PCU and related GoG
structures; (vi) facilitation of internal project learning; and (vii) exchanges with other projects and agencies operating in Ghana, organizing workshops, producing a website, publications, videos and
other activities to disseminate results, attract interest of other partners, and replicate/scale up tested and documented innovations.
14.  PROSPER will participate in, contribute to and benefit from SSTC activities under IGREENFIN regional activities concentrated on the generation and dissemination of practical and technical knowledge
in the context of the escalating climate emergency. Ghana (with Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali and Senegal) is part of the first phase of the IGREENFIN programme, to be extended subsequently to
six more countries in West and Eastern Africa, all under the GCF Great Green Wall Umbrella Programme. The ambitious IGREENFIN agenda mirrors most of the key KM purposes of PROSPER –
climate-related know-how/knowledge creation and dissemination in the region, with a strong focus on responding to climate change in semi‑arid areas and the promotion of synergies between
countries tackling similar developmental challenges independently.
15.  PROSPER will engage in IGREENFIN regional SSTC activities through, inter alia, experience-sharing and fact-finding visits and support for and entries in the annual Sahel and Great Green Wall
Award event rewarding the best green business plans produced by women and youth entrepreneurs. PROSPER will collaborate with these interrelated structured and participatory learning
programmes in the region which will provide opportunities for knowledge exchanges, the sharing of experiences and awareness raising about successful practices and pilots that can be scaled up, for
instances, in agricultural adaptation, value chain development, and the needs of private sector investors and access to productive land. PROSPER will also play a part in the IGREENFIN establishment
and maintenance of an integrated regional M&E systems.
16.  Other possible areas for SSTC cooperation will include policy agendas that are best tackled through regional collaboration such as developing a common conducive commercial environment for
cashew production, processing and trade, and regulation of domestic and international trade in agricultural commodities.
b. Innovation and scaling up
1.  BACs and the recently developed BRCs are institutional structures created under the Rural Enterprise Programme to train MSMEs and provide business advisory services. These structures have
become institutionalised and made an integral part of the district Assemblies and the newly created Ghana Enterprise Agency. They need to be consolidated and scaled up to help build the capacities
of smallholder businesses to take advantage of opportunities under PROSPER. REP designed a web-based M&E system to improve timely report on critical indicators for decision making and to show
project results at any time during implementation. This can be replicated under PROSPER and implementation districts supported to adopt it in their reporting.
2.  Innovations involving the use of digital tools such as mobile money transfers, transmission of weather and price information, and dissemination of technologies through mobile phones can be scaled up
during implementation of PROSPER. Ghanaians will soon be using the Ghana card with biometric features as the sole means of identification. This will help in farmer data compilation and help in
targeting.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
1.  The strategy relating to transparency and citizen participation will be applied according to the following: (i) transparent access to information and reporting on project activities and results; (ii) monitoring
and evaluation of service providers, implementing partners, beneficiaries and the performance of projects by third parties; (iii) active engagement of civil society through a participatory evaluation of the
Country Programme and its actors; (iv) creation of a complaints and grievances mechanism as well as a feedback mechanism on beneficiary satisfaction; and (v) transparent selection of service
providers in procurement by ensuring freedom of access to public procurement, equal treatment of candidates and transparency of procedures.
b. Grievance redress.
1.  PROSPER activities will have a differentiated level of risks and impacts on its beneficiaries that could upset or put them in a discomfort situation despite mitigation measures embedded in the ESMF.
Consequently, to ensure consistency with IFAD’s SECAP core requirement, the ESMF will include the IFAD complaints procedure as a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that will guide the project
through implementation. The above procedure arranges for receiving and facilitating the resolution of concerns and complaints with respect to alleged non-compliance with environmental and social
policies and the mandatory aspects of SECAP. The GRM will be aligned with applicable EPA regulations and international standards and be considerate of local approaches to grievance resolution.
2.  PROSPER will align with national and/or IFAD[1] whistle blower protection procedures that aim to better protect project staff, community members and any other stakeholders from potential threats or
reprisals they may suffer for having reported, in good faith, reprehensible conduct, abuse and abusive acts, alleged professional misconduct or acts of corruption. PROSPER will establish a digital
platform to collect comments, complaints and claims from beneficiaries, using social media (WhatsApp, Facebook and Twitter, Toll Free Numbers). All contracts with project staff, implementing
partners and service providers will include provisions that: (i) prohibit any act of sexual harassment, exploitation and abuse; (ii) establish an obligation to report immediately to IFAD, the Government or
the project any incidents of corruption, fraud, sexual harassment and exploitation, child labour and any unethical behaviour of staff and partners of the project; (iii) provide for the immediate termination
of the contract on the basis of proven acts of sexual harassment, exploitation or abuse in connection with an activity or operation financed or managed by IFAD; (iv) prohibit the use of child labour in
the project; (v) recommend setting up a grievance mechanism; and (vi) recommend inclusion of people with disabilities in project activities.
45.
[1] https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/whistleblower-protection-procedures.
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
1.  Implementation readiness and start-up plans. The IFAD country office (ICO) will take the following steps to ensure PROSPER readiness for implementation: (i) Preliminary mapping and
identification of the clusters of communities will be carried out with the support of GASIP and REP; (ii) Offtakers, financial institutions, RIs and BACs/BRCs (operating in the PROSPER project area)
with a good track record of partnership with GASIP and REP will be identified, oriented and prepared for partnership; (iii) REP, through existing partnership arrangements with the BoG and ARB Apex
Bank, will support the swift initiation of the PROSPER BFF; (iv) MoFA has experience of partnering with donor projects including IFAD; (v) sensitize the donor community and prepare them for
PROSPER partnership in relevant areas; (vi) work continuously with authorities to fulfil conditions prior to Board approval; and (vii) ensure that the budget for year one and procurement plan is
available by the effectiveness date and set up the team prior to the start-up.
2.  Supervision. PROSPER supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD. One Supervision Mission and one follow-up mission will be undertaken each year. Implementation Support will focus on
planning, gender, vulnerability and targeting, procurement, financial management, safeguards and climate change risks management, M&E, partnerships and the integration of activities within the
governance framework. Such support will be a continuous process with frequent communication and engagement with MoFA, the PCU and other relevant stakeholders. The first Implementation
Support mission will occur soon after start-up. The frequency and composition of Supervision and Implementation Support Missions will be based on implementation requirements and MoFA requests.
During the initial two years of implementation, one full supervision mission and one partial supervision mission will be carried out to ensure close follow-up on meeting the triggers for the replication
phase. The supervision report will contain a dedicated section on progress for meeting the triggers; such as meeting in-kind financing and timely reporting and satisfactory progress of implementation.
Portfolio stocktakes will be used to address cross cutting issues that are affecting satisfying conditions for starting the replication phase. The supervision missions the follow up on the compliance with
the IGREENFIN Operational Manual regarding green investments by the MG Fund and BFF.
3.  Mid-term Review. MoFA, as the lead project agency, IFAD and implementing partners will prepare and carry out jointly the Mid-term Review (MTR) at the end of Project Year 4. The MTR will be based
on, inter alia, a dedicated Mid-term evaluation study (with terms of reference agreed at least one year ahead), the PDR, SECAP, Procurement Plans, Reports of Supervision and Follow Up Missions,
AWPBs, Progress Reports, Financing Agreements, evolving government policies and strategies, and additional data from various commissioned studies. The MTR findings will be communicated
promptly to the implementing agencies and, in consultation with the GoG and partners, and the project design and financing agreements adjusted as needed to remove constraints and achieve the
PROSPER objectives. The GoG will ensure that the MTR recommendations are implemented within the specified time and to the satisfaction of IFAD.
4.  In case conditions for start-up of the replication phase are not met, an early MTR would be held to address the underlying issues and take necessary actions to restructure the project; such as reducing
the outreach to match available funding, reconfiguring implementation arrangements to address performance shortfalls, reducing the scope of components facing challenges and increasing the size of
those that are performing better, and /or partial cancellation.
5.  Project Completion Review. The MoFA will be responsible for organizing the preparation of a Project Completion Review (PCR) to be submitted to the Fund after the Project Completion Date but in
any event no later than the Financing Closing Date. A completion evaluation would be conducted as an input into the PCR through a formal survey undertaken by a neutral agency with no previous
involvement in project implementation. The PCR will focus on PROSPER costs and benefits, the achievement of development objectives, risks, impact on beneficiaries and communities, partner
performance and lessons learned.
Footnotes
Context
National Context
[1] Statisa, 2021.
[2] SDSN Sustainable Development Report, Sustainable Development Solutions Network 2021.
[3] Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) For 2020-2023, Ministry of Food and Agriculture in Ghana, Programme Based Budget Estimates, 2020.
[4] Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018.
[5] Ghana’s Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Report, UNDP, 2020. The indicators that contribute most to multidimensional poverty in Ghana are lack of health insurance coverage, undernutrition, school
lag and households with members without any educational qualification.
[6] Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018.
[7] 2010 Population and Household Census.
15/15
[8] Ghana Economic Outlook, African Development Bank, https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/west-africa/ghana/ghana-economic-outlook
[9]https://www.focus-economics.com/countries/ghana
[10] https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/ghana/overview.
 Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
[1] The National Youth Policy in Ghana (2010).
[2] Youth Employment Programmes in Ghana: Options for Effective Policy Making and Implementation, World Bank, 2020.
[3] https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/africa/western-africa/ghana/.
Lessons Learned
[1] https://gcx.com.gh/.
[2] The new inclusive rural finance policy (IRF) passed by IFAD’s EB on 14 September 2021 underscores the need to “improve use of subsidies to foster long term sustainable outcomes of IRF activities and
to attract investment capital”. In lieu of market-priced on-lending interest rates, IRF 2021 stipulates, “IFAD will employ asset subsidies, matching grants, production and market access TA, value chain
development, public and private infrastructure development, and other interventions to help develop sustainable climate IRF markets in developing member states”.
Project Description
Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
[1] Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) is an indicator for the dietary diversity in households.
[2] The socially sensitive household methodologies to be employed, as recommended strongly by GASIP supervision missions, are mentioned in the Household nutrition and healthy diet campaign section
under Subcomponent 1.1 below and in detail in the PIM.
Components/outcomes and activities
[1] In this document, a “cluster” is a term for several neighbouring settlements sharing natural resources. It has no administrative significance but locates the combined population in the specific land area
upon which they depend and provides the project with a convenient unit for planning and operational purposes. Each cluster will include various common economic interest groups, such as Farmer Based
Organisations and VSLAs, alongside non-profit community structures. To avoid confusion and excessive use of acronyms, the term Rural Institution (RI) is used here for a production-related group and Micro-,
Small- and Medium-Enterprise (MSME) for any business set up for other purposes.
[2] Small businesses comprise enterprises and organised groups engaged in income generating activities other than primary production. The members are drawn from the same population.
[3]   However, for reasons of equity and to avoid any elite capture of benefits, strict rules will limit any material provision of inputs to RIs members to a standard package sufficient to cultivate 1 ha (Matching
Grants) and 2 ha (BFF loans).
[4] The concept of supporting “flexibility to achieve sustainability” in financing rural poor people is central to IFAD’s new Inclusive Rural Finance Policy, with less emphasis on commercial (market-priced)
finance at the entry level.
[5] CARE has also had successful experience in developing the concept for women in Ghana.
[6] This systematic objective selection approach and self-targeting mitigate potential elite capture of the MG fund.
[7] The matching grants ranges for groups of RIs are based on specific assumptions with regard to total number of beneficiaries, no of Rural Institutions participating in the Business Plan, area to be
cultivated. During implementation, the tables in the PIM should be used as guidance regarding the maximum amount per single beneficiary to guide the process and not as guidance regarding the limit of
matching grant regardless of number of beneficiaries per Business Plan. Additionally, it is strongly recommended to limit the upper limit amount of MG per beneficiary (for group of RIs receiving MG for
production) to equivalent of MG share per one hectare. The limits for MSMEs (9 employees and less) are based on examples and should be used as guidance for the process.
[8] Only for the six main VCs: rice, maize, soya, poultry, cashew and shea.
[9] Currently, there is almost no demand for climate finance in Ghana because uptake of climate mitigation and adaptation technologies is still in its very early stages. BFF will be one of the very first funds set
up in Ghana to contribute to climate finance market development.
[10] A dedicated technical team of IFAD experts, private sector independent consultants and Apex Bank bankers and economists carried out a joint exercise to determine the blended affordable on-lending
rate. Details of the adopted approach to the interest rate determination are documented in a “Technical guidance note on determining the on-lending rate from blending and structuring a mixture of highly
concessional and commercially-priced loans”.
[11] The ARB Apex Bank in collaboration with PROSPER will look for investors and other development partners. A technical guidance note (in the PIM) shows that the average cost (wholesale rate) of the
blended funds will be in the single digits (less than 10%) and the average structured interest rate applied to the clients (on-lending or retail rate) will also be in single digits. This latter is compared to the
current market rate of between 26% and 28% applied by Apex Bank’s network of RCBs.
[12] To ensure that green loans are validated and to avoid greenwashing risks, the eligibility criteria of the green loans are clearly defined in the GCF’s project Operational Manual, which is the equivalent of
the PIM.
[13] For purposes of flexibility to achieve sustainability (IRF Policy 2021), the evolution and performance of the innovative blended fund will be closely monitored by a dedicated GCF/IGREENFIN TA-
supported M&E Unit lodged at the Apex Bank. The dedicated M&E team will collect and analyse data that will be used to inform recommendations and/or decisions to be taken at midterm (MTR) on whether to
make any adjustments to the blended fund and its operations.
[14] The premium is currently estimated at 1% of loan portfolio to PROSPER clients.
[15] Details of the premium determination will be worked out with GAIP in time for the beneficiaries to access BFF.
[16] The BFF loans ranges for the VC actors and groups of RIs (coming under the same BP) are based on specific assumptions with regard to total number of beneficiaries, no of Rural Institutions
participating in the Business Plan, area to be cultivated. Same principles applies for other BFF windows; e,g. for MSMEs. During implementation, the tables in the PIM should be used as guidance regarding
the maximum amount per single beneficiary to guide the process and not as guidance regarding the limit of BFF loans regardless of number of beneficiaries per Business Plan. Additionally, it is strongly
recommended to limit the amount of BFF loan share per beneficiary (for group of RIs receiving loan for production) to an equivalent of loan share of two hectares. The limits for MSMEs (29 employees and
less) are based on examples and should be used as guidance for the process.
Alignment, ownership and partnerships
[1] The Ghana SDGs Baseline Indicator Report was published in June 2018. No data yet available on progress.
Implementation
Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
Grievance redress
[1] https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/whistleblower-protection-procedures.
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience (PROSPER)
Logical Framework
1/7
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outreach 
Total number of persons receiving services promoted or supported by
PROSPER
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Project reports Semi-annual
PCU
Household members
0 210000
420000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Project reports Semi-annual
PCU
Households
0
35000
70000
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Project reports Semi-annual
PCU
Effective
stakeholder
identification, needs
assessment and
gender/youth
targeting is carried
out at the
community level
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Non-Indigenous people
Total number of persons
receiving services
0
0
0
0
30000
60000
20000
40000
15000
30000
42000
60000
0
50000
100000
Persons with disabilities receiving services promoted or
supported by the project
Females
Males
Young
Total number of PwD receiving
services
0
0
0
0
1000
1500
750
2500
2000
3000
1500
5000
Mid-term
Review and
completion
PCU
Ghana
Statistical
Services/
PROSPER
surveys
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Project Goal 
Contribute to reduced poverty, improved natural resources management and
healthy, sustainable and climate resilient rural livelihoods.
HH living below the poverty line in the districts targeted
Households
0
8
Households reporting reduction in production losses due to
adverse climate events
Households
0
70
PROSPER
PCU
PROSPER
PCU
Ghana
Statistical
Services/
PROSPER
surveys
Ghana
Statistical
Services/
PROSPER
surveys using
COI
methodology
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
Development Objective 
Strengthen the integration, climate resilience and environmental
sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority VCs in the Northern
and Middle Ecological Belts taking advantage of the increased demand
created by the national agro-processing strategy.
Percentage of target households in the project supported
communities reporting an increase in income contributed to by
the services provided by the Project
Baseline
survey, Project
reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
PROSPER
PCU
Targeted households
0
60
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities
Males
Females
Young
Total number of persons with
new jobs/employment
opportunities
0
0
0
0
2628
1752
3942
4380
5256
3504
7884
8760
PROSPER
PCU
Baseline
survey, Project
reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-
making of local authorities and project-supported service
providers
Baseline
survey, Project
reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
Mid-term
Review and
completion
Household members
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
0
315000
75
52500
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the region
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
Outcome 
Outcome 1. Financially and environmentally sustainable livelihoods
developed and nutrition security enhanced in project areas
Rural Institutions with improved capacity
Rural Institutions
Household members
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
0
0
315000
75
52500
1687
3375
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices
Total number of household
members
Households
Households
0
0
0
252000
60
42000
3.2.1 Tons of Greenhouse gas emissions (tCO2e) avoided
and/or sequestered
Hectares of land
tCO2e/20 years
tCO2e/ha
tCO2e/ha/year
0
0
0
0
39217
-1945462
-49.6
-2.5
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Baseline
survey, Project
reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
Mid-term
Review and
completion
PROSPER
PCU
PROSPER
PCU
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
PROSPER
PCU
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
1.2.9 Households with improved nutrition Knowledge Attitudes
and Practices (KAP)
Women-headed households
Households (number)
Households (%)
Household members
0
0
0
0
672
8400
70
50400
PROSPER
PCU
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Persons in rural areas accessing public socio-economic
infrastructures to build environmental resilience
Persons
0
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to
markets, processing and storage facilities
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
40
10
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
Annually
PROSPER
PCU
PROSPER
PCU
PROSPER
PCU
Output 
Output 1.1 Strengthening of rural institutions and enterprises
Households reporting improved
physical access to markets
Rural Institutions and MSMEs trained
Rural Institutions
MSMEs
0
0
0
M&E Data/
Component
reports
2250
4500
400
800
Output 
Output 1.2 Climate proofing smallholder production technologies
Climate smart demonstrations installed
Demonstrations
0
100
320
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural
resources and climate-related risks
Total size of groups
Groups supported
Males
Females
Young
0
0
0
0
0
50000
100000
2560
5300
30000
60000
20000
40000
15000
30000
Annually
Annually
M&E Data/
Component
reports
M&E Data/
Component
reports
PROSPER
PCU
PROSPER
PCU
3.1.2 Persons provided with climate information services
Males
Females
Young
0
0
0
9000
18000
6000
12000
4500
9000
M&E Data/
Component
reports
Annually
PROSPER
PCU
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/7
Name
Persons provided with climate
information services
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
0
15000
30000
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Output 1.3 Promotion of nutrition-sensitive farming and healthy-diets
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve
their nutrition
Total persons participating
Males
Females
Households
Young
0
0
0
0
0
15000
72000
7500
36000
7500
36000
2500
12000
7500
7500
1.1.7 Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy and/or
use of financial products and services
Males
Females
Young
Persons in rural areas trained
in FL and/or use of FProd and
Services (total)
0
0
0
0
30000
60000
20000
40000
15000
30000
50000
100000
Annually
M&E Data/
Component
reports
PROSPER
PCU and
RCU/ZCUs
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
M&E Data/
Component
reports
Annually
PROSPER
PCU
Output 
Output 1.4 Development of socioeconomic infrastructures
Clusters benefitting from infrastructures for enhancing
environmental management and climate resilience (off-
farm/watershed and communal social infrastructures)
M&E Data/
Component
reports
Annually
PROSPER
PCU
Clusters
0
60
320
2.1.5 Roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded
Length of roads
0
90
90
Outcome 
Outcome 2. Smallholders and small businesses are empowered to take
advantage of the increasing market demand for agricultural produce
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private
entities
Number of POs
0
1013
2025
M&E Data/
Component
reports
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Annually
PROSPER
PCU
Baseline survey
using COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 2.1 Creation of sustainable marketing linkages and business
development
Output 
Output 2.2 Access to rural financial services
6/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Total number of household
members
Households
Households
0 175000
350000
0
0
25
50
25000
50000
1.2.5 Households reporting using rural financial services
Total number of household
members
Households
Households
0 175000
350000
0
0
25
50
25000
50000
2.1.3 Rural producers’ organizations supported
Total size of POs
Rural POs supported
Males
Females
Young
0
0
0
0
0
45000
90000
2250
4500
27000
54000
18000
36000
13500
27000
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Total number of accesses to
financial services
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
0
0
42000
54000
12000
12000
0
9000
9000
0
18000
18000
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
PROSPER
PCU
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
M&E Data/
Component
reports
Annually
PROSPER
PCU
M&E Data/
Component
reports
Annually
PROSPER
PCU
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
7/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Total persons accessing
financial services - savings
Total persons accessing
financial services - credit
0
0
7200
14400
4800
9600
0
3600
7200
0
0
30000
30000
12000
24000
Outcome 
Outcome 3. Development of an enabling policy environment that will help
achieve the project’s goals and objectives
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies
proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or
amendment
Number
0
0
2
PROSPER
PCU
Baseline
survey using
COI
methodology,
Project reports
Baseline, Mid-
term Review
and completion
survey using
COI
methodology
Output 
Output 3.1. Financial policies to enhance smallholders’ access to financial
services and formalize MSMEs
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
0
5
10
M&E Data/
Component
reports
Annually
PROSPER
PCU
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the
region.
Political stability.
Macroeconomic
conditions remain
stable or improve.
No major political
shocks in the region
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
CONSTRAINTS
Low crop 
productivity and 
quality
Natural resources 
degradation
Water shortage
Limited 
agricultural skills
Little marketable 
surplus sold at a 
low price
Poor commercial 
linkages
Shortage of 
commercial and 
enabling public 
infrastructures 
(e.g. FBOs)
Limited access 
to financial 
services
Food insecurity 
and no healthy 
and diversified 
diet
No profitable 
opportunities for 
youth
Low women’s 
social and 
economic 
participation 
and 
empowerment 
ASSUMPTIONS
OUTPUTS
Demonstration of and capacity building on 
climate resilient technologies and practices
Building of socio-economic public 
infrastructures
Strengthening and 
capacitation of RIs
Internal capital 
development of RIs
Marketing 
agreements 
between 
agribusiness 
and RIs
Training in financial 
literacy
Strengthen bank linkages to 
support partnerships with 
agribusinesses
Saving and loan 
system promotion
Establishment of agricultural 
development refinancing 
facility in the Apex bank
Raising awareness about 
family nutrition and dietary 
diversity
Ensuring the availability of and 
access to diverse nutritious 
foods 
Training on business 
management
Link of youth-led 
MSMEs to affordable 
finance
OUTCOMES
IMPACT
DEVELOPMENT 
OBJECTIVE
Adoption of climate resilient 
technologies and practices in 
production and post-harvest 
Increased production, marketable 
surplus and progression to more 
sustainable NRM  practices
Persons in rural areas 
accessing public socio-
economic infrastructures
to build environmental 
resilience
Capacities of 
smallholder farmers 
and RIs enhanced
Strengthen the integration, 
climate resilience and 
environmental sustainability 
of smallholders and 
businesses
Increased 
income
Employment 
creation
Access to financial 
services
Partnership with PFIs 
developed
RIs improve their governance 
and management structures, 
functioning as effective value 
chain partners
Training and promotion of 
educational and income 
generation activities
Labour - saving and women-
friendly technologies to 
address workload
Community awareness 
on gender equality 
Adoption of nutrition 
oriented farming models
Improved food security and 
nutrition, especially for women 
and youth
- Smallholders attend trainings and trainings are relevant
- No barriers for adoption of climate resilient technologies and 
practices
- New technologies increase yield/production
Effective stakeholder 
identification, needs assessment 
and gender/youth targeting is 
carried out at the community level 
Private sector actors 
are interested in 
creating linkages with 
smallholders
FIs are interested in 
borrowing to 
smallholders
Political and 
economic 
stability
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
Assumptions. The PROSPER Project aims to increase agricultural production, rural employment 
Unit costs and contingencies. Costs have been estimated based on prices prevailing in 
1. 
and income levels through individual and group activities, based on a participatory and integrated 
approach for crop and animal production, post-harvest handling and enabling market access for the 
sale of agricultural products, especially for landless, and vulnerable households. The project 
implementation period is estimated at eight years over the period 2022 to 2029. 
2. 
Ghana in June 2021. The detailed estimate of quantities and unit costs must be seen as indicative. 
Only the total amount is to be considered; some of these amounts are to be adjusted, especially after 
the final government of Ghana’s (GOG) contribution. The amount of IFAD 11 and the GCF (Green 
Climate Fund) financing is fixed because it is set with the signing of the financing Agreement. Only the 
use of this allocation among disbursement categories as set in the Financing Agreement may be 
amended if necessary. Costs have been estimated in USD by applying a fixed exchange GHS 
6.03/USD, assumed to remain stable through the remaining period. Physical contingencies represent 5 
% for different costs. Financial contingencies are related to inflation and variation in exchange rates 
between the Ghanaian currency (GHS) and USD. Local inflation rates have been assumed to vary 
between 10% (years 1 and 2), to 7% (years 7and 8) per year, while international inflation rate is 
estimated at 2% to 3% per year. 
Table 1: Inflation and exchange rates  
Inflation and 
Exchange Rates 
Up to 
Negotiation 
Up to 
Project 
Start  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026  2027  2028  2029 
Inflation (in %'s) 
/a 
Inflation 
Annual rates 
Local 
Foreign 
Compounded rates 
Local 
Foreign 
Exchange rates (Local/Foreign) 
/b 
Inflation 
Rates actually used 
Constant purchasing 
parity rates 
% deviation 
9,9 
2,0 
9,9 
2,0 
5,8 
5,8 
0,0 
9,9  10,0  10,0 
3,0 
2,0 
2,0 
9,0 
2,0 
9,0 
2,0 
7,5 
2,0 
7,5 
2,0 
7,0 
2,0 
7,0 
2,0 
9,9  15,4  26,9  39,0  51,5  63,9  76,2  89,0  102,2 
8,2  10,4  12,6  14,9  17,2  19,5 
2,0 
3,0 
5,6 
6,2 
7,0 
7,5 
8,0 
8,6 
9,1 
9,6  10,1  10,6 
6,2 
0,0 
7,0 
0,0 
7,5 
0,0 
8,0 
0,0 
8,6 
0,0 
9,1 
0,0 
9,6  10,1  10,6 
0,0 
0,0 
0,0 
\a Yearly values are within Each 
Project Year 
\b Yearly values are at Project Year 
Midpoints 
Taxes and Foreign exchange. The levels of taxes in the unit costs were estimated to quantify 
3. 
the financial counterpart of the Government for duties and taxes. Costs items include taxes, which 
account for 15%. Salaries are inclusive of income tax. The estimated level of currency in unit costs was 
made based on information collected, and similar projects in Ghana. The foreign exchange part is 
needed because financial contingencies apply differently to the part of foreign exchange costs and the 
local currency, and thus it affects the computation of project economic costs. 
The total project costs, for eight-years, are estimated at USD 147.3 million or GHS 1.2 billion. The 
base cost amount to USD 133.1 million or GHS 827.6 million, equivalent to 90,3% of total costs. 
Physical and price contingencies at USD 14.2 million account for about 11% of base costs or 9.7% of 
total costs. Investment costs of USD 135.1 million represent 91.7% of total project costs; and 
recurrent costs of USD12.3 representing 8.3%. Project costs by component are presented in the table 
below (annexes). 
1 
Table 2: Components Project Cost Summary (USD Million) 
The main component of the project cost is that related to “Development of Rural Institutions and 
Socioeconomic Infrastructure” with USD 30.9 million or 23 % of base costs. This component includes 
two subcomponents: (i) Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households, and (ii) 
Development of socio-economic infrastructure. The second component relates to “Strengthening the 
benefits for smallholders and small operators around agricultural value chains” with USD 90.8 million 
or 68% of base costs. This component includes two subcomponents: (i) Sustainable marketing linkages 
and business development, and (ii) Access to rural financial services. The third component is related to 
“Project Management and Policy engagement”, with USD 133 thousands or 9% of total cost and has 
two subcomponents: i) Project Management, and ii) Policy engagement. The total project cost is 
divided into USD 46.4 million in foreign currency, USD 84.7 million in local currency (excluding taxes) 
and USD 16.2 million of taxes. 
Project Financiers. Different financiers have been identified in the PROSPER project: 
4. 
Government, IFAD (IFAD 11 and a financing gap potentially financed by IFAD 12), Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) (grant, adaptation, and mitigation), Project financial institutions (PFIs) and private sector and 
beneficiaries (farmers, cooperatives and local communities). The financing plan by components is 
summarized in the table 4 below. The PROSPER project will be financed for the first three years (2022, 
2024) by IFAD 11, while the remaining five years will be potentially financed by IFAD 12. For some 
activities such as the development of socio-economic infrastructure (Component 2.2), year 4 is shared 
between IFAD 11 and, possibly, IFAD 12. 
Contribution of IFAD 11 will be of USD 52.5 million (35.6 % of project total cost) , while the 
5. 
potential contribution of IFAD 12 will be of USD 22.7 million or 15.4 % of total costs. IFAD share of the 
project costs will be related to works; equipment and materials, goods, Services and Inputs; 
consultancies; training and workshops, Grants and subsidies, Salaries & Allowances. The Government 
of Ghana’s contribution is estimated at USD 22.5 million or 15.3 % of total costs. This contribution 
would take mainly the form or waiving the cost of all taxes on goods and services procured under the 
PROSPER. Beneficiaries’ contribution is estimated at USD 19.3 million or 13% of total costs, and is 
related to mainly to works, goods, services and inputs. PFIs and the private sector represents USD 4.9 
million or 3.3% of total costs (table 3). 
Table 3: Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD Million) 
2 
Republic of GhanaPROSPER(GHS Million)(US$ '000)Components Project Cost Summary%% Total%% TotalForeignBaseForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic Infrastructure1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households61.71.763.4389,878.6267.810,146.4382. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure98.731.0129.7241615,794.24,959.820,753.92416Subtotal160.432.7193.1172325,672.85,227.530,900.31723B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development72.81.974.73911,649.9306.011,955.9392. Access to Rural Financial Services267.9220.5488.4455943,066.335,757.678,823.94559Subtotal340.7222.4563.1396854,716.236,063.690,779.84068C. Project Management and Policy Engagement1. Project Management60.68.669.21289,701.31,377.411,078.71282. Policy Engagement1.9-1.9--306.0-306.0--Subtotal62.58.671.112910,007.31,377.411,384.7129Total BASELINE COSTS563.6263.7827.33210090,396.342,668.5133,064.932100Physical Contingencies5.41.97.2261860.5297.41,157.9261Price Contingencies305.0108.1413.226509,690.53,432.713,123.32610Total PROJECT COSTS874.0373.71,247.730151100,947.346,398.6147,346.031111Republic of GhanaPROSPERDisbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ Million)The GovernmentFor.Local (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)Taxes1. Civil works16.972.23.012.8------------3.515.023.415.95.914.03.52. Equipments,Goods and Vehicles1.027.91.541.9------------1.130.23.62.51.12.00.53. Consultancies3.125.15.543.9----2.016.10.00.3----1.814.612.48.4-10.61.84. Training and Workshops5.639.65.840.9----2.014.4------0.75.014.29.6-13.50.75. Grants and Subsidies11.660.01.05.0--------6.735.0--0.0-19.313.113.55.8-6. Credit,Gurantee Funds12.219.72.54.013.822.26.911.1--2.33.712.620.22.54.19.315.062.142.224.928.09.37. Salaries and allowances0.77.12.928.9----0.77.0------5.757.010.16.8-10.1-8. Operating costs1.360.30.524.7------------0.315.02.21.51.10.80.3Total PROJECT COSTS52.535.622.715.413.89.36.94.74.73.22.31.619.313.12.51.722.515.3147.3100.046.484.716.2IFAD 11IFAD 12TotalGCF AdaptationGCF GrantGCF MitigationPFIsBeneficiariesPrivate Sector 
Expenditure Categories. The most important investment expenditure categories are “Credit, 
6. 
Guarantee Funds” (USD 62.1 million and 42.2% of total costs), “Civil Works” category (USD 23.4 
million, 15.9% of total costs). Grants and subsidies stand for USD 19.3 million (13.1% of total costs). 
Training and workshops represent USD 14.2 million and 9.6% of total costs. In terms of recurring 
costs, salaries and allowances stands for about USD 10.1, or 6.8% of total costs and 85% of recurrent 
costs. Table 4 summarizes the expenditure accounts project cost summary. 
Table 4: PROSPER project costs by component and year 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Table 5. Expenditure Accounts by Components 
3 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies20222023202420252026202720282029TotalA. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic Infrastructure1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households786.31,211.11,615.52,769.02,162.41,172.9958.4622.011,297.62. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure26.52,321.34,561.14,942.05,040.83,634.73,707.430.724,264.5Subtotal812.83,532.46,176.67,710.97,203.24,807.64,665.9652.735,562.1B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development924.61,548.92,082.72,613.72,544.81,889.21,043.4663.913,311.12. Access to Rural Financial Services465.911,483.913,402.815,149.016,792.215,285.412,229.6954.185,762.8Subtotal1,390.513,032.815,485.417,762.619,337.017,174.613,273.01,617.999,073.9C. Project Management and Policy Engagement1. Project Management1,814.31,074.61,779.41,625.51,759.41,523.41,392.01,402.812,371.32. Policy Engagement23.672.735.936.677.538.126.927.4338.7Subtotal1,837.91,147.31,815.21,662.11,836.91,561.51,418.91,430.212,710.0Total PROJECT COSTS4,041.217,712.523,477.227,135.728,377.123,543.719,357.73,700.8147,346.0Republic of GhanaPROSPERExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and HouseholdsDevelopment of Socioeconomic InfrastructureSustainable Marketing Linkages and Business DevelopmentAccess to Rural Financial ServicesProject ManagementPolicy EngagementTotal I. Investment CostsA. Civil Works-23,244.5--167.6-23,412.1B. Equipments, Goods and Vehicles1,033.6-1,194.070.11,329.3-3,627.1D. National Consultancies1,626.9998.03,659.32,683.93,119.5338.712,426.2E. Training & Workshops5,874.622.05,486.21,579.51,225.7-14,187.9F. Grants and subsidies---19,283.0--19,283.0G. Credit,Guarantee Funds_EA---62,146.3--62,146.3Total Investment Costs8,535.124,264.510,339.485,762.85,842.1338.7135,082.7II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and allowances2,762.5-2,971.6-4,327.4-10,061.5B. Operating costs----2,201.7-2,201.7Total Recurrent Costs2,762.5-2,971.6-6,529.1-12,263.2Total PROJECT COSTS11,297.624,264.513,311.185,762.812,371.3338.7147,346.0Taxes692.83,637.51,002.39,814.01,030.850.816,228.2Foreign Exchange310.15,811.1358.238,377.71,541.6-46,398.6Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic InfrastructureProject Management and Plicy EngagementStrengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small Operators Around Selected Agricultural value  
Table 6. Summary Tables: Procurement Account by years (USD Million) 
Table 7. Summary Tables: Component by Financiers  
Table 8. Summary Tables: Expenditure Accounts by Financiers  
Table 9. Summary Tables: Local/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers  
4 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERProcurement Accounts by Years(US$)Totals Including Contingencies20222023202420252026202720282029Total1. Civil Works124,126     2,171,486   4,448,328   4,782,634   4,878,286    3,468,950    3,538,329   -             23,412,139   2. Equipments, Goods and Services1,020,042  294,055      270,667      652,661      593,354       420,702       353,833      21,757       3,627,071     3. Consultancies1,066,514  1,467,434   2,010,371   1,998,791   1,864,758    1,646,070    1,437,988   934,318     12,426,244   4. Training and Workshops1,146,585  1,843,663   2,937,069   3,513,796   3,042,978    1,007,354    467,356      229,149     14,187,950   5. Grants & Subsidies-             2,313,524   3,598,078   4,098,078   4,242,453    3,733,353    914,375      383,125     19,282,986   6. Credit, Guarantee Funds-             8,546,645   9,016,868   10,262,492 11,715,844  11,187,082  10,982,027 435,383     62,146,341   7. Salaries and Allowances492,134     879,122      930,909      1,557,014   1,729,314    1,763,900    1,341,151   1,367,974  10,061,519   8. Operating Costs191,772     196,576      264,954      270,253      310,115       316,318       322,644      329,097     2,201,728     Total4,041,172  17,712,504 23,477,244 27,135,718 28,377,103  23,543,731  19,357,703 3,700,803  147,345,978 Republic of GhanaPROSPERComponents by FinanciersLocal(US$ Million)For.Local (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic Infrastructure1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households4.842.62.522.0----0.54.8------3.530.611.37.70.310.30.72. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure17.471.93.213.1------------3.615.024.316.55.814.83.6Subtotal22.362.65.715.9----0.51.5------7.119.935.624.16.125.14.3B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development1.511.06.548.8----1.410.3------4.029.913.39.00.412.01.02. Access to Rural Financial Services25.729.94.35.013.816.16.98.11.11.32.32.719.322.52.53.09.811.485.858.238.437.69.8Subtotal27.227.410.810.913.813.96.97.02.52.52.32.419.319.52.52.613.813.999.167.238.749.510.8C. Project Management and Policy Engagement1. Project Management3.024.56.149.3----1.613.3------1.612.812.48.41.59.81.02. Policy Engagement0.014.70.250.7----0.119.5------0.115.00.30.2-0.30.1Subtotal3.124.26.349.4----1.713.5------1.612.912.78.61.510.11.1Total PROJECT COSTS52.535.622.715.413.89.36.94.74.73.22.31.619.313.12.51.722.515.3147.3100.046.484.716.2BeneficiariesPrivate SectorThe GovernmentTotalIFAD 11IFAD 12GCF AdaptationGCF MitigationGCF GrantPFIsRepublic of GhanaPROSPERExpenditure Accounts by Financiers(US$ Million)The GovernmentTotalFor.Local (Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment CostsA. Civil Works16.972.23.012.8------------3.515.023.415.95.914.03.5B. Equipments, Goods and Vehicles1.027.91.541.9------------1.130.23.62.51.12.00.5D. National Consultancies3.125.15.543.9----2.016.10.00.3----1.814.612.48.4-10.61.8E. Training & Workshops5.639.65.840.9----2.014.4------0.75.014.29.6-13.50.7F. Grants and subsidies11.660.01.05.0--------6.735.0--0.0-19.313.113.55.8-G. Credit,Guarantee Funds12.219.72.54.013.822.26.911.1--2.33.712.620.22.54.19.315.062.142.224.928.09.3Total Investment Costs50.437.319.214.213.810.26.95.14.03.02.31.719.314.32.51.916.512.2135.191.745.373.915.9II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and allowances0.77.12.928.9----0.77.0------5.757.010.16.8-10.1-B. Operating costs1.360.30.524.7------------0.315.02.21.51.10.80.3Total Recurrent Costs2.016.73.528.2----0.75.7------6.149.512.38.31.110.80.3Total PROJECT COSTS52.535.622.715.413.89.36.94.74.73.22.31.619.313.12.51.722.515.3147.3100.046.484.716.2Private SectorPFIsGCF GrantIFAD 12IFAD 11GCF AdaptationGCF MitigationBeneficiariesRepublic of GhanaPROSPERLocal/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers(US$ Million)Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I.   Foreign20.043.03.67.76.514.03.37.0--1.12.310.622.91.22.60.20.446.431.5II.  Local (Excl. Taxes)32.538.419.122.67.38.63.74.34.75.61.31.58.710.21.31.66.17.284.757.5III. Taxes----------------16.2100.016.211.0Total Project52.535.622.715.413.89.36.94.74.73.22.31.619.313.12.51.722.515.3147.3100.0BeneficiariesPrivate SectorThe GovernmentTotalIFAD 11IFAD 12GCF AdaptationGCF MitigationGCF GrantPFIs 
Table 10. Summary Tables: Disbursements by Semesters
Table 11. Summary Tables: Financing Plan 
Republic of Ghana 
PROSPER 
Financing Plan 
(US$ Million) 
Foreign  Local  Total  Percent 
 IFAD 11 
   20.0 
32.5 
52.5 
35.6 
 IFAD 12 
(financing 
gap) 
 GCF 
Adaptation 
 GCF 
Mitigation 
   3.6 
19.1 
22.7 
15.4 
   6.5 
7.3 
13.8 
9.3 
   3.3 
 GCF Grant 
   - 
 PFIs 
   1.1 
3.7 
4.7 
1.3 
6.9 
4.7 
2.3 
4.7 
3.2 
1.6 
Beneficiaries 
   10.6 
8.7 
19.3 
13.1 
 Private 
Sector 
 The 
Government 
   1.2 
1.3 
2.5 
1.7 
   0.2 
22.3 
22.5 
15.3 
Total 
   46.4 
100.9  147.3  100.0 
5 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERDisbursements by Semesters and Government Cash FlowFinancing Available(US$ Million)Costs to be FinancedIFAD 11IFAD 12GCF AdaptationGCF MitigationGCF GrantPFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorProjectCashCumulativeAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountTotalCostsFlowCash Flow11.3---0.20.0--1.52.0-0.5-0.521.3---0.20.0--1.52.0-0.5-1.034.3-0.90.60.40.21.20.17.78.9-1.2-2.244.3-0.90.60.40.21.20.17.78.9-1.2-3.455.31.20.90.60.40.21.50.110.211.7-1.5-4.965.31.20.90.60.40.21.50.110.211.7-1.5-6.376.11.31.00.70.40.21.70.211.613.6-1.9-8.386.11.31.00.70.40.21.70.211.613.6-1.9-10.295.12.21.20.80.40.21.90.212.114.2-2.1-12.3105.12.21.20.80.40.21.90.212.114.2-2.1-14.4114.21.21.40.40.30.21.90.39.911.8-1.9-16.3124.21.21.40.40.30.21.90.39.911.8-1.9-18.2130.04.31.40.40.10.21.40.38.09.7-1.6-19.9140.04.31.40.40.10.21.40.38.09.7-1.6-21.5150.01.20.10.00.00.00.1-1.31.9-0.5-22.0160.01.20.10.00.00.00.1-1.31.9-0.5-22.5Total52.522.713.86.94.72.319.32.5124.8147.3-22.5-22.5The Government 
Table 12. Summary Tables: Components Project Cost Summary 
6 
Republic of GhanaPROSPER(GHS Million)(US$ '000)Components Project Cost Summary%% Total%% TotalForeignBaseForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic Infrastructure1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households61.71.763.4389,878.6267.810,146.4382. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure98.731.0129.7241615,794.24,959.820,753.92416Subtotal160.432.7193.1172325,672.85,227.530,900.31723B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development72.81.974.73911,649.9306.011,955.9392. Access to Rural Financial Services267.9220.5488.4455943,066.335,757.678,823.94559Subtotal340.7222.4563.1396854,716.236,063.690,779.84068C. Project Management and Policy Engagement1. Project Management60.68.669.21289,701.31,377.411,078.71282. Policy Engagement1.9-1.9--306.0-306.0--Subtotal62.58.671.112910,007.31,377.411,384.7129Total BASELINE COSTS563.6263.7827.33210090,396.342,668.5133,064.932100Physical Contingencies5.41.97.2261860.5297.41,157.9261Price Contingencies305.0108.1413.226509,690.53,432.713,123.32610Total PROJECT COSTS874.0373.71,247.730151100,947.346,398.6147,346.031111 
Table 13. Summary Tables: Project Components by Year - Totals Including Contingencies 
7 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies20222023202420252026202720282029TotalA. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic Infrastructure1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households786.31,211.11,615.52,769.02,162.41,172.9958.4622.011,297.62. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure26.52,321.34,561.14,942.05,040.83,634.73,707.430.724,264.5Subtotal812.83,532.46,176.67,710.97,203.24,807.64,665.9652.735,562.1B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development924.61,548.92,082.72,613.72,544.81,889.21,043.4663.913,311.12. Access to Rural Financial Services465.911,483.913,402.815,149.016,792.215,285.412,229.6954.185,762.8Subtotal1,390.513,032.815,485.417,762.619,337.017,174.613,273.01,617.999,073.9C. Project Management and Policy Engagement1. Project Management1,814.31,074.61,779.41,625.51,759.41,523.41,392.01,402.812,371.32. Policy Engagement23.672.735.936.677.538.126.927.4338.7Subtotal1,837.91,147.31,815.21,662.11,836.91,561.51,418.91,430.212,710.0Total PROJECT COSTS4,041.217,712.523,477.227,135.728,377.123,543.719,357.73,700.8147,346.0 
Component 1. Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
Base costs 
Table 14. Subcomponent 1.1 Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and 
Households 
8 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 1.1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions Enterprises [1.1]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. CapaCity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households1. Community mobilisation, cluster identification and planninga. Community mobilisationWorkshop/consultation with stakeholders at regional levelworkshop2222----8Workshop/consultation with stakeholders at district levelworkshop1020202010---80Subtotalb. Cluster identificationMeetings at community level for identification of clustersmeetings50100100100100---450Training of trainers for extension staff /atraining2020505020---160Subtotalc. Cluster planningCluster consultation and synthesisation meetingscluster80150205205----640d. Support by RDAs/DDAs to Field ActivitiesRegional/national depts of MoFA and other line ministriesdays300500500500450---2,250DDA support for community mobilization and cluster  planningdays1,2001,8002,6003,3002,300---11,200SubtotalSubtotal2. Community nutrition and healthy diet campaigna. NutritionParticipatory Needs AssessmentLS3--5----8Nutrition Knowledge, attitude, and practice study (KAP)LS-1------1Training on HH nutrition and household methodologyHH-501501502502502501001,200Nutrition education for communities /bHH-501501502502502501001,200Training on Financial literacy - HH economicscluster-501501502502502501001,200Climate smart HH nutrition gardens; demos and training /cHH-501501502502502501001,200Dedicated training on post-harvest managementcluster-501501502502502501001,200DDA Extension Field Support /ddays2002002002002002002002001,600Regional / National of MOFA and Other Line Ministries for nutritiondays100100100100100100100100800Subtotalb. capacitation of rural institutionsAwareness raising for Youth Farmership DevelopmentWorkshop1010202020---80Training on organisational capacitygroup3060130210210---640Training on NRM Sustainability trainingTraining3090150250120---640Training on Sustainable Use of Pesticides and Fertilizers (ESMP)Training154560100100---320Climate adaptation and mitigation demonstrations (ESMP) /edemo154560100100---320Training on farming as a business including climate/NRMcluster154560100100---320Training on enterprise Dev't including climate/NRM aspectscluster154560100100---320Training of trainers for extension staff including climate/NRMdistrict10102040----80Training of trainers for extension staff on IFAD SECAP and EPA Proceduresdistrict0.2-0.20.2-0.2-0.21DDA Extension Field Support for nutritiondays1,2001,2001,2001,2001,2001,2001,2001,2009,600Support by Regional/national depts of MoFA and other line ministries /fdays120120120120120120120120960Subtotal 
9 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 1.1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions Enterprises [1.1]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs3. TA (national)months815334233---1314. Gender, Vulnerability & Social Inclusion Specialistperson/year0.51111110.575. Climate and Safeguard Specialist /gperson/year0.51111110.576. Institutional support to Extension Servicesmotorcycles for AEAs at district levelmotorcycle50--50--50-150Laptopsunit50--50--50-150Assessment, categorization and creation of database of FBOs (including performance) /hunit1-------1Protective gearlumpsum0.20.10.10.10.20.10.10.11Subtotal7. Mini-Weather Stations (ESMP) /ilumpsum-0.3-0.4-0.3--1Total Investment CostsII. Recurrent CostsA. GoG staff pro rata time on PROSPER activities1. Chief Directorperson/year1111111182. Director Project Planning  M&Eperson/year1111111183. Director of MOFA Extension Servicesperson/year1111111184. Regional Director of Agricultureperson/year33588888515. Senior Agric Officer (Regional Rep for PROSPER)person/year33588888516. District Director of Agricultureperson/year8242460808050503767. District Planning Officerperson/year8242460808050503768. District Works Engineerperson/year8242460808050503769. Management Information Officers (MISOs)person/year82424608080505037610. Accountantsperson/year82424608080505037611. Crop Officersperson/year82424608080505037612. WIAD Officersperson/year82424608080505037613. Agriculture Extension Officersperson/year2472721802402401501501,128Total Recurrent CostsTotal_________________________________\a 2 trainings per visit; this includes procedures for cluster identification and other procedural aspects, including IFAD SECAP  and EPA  procedures\b Promotion of healthy diets\c Promotion of healthy diets\d Promotion of healthy diets\e Including water harvesting for dry season farming\f DSA_USD50, 3 days per cluster.\g GCF Funding on national consultant\h in project target areas\i Support to Agrinet to Install Mini-Weather Stations and Disseminate Data (ESMP) 
10 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 1.1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions Enterprises [1.1]Detailed CostsUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. CapaCity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households1. Community mobilisation, cluster identification and planninga. Community mobilisationWorkshop/consultation with stakeholders at regional level10.00021,016.121,542.522,079.522,521.1----87,159.2Workshop/consultation with stakeholders at district level2.00021,016.143,085.044,159.045,042.222,971.5---176,273.8Subtotal42,032.264,627.666,238.567,563.322,971.5---263,433.0b. Cluster identificationMeetings at community level for identification of clusters20010,508.021,542.522,079.522,521.122,971.5---99,622.6Training of trainers for extension staff /a1.50031,524.132,313.882,798.184,454.134,457.3---265,547.3Subtotal42,032.253,856.3104,877.6106,975.157,428.8---365,170.0c. Cluster planningCluster consultation and synthesisation meetings50042,032.280,784.5113,157.4115,420.6----351,394.6d. Support by RDAs/DDAs to Field ActivitiesRegional/national depts of MoFA and other line ministries5015,762.126,928.227,599.428,151.425,842.9---124,283.9DDA support for community mobilization and cluster  planning1012,609.619,388.328,703.337,159.826,417.2---124,278.3Subtotal28,371.746,316.456,302.765,311.152,260.2---248,562.2Subtotal154,468.2245,584.8340,576.2355,270.1132,660.4---1,228,559.72. Community nutrition and healthy diet campaigna. NutritionParticipatory Needs Assessment5.00015,762.1--28,151.4----43,913.4Nutrition Knowledge, attitude, and practice study (KAP)7.500-8,078.4------8,078.4Training on HH nutrition and household methodology200-10,771.333,119.233,781.657,428.858,577.359,748.924,377.5277,804.7Nutrition education for communities /b100-5,385.616,559.616,890.828,714.429,288.729,874.412,188.8138,902.3Training on Financial literacy - HH economics100-5,385.616,559.616,890.828,714.429,288.729,874.412,188.8138,902.3Climate smart HH nutrition gardens; demos and training /c250-13,464.141,399.142,227.071,786.073,221.774,686.130,471.9347,255.8Dedicated training on post-harvest management250-13,464.141,399.142,227.071,786.073,221.774,686.130,471.9347,255.8DDA Extension Field Support /d102,101.62,154.32,207.92,252.12,297.22,343.12,390.02,437.818,183.9Regional / National of MOFA and Other Line Ministries for nutrition505,254.05,385.65,519.95,630.35,742.95,857.75,974.96,094.445,459.7Subtotal23,117.764,089.0156,764.4188,051.0266,469.5271,798.8277,234.8118,231.11,365,756.4b. capacitation of rural institutionsAwareness raising for Youth Farmership Development6006,304.86,462.813,247.713,512.713,782.9---53,310.8Training on organisational capacity80025,219.351,702.1114,813.4189,177.1192,960.6---573,872.5Training on NRM Sustainability training80025,219.377,553.1132,477.0225,210.8110,263.2---570,723.4Training on Sustainable Use of Pesticides and Fertilizers (ESMP)80012,609.638,776.552,990.890,084.391,886.0---286,347.3Climate adaptation and mitigation demonstrations (ESMP) /e2.00031,524.196,941.4132,477.0225,210.8229,715.1---715,868.3Training on farming as a business including climate/NRM1.50023,643.172,706.099,357.7168,908.1172,286.3---536,901.2Training on enterprise Dev't including climate/NRM aspects80012,609.638,776.552,990.890,084.391,886.0---286,347.3Training of trainers for extension staff including climate/NRM3.00031,524.132,313.866,238.5135,126.5----265,202.9Training of trainers for extension staff on IFAD SECAP and EPA Procedures100.00021,016.1-22,079.522,521.1-23,430.9-24,377.5113,425.1DDA Extension Field Support for nutrition1012,609.612,925.513,247.713,512.713,782.914,058.614,339.714,626.5109,103.2Support by Regional/national depts of MoFA and other line ministries /f506,304.86,462.86,623.86,756.36,891.57,029.37,169.97,313.354,551.6Subtotal208,584.6434,620.4706,543.81,180,104.8923,454.544,518.821,509.646,317.33,565,653.8Subtotal231,702.3498,709.4863,308.21,368,155.81,189,924.0316,317.6298,744.4164,548.44,931,410.2 
11 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 1.1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions Enterprises [1.1]Detailed CostsUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costs3. TA (national)3.50029,422.556,549.1127,509.1165,530.0132,660.4---511,671.14. Gender, Vulnerability & Social Inclusion Specialist40.68021,373.443,817.544,909.745,807.946,724.047,658.548,611.724,792.0323,694.65. Climate and Safeguard Specialist /g50.40026,480.354,287.255,640.356,753.157,888.259,046.060,226.930,715.7401,037.66. Institutional support to Extension Servicesmotorcycles for AEAs at district level2.000110,334.4--118,235.7--125,472.7-354,042.8Laptops50027,583.6--29,558.9--31,368.2-88,510.7Assessment, categorization and creation of database of FBOs (including performance) /h100.000105,080.4-------105,080.4Protective gear100.00022,066.911,309.811,591.711,823.624,120.112,301.212,547.312,798.2118,558.8Subtotal265,065.311,309.811,591.7159,618.224,120.112,301.2169,388.112,798.2666,192.77. Mini-Weather Stations (ESMP) /i400.000-135,717.9-189,177.1-147,614.9--472,509.9Total Investment Costs728,511.91,045,975.61,443,535.22,340,312.21,583,977.2582,938.2576,971.1232,854.38,535,075.7II. Recurrent CostsA. GoG staff pro rata time on PROSPER activities1. Chief Director600630.5646.3662.4675.6689.1702.9717.0731.35,455.22. Director Project Planning  M&E580609.5624.7640.3653.1666.2679.5693.1706.95,273.33. Director of MOFA Extension Services9601,008.81,034.01,059.81,081.01,102.61,124.71,147.21,170.18,728.34. Regional Director of Agriculture9603,026.33,102.15,299.18,648.18,821.18,997.59,177.49,361.056,432.65. Senior Agric Officer (Regional Rep for PROSPER)270851.2872.51,490.42,432.32,480.92,530.52,581.22,632.815,871.76. District Director of Agriculture7706,473.019,905.320,401.552,023.770,752.272,167.346,006.646,926.8334,656.37. District Planning Officer3402,858.28,789.39,008.422,971.531,241.231,866.120,314.620,720.9147,770.38. District Works Engineer6855,758.417,708.018,149.346,280.862,941.964,200.840,928.041,746.5297,713.79. Management Information Officers (MISOs)3402,858.28,789.39,008.422,971.531,241.231,866.120,314.620,720.9147,770.310. Accountants2101,765.45,428.75,564.014,188.319,296.119,682.012,547.312,798.291,269.911. Crop Officers7606,388.919,646.820,136.551,348.169,833.471,230.045,409.246,317.3330,310.112. WIAD Officers7606,388.919,646.820,136.551,348.169,833.471,230.045,409.246,317.3330,310.113. Agriculture Extension Officers76019,166.758,940.360,409.5154,044.2209,500.1213,690.1136,227.5138,952.0990,930.4Total Recurrent Costs57,783.7165,134.2171,966.1428,666.3578,399.5589,967.5381,472.7389,102.22,762,492.3Total786,295.61,211,109.81,615,501.42,768,978.52,162,376.71,172,905.8958,443.8621,956.511,297,568.1_________________________________\a 2 trainings per visit; this includes procedures for cluster identification and other procedural aspects, including IFAD SECAP  and EPA  procedures\b Promotion of healthy diets\c Promotion of healthy diets\d Promotion of healthy diets\e Including water harvesting for dry season farming\f DSA_USD50, 3 days per cluster.\g GCF Funding on national consultant\h in project target areas\i Support to Agrinet to Install Mini-Weather Stations and Disseminate Data (ESMP) 
Table 15. Subcomponent 1.2. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure  
12 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 1.2. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure [1.2]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Development of socio-economic infrastructure1. Off-farm/watershed workscluster-206060606060-3202. Feeder roads and farm trackskm-20202525---903. Communal social infrastructurecluster-206060606060-3204. Site Monitoring of Environmental, Climate and Social Conditions [ESMP)lumpsum-111111-65. Infrastructure Engineerperson/year0.51111110.576. District Staff Field Supportdays-120360360360360360-1,920TotalUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Development of socio-economic infrastructure1. Off-farm/watershed works24.500-554,181.41,703,984.91,738,064.61,772,825.91,808,282.41,844,448.1-9,421,787.42. Feeder roads and farm tracks49.000-1,108,362.81,135,989.91,448,387.21,477,354.9---5,170,094.83. Communal social infrastructure22.500-508,942.11,564,884.11,596,181.81,628,105.41,660,667.51,693,880.9-8,652,661.94. Site Monitoring of Environmental, Climate and Social Conditions [ESMP)87.500-94,248.596,597.898,529.7100,500.3102,510.3104,560.5-596,947.35. Infrastructure Engineer50.40026,480.354,287.255,640.356,753.157,888.259,046.060,226.930,715.7401,037.66. District Staff Field Support10-1,292.63,974.34,053.84,134.94,217.64,301.9-21,975.0Total26,480.32,321,314.54,561,071.44,941,970.35,040,809.73,634,723.83,707,418.330,715.724,264,504.0 
Component 2. Strengthening the benefits for smallholders and small operators around agricultural value chains. 
Table 16. Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development 
13 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 2.1. Sustainable marketing linkages and business development [2.1]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Sustainable marketing linkages and business development.1. Value chain analysisa. Value chain studies and integration of climate risks /alumpsum0.30.7------1b. Scoping and mapping of operational VC actors in target areas /blumpsum0.3-0.7-----1Subtotal2. Establish and maintain value chain bodiesLumpsum1111111183. Promotion of linkages between producers and VC actorsa. Engagement with VC actorsSupport by DDAs to collect information /cfield days200200200200200200--1,200District-level meetingsmeeting1015202015---80Discussions with interested VC actorslumpsum0.10.20.10.20.20.10.1-1Subtotalb. Creation of and support for partnershipsDDA support for the trainings and demonstrations /dfield days5007501,0001,0001,0001,000750-6,000Training of RIs and MSMEs on climate risks and integration into BPs /ecluster405070707020--320Training of RIs and MSMEs on VC linkages and green bankable BPscluster405070707020--320Demonstrations on climate risks and green BPscluster405070707020--320BRCs/BACs support for Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /fcluster405070707020--320Demonstrations dedicated for women and youth on climate risks/green BPscluster405070707020--320Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /gcluster405070707020--320SubtotalSubtotal4. Development of Business Plans.a. Preparation of business plans for RIs & MSMEs - MG windowCall for preparation  BPs at cluster levelcluster405070707020--320BRCs/BACs for Preparation of BPs under Matching Grant Windowcluster405070707020--320DDAs Support for BPs Preparationdays300400500500500200--2,400MoFA regional and central departmentsdays8012015015015050--700Subtotalb. Evaluation of business plans at RIs/MSMEs level - MG windowLS0.10.20.20.20.20.1--1c. Preparation of business plans for RIs linked to VC Actors (BFF) /hCall for preparation of ABPs for RIscluster-308080505030-320BRCs/BACs for Preparation of ABPs for RIs (BFF)cluster-30808050502010320Subtotal 
14 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 2.1. Sustainable marketing linkages and business development [2.1]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costsd. Preparation of business plans for SMEs (standalone) - (BFF)Call for preparation of ABPs for MSMEscluster-308080505030-320BRCs/BACs for Preparation of ABPs for MSMEs (BFF)cluster-30808050502010320SubtotalSubtotal5. Technical Assistance to Support to the BRCs/ BACsDesign of assessment processNat consultant-1------1TA for support for partnership creation and preparation of BPsmonth2436369696966024468Subtotal6. Value Chain Specialistsa. Senior Value Chain Development Specialistperson/year-11111117b. Value Chain Development Specialistperson/year-222221112Subtotal7. Institutional support to Value ChainsSupport to veternary services in MoFA and at dstrictsLumpsum0.080.080.10.20.20.20.14-1Support for shea tree domestication programLumpsum0.080.080.10.20.20.20.14-1Support to Tree Crop DevelopmentLumpsum0.080.080.10.20.20.20.14-1SubtotalTotal Investment CostsII. Recurrent CostsA. GoG staff pro rata time on PROSPER activities1. District Director of Agricultureperson/year10303080808050504102. District Planning Officerperson/year10303080808050504103. Crop Officersperson/year10303080808050504104. WIAD Officersperson/year10303080808050504105. Agriculture Extension Officersperson/year3090902402402401501501,230Total Recurrent CostsTotal_________________________________\a TA supported by BRCs / BACs. Budget lines for BRCs / BACs are provided separately\b TA supported by BRCs / BACs. Budget lines for BRCs / BACs are provided separately\c The role of the DDA is to support BRCs / BACs. Provision for BRCs / BACs are provided for seperately.\d BRCs and BACs play the leading role with support from DDAs\e The cost covers the cost of trainers as well.\f Cost covers trainers as well.\g This item supports collection of information above.\h BFF window 
15 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 2.1. Sustainable marketing linkages and business development [2.1]Detailed CostsUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Sustainable marketing linkages and business development.1. Value chain analysisa. Value chain studies and integration of climate risks /a150.00047,286.2113,098.2------160,384.4b. Scoping and mapping of operational VC actors in target areas /b300.00094,572.4-231,834.7-----326,407.0Subtotal141,858.5113,098.2231,834.7-----486,791.52. Establish and maintain value chain bodies25.00026,270.126,928.227,599.428,151.428,714.429,288.729,874.430,471.9227,298.43. Promotion of linkages between producers and VC actorsa. Engagement with VC actorsSupport by DDAs to collect information /c102,101.62,154.32,207.92,252.12,297.22,343.1--13,356.2District-level meetings2.50026,270.140,392.255,198.756,302.743,071.6---221,235.3Discussions with interested VC actors150.00015,762.132,313.816,559.633,781.634,457.317,573.217,924.7-168,372.2Subtotal44,133.874,860.373,966.392,336.479,826.019,916.317,924.7-402,963.7b. Creation of and support for partnershipsDDA support for the trainings and demonstrations /d105,254.08,078.411,039.711,260.511,485.811,715.58,962.3-67,796.3Training of RIs and MSMEs on climate risks and integration into BPs /e1.20050,438.664,627.692,733.994,588.696,480.328,117.1--426,986.0Training of RIs and MSMEs on VC linkages and green bankable BPs2.20092,470.8118,483.9170,012.1173,412.3176,880.651,548.1--782,807.7Demonstrations on climate risks and green BPs1.80075,657.996,941.4139,100.8141,882.8144,720.542,175.7--640,479.0BRCs/BACs support for Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /f1.50063,048.280,784.5115,917.3118,235.7120,600.435,146.4--533,732.5Demonstrations dedicated for women and youth on climate risks/green BPs1.50063,048.280,784.5115,917.3118,235.7120,600.435,146.4--533,732.5Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /g1.50063,048.280,784.5115,917.3118,235.7120,600.435,146.4--533,732.5Subtotal412,966.0530,484.6760,638.6775,851.3791,368.4238,995.58,962.3-3,519,266.7Subtotal457,099.7605,344.9834,604.9868,187.8871,194.3258,911.826,887.0-3,922,230.44. Development of Business Plans.a. Preparation of business plans for RIs & MSMEs - MG windowCall for preparation  BPs at cluster level502,101.62,692.83,863.93,941.24,020.01,171.5--17,791.1BRCs/BACs for Preparation of BPs under Matching Grant Window1.00042,032.253,856.377,278.278,823.880,400.323,430.9--355,821.7DDAs Support for BPs Preparation103,152.44,308.55,519.95,630.35,742.92,343.1--26,697.0MoFA regional and central departments504,203.26,462.88,279.88,445.48,614.32,928.9--38,934.4Subtotal51,489.467,320.494,941.896,840.798,777.529,874.4--439,244.2b. Evaluation of business plans at RIs/MSMEs level - MG window50.0005,254.010,771.311,039.711,260.511,485.85,857.7--55,669.1c. Preparation of business plans for RIs linked to VC Actors (BFF) /hCall for preparation of ABPs for RIs50-1,615.74,415.94,504.22,871.42,928.91,792.5-18,128.6BRCs/BACs for Preparation of ABPs for RIs (BFF)2.000-64,627.6176,635.9180,168.7114,857.5117,154.747,799.124,377.5725,621.0Subtotal-66,243.3181,051.8184,672.9117,729.0120,083.549,591.624,377.5743,749.6 
16 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 2.1. Sustainable marketing linkages and business development [2.1]Detailed CostsUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029 I. Investment Costsd. Preparation of business plans for SMEs (standalone) - (BFF)Call for preparation of ABPs for MSMEs50-1,615.74,415.94,504.22,871.42,928.91,792.5-BRCs/BACs for Preparation of ABPs for MSMEs (BFF)1.000-32,313.888,318.090,084.357,428.858,577.323,899.612,188.8Subtotal-33,929.592,733.994,588.660,300.261,506.225,692.012,188.8Subtotal56,743.4178,264.4379,767.3387,362.6288,292.4217,321.975,283.636,566.35. Technical Assistance to Support to the BRCs/ BACsDesign of assessment process50.000-53,856.3------TA for support for partnership creation and preparation of BPs3.50088,267.5135,717.9139,100.8378,354.2385,921.3393,639.7250,945.3102,385.7Subtotal88,267.5189,574.2139,100.8378,354.2385,921.3393,639.7250,945.3102,385.76. Value Chain Specialistsa. Senior Value Chain Development Specialist50.400-54,287.255,640.356,753.157,888.259,046.060,226.961,431.4b. Value Chain Development Specialist40.680-87,635.089,819.491,615.893,448.195,317.048,611.749,583.9Subtotal-141,922.1145,459.7148,368.9151,336.3154,363.0108,838.6111,015.37. Institutional support to Value ChainsSupport to veternary services in MoFA and at dstricts320.00028,245.628,953.237,093.575,670.877,184.378,727.956,211.8-Support for shea tree domestication program200.00017,653.518,095.723,183.547,294.348,240.249,205.035,132.3-Support to Tree Crop Development480.00042,368.443,429.755,640.3113,506.3115,776.4118,091.984,317.6-Subtotal88,267.590,478.6115,917.3236,471.4241,200.8246,024.8175,661.7-Total Investment Costs858,506.91,345,610.61,874,284.12,046,896.21,966,659.51,299,550.0667,490.6280,439.3II. Recurrent CostsA. GoG staff pro rata time on PROSPER activities1. District Director of Agriculture385,564,051.512,458.912,769.534,732.935,427.636,136.123,036.823,497.52. District Planning Officer856,48,999.127,673.528,363.377,148.278,691.280,265.051,168.952,192.33. Crop Officers1.712,817,998.255,347.056,726.6154,296.4157,382.4160,530.0102,337.9104,384.64. WIAD Officers1.712,817,998.255,347.056,726.6154,296.4157,382.4160,530.0102,337.9104,384.65. Agriculture Extension Officers541,317,064.052,474.453,782.3146,288.0149,213.7152,198.097,026.298,966.7Total Recurrent Costs66,110.9203,300.9208,368.4566,762.0578,097.2589,659.2375,907.7383,425.9Total924,617.81,548,911.52,082,652.42,613,658.22,544,756.71,889,209.11,043,398.4663,865.2_________________________________\a TA supported by BRCs / BACs. Budget lines for BRCs / BACs are provided separately\b TA supported by BRCs / BACs. Budget lines for BRCs / BACs are provided separately\c The role of the DDA is to support BRCs / BACs. Provision for BRCs / BACs are provided for seperately.\d BRCs and BACs play the leading role with support from DDAs\e The cost covers the cost of trainers as well.\f Cost covers trainers as well.\g This item supports collection of information above.\h BFF window 
Table 17. Subcomponent 2.2. Access to Rural Financial Services  
17 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 2.2. Access to Rural Financial Services [2.2]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Access to Rural Financial Services.1. Savings mobilisationa. Promotion of Savings and Credit Group MethodologyTraining of trainers and mentors /aTraining2133----9VSLA training and mentoring /bGroups8508501,2001,2001,200---5,300RCB training on VSLA and savings promotion /cRCB-3453---15Subtotal2. Activities Supported by Matching Grantsa. Business Plans with Matching Grants for Groups of RIsBP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - RiceGroup-68886--36BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - MaizeGroup-68886--36BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - SoyGroup-61010108--44BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - CashewGroup-0.524.55.254.752.750.2520BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - sheaGroup-66666--30BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - PoultryGroup-610101010--46Subtotalb. BP with Matching Grants with MSME (Standalone)BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer)- RiceGroup-47777--32BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - MaizeGroup-47777--32BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - SoyGroup-47777--32BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - CashewGroup-47777--32BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - SheaGroup-47777--32BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - PoultryGroup-47777--32Subtotalc. Investment with Matching Grants for Nutrition and Other Poverty InitiativesInvestment with matching grants support for off-season vegetable productiongroup-101515151515590Investment with matching grants support for post-harvest management group--55555530Investment with matching grants support for small ruminants (goats)group-555555535Investment with matching grants support for poultry - egg productiongroup-555555535Investment with matching grants support for MSME along the food systemgroup-555555535Subtotald. Agricultural risk guarantee - GIRSAL (50% of Premium Cost) /dlumpsum-0.10.150.30.30.15--1e. Agricultural Insurance /elumpsum-0.10.20.20.20.20.50.51.9f. Site specific monitoring of the environmental, climate and social conditions (ESMP)lumpsum-11111117Subtotal3. Blended Finance Facilitya. Development of the BFFTA to APEX Bank to develop the BFFlumpsum0.5-0.5-----1Selection of the PFIs: TA to APEX Banklumpsum0.20.20.20.20.2---1Subtotal 
18 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 2.2. Access to Rural Financial Services [2.2]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costsb. PFI Capacity BuildingAwareness raising and training on climate agriculturelumpsum0.170.170.170.170.170.17--1.02TA for PFIs to develop  financial products  (Green Lending) /flumpsum0.20.10.20.20.20.1--1Tools and instruments to assess BPs (safeguards, mitigation, adaptation)lumpsum0.150.10.10.150.150.150.10.11TA to enhance governance and management of loan productslumpsum0.20.20.20.20.2---1Subtotalc. Management of the BFF at the APEX BankBFF managerper annum0.51111110.57Two officers for north and middle beltsper annum0.2511.252222111.5Adaptation and Climate Coordinatorper annum-111111-6Environment and Safeguard Specialistper annum-111111-6Vehicle pickupNumber-1--1---2Subtotald. BP with  BFF loans to RIs (Groups) with Value Chain ActorsBP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - RiceNumber-222344-17BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - MaizeNumber-222344-17BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - SoyNumber-223344-18BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - CashewNumber-2222---8BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - sheaNumber-223344-18BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - PoultryNumber-223344-18Subtotale. BP with BFF Loans for standalone MSMEs BPs (up to 20 employees)BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - RiceNumber-222233-14BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - MaizeNumber-222233-14BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - SoyNumber-222232215BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - CashewNumber-244665-27BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - SheaNumber-244665-27BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs)- PoultryNumber-222233-14Subtotalf. GIRSAL Guarantee (50% of the premium cost) /gLumpsum-0.050.10.20.20.250.10.11g. Agricultural InsuranceLumpsum-0.050.10.20.20.250.10.11Subtotal4. Rural Financial Services Specialistperson/year0.51111110.57Total Investment CostsII. Recurrent CostsTotal_________________________________\a Volunteers trained as trainers. 1 Trainer per 25 Groups, 5300 Groups in total, 212 as total trainers, 9 Seesions for TOT (3 Days Each Training) Each Training for 25 Trainiers\b 1 Trainer to train 25 groups. Each Trainer needs 5 days to mobilize the Group. Cost of 1 day is $50.\c TA to modify existing products at the banks to encourage savings mobilization\d 50% of Premium Cost paid GIRSAL is borne by the project while the remaining 50% of the risk guarantee is incorporated in the basic business plan\e 50% of Premium Cost paid GIRSAL is borne by the project while the remaining 50% of the risk guarantee is incorporated in the basic business plan\f TA for PFIs to develop  financial products for target group under the BFF including green lending and climate risk products\g 50% of teh rick guarantee cost is incorporated in the Advance Business Plan (ABP) 
19 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 2.2. Access to Rural Financial Services [2.2]Detailed CostsUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Access to Rural Financial Services.1. Savings mobilisationa. Promotion of Savings and Credit Group MethodologyTraining of trainers and mentors /a1.2002,521.91,292.63,974.34,053.8----11,842.6VSLA training and mentoring /b250223,295.9228,889.3331,192.4337,816.3344,572.6---1,465,766.4RCB training on VSLA and savings promotion /c1.000-3,231.44,415.95,630.33,445.7---16,723.3Subtotal225,817.8233,413.2339,582.6347,500.3348,018.3---1,494,332.22. Activities Supported by Matching Grantsa. Business Plans with Matching Grants for Groups of RIsBP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Rice99.800-598,800.0798,400.0798,400.0798,400.0598,800.0--3,592,800.0BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Maize78.000-468,000.0624,000.0624,000.0624,000.0468,000.0--2,808,000.0BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Soy19.250-115,500.0192,500.0192,500.0192,500.0154,000.0--847,000.0BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Cashew192.500-96,250.0385,000.0866,250.01,010,625.0914,375.0529,375.048,125.03,850,000.0BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - shea30.250-181,500.0181,500.0181,500.0181,500.0181,500.0--907,500.0BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Poultry25.053-150,318.0250,530.0250,530.0250,530.0250,530.0--1,152,438.0Subtotal-1,610,368.02,431,930.02,913,180.03,057,555.02,567,205.0529,375.048,125.013,157,738.0b. BP with Matching Grants with MSME (Standalone)BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer)- Rice25.244-100,976.0176,708.0176,708.0176,708.0176,708.0--807,808.0BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Maize18.578-74,312.0130,046.0130,046.0130,046.0130,046.0--594,496.0BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Soy21.975-87,900.0153,825.0153,825.0153,825.0153,825.0--703,200.0BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Cashew21.867-87,468.0153,069.0153,069.0153,069.0153,069.0--699,744.0BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Shea14.750-59,000.0103,250.0103,250.0103,250.0103,250.0--472,000.0BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Poultry21.500-86,000.0150,500.0150,500.0150,500.0150,500.0--688,000.0Subtotal-495,656.0867,398.0867,398.0867,398.0867,398.0--3,965,248.0c. Investment with Matching Grants for Nutrition and Other Poverty InitiativesInvestment with matching grants support for off-season vegetable production5.000-50,000.075,000.075,000.075,000.075,000.075,000.025,000.0450,000.0Investment with matching grants support for post-harvest management (preservation/conservation)5.000--25,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.0150,000.0Investment with matching grants support for small ruminants (goats)12.000-60,000.060,000.060,000.060,000.060,000.060,000.060,000.0420,000.0Investment with matching grants support for poultry - egg production5.000-25,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.0175,000.0Investment with matching grants support for MSME along the food system5.000-25,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.025,000.0175,000.0Subtotal-160,000.0210,000.0210,000.0210,000.0210,000.0210,000.0160,000.01,370,000.0d. Agricultural risk guarantee - GIRSAL (50% of Premium Cost) /d125.000-12,500.018,750.037,500.037,500.018,750.0--125,000.0e. Agricultural Insurance /e350.000-35,000.070,000.070,000.070,000.070,000.0175,000.0175,000.0665,000.0f. Site specific monitoring of the environmental, climate and social conditions (ESMP)15.000-16,156.916,559.616,890.817,228.617,573.217,924.718,283.2120,617.0Subtotal-2,329,680.93,614,637.64,114,968.84,259,681.63,750,926.2932,299.7401,408.219,403,603.03. Blended Finance Facilitya. Development of the BFFTA to APEX Bank to develop the BFF100.00052,540.2-55,198.7-----107,738.9Selection of the PFIs: TA to APEX Bank225.00047,286.248,470.749,678.950,672.451,685.9---247,794.0Subtotal99,826.448,470.7104,877.650,672.451,685.9---355,533.0 
20 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 2.2. Access to Rural Financial Services [2.2]Detailed CostsUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment Costsb. PFI Capacity BuildingAwareness raising and training on climate agriculture75.00013,397.813,733.414,075.714,357.214,644.314,937.2--85,145.5TA for PFIs to develop  financial products  (Green Lending) /f150.00031,524.116,156.933,119.233,781.634,457.317,573.2--166,612.3Tools and instruments to assess BPs (safeguards, mitigation, adaptation)100.00015,762.110,771.311,039.716,890.817,228.617,573.211,949.812,188.8113,404.3TA to enhance governance and management of loan products100.00021,016.121,542.522,079.522,521.122,971.5---110,130.7Subtotal81,700.062,204.080,314.287,550.789,301.750,083.611,949.812,188.8475,292.8c. Management of the BFF at the APEX BankBFF manager50.40026,480.354,287.255,640.356,753.157,888.259,046.060,226.930,715.7401,037.6Two officers for north and middle belts40.68010,686.743,817.556,137.191,615.893,448.195,317.097,223.449,583.9537,829.5Adaptation and Climate Coordinator40.680-43,817.544,909.745,807.946,724.047,658.548,611.7-277,529.3Environment and Safeguard Specialist40.680-43,817.544,909.745,807.946,724.047,658.548,611.7-277,529.3Vehicle pickup30.000-33,929.5--36,180.1---70,109.6Subtotal37,166.9219,669.1201,596.8239,984.7280,964.5249,680.0254,673.680,299.61,564,035.3d. BP with  BFF loans to RIs (Groups) with Value Chain ActorsBP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Rice487.680-1,050,585.71,076,772.71,098,308.21,680,411.52,285,359.72,331,066.9-9,522,504.8BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Maize408.507-880,027.1901,962.8920,002.01,407,603.11,914,340.21,952,627.0-7,976,562.3BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Soy158.200-340,802.7349,297.6534,425.3545,113.8741,354.8756,181.9-3,267,176.1BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Cashew1.514.899-3,263,474.63,344,820.33,411,716.73,479,951.0---13,499,962.6BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - shea258.000-555,797.1569,650.9871,565.9888,997.31,209,036.31,233,217.0-5,328,264.4BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Poultry444.835-958,286.8982,173.21,502,724.91,532,779.42,084,580.02,126,271.6-9,186,815.9Subtotal-7,048,974.07,224,677.58,338,743.19,534,856.28,234,671.08,399,364.4-48,781,286.1e. BP with BFF Loans for standalone MSMEs BPs (up to 20 employees)BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Rice117.533-253,195.7259,506.9264,697.1269,991.0413,086.2421,347.9-1,881,824.8BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Maize136.100-293,193.7300,501.9306,511.9312,642.2478,342.5487,909.4-2,179,101.7BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Soy136.100-293,193.7300,501.9306,511.9312,642.2478,342.5325,272.9331,778.42,348,243.6BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Cashew40.233-86,672.0177,664.9181,218.2277,263.8282,809.0240,387.7-1,246,015.5BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Shea55.000-118,483.9242,874.4247,731.9379,029.8386,610.4328,618.9-1,703,349.4BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs)- Poultry189.000-407,153.7417,302.4425,648.5434,161.4664,267.0677,552.4-3,026,085.4Subtotal-1,451,892.81,698,352.41,732,319.51,985,730.42,703,457.82,481,089.2331,778.412,384,620.5f. GIRSAL Guarantee (50% of the premium cost) /g350.000-18,849.738,639.178,823.880,400.3102,510.341,824.242,660.7403,708.1g. Agricultural Insurance500.000-26,928.255,198.7112,605.4114,857.5146,443.359,748.960,943.9576,725.9Subtotal218,693.38,876,988.49,403,656.310,640,699.612,137,796.511,486,846.211,248,650.1527,871.464,541,201.84. Rural Financial Services Specialist40.68021,373.443,817.544,909.745,807.946,724.047,658.548,611.724,792.0323,694.6Total Investment Costs465,884.511,483,900.013,402,786.315,148,976.616,792,220.415,285,430.912,229,561.5954,071.585,762,831.7II. Recurrent CostsTotal465,884.511,483,900.013,402,786.315,148,976.616,792,220.415,285,430.912,229,561.5954,071.585,762,831.7_________________________________\a Volunteers trained as trainers. 1 Trainer per 25 Groups, 5300 Groups in total, 212 as total trainers, 9 Seesions for TOT (3 Days Each Training) Each Training for 25 Trainiers\b 1 Trainer to train 25 groups. Each Trainer needs 5 days to mobilize the Group. Cost of 1 day is $50.\c TA to modify existing products at the banks to encourage savings mobilization\d 50% of Premium Cost paid GIRSAL is borne by the project while the remaining 50% of the risk guarantee is incorporated in the basic business plan\e 50% of Premium Cost paid GIRSAL is borne by the project while the remaining 50% of the risk guarantee is incorporated in the basic business plan\f TA for PFIs to develop  financial products for target group under the BFF including green lending and climate risk products\g 50% of teh rick guarantee cost is incorporated in the Advance Business Plan (ABP) 
Component 3. Project Management and Policy Engagement 
Table 18. Subcomponent 3.1. Project Management  
21 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 3.1. Project Management [3.1]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Project Management1. Infrastructure, vehicles and equipmenta. Office Building and EquipmentOffice buildinglumpsum0.75-0.25-----1Computer setsset10-------10Computer sets-2set--10--5--15Multifunction Laser PrinterUnit2-------2Multifunction Laser Printer-2Unit---2----2Multifunction Laser Printer-3 /aUnit---3----3Office furnitureSum1-1-----2Air ConditionersUnit10-------10Office equipment, variousSum0.3-0.5-0.2---1Subtotalb. Vehicles4WD pickupunit----5---54WD pickupunit15-------154WD station wagonunit----1---14WD station wagonunit2-------2SubtotalSubtotal2. Project management and coordinationa. Support for IFAD Desks in MoFA and MoFVehicleunit2-------2Trainings for Desk OfficersLS2222----8Trainings for Desk OfficersLS2222----8Equipment for IFAD Desks in MoFA and MoFLS2-------2Subtotalb. Support for GIFMIS ImplementationEquipment for Internet Connectivityunit0.40.20.4-----1c. Project supportSupervision missionsmission-11111117Implementation support missionsmission-11111117Unspecified studies and contract supervisionLS111111118SubtotalSubtotal3. Audita. Internal auditLS-11111117b. External auditLS-11111117c. Meetings and workshopsProject steering committee meetingsmeeting2222222216Consultative stakeholder workshopsWorkshop111111118Consultative AWPB workshopWorkshop111111118Subtotald. Staff developmentTrainingLS2535333-24Subtotal4. Knowledge management and learninga. KM strategy formulation.consultancy1-------1b. Studies and learning products including climateLS-0.10.10.10.20.250.25-1c. Learning events and communications materials incl climateEvent-0.10.10.20.20.20.2-1d. Communications and publicationsLS111111118e. South-South and triangular cooperation - toursWorkshop--11-11-4f. Annual Sahel Awardevent--1111--4g. Sahel Award replenishmentevent--1111--4h. Develop Sahel Award protocolsLS---1----1i. Enrol women and Youth to compete for Sahel AwardLS--1111--4Subtotal 
22 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 3.1. Project Management [3.1]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029TotalA. Project Management I. Investment Costs5. M&E/MIS systemM&E software (PLAMES)Software1-------1ArcGISSoftware1-------1ArcGIS licenceLicence--1111116Specialist servicesMonth211111119Training on M&E and RBM for Staff and PartnersWorkshop111111118Subtotal6. M&E studies and reviewsa. Baseline StudyStudy1-------1b. Mid-Term ReviewStudy---1----1c. Completion StudyStudy-------11d. Outcome and Impact thematic studieslumpsum---112228e. Environmental, Climate and Social Monitoring (ESMP)lumpsum111111118f. Conflict Resolution and Land Governance Dialogue (ESMP) /blumpsum--1-----1g. Other Social Monitoring (GBV, SEAH Vulnerability) - ESMP /clumpsum111111118h. Health Insurance and Outreach Monitoring [ESMP] /dlumpsum111111118i. Environmental, Climate and Social Audit /elumpsum-1--1---2SubtotalTotal Investment CostsII. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries1. Project Coordinatorperson/year0.811111117.82. KM/M&E Manageryear0.811111117.83. KM/M&E Officerpers-year0.811111117.84. M&E/MIS assistantpers-year0.8222222214.85. Financial Controlleryear0.811111117.86. Project Accountantpers-year0.811111117.87. Project Accountant - GCF /fpers-year0.811111117.88. Accountant Assistantyear0.511111117.59. Accountant Assistant - GCF /gyear0.511111117.510. Procurement Manageryear0.811111117.811. Procurement Assistantyear0.511111117.512. Admin. Assistantyear0.8122221111.813. Office Assistantyear0.8222222214.814. Driversyear0.8244444426.815. PROSPER Liaison Officeryear0.811111117.816. LO Assistantyear0.811111117.8SubtotalB. Operating costs (Proj Mgt + Policy)1. Staff Monitoring ActivitiesLS0.50.511111172. MOFA-PCU/IFAD Desk Monitoring ActivitiesLS0.50.511111173. Stationary and Sanitary SuppliesLS0.50.511111174. Vehicle Running, Repairs, & Maintenancevehicle/year17171717232323231605. UtilitiesLS1111111186. Computer & Equipment Maintenance, miscellaneous.LS0.50.51111117SubtotalTotal Recurrent CostsTotal_________________________________\a Support to IFAD Desks at MOFA Directorates\b One-time support\c Surveys\d Surveys\e Workshop for ECS Officers\f Reference IGREENFIN Workshop in Sept. 2021 in Abidjan. The PMU for participating countries of the IGREENFIN project would have 1 Project Accountant and 1 Assistant Accountant each for Ghana, Mali and Code D'Ivoire\g Reference IGREENFIN Workshop in Sept. 2021 in Abidjan. The PMU for participating countries of the IGREENFIN project would have 1 Project Accountant and 1 Assistant Accountant each for Ghana, Mali and Code D'Ivoire 
23 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 3.1. Project Management [3.1]Detailed CostsUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Project Management1. Infrastructure, vehicles and equipmenta. Office Building and EquipmentOffice building150.000124,126.2-43,469.0-----167,595.2Computer sets5005,516.7-------5,516.7Computer sets-21.000--11,591.7--6,150.6--17,742.4Multifunction Laser Printer5.00011,033.4-------11,033.4Multifunction Laser Printer-210.000---23,647.1----23,647.1Multifunction Laser Printer-3 /a10.000---35,470.7----35,470.7Office furniture4.0004,413.4-4,636.7-----9,050.1Air Conditioners2.00022,066.9-------22,066.9Office equipment, various125.00041,375.4-72,448.3-30,150.1---143,973.8Subtotal208,532.1-132,145.859,117.830,150.16,150.6--436,096.4b. Vehicles4WD pickup30.000----180,900.6---180,900.64WD pickup24.000397,203.9-------397,203.94WD station wagon60.000----72,360.2---72,360.24WD station wagon45.00099,301.0-------99,301.0Subtotal496,504.9---253,260.8---749,765.7Subtotal705,036.9-132,145.859,117.8283,410.96,150.6--1,185,862.12. Project management and coordinationa. Support for IFAD Desks in MoFA and MoFVehicle30.00066,200.7-------66,200.7Trainings for Desk Officers2.5005,254.05,385.65,519.95,630.3----21,789.8Trainings for Desk Officers2.5005,254.05,385.65,519.95,630.3----21,789.8Equipment for IFAD Desks in MoFA and MoF5.00011,033.4-------11,033.4Subtotal87,742.110,771.311,039.711,260.5----120,813.7b. Support for GIFMIS ImplementationEquipment for Internet Connectivity100.00044,133.822,619.646,366.9-----113,120.4c. Project supportSupervision missions15.000-16,156.916,559.616,890.817,228.617,573.217,924.718,283.2120,617.0Implementation support missions10.000-10,771.311,039.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.880,411.3Unspecified studies and contract supervision20.00021,016.121,542.522,079.522,521.122,971.523,430.923,899.624,377.5181,838.7Subtotal21,016.148,470.749,678.950,672.451,685.952,719.653,774.054,849.5382,867.0Subtotal152,892.081,861.6107,085.561,933.051,685.952,719.653,774.054,849.5616,801.13. Audita. Internal audit5.000-5,385.65,519.95,630.35,742.95,857.75,974.96,094.440,205.7b. External audit15.000-16,156.916,559.616,890.817,228.617,573.217,924.718,283.2120,617.0c. Meetings and workshopsProject steering committee meetings5.00010,508.010,771.311,039.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.890,919.4Consultative stakeholder workshops5.0005,254.05,385.65,519.95,630.35,742.95,857.75,974.96,094.445,459.7Consultative AWPB workshop10.00010,508.010,771.311,039.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.890,919.4Subtotal26,270.126,928.227,599.428,151.428,714.429,288.729,874.430,471.9227,298.4d. Staff developmentTraining3.0006,304.816,156.99,935.816,890.810,337.210,543.910,754.8-80,924.2Subtotal32,574.964,627.659,614.667,563.362,023.163,263.564,528.854,849.5469,045.24. Knowledge management and learninga. KM strategy formulation.10.00010,508.0-------10,508.0b. Studies and learning products including climate300.000-32,313.833,119.233,781.668,914.587,866.089,623.3-345,618.5c. Learning events and communications materials incl climate300.000-32,313.833,119.267,563.368,914.570,292.871,698.7-343,902.3d. Communications and publications10.00010,508.010,771.311,039.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.890,919.4e. South-South and triangular cooperation - tours20.000--22,079.522,521.1-23,430.923,899.6-91,931.1f. Annual Sahel Award40.000--44,159.045,042.245,943.046,861.9--182,006.0g. Sahel Award replenishment40.000--44,159.045,042.245,943.046,861.9--182,006.0h. Develop Sahel Award protocols30.000---33,781.6----33,781.6i. Enrol women and Youth to compete for Sahel Award40.000--44,159.045,042.245,943.046,861.9--182,006.0Subtotal21,016.175,398.8231,834.7304,034.6287,143.8333,890.8197,171.312,188.81,462,679.0 
24 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 3.1. Project Management [3.1]Detailed CostsUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Project Management5. M&E/MIS systemM&E software (PLAMES)20.00022,066.9-------22,066.9ArcGIS43.00047,443.8-------47,443.8ArcGIS licence7.000--8,114.28,276.58,442.08,610.98,783.18,958.751,185.4Specialist services25.00052,540.226,928.227,599.428,151.428,714.429,288.729,874.430,471.9253,568.5Training on M&E and RBM for Staff and Partners10.00010,508.010,771.311,039.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.890,919.4Subtotal132,558.937,699.446,753.347,688.448,642.249,615.050,607.351,619.5465,184.06. M&E studies and reviewsa. Baseline Study150.000157,620.6-------157,620.6b. Mid-Term Review150.000---168,908.1----168,908.1c. Completion Study150.000-------182,831.6182,831.6d. Outcome and Impact thematic studies25.000---28,151.428,714.458,577.359,748.960,943.9236,135.8e. Environmental, Climate and Social Monitoring (ESMP)25.00026,270.126,928.227,599.428,151.428,714.429,288.729,874.430,471.9227,298.4f. Conflict Resolution and Land Governance Dialogue (ESMP) /b300.000--331,192.4-----331,192.4g. Other Social Monitoring (GBV, SEAH Vulnerability) - ESMP /c12.50013,135.113,464.113,799.714,075.714,357.214,644.314,937.215,236.0113,649.2h. Health Insurance and Outreach Monitoring [ESMP] /d12.50013,135.113,464.113,799.714,075.714,357.214,644.314,937.215,236.0113,649.2i. Environmental, Climate and Social Audit /e50.000-53,856.3--57,428.8---111,285.1Subtotal210,160.8107,712.6386,391.1253,362.2143,571.9117,154.7119,497.8304,719.31,642,570.4Total Investment Costs1,254,239.7367,300.0963,825.1793,699.3876,477.8622,794.3485,579.2478,226.55,842,141.8II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries1. Project Coordinator60.00050,438.664,627.666,238.567,563.368,914.570,292.871,698.773,132.6532,906.52. KM/M&E Manager50.40042,368.454,287.255,640.356,753.157,888.259,046.060,226.961,431.4447,641.53. KM/M&E Officer40.68034,197.443,817.544,909.745,807.946,724.047,658.548,611.749,583.9361,310.64. M&E/MIS assistant10.2008,574.621,973.422,521.122,971.523,430.923,899.624,377.524,865.1172,613.75. Financial Controller50.40042,368.454,287.255,640.356,753.157,888.259,046.060,226.961,431.4447,641.56. Project Accountant40.68034,197.443,817.544,909.745,807.946,724.047,658.548,611.749,583.9361,310.67. Project Accountant - GCF /f40.68034,197.443,817.544,909.745,807.946,724.047,658.548,611.749,583.9361,310.68. Accountant Assistant10.2005,359.110,986.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.812,432.587,378.69. Accountant Assistant - GCF /g10.2005,359.110,986.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.812,432.587,378.610. Procurement Manager50.40042,368.454,287.255,640.356,753.157,888.259,046.060,226.961,431.4447,641.511. Procurement Assistant10.2005,359.110,986.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.812,432.587,378.612. Admin. Assistant10.2008,574.610,986.722,521.122,971.523,430.923,899.612,188.812,432.5137,005.613. Office Assistant7.2006,052.615,510.615,897.216,215.216,539.516,870.317,207.717,551.8121,844.914. Drivers7.2006,052.615,510.631,794.532,430.433,079.033,740.534,415.435,103.7222,126.615. PROSPER Liaison Officer40.68034,197.443,817.544,909.745,807.946,724.047,658.548,611.749,583.9361,310.616. LO Assistant10.2008,574.610,986.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.812,432.590,594.1Subtotal368,239.6510,687.0550,574.3561,585.7572,817.5584,273.8583,770.5595,445.94,327,394.3B. Operating costs (Proj Mgt + Policy)1. Staff Monitoring Activities65.00034,151.135,006.671,758.473,193.574,657.476,150.577,673.679,227.0521,818.12. MOFA-PCU/IFAD Desk Monitoring Activities10.0005,254.05,385.611,039.711,260.511,485.811,715.511,949.812,188.880,279.73. Stationary and Sanitary Supplies25.00013,135.113,464.127,599.428,151.428,714.429,288.729,874.430,471.9200,699.34. Vehicle Running, Repairs, & Maintenance5.00089,318.391,555.793,837.895,714.6132,086.2134,727.9137,422.4140,170.9914,833.95. Utilities40.00042,032.243,085.044,159.045,042.245,943.046,861.947,799.148,755.1363,677.46. Computer & Equipment Maintenance, miscellaneous.15.0007,881.08,078.416,559.616,890.817,228.617,573.217,924.718,283.2120,419.6Subtotal191,771.7196,575.5264,953.9270,253.0310,115.3316,317.6322,644.0329,096.92,201,728.0Total Recurrent Costs560,011.3707,262.6815,528.2831,838.7882,932.8900,591.4906,414.5924,542.86,529,122.2Total1,814,250.91,074,562.61,779,353.31,625,538.01,759,410.61,523,385.71,391,993.71,402,769.312,371,264.0_________________________________\a Support to IFAD Desks at MOFA Directorates\b One-time support\c Surveys\d Surveys\e Workshop for ECS Officers\f Reference IGREENFIN Workshop in Sept. 2021 in Abidjan. The PMU for participating countries of the IGREENFIN project would have 1 Project Accountant and 1 Assistant Accountant each for Ghana, Mali and Code D'Ivoire\g Reference IGREENFIN Workshop in Sept. 2021 in Abidjan. The PMU for participating countries of the IGREENFIN project would have 1 Project Accountant and 1 Assistant Accountant each for Ghana, Mali and Code D'Ivoire 
Table 19. Subcomponent 3.2. Policy Engagement  
25 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERTable 3.2. Policy Engagement [3.2]Detailed CostsQuantitiesUnit20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Policy Engagement1. Sectoral policy support to GoGShort Studies Related to ASWGlumpsum111111118TA Support to Green Finance and Green AgricultureTA days111111118Studies on Different Policy Topicsstudy-11111--5Dialogue and advocacy on policy Topics /alumpsum111111118Support to BoG on climate risk and green financeLumsum-0.5--0.5---1Total Investment CostsII. Recurrent CostsTotalUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$)(US$)20222023202420252026202720282029Total I. Investment CostsA. Policy Engagement1. Sectoral policy support to GoGShort Studies Related to ASWG2.5002,627.02,692.82,759.92,815.12,871.42,928.92,987.43,047.222,729.8TA Support to Green Finance and Green Agriculture12.50013,135.113,464.113,799.714,075.714,357.214,644.314,937.215,236.0113,649.2Studies on Different Policy Topics10.000-10,771.311,039.711,260.511,485.811,715.5--56,272.8Dialogue and advocacy on policy Topics /a7.5007,881.08,078.48,279.88,445.48,614.38,786.68,962.39,141.668,189.5Support to BoG on climate risk and green finance70.000-37,699.4--40,200.1---77,899.5Total Investment Costs23,643.172,706.035,879.236,596.877,528.838,075.326,887.027,424.7338,740.9II. Recurrent CostsTotal23,643.172,706.035,879.236,596.877,528.838,075.326,887.027,424.7338,740.9 
26 
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Introduction. The EFA of the PROSPER covers the overall increase in production costs at the crop level, the MSME 
level and the RI level, and the overall project level, which will be compared with the increase of their economic costs. 
The prices used for EFA correspond to those paid to producers for farmgate price. Based on the data available, the 
mission developed 10 models for EFA: i) three selected models for crop production (rice, maize and soy), ii) four 
selected matching grants Crops MSMEs (Small and Medium-sized Enterprises) for rice, maize, soy, and poultry; and 
iii) Loans Cluster of Rural Institutions (RI) for matching grant RI Cluster for rice, maize, and soy. 
1.  Productivity increases are expected through improved agricultural practices, increased use of inputs, 
improved crop intensity, a better valuation of downstream of different value chains, and cost-
effectiveness of infrastructure such as roads. Productivity of the various speculations was low without 
project, mainly because of the low use of inputs (phytosanitary treatment, mineral manure, size). They 
have been significantly improved through the PROSPER. 
2.  The MSME level analysis was done for rice milling, soy aggregation, maize aggregation and poultry feed. 
MSME model for rice is to buy Paddy, aggregate to sell to big buyers/processors and to buy the straw 
from the field, mix it with salt and cashew nutshell as livestock feed. MSME Model of maize is to 
aggregate and to sell to big buyers and processors, and to use the maize cobs and husks to produce 
animal feed. MSME Model of soy is to buy soy, aggregate to sell to big buyers / processors and to buy 
the vegetative part from the field, mix it with salt and possibly cashew nutshell as livestock feed. MSME 
Model for poultry is to buy chicken, aggregate, supply feed, drugs, and other inputs, but also to buy 
chicken from producers, slaughter, process and sell. 
3.  Financial analysis. Financial analysis on these models covered: finance and investment, operating costs, 
revenue estimation, operating statement, depreciation and amortization, proposed loan (Capex and 
working capital) and loan repayment, free cash flow analysis showing NPV and IRR from the equity 
holders’ perspective. The RI level analysis focused on the production cost as against revenue per hectare 
for rice, soy, and maize over a 20-year period for each model. 
4.  The increases in production costs relate to the production developed by the PROSPER as they relate to 
investments made, which include the purchase of seeds, and the use of fertilizers. The productivity is 
assumed to increase. 
5. 
Increases in gross margins, albeit cautious, are relatively high. These increases are significantly larger for 
Project-targeted productions in terms of intensification. The ultimate objective is to sustainably improve 
farm incomes of the small and micro-farm, which represents most farms in the PROSPER area. The gross 
margins of the value chains analysed (rice, maize, and soy) show that their contribution to income 
generation is significant for small producers in the PROSPER area. 
6.  The financial profitability indicators of the different production models such as net present value (NPV) 
and financial internal rate of return (IRR) when applicable indicate that these models are highly 
profitable. The profitability of crops and MSME remains subject to the risk of price changes in the 
market. Similarly, producers' profit margins are affected by the selling prices of their products, which 
vary widely. Prices can range from simple to quintuple due to the defective and disorganized marketing 
channels, to the multitude of operators and intermediaries present in the different production areas and 
to the antiquated upgrading units. 
7. 
Infrastructure. The project will rehabilitate 90 km of rural roads. This infrastructure improves the quality 
of life of rural populations, including vulnerable populations (women, youth) by: i) the opening up of 
communities and villages with residents who are farmers and traders, significantly improving the 
movement of people and goods, and improved access to advisory services, increased productivity and 
agricultural products and livestock and fisheries; ii) the reduction of post-harvest losses through 
1 
improved transport conditions; iii) increased producer prices due to improved market access in the local 
and regional markets; and improving means of transportation (vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles, tricycles, 
etc.) and access to rural services as well as the reduction of maintenance costs and of transport prices of 
people and goods. MSMEs are in the production areas. Matching grants (cost-sharing financing) allowed 
the MSME development around localities. 
8.  Beneficiaries of the project. The PROSPER target groups are producers, investors, MSMEs and households 
located in the project area. Farmers were expected to benefit directly from the project, including 
women, and youth. In addition SMEs and RI will take advantage of positive externalities brought by the 
project. Indirect beneficiaries will include local institutions and the families of workers directly employed 
by the project. Finally, in the targeted areas will also benefit from the increase in taxes driven by the 
development of economic activities. 
9.  Economic analysis. The PROSPER economic analysis is based on several assumptions about the 
production levels of rice, maize and soy value chains. These assumptions are conservative. Similarly, the 
reduction in transaction costs - due to easier access to certain technical services, information and 
technology - was not included. The main assumptions are as follows: 
  The 20-year economic lifespan (2022 to 2042) was selected to reflect the useful life of the major investments 
made. The future costs of implementing the PROSPER were considered. The year without a project is 2021. 
  Economic prices were introduced to correct the distortions of prices/financial costs due to government 
intervention (taxation, subsidies, financial unforeseen events, and other transfers) and imperfect labour 
markets, capital, and goods & services affected by the Project. For products not traded internationally, 
financial prices were used for economic analysis. A standard conversion factor (SCF) of 0.7 was used to 
reflect existing distortions and to convert financial prices into economic prices.; 
  An aggregation of benefits was made from three levels (crop level, matching grant MSME and MG crop Rural 
institutions) and aggregated at the project level by comparing economic costs to economic benefits. A zero 
residual value was assumed for Project investments and an average exchange rates of 6.03 GHS per USD was 
used; 
  Recurrent expenditure on the Government budget will continue to be implemented with the PROSPER, to 
cover the operation of the government technical services dedicated to value chain development in the 
PROSPER area. The costs of periodic infrastructure maintenance would be supported by the Government, 
professional organizations, and the private sector. Also, the annual recurring costs were extended over the 
economic lifespan of the Project, with 10% of these costs from the last year of project implementation 
(2029) to year 20 of the Project (2042); 
  The opportunity cost of capital (OCC) is 12,25%, reflecting the landlocked nature of the PROSPER area and its 
partial integration into the markets for capital, goods and services; 
  The cost-benefit analysis (CBA) indicators used at the project level are the NPV (net present value), and the 
ERR (economic rate of return); 
  The volumes of the production for consumption of the three products (rice, maize and soy) are fully 
absorbed by sales and partially by self-consumption; post-harvest losses are negligible. 
Table 1: Summary of economic analysis of PROSPER (GHS and USD) 
2 
10. Economic rate of return of the project. Based on the above assumptions, the Project’s economic rate of 
return (ERR) is 22%. The ERR is satisfactory as some of the benefits could not be quantified. The NPV is 
positive (USD 43.7 million). All these indicators show the economic profitability of the PROSPER and are 
relatively high for a project structured around developing selected value chains with land and 
infrastructure protection issues and a relatively large area. 
11. It is important to add to this the improvement of access to basic social services with roads ((Feeder roads 
and farm tracks, off-farm/watershed works, and communal social infrastructure), improvement in 
revenues; enhanced nutrition and children education. These benefits, which are not included in the 
calculation of the ERR, consolidate the economic profitability of the PROSPER and contribute to the 
justification of the investments made. 
13. It is also important to note that the PROSPER has targeted population groups with precarious and relatively 
disadvantaged conditions, living in areas that are vulnerable from a market access perspective, and who are 
handicapped by high levels of transaction costs. 
Table 2: Summary of economic analysis of PROSPER 
3 
1.Total crops (GHc)Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20soy19.781            (50.437)              72.569               72.569               72.569                58.055                58.055                58.055                5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  5.806                  Maize(129.994)         (168.938)           117.816             385.963             385.963              289.472              289.472              289.472              28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                28.947                Rice(697.586)         (1.607.900)        (177.899)           319.339             805.085              603.814              603.814              603.814              423.814              603.814              603.814              603.814              750.814              423.814              603.814              867.814              867.814              867.814              687.814              867.814              Total crops (GHS)(807.799)         (1.827.276)        12.486               777.871             1.263.617          951.341              951.341              951.341              458.567              638.567              638.567              638.567              785.567              458.567              638.567              902.567              902.567              902.567              722.567              902.567              1.Total crops (GHc)(807.799)         (1.827.276)        12.486               777.871             1.263.617          951.341              951.341              951.341              458.567              638.567              638.567              638.567              785.567              458.567              638.567              902.567              902.567              902.567              722.567              902.567              2.MG Crops SMEs (GHc):MG Rice SME-                   (45.499.123)      (49.221.975)      (34.581.994)      (2.524.312)         6.735.631          15.829.242        26.412.333        35.141.984        43.735.928        42.782.725        42.782.725        42.782.725        42.782.725        42.782.725        42.782.725        42.782.725        42.782.725        42.782.725        42.782.725        MG Maize SME(4.178.105)     (2.309.583)        (8.167)                (182.912)           (375.131)            (586.572)            (819.157)            (1.075.000)         3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          3.991.047          MG  Soy SME-                   23.505.750       79.299.297       87.359.338       95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        95.519.170        MG  Poultry-                   5.984.128         10.461.472       10.449.309       17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        17.851.326        total MG (GH c?)(4.178.105)     (18.318.827)      40.530.627       63.043.741       110.471.053      119.519.555      128.380.581      138.707.829      152.503.527      161.097.471      160.144.268      160.144.268      160.144.268      160.144.268      160.144.268      160.144.268      160.144.268      160.144.268      160.144.268      160.144.268      3. Loans Cluster of Rural InstitionsMG Rice RI Cluster -                   763.461             1.110.217         1.472.687         1.945.493          1.945.493          1.945.493          1.296.995          11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        11.024.460        MG Maize RI Cluster-                   70.994               77.834               76.852               27.679                27.679                27.679                18.452                156.845              -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       MG Soy RI Cluster-                   83.996               93.892               138.852             51.252                51.252                51.252                34.168                307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              307.515              Total Rural Institions-                   918.451             1.281.944         1.688.392         2.024.424          2.024.424          2.024.424          1.349.616          11.488.820        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        11.331.975        Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20Total bene fits (GHS)(4.985.904)     (19.227.652)      41.825.057       65.510.004       113.759.094      122.495.321      131.356.346      141.008.786      164.450.914      173.068.012      172.114.810      172.114.810      172.261.810      171.934.810      172.114.810      172.378.810      172.378.810      172.378.810      172.198.810      172.378.810      total Benefits in $(826.850)         (3.188.665)        6.936.162         10.864.014       18.865.521        20.314.315        21.783.805        23.384.542        27.272.125        28.701.163        28.543.086        28.543.086        28.567.464        28.513.235        28.543.086        28.586.867        28.586.867        28.586.867        28.557.017        28.586.867        Proejct eco costs ($)4.748.118       14.558.546       18.109.646       22.756.248       21.894.989        16.311.451        13.459.338        7.301.235          730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              730.123              Cash flow(5.574.968)     (17.747.211)      (11.173.483)      (11.892.234)      (3.029.468)         4.002.864          8.324.468          16.083.307        26.542.001        27.971.039        27.812.963        27.812.963        27.837.341        27.783.112        27.812.963        27.856.744        27.856.744        27.856.744        27.826.893        27.856.744         
15. Sensitivity analysis. To test the profitability of the PROSPER under different scenarios, a sensitivity 
analysis was carried out compared to the base case. The sensitivity of the Project relates to increases in 
costs, and decreases in benefits, and delays in achieving benefits. 
16. The sensitivity analysis tests the robustness of the results of the economic profitability study with 
respect to the parameters that are used in the EFA approach. The idea is to classify the input data 
according to its ability to influence the results of the ERR. This also makes it possible to deepen the 
quality of the hypotheses and to identify those generating high variability. 
17. The estimation is made variable by variable (VBV) and in terms of scenarios. VBV analysis indicates the 
sensitivity of ERR to increasing/decreasing costs, assuming constant benefits, or increasing/decreasing 
benefits while costs are constant (Ceteris paribus). On the other hand, the analysis in terms of scenarios 
tells us about the simultaneous increase/ decrease in costs and benefits of the PROSPER. 
18. In terms of “variable by variable” analysis. A decrease in benefits from 10% to 40% results in an 
economically profitable Project: this rate drops to 22% to 11% respectively since the OCC is around 
12.25%. An increase in costs, while having constant benefits, from 10% to 60% would leave the ERR 
higher than the OCC. 
Table 3: Sensitivity of the ERR to the change in the additional costs and benefits of the Project (%) 
4 
1.Total crops (GHc)Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8-Y20soy19.781             (50.437)            72.569             72.569             72.569             58.055             58.055             58.055             Maize(129.994)         (168.938)         117.816           385.963           385.963           289.472           289.472           289.472           Rice(697.586)         (1.607.900)      (177.899)         319.339           805.085           603.814           603.814           603.814           Total crops (GHS)(807.799)         (1.827.276)      12.486             777.871           1.263.617       951.341           951.341           951.341           1.Total crops (GHc)(807.799)         (1.827.276)      12.486             777.871           1.263.617       951.341           951.341           951.341           2.MG Crops SMEs (GHc):MG Rice SME-                    (45.499.123)    (49.221.975)    (34.581.994)    (2.524.312)      6.735.631       15.829.242     26.412.333     MG Maize SME(4.178.105)      (2.309.583)      (8.167)              (182.912)         (375.131)         (586.572)         (819.157)         (1.075.000)      MG  Soy SME-                    23.505.750     79.299.297     87.359.338     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     MG  Poultry-                    5.984.128       10.461.472     10.449.309     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     total MG (GH c?)(4.178.105)      (18.318.827)    40.530.627     63.043.741     110.471.053   119.519.555   128.380.581   138.707.829   3. Loans Cluster of Rural InstitionsMG Rice RI Cluster -                    763.461           1.110.217       1.472.687       1.945.493       1.945.493       1.945.493       1.296.995       MG Maize RI Cluster-                    70.994             77.834             76.852             27.679             27.679             27.679             18.452             MG Soy RI Cluster-                    83.996             93.892             138.852           51.252             51.252             51.252             34.168             Total Rural Institions-                    918.451           1.281.944       1.688.392       2.024.424       2.024.424       2.024.424       1.349.616       Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Total bene fits (GHS)(4.985.904)      (19.227.652)    41.825.057     65.510.004     113.759.094   122.495.321   131.356.346   141.008.786   total Benefits in $(826.850)         (3.188.665)      6.936.162       10.864.014     18.865.521     20.314.315     21.783.805     23.384.542     Proejct eco costs ($)4.748.118       14.558.546     18.109.646     22.756.248     21.894.989     16.311.451     13.459.338     7.301.235       Cash flow(5.574.968)      (17.747.211)    (11.173.483)    (11.892.234)    (3.029.468)      4.002.864       8.324.468       16.083.307     NPV ($)43.139.365     ERR22,3% 
19. A simultaneous increase in costs between 10% and 60% combined with a decrease in benefits of 10% 
gives an ERR greater than or equal to the OCC. Overall, the PROSPER is not sensitive to variations in costs 
and aggregate benefits of the Project. The ERR remains at an acceptable level as it does not consider 
certain direct and indirect benefits. Also, environmental benefits such as improving soil fertility, reducing 
erosion, improving groundwater recharge and better management of the natural resource base, through 
soft and transversal actions of the Project have not been estimated. 
20. Calculated over a relatively long economic lifespan, the sensitivity analysis makes it possible to assess the 
risk weighing on the execution of the Project following an unfavourable development in the economic 
and financial situation, in particular the degradation of the local socio-political situation, an inflationary 
trend, and the poor governance or even the dismantling of cooperatives and the degradation of 
infrastructure (rural roads, hydro-agricultural schemes, etc.) resulting from the lack of their regular 
maintenance. 
5 
decrease in benefice by :Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8-Y2010%(744.165)      (2.869.799)     6.242.546      9.777.613      16.978.969          18.282.884          19.605.425          21.046.088          ERR(5.492.283)  (17.428.345)  (11.867.100)  (12.978.636)  (4.916.020)            1.971.432             6.146.087             13.744.853          20%(661.480)      (2.550.932)     5.548.930      8.691.211      15.092.417          16.251.452          17.427.044          18.707.633          ERR(5.409.598)  (17.109.478)  (12.560.716)  (14.065.037)  (6.802.572)            (59.999)                   3.967.707             11.406.398          40%(496.110)      (1.913.199)     4.161.697      6.518.408      11.319.313          12.188.589          13.070.283          14.030.725          ERR(5.244.228)  (16.471.745)  (13.947.948)  (16.237.840)  (10.575.676)         (4.122.862)            (389.054)                6.729.490             Increase in costs by :10%5.222.930   16.014.400   19.920.610   25.031.873   24.084.488          17.942.596          14.805.271          8.031.358             ERR(6.049.780)  (19.203.066)  (12.984.448)  (14.167.859)  (5.218.966)            2.371.719             6.978.534             15.353.183          20%5.697.742   17.470.255   21.731.575   27.307.498   26.273.987          19.573.742          16.151.205          8.761.482             ERR(6.524.592)  (20.658.920)  (14.795.413)  (16.443.484)  (7.408.465)            740.574                  5.632.600             14.623.060          40%6.647.366   20.381.964   25.353.504   31.858.748   30.652.985          22.836.032          18.843.073          10.221.729          ERR(7.474.215)  (23.570.630)  (18.417.342)  (20.994.734)  (11.787.463)         (2.521.717)            2.940.733             13.162.813          60%7.596.989   23.293.673   28.975.433   36.409.997   35.031.982          26.098.322          21.534.940          11.681.976          ERR(8.423.839)  (26.482.339)  (22.039.271)  (25.545.983)  (16.166.461)         (5.784.007)            248.865                  11.702.566          scenario analysis:10%B &10% C(5.967.095)  (18.884.199)  (13.678.064)  (15.254.261)  (7.105.519)            340.287                  4.800.154             13.014.729          10%B &20% C(6.441.907)  (20.340.054)  (15.489.029)  (17.529.885)  (9.295.018)            (1.290.858)            3.454.220             12.284.606          10%B &60% C(8.341.154)  (23.251.763)  (19.110.958)  (22.081.135)  (13.674.015)         (4.553.148)            762.352                  10.824.359           
APPENDICES OF EFA 
I. CROP MODELS: 
1.  Soy 
2.  Maize 
3.  Rice 
II. MATCHING GRANTS CROPS MSMES: 
4.  Rice 
5.  Maize 
6.  Soy 
7.  Poultry 
III. LOANS CLUSTER OF RURAL INSTITUTIONS (RI) FOR MG: 
8.  Rice 
9.  Maize 
10. Soy 
IV. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS AT DIFFERENT LEVELS (CROPS, MG, RI) 
6 
1.Soybean 
2. Maize 
7 
Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20I. PRODUCTION % post-harvest loss6%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%Production Production per cycle, per acreKg650               650               650                724             724             724             724             724             724             724     724     724     724     724     724     724     724     724     724     724     724     Post-harvest lossKg39                  33                  33                  36                36                36                36                36                36                36       36       36       36       36       36       36       36       36       36       36       36       Net production Kg611               618               618                688             688             688             688             688             688             688     688     688     688     688     688     688     688     688     688     688     688     Soyabean Self-consumption 1,112                  12                  12                  12                12                12                12                12                12                12       12       12       12       12       12       12       12       12       12       12       12       Soyabean Selling2,15599               606               606                676             676             676             676             676             676             676     676     676     676     676     676     676     676     676     676     676     676     II. Inv. CostsOperational costsSeeds local kg5,59                    -                -                -              -              -              -              -              -              -      -      1          2          3          4          5          6          7          8          9          10       Improved seeds unit4-                8                    8                    8                  8                  8                  8                  8                  8                  8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          TSP bag60-                2                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          NPK  bag80-                2                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          Weedicidesunit202                    3                    3                    3                  3                  3                  3                  3                  3                  3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          Other operational costs Bagseach 56                    6                    6                    7                  7                  7                  7                  7                  7                  7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          Transportlumpsum31                    18                  18                  20                20                20                20                20                20                20       20       20       20       20       20       20       20       20       20       20       20       Mechanization servicesShelling Unit401                    1                    1                    1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          WinnowingUnit501                    1                    1                    1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          Ploughing unit151                    1                    1                    1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          Labour/dayManual Land clearing p-day751                    2                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          Linning and Pegging  p-day201                    2                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          Sowing /plantingp-day53                    3                    3                    3                  3                  3                  3                  3                  3                  3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          3          Weed control  ( post emegence)p-day252                    2                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          Cost of labour for chemical applicationp-day252                    2                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          Second weed control p-day252                    2                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          Cost of labour for chemical application p-day251                    1                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          Cost of labour for fertilizer application p-day251                    1                    1                    1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          Cost of labour for second  fertilizer application p-day251                    1                    1                    1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1                  1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          1          Cost of labour of TSP application p-day252                    2                    2                    2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2                  2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          2          Harvestingp-day257                    7                    7                    7                  7                  7                  7                  7                  7                  7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          7          Sub-total labour23252626262626262625,525,525,525,525,525,525,525,525,525,525,525,5Hired labour4455555554,54,54,54,54,54,54,54,54,54,54,54,5Family labour192121212121212121212121212121212121212121BUDGET FINANCIERI. PRODUCTION 950144514451612161216121612161216121.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 % post-harvest lossProduction 950144514451612161216121612161216121.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 1.612 Production per cycle, per acreKg0Post-harvest lossKg0Net production Kg0Soyabean Self-consumption Kg1,113,2131313131313131313,213,213,213,213,213,213,213,213,213,213,213,2Soyabean SellingKg2,151417143214321598159815981598159815981.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 1.598 II. COSTS775120413541364136413641364136413641.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 Operational costs90372372372372372372372372372     372     372     372     372     372     372     372     372     372     372     372     Seeds local kg5,55000000000-      -      Improved seeds unit40323232323232323232       32       32       32       32       32       32       32       32       32       32       32       TSP bag600120120120120120120120120120     120     120     120     120     120     120     120     120     120     120     120     NPK  bag800160160160160160160160160160     160     160     160     160     160     160     160     160     160     160     160     Weedicidesunit2040606060606060606060       60       60       60       60       60       60       60       60       60       60       60       Other operational costs138190190200200200200200200200     200     200     200     200     200     200     200     200     200     200     200      Bagseach 530303034343434343434       34       34       34       34       34       34       34       34       34       34       34       Transportlumpsum33545461616161616161       61       61       61       61       61       61       61       61       61       61       61       Shelling Unit4040404040404040404040       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       WinnowingUnit5050505050505050505050       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       Ploughing unit1515151515151515151515       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       labour day 548643793793793793793793793793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     Manual Land clearing p-day7575150150150150150150150150150     150     150     150     150     150     150     150     150     150     150     150     Linning and Pegging  p-day2020404040404040404040       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       40       Sowing /plantingp-day515151515151515151515       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       15       Weed control  ( post emegence)p-day2550505050505050505050       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       Cost of labour for chemical applicationp-day255050175175175175175175175175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     Second weed control p-day2550505050505050505050       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       Cost of labour for chemical application p-day2525255050505050505050       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       50       Cost of labour for fertilizer application p-day2525252525252525252525       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       Cost of labour for second  fertilizer application p-day2525252525252525252525       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       25       Cost of labour of TSP application p-day2538383838383838383838       38       38       38       38       38       38       38       38       38       38       38       Harvestingp-day25175175175175175175175175175175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     175     Sub-total labour548643793793793793793793793793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     Hired labourp-day8888888888          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          8          Family labourp-day540635785785785785785785785785     785     785     785     785     785     785     785     785     785     785     785     Sub-total labour costs548643793793793793793793793793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     793     Total production  costs775120413541364136413641364136413641.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 1.364 Income (after labour costs)17524191248248248248248248248     248     248     248     248     248     248     248     248     248     248     248     Income (before labour costs)7158768761033103310331033103310331.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 1.033 Incremental net income 66-8473737373737373       73       73       73       73       73       73       73       73       73       73       73       incremental net Income*Nb farmers19781(50.437)        72.569       72.569       72.569       58.055       58.055       58.055       5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 5.806 NPV  (GHS, @19%)207345,3NPV (USD)34385,6IRR-NPVb (GHS, @19%)11571,8NPVc (GHS, @19%)9881,4B/C ratio1,2Discount rate12,25% 
8 
Republic of Ghana PROSPEREconomic and Financial AnalysisMaize 222,3%Land size/acre1Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20I. PRODUCTION % post-harvest loss9%20%18%15%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%Production Production per cycle, per acreKg1.0321.058              1.084              1.139            1.142                1.142                   1.142                   1.142                   1.142                   1.142                   1.142                   1.142                 1.142                 1.142                 1.142                 1.142                 1.142                 1.142                 1.142                 1.142                 1.142    Gross production, total ( 2 cycles) Kg1.5482.010              2.060              2.164            2.170                2.170                   2.170                   2.170                   2.170                   2.170                   2.170                   2.170                 2.170                 2.170                 2.170                 2.170                 2.170                 2.170                 2.170                 2.170                 2.170    Post-harvest lossKg139402                  371                  325                217                    217                       217                       217                       217                       217                       217                       217                     217                     217                     217                     217                     217                     217                     217                     217                     217       Net production Kg3,01.4091.608              1.689              1.840            1.953                1.953                   1.953                   1.953                   1.953                   1.953                   1.953                   1.953                 1.953                 1.953                 1.953                 1.953                 1.953                 1.953                 1.953                 1.953                 1.953    MaizeSelf-consumption 5%3,06363                    63                    63                  63                      63                         63                         63                         63                         63                         63                         63                       63                       63                       63                       63                       63                       63                       63                       63                       63          MaizeSelling100%2,71.3451.544              1.626              1.776            1.889                1.889                   1.889                   1.889                   1.889                   1.889                   1.889                   1.889                 1.889                 1.889                 1.889                 1.889                 1.889                 1.889                 1.889                 1.889                 1.889    II. Inv. CostsOperational costsSeeds local kg218000000000012345678910Improved seeds unit592020202020202020202020202020202020202020NPK unit84244444444444444444444Urea  unit80122222222222222222222Pesticides ( E mastar)unit35244444444444444444444Weedicidesunit43166666666666666666666Other operational costsPics bagseach 3201010101010101010101010101010101010101010Transportls8011111111111PlanterUnit6022222222222222222222DryerUnit81099101010101010101010101010101010101010ShellerUnit1099101010101010101010101010101010101010Ploughing unit12011111111111111111111Labour/dayManual Land clearing p-d120122222222222222222222Linning and Pegging  p-d50122222222222222222222Shellingp-d102044444444444444444444Sowing p-d30122222222222222222222Weed control  ( post emegence)p-d30111111111111111111111Cost of labour for chemical applicationp-d25144444444444444444444Second weed control p-d15112222222222222222222Cost of labour for chemical application p-d25122222222222222222222Cost of labour for fertilizer application p-d25111111111111111111111Cost of labour for second  fertilizer application p-d25222222222222222222222Cost of labour of urea application p-d25222222222222222222222Cost of labour for pesticide application p-d25111111111111111111111Cost of labour for pesticide second application p-d25111111111111111111111Harvestingp-d25177777777777777777777Post-harvest activity p-d25333333333333333333333Sub-total labourp-d383536363636363636363636363636363636363636Hired labourp-d2799999999999999999999Family labourp-d112627272727272727272727272727272727272727BUDGET FINANCIERI. PRODUCTION 4.1864.7775.0195.4665.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.801% post-harvest lossProduction 4.1864.7775.0195.4665.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.8015.801Production per cycle, per acreGross production, total ( 2 cycles) Post-harvest lossNet production ]MaizeSelf-consumption 5%Kg3190190190190190190190190190190190190190190190190190190190190190MaizeSellingKg33.9964.5874.8295.2765.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.6115.611II. COSTS1.4192.4442.5342.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.552Equipments and infrastructureOperational costs442994994994994994994994994994994994994994994994994994994994994Seeds local kg2360000000000Improved seeds unit545100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100NPK unit84168336336336336336336336336336336336336336336336336336336336336Urea  unit8080160160160160160160160160160160160160160160160160160160160160Pesticides ( E mastar)unit3570140140140140140140140140140140140140140140140140140140140140Weedicidesunit4343258258258258258258258258258258258258258258258258258258258258Other operational costs207390390408408408408408408408408408408408408408408408408408408Pics bagseach 2,5502626262626262626262626262626262626262626Transportls80808080808080808080808080808080808080808080PlanterUnit600120120120120120120120120120120120120120120120120120120120120DryerUnit8777272808080808080808080808080808080808080ShellerUnit1009090100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100Storage (barns) 40% they are storing per season 20022222222222222222222labour day 7701.0601.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.150Manual Land clearing p-day120120240240240240240240240240240240240240240240240240240240240240Linning and Pegging  p-day5050100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100Shelling p-day102004040404040404040404040404040404040404040Sowing p-day30306060606060606060606060606060606060606060Weed control  ( post emegence)p-day30303030303030303030303030303030303030303030Cost of labour for chemical applicationp-day2525100175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175Second weed control p-day15151530303030303030303030303030303030303030Cost of labour for chemical application p-day25255050505050505050505050505050505050505050Cost of labour for fertilizer application p-day25252525252525252525252525252525252525252525Cost of labour for second  fertilizer application p-day25505050505050505050505050505050505050505050Cost of labour of urea application p-day25505050505050505050505050505050505050505050Cost of labour for pesticide application p-day25252525252525252525252525252525252525252525Cost of labour for pesticide second application p-day25252525252525252525252525252525252525252525Harvestingp-day2525175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175175Post-harvest activity p-day25757575757575757575757575757575757575757575Sub-total labour7701.0601.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.150Hired labourp-day408448455455455455455455455455455455455455455455455455455455455Family labourp-day363613695695695695695695695695695695695695695695695695695695695Sub-total labour costs7701.0601.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.1501.150Total production costs1.4192.4442.5342.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.5522.552Income ( after labour costs)2.7672.3332.4852.9143.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.2493.249Income ( before labour costs)3.1292.9463.1803.6093.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.9443.944Incremental net income -433-282147482482482482482482482482482482482482482482482482482# farmers300600800800800600600600600600600600600600600600600600600600incremental net Income*cumul clustersMAIZE(129.994)        (168.938)        117.816       385.963           385.963               289.472               289.472               289.472               28.947                 28.947                 28.947               28.947               28.947               28.947               28.947               28.947               28.947               28.947               28.947               28.947 NPV  (GHS, @19%)751.893NPV (USD)124.692                   IRR64%NPVb (GHS @19%)40.890NPVc (GHS, @19%)18.655B/C ratio2,19Discount rate12,25%Unit PriceWoPWP 
3. Rice 
9 
PROSPEREconomic and Financial AnalysisLowland rice ( number of cycles)2Acre1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20PRODUCTION AND COSTSI. PRODUCTION % post harvest loss5%0,1                         5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%1.1 Production Gross production per 1 cycle, per acreKg1.3361.336,0                1.400                         2.200                    2.500                  2.600                  2.600                  2.600                  2.600                  2.600                2.600                2.600                2.600                2.600                2.600                2.600                2.600                2.600                2.600                2.600                              2.600                              Total production Kg2.0042.004,0                2.100                         3.300                    3.750                  3.900                  3.900                  3.900                  3.900                  3.900                3.900                3.900                3.900                3.900                3.900                3.900                3.900                3.900                3.900                3.900                              3.900                              Production lossKg100100,2                    105                            165                        188                      195                      195                      195                      195                      195                   195                   195                   195                   195                   195                   195                   195                   195                   195                   195                                  195                                  Net production Kg1.9041.903,8                1.995                         3.135                    3.563                  3.705                  3.705                  3.705                  3.705                  3.705                3.705                3.705                3.705                3.705                3.705                3.705                3.705                3.705                3.705                3.705                              3.705                              Rice paddySelf-consumption 5%Kg2,29595,2                      100                            157                        178                      185                      185                      185                      185                      185                   185                   185                   185                   185                   185                   185                   185                   185                   185                   185                                  185                                  Riz paddySellingKg2,21.808,6     1.808,6                1.895,3                     2.978,3                3.384,4               3.519,8               3.519,8               3.519,8               3.519,8               3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8            3.519,8                           3.519,8                           II. Inv. Costs2.1 Equipments and InfrastructureHoeunit121,0             1,0                         1,0                         1,0                       1,0                       1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                                   2.2 Operational costsLocal seeds240,0           -                        -                             -                        -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    Improved seeds kg340,0           40,0                      40,0                           40,0                      40,0                     40,0                     40,0                     40,0                     40,0                     40,0                  40,0                  40,0                  40,0                  40,0                  40,0                  40,0                  40,0                  40,0                  40,0                  40,0                                 40,0                                 NPKKg840,5             2,0                         2,0                             2,0                         2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                                   2,0                                   Ureasac800,5             2,0                         2,0                             2,0                         2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    Herbicide Litre35-             8,0                         8,0                             8,0                         8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    1,0                    8,0                    8,0                    2.3 Other operational costsBagsUnit2,532,0           36,2                      36,2                           36,2                      36,2                     36,2                     36,2                     36,2                     36,2                     36,2                  36,2                  36,2                  36,2                  36,2                  36,2                  36,2                  36,2                  36,2                  36,2                  36,2                                 36,2                                 Transportation lumpsum 712,1           12,1                      12,6                           19,9                      22,6                     23,5                     23,5                     23,5                     23,5                     23,5                  23,5                  23,5                  23,5                  23,5                  23,5                  23,5                  23,5                  23,5                  23,5                  23,5                                 23,5                                 Rice smut ( top cop, 5 star) -disease control lumpsum801,0             1,0                         1,0                             1,0                         1,0                       1,0                       1,0                       1,0                       1,0                       1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                    1,0                                   1,0                                   2.4 LabourLand clearance p-day384,0             24,0                      24,0                           24,0                      24,0                     24,0                     24,0                     24,0                     24,0                     24,0                  24,0                  24,0                  24,0                  24,0                  24,0                  24,0                  24,0                  24,0                  24,0                  24,0                                 24,0                                 Brushing p-day258,0             12,0                      12,0                           12,0                      12,0                     12,0                     12,0                     12,0                     12,0                     12,0                  12,0                  12,0                  12,0                  12,0                  12,0                  12,0                  12,0                  12,0                  12,0                  12,0                                 12,0                                 Sprayingp-day502,0             6,0                         6,0                             6,0                         6,0                       6,0                       6,0                       6,0                       6,0                       6,0                    6,0                    6,0                    6,0                    6,0                    6,0                    6,0                    6,0                    6,0                    6,0                    6,0                                   6,0                                   Plowing ( power tiller) p-day2001,0             2,0                         2,0                             2,0                         2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                       2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                    2,0                                   2,0                                   Weeding 1p-day502,0             8,0                         8,0                             8,0                         8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                                   8,0                                   Weeding 2p-day451,0             8,0                         8,0                             8,0                         8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                       8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                    8,0                                   8,0                                   Bird Scaring p-day1015,0           16,0                      16,0                           16,0                      16,0                     16,0                     16,0                     16,0                     16,0                     16,0                  16,0                  16,0                  16,0                  16,0                  16,0                  16,0                  16,0                  16,0                  16,0                  16,0                                 16,0                                 Bumds construction (hoe) p-day608,0             10,0                      5,0                       5,0                    5,0                    5,0                                   Sub-total labourp-day41,0           86,0                      76,0                           76,0                      81,0                     76,0                     76,0                     76,0                     76,0                     81,0                  76,0                  76,0                  76,0                  76,0                  81,0                  76,0                  76,0                  76,0                  76,0                  81,0                                 76,0                                 Hired labourp-day17,0           26,0                      26,0                           26,0                      26,0                     26,0                     26,0                     26,0                     26,0                     26,0                  26,0                  26,0                  26,0                  26,0                  26,0                  26,0                  26,0                  26,0                  26,0                  26,0                                 26,0                                 Family labourp-day24,0           60,0                      50,0                           50,0                      55,0                     50,0                     50,0                     50,0                     50,0                     55,0                  50,0                  50,0                  50,0                  50,0                  55,0                  50,0                  50,0                  50,0                  50,0                  55,0                                 50,0                                 2.1 Financial BudgetI. PRODUCTION 4.188,4     4.188,4                4.389,0                     6.897,0                7.837,5               8.151,0               8.151,0               8.151,0               8.151,0               8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0            8.151,0                           8.151,0                           1.1 Production 4.188,4    4.188,4                4.389,0                    6.897,0                7.837,5              8.151,0              8.151,0              8.151,0              8.151,0              8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0           8.151,0                          8.151,0                          Gross production per 1 cycle, per acreKgTotal production KgProduction lossKgNet production KgRice paddySelf-consumption 5%Kg209,4         209,4                    219,5                         344,9                    391,9                  407,6                  407,6                  407,6                  407,6                  407,6                407,6                407,6                407,6                407,6                407,6                407,6                407,6                407,6                407,6                407,6                              407,6                              Riz paddySellingKg23.978,9     3.978,9                4.169,6                     6.552,2                7.445,6               7.743,5               7.743,5               7.743,5               7.743,5               7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5            7.743,5                           7.743,5                           II. Costs2.436,4     4.414,3                3.806,9                     3.857,4                4.176,4               3.882,7               3.882,7               3.882,7               3.882,7               4.182,7            3.882,7            3.882,7            3.882,7            3.637,7            4.182,7            3.882,7            3.442,7            3.442,7            3.442,7            3.742,7                           3.442,7                           2.1 Equipments and infrastructure-            11,5                      -                            -                        -                      -                      -                      -                      -                      -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                                  -                                  Hoe11,5                      2.2 Planting materials282,0        728,0                   728,0                        728,0                   728,0                  728,0                  728,0                  728,0                  728,0                  728,0               728,0               728,0               728,0               483,0               728,0               728,0               288,0               288,0               288,0               288,0                              288,0                              Local seeds0280,0           -                        -                             -                        -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                                   -                                   Improved seeds kg3120,0         120,0                    120,0                         120,0                    120,0                  120,0                  120,0                  120,0                  120,0                  120,0                120,0                120,0                120,0                120,0                120,0                120,0                120,0                120,0                120,0                120,0                              120,0                              NPKKg7042,0           168,0                    168,0                         168,0                    168,0                  168,0                  168,0                  168,0                  168,0                  168,0                168,0                168,0                168,0                168,0                168,0                168,0                168,0                168,0                168,0                168,0                              168,0                              Ureasac8040,0           160,0                    160,0                         160,0                    160,0                  160,0                  160,0                  160,0                  160,0                  160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                -                    -                    -                    -                                   -                                   Herbicide Litre35-             280,0                    280,0                         280,0                    280,0                  280,0                  280,0                  280,0                  280,0                  280,0                280,0                280,0                280,0                35,0                  280,0                280,0                -                    -                    -                    -                                   -                                   2.3 Other costs244,4        254,8                   258,9                        309,4                   328,4                  334,7                  334,7                  334,7                  334,7                  334,7               334,7               334,7               334,7               334,7               334,7               334,7               334,7               334,7               334,7               334,7                              334,7                              Sacsunit 380,0           90,4                      90,4                           90,4                      90,4                     90,4                     90,4                     90,4                     90,4                     90,4                  90,4                  90,4                  90,4                  90,4                  90,4                  90,4                  90,4                  90,4                  90,4                  90,4                                 90,4                                 Transport ls784,4           84,4                      88,4                           139,0                    157,9                  164,3                  164,3                  164,3                  164,3                  164,3                164,3                164,3                164,3                164,3                164,3                164,3                164,3                164,3                164,3                164,3                              164,3                              Rice smut ( top cop, 5 star) -disease control unit8080,0           80,0                      80,0                           80,0                      80,0                     80,0                     80,0                     80,0                     80,0                     80,0                  80,0                  80,0                  80,0                  80,0                  80,0                  80,0                  80,0                  80,0                  80,0                  80,0                                 80,0                                 2.4 Labour day 1.910,0    3.420,0                2.820,0                    2.820,0                3.120,0              2.820,0              2.820,0              2.820,0              2.820,0              3.120,0           2.820,0           2.820,0           2.820,0           2.820,0           3.120,0           2.820,0           2.820,0           2.820,0           2.820,0           3.120,0                          2.820,0                          labour day Land clearance p-day38150,0         900,0                    900,0                         900,0                    900,0                  900,0                  900,0                  900,0                  900,0                  900,0                900,0                900,0                900,0                900,0                900,0                900,0                900,0                900,0                900,0                900,0                              900,0                              labour day Brushing p-day25200,0         300,0                    300,0                         300,0                    300,0                  300,0                  300,0                  300,0                  300,0                  300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                              300,0                              labour day Sprayingp-day50200,0         300,0                    300,0                         300,0                    300,0                  300,0                  300,0                  300,0                  300,0                  300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                300,0                              300,0                              labour day Plowing ( power tiller) p-day200100,0         400,0                    400,0                         400,0                    400,0                  400,0                  400,0                  400,0                  400,0                  400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                              400,0                              labour day Weeding 1p-day40150,0         400,0                    400,0                         400,0                    400,0                  400,0                  400,0                  400,0                  400,0                  400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                400,0                              400,0                              labour day Weeding 2p-day45480,0         360,0                    360,0                         360,0                    360,0                  360,0                  360,0                  360,0                  360,0                  360,0                360,0                360,0                360,0                360,0                360,0                360,0                360,0                360,0                360,0                360,0                              360,0                              labour day Bird Scaring p-day10150,0         160,0                    160,0                         160,0                    160,0                  160,0                  160,0                  160,0                  160,0                  160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                160,0                              160,0                              labour day Bumds construction (hoe) p-day60480,0         600,0                    -                             -                        300,0                  -                       -                       -                       -                       300,0                -                    -                    -                    -                    300,0                -                    -                    -                    -                    300,0                              -                                   Sub-total labour1.910,0     3.420,0                2.820,0                     2.820,0                3.120,0               2.820,0               2.820,0               2.820,0               2.820,0               3.120,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            3.120,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            3.120,0                           2.820,0                           Hired labour400,0         1.400,0                1.400,0                     1.400,0                1.400,0               1.400,0               1.400,0               1.400,0               1.400,0               1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0            1.400,0                           1.400,0                           Family labour1.510,0     2.020,0                1.420,0                     1.420,0                1.720,0               1.420,0               1.420,0               1.420,0               1.420,0               1.720,0            1.420,0            1.420,0            1.420,0            1.420,0            1.720,0            1.420,0            1.420,0            1.420,0            1.420,0            1.720,0                           1.420,0                           Sub-total labour costs1.910,0     3.420,0                2.820,0                     2.820,0                3.120,0               2.820,0               2.820,0               2.820,0               2.820,0               3.120,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            3.120,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            2.820,0            3.120,0                           2.820,0                           Total production costs2.436,4     4.414,3                3.806,9                     3.857,4                4.176,4               3.882,7               3.882,7               3.882,7               3.882,7               4.182,7            3.882,7            3.882,7            3.882,7            3.637,7            4.182,7            3.882,7            3.442,7            3.442,7            3.442,7            3.742,7                           3.442,7                           Income (after labour costs)1.752,0     (226,0)                  582,1                         3.039,6                3.661,1               4.268,3               4.268,3               4.268,3               4.268,3               3.968,3            4.268,3            4.268,3            4.268,3            4.513,3            3.968,3            4.268,3            4.708,3            4.708,3            4.708,3            4.408,3                           4.708,3                           Income (before labour costs)3.262,0     (226,0)                  582,1                         3.039,6                3.661,1               4.268,3               4.268,3               4.268,3               4.268,3               3.968,3            4.268,3            4.268,3            4.268,3            4.513,3            3.968,3            4.268,3            4.708,3            4.708,3            4.708,3            4.408,3                           4.708,3                           Incremental net income(3.487,9)               (2.679,8)                   (222,4)                  399,2                  1.006,4               1.006,4               1.006,4               1.006,4               706,4                1.006,4            1.006,4            1.006,4            1.251,4            706,4                1.006,4            1.446,4            1.446,4            1.446,4            1.146,4                           1.446,4                           # farmers200,0              600,0                  800,0              800,0             800,0             600,0             600,0             600,0             600,0           600,0           600,0           600,0           600,0           600,0           600,0           600,0           600,0           600,0           600,0                      600,0                      incremental net Income*cumul clusters(697.586,1)    (1.607.900,2)    (177.899,0)    319.339,0    805.085,0    603.813,8    603.813,8    603.813,8    423.813,8  603.813,8  603.813,8  603.813,8  750.813,8  423.813,8  603.813,8  867.813,8  867.813,8  867.813,8  687.813,8             867.813,8             NPV  GHS987.241NPV (USD)163.722IRR18,2%NPVb (GHS, @19%)47.182NPVc (GHS, @19%)28.999B/C ratio1,6Discount rate12,25%Y1PARAMETERSUnit PriceWoPWith Project 
4. MG Rice SME 
5. MG Maize SME 
10 
7c Cash Flow Projections from Equity Holders PerspectiveYear 0Year 1      Year 2      Year 3       Year 4       Year 5       Year 6         Year 7              Year 8       Year 9       Year 10 Year 11Year 12Year 13Year 14Year 15Year 16Year 17Year 18Year 19Year 20GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ GH ȼ NET CASH FLOW BF FINANCING(11.003.000)   (5.363.544)            (10.932.198)            (7.918.029)        (6.538.137)         (5.145.028)           (3.676.290)            (2.119.428)            (469.153)               1.280.138               3.134.386               3.134.386               3134385,8013134385,8013134385,8013134385,8013134385,8013134385,8013134385,8013134385,8013134385,801LOANS:CAPEX Loan8.014.900       Working capital Loan1.450.068              2.900.136               2.900.136         2.900.136          2.900.136             2.900.136              2.900.136              NET CASH FLOW BF Debt Servicing(2.988.100)     (3.913.476)            (8.032.062)              (5.017.893)        (3.638.001)         (2.244.892)           (776.154)               780.708                 (469.153)               1.280.138               3.134.386               3.134.386               3.134.386                       3.134.386                       3.134.386                       3.134.386                       3.134.386                   3.134.386                   3.134.386                   3.134.386                   3.134.386                   Taxation-                            (2.899.200)              (2.425.057)        (1.954.580)         (1.511.325)           (1.141.603)            (749.698)               (254.524)               185.820                  652.586                  652.586                  652.586                           652.586                           652.586                           652.586                           652.586                        652.586                        652.586                        652.586                        652.586                        Dividend Pmt-                            -                              -                        -                         -                           -                            -                            -                            -                              -                              -                              DEBT SERVICING:Loan Repayment  - CAPEX Loan Principal1.259.484             2.518.969               2.518.969         2.518.969              CAPEX Loan Interest881.639                1.385.433                881.639             377.845                - Working Capital Loan Principal1.450.068              2.900.136               2.900.136         2.900.136          2.900.136             2.900.136              2.900.136                  Working capital Interest159.507                319.015                  319.015            319.015             319.015                319.015                 319.015                 NET CASH FLOW after Debt Servicing(2.988.100)     (7.664.175)            (12.256.413)            (9.212.594)        (7.799.385)         (3.952.719)           (2.853.702)            (1.688.745)            (214.629)               1.094.317               2.481.800               2.481.800               2.481.800                       2.481.800                       2.481.800                       2.481.800                       2.481.800                   2.481.800                   2.481.800                   2.481.800                   2.481.800                   Estimated Dollar Rate6,0                 6,0                        6,4                          6,7                    7,0                     7,3                        7,6                         7,8                         8,1                         8,4                          8,8                          9,3                          9                                            9                                            9                                            9                                            9                                        9                                        9                                        9                                        9                                         US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$PPP Do, Terms(498.017)        (1.277.362)            (1.919.864)              (1.376.981)        (1.115.552)         (543.094)              (377.738)               (215.352)               (26.368)                 129.519                  282.982                  265.961                  265.961                           265.961                           265.961                           265.961                           265.961                        265.961                        265.961                        265.961                        265.961                        additional (779.346)               (1.421.848)              (878.964)           (617.536)            (45.077)                120.279                 282.665                 471.649                 627.535                  780.999                  763.977                  763.977                  763.977                  763.977                  763.977                  763.977               763.977               763.977               763.977               763.977               nb of farmers032565656565656565656565656565656565656nb of farmers cumul032881442002563123684244805365926487047608168729289841.040additional* nb farmers-                            (45.499.123)            (49.221.975)      (34.581.994)       (2.524.312)           6.735.631              15.829.242            26.412.333            35.141.984             43.735.928             42.782.725             42.782.725             42.782.725             42.782.725             42.782.725             42.782.725          42.782.725          42.782.725          42.782.725          42.782.725          Cedi Discount Rate20,00%Real Rate4%NPV (US $)-6.208.024   IRR#NOMBRE!Payback3Total Cash Outflow14.261.693            41.703.589              45.873.948         50.461.342         55.507.477      61.058.224     67.164.047   73.880.451       81.268.496  89.395.346     89.395.346               89.395.346        89.395.346        89.395.346        89.395.346        89.395.346        89.395.346        89.395.346        89.395.346        89.395.346        89.395.346        Net Cash Flow(14.261.693)          (5.917.438)               (4.048.884)          (1.747.445)          (1.922.190)       (2.114.409)      (2.325.849)    (2.558.434)        (2.814.278)   2.251.769        2.251.769                  2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          Net Cash Flow Before Financing(14.261.693)          (5.917.438)               (4.048.884)          (1.747.445)          (1.922.190)       (2.114.409)      (2.325.849)    (2.558.434)        (2.814.278)   2.251.769        2.251.769                  2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          2.251.769          Fixed Asset Loan 7.339.426,56        -                              -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Working Capital Loan1.739.334                1.739.334           1.739.334            1.739.334        1.739.334        1.739.334     1.739.334         1.739.334    1.739.334        1.739.334                  1.739.334          1.739.334          1.739.334          1.739.334          1.739.334          1.739.334          1.739.334          1.739.334          1.739.334          1.739.334          Net Cash Flow Before Debt Servicing(6.922.267)             (4.178.105)               (2.309.551)          (8.111)                  (182.856)          (375.075)          (586.516)       (819.101)           (1.074.944)   3.991.103        3.991.103                  3.991.103          3.991.103          3.991.103          3.991.103          3.991.103          3.991.103          3.991.103          3.991.103          3.991.103          3.991.103          Taxation(1.735.577)               (1.247.469)          (692.999)              (673.007)          (654.845)          (511.727)       (497.796)           (486.303)      (491.856)          (491.856)                    (491.856)            (491.856)            (491.856)            (491.856)            (491.856)            (491.856)            (491.856)            (491.856)            (491.856)            (491.856)            Interest Payment488.404                   861.890              708.665               555.440            402.215           248.990        95.766               -                              -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Principal Repayment625.407                   1.250.815           1.250.815            1.250.815        1.250.815        1.250.815     1.250.815         -                              -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Principal & Interest Repayment1.845.868                1.845.868           1.845.868            1.845.868        1.845.868        1.845.868     1.845.868         1.845.868    1.845.868        1.845.868                  1.845.868          1.845.868          1.845.868          1.845.868          1.845.868          1.845.868          1.845.868          1.845.868          1.845.868          1.845.868          -                              -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Dividends Payment(781.009)                  (1.122.722)          (623.700)              (605.706)          (589.361)          (460.555)       (522.686)           (510.618)      (516.448)          (516.448)                    (516.448)            (516.448)            (516.448)            (516.448)            (516.448)            (516.448)            (516.448)            (516.448)            (516.448)            (516.448)            Net Cash Flow After Debt Servicing(6.922.267)             (4.621.198)               (3.897.932)          (2.496.760)          (2.556.265)       (2.629.766)      (2.959.907)    (2.991.066)        (1.923.891)   3.153.539        3.153.539                   3.153.539            3.153.539            3.153.539            3.153.539            3.153.539            3.153.539            3.153.539            3.153.539            3.153.539            3.153.539            Add.2.301.069                3.024.335           4.425.507            4.366.001        4.292.500        3.962.360     3.931.200         4.998.376    10.075.806     10.075.806                 10.075.806        10.075.806        10.075.806        10.075.806        10.075.806        10.075.806        10.075.806        10.075.806        10.075.806        10.075.806        Nb farmers-                            32                         56                         56                      56                     56                   56                       56                  56                     56                                 56                         56                         56                         56                         56                         56                         56                         56                         56                         56                         Nb farmers cum,03288144200256312368424424                                                480536592648704760816872928984add* nb farm(4.178.105)               (2.309.583)          (8.167)                  (182.912)          (375.131)          (586.572)       (819.157)           (1.075.000)   3.991.047        3.991.047                   3.991.047            3.991.047            3.991.047            3.991.047            3.991.047            3.991.047            3.991.047            3.991.047            3.991.047            3.991.047            Discount rate12,25%NPV(GHc)2.724.565              IRR #NOMBRE! 
6. MG Soy SME 
11 
Year-0Year-1Year-2Year-3Year-4Year-5Year-6Year-7Year-8Year-9Year-10Year-11Year-12Year-13Year-14Year-15Year-16Year-17Year-18Year-19Year-20Cash Inflow:GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢Sales Revenue 17.099.898 21.565.779  24.966.747    26.539.652                                    28.132.031                                      29.819.953                   29819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,15Liduidation value of Fixed Assets1.608.200                     16082001608200160820016082001608200160820016082001608200160820016082001608200160820016082001608200TOTAL INFLOWS-                17.099.898 21.565.779  24.966.747    26.539.652                                    28.132.031                                      31.428.153                   31428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1500000000000000CASH OUTFLOW:00000000000000Investments 00000000000000 In-use Value of Existing Fixed Assets:00000000000000Land200.000       00000000000000Other existing assets1.128.000    00000000000000Required Additions to Fixed Assets:00000000000000Sheds50.000         00000000000000Ashok Leyland 1116 drop-side deck170.000        00000000000000Soya Threshers824.000       00000000000000Pick-up vehicle170.000        00000000000000Motor bikes48.000          00000000000000Tricycles247.000        00000000000000Industrial Scales20.120         34.880          00000000000000Tapauline24.000         -                 00000000000000Handheld stitching machine7.680           -                 0000000000000000000000000000Purchases:00000000000000soya14.871.608 17.585.677  20.659.653    21.961.211                                    23.278.884                                      24.675.617                   2467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617Sub-total15.747.408 18.255.557  20.659.653    21.961.211                                    23.278.884                                      24.675.617                   2467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617Direct Labour:00000000000000Warehouse Manager54.000         58.050          61.997            65.903                                            69.857                                              74.049                           74048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,87619Procurement officers43.200         46.440          49.598            52.723                                            55.886                                              59.239                           59239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,10096Assistant Warehouse Managers36.000         38.700          41.332            43.935                                            46.572                                              49.366                           49365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,91746Drivers (production and sales)28.800         30.960          33.065            35.148                                            37.257                                              39.493                           39492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,73397Security18.000         19.350          20.666            21.968                                            23.286                                              24.683                           24682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,95873Thresher Labour120.000       129.000        137.772         146.452                                          155.239                                            164.553                        164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582Social Security Contribution(13%)23.400         25.155          26.866            28.558                                            30.272                                              32.088                           32087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,84635Casual Labourers19.200         20.640          22.044            23.432                                            24.838                                              26.328                           26328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,48931Sub-total342.600       368.295        393.339         418.119                                          443.207                                            469.799                        469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812Utilities & Other Prodn. Overheads00000000000000Warehouse Rent72.000         77.400          82.663            87.871                                            93.143                                              98.732                           98731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,83493Tractor hiring for threshing-                208.000        222.144         236.139                                          250.307                                            265.326                        265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613Haulage520.921       681.939        868.533         868.533                                          868.533                                            868.533                        868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685Electricity18.000         19.350          20.666            21.968                                            23.286                                              24.683                           24682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,95873Water12.000         12.900          13.777            14.645                                            15.524                                              16.455                           16455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,30582Fuel and Lubricants301.440       324.048        346.083         367.887                                          389.960                                            413.357                        413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822Sub-total924.361       1.323.637     1.553.867      1.597.043                                      1.640.753                                         1.687.087                     1687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,512Indirect Labour:00000000000000Managing Director96.000         103.200        110.218         117.161                                          124.191                                            131.642                        131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466Deputy Managing Director72.000         77.400          82.663            87.871                                            93.143                                              98.732                           98731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,83493Accountant48.000         51.600          55.109            58.581                                            62.095                                              65.821                           65821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,22328Internal Auditor24.000         25.800          27.554            29.290                                            31.048                                              32.911                           32910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,61164Assistant Accountant24.000         25.800          27.554            29.290                                            31.048                                              32.911                           32910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,61164Personnel Officer18.000         19.350          20.666            21.968                                            23.286                                              24.683                           24682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,95873Marketing Officers31.200         33.540          35.821            38.077                                            40.362                                              42.784                           42783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,79513Transport Officer19.200         20.640          22.044            23.432                                            24.838                                              26.328                           26328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,48931MD's Secretary4.800           5.160             5.511              5.858                                              6.210                                                 6.582                             6582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,122328Drivers (Admin.)8.400           9.030             9.644              10.252                                            10.867                                              11.519                           11518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,71407Social Security Contribution44.928         48.298          51.582            54.831                                            58.121                                              61.609                           61608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,66499Sub-total390.528       419.818        448.365         476.612                                          505.209                                            535.521                        535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726Other Cost Estimates:00000000000000Office Rent3.600           3.870             4.133              4.394                                              4.657                                                 4.937                             4936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,591746Administrative Cost (Stationery, Corresp'dence, etc.)6.000           6.450             6.889              7.323                                              7.762                                                 8.228                             8227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,65291Fuel and Lubricants (Admin.)16.668         17.918          19.137            20.342                                            21.563                                              22.856                           22856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,41979Repairs and Maintenance131.150       140.986        150.573         160.059                                          169.663                                            179.843                        179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799Consummables for Cleaning/Fumigation5.844           6.282             6.709              7.132                                              7.560                                                 8.014                             8013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,733935Exhibitions and Travel12.000         12.900          13.777            14.645                                            15.524                                              16.455                           16455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,30582Staff Medicals60.000         64.500          68.886            73.226                                            77.619                                              82.277                           82276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,5291Insurance Provision196.289       211.011        225.360         239.557                                          253.931                                            269.167                        269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508Sub-total431.551       463.918        495.464         526.678                                          558.279                                            591.776                        591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764Total overhead2.089.040   2.575.668     2.891.035      3.018.453                                      3.147.448                                         3.284.183                     3284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,729Total Cash Outflow1.378.000    17.836.449 20.831.225  23.550.688    24.979.664                                    26.426.332                                      27.959.800                   27959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,73Net Cash Flow Before Financing(1.378.000)  (736.551)     734.555        1.416.059      1.559.988                                      1.705.699                                         3.468.353                     3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         Fixed Asset Loan693.664       542.880        00000000000000Aggregation Loan2.160.668   2.160.668     2.376.735      2.376.735                                      2.376.735                                         00000000000000Net Cash Flow Before Debt Servicing(1.378.000)  2.117.781   3.438.102     3.792.793      3.936.723                                      4.082.434                                         3.468.353                     3468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,424Taxation(20.032)        299.639        -                  -                                                   282.598                                            471.934                        471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862Interest Payment -Fixed Asset Loan45.089         98.413          76.457            21.173                                            -                                                     -                                 00000000000000Principal Repayment -Fixed Asset Loan147.230       409.687        524.913         230.453                                          -                                                     -                                 00000000000000Int & Principal pmt - Aggregation loan2.295.710   2.295.710     2.525.280      2.525.280                                      2.525.280                                         00000000000000Dividends Payment-                -                 -                  -                                                   169.559                                            283.160                        283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517Net Cash Flow After Debt Servicing(1.378.000)  (350.216)     334.654        666.143         1.159.817                                      1.104.997                                         2.713.259                     2713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,886Add.1.027.784   1.712.654     2.044.143      2.537.817                                      2.482.997                                         4.091.259                     4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         Nb farmers-                32                  56                    56                                                    56                                                      56                                   56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       Nb farmers Cumul32                  88                    144                                                  200                                                    256                                312                     368                     424                     480                     536                     592                     648                     704                     760                     816                     872                     928                     984                     1.040                 add*nb farm-                23.505.750  79.299.297    87.359.338                                    95.519.170                                      194.227.792                194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     Discount rate12%NPV (GH c)1.753.536    IRR 32%CASHFLOW PROJECTIONS FROM TOTAL INVESTMENT PERSPECTIVE (In GH¢) 
12 
Year-0Year-1Year-2Year-3Year-4Year-5Year-6Year-7Year-8Year-9Year-10Year-11Year-12Year-13Year-14Year-15Year-16Year-17Year-18Year-19Year-20Cash Inflow:GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢GH¢Sales Revenue 17.099.898 21.565.779  24.966.747    26.539.652                                    28.132.031                                      29.819.953                   29819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,1529819953,15Liduidation value of Fixed Assets1.608.200                     16082001608200160820016082001608200160820016082001608200160820016082001608200160820016082001608200TOTAL INFLOWS-                17.099.898 21.565.779  24.966.747    26.539.652                                    28.132.031                                      31.428.153                   31428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1531428153,1500000000000000CASH OUTFLOW:00000000000000Investments 00000000000000 In-use Value of Existing Fixed Assets:00000000000000Land200.000       00000000000000Other existing assets1.128.000    00000000000000Required Additions to Fixed Assets:00000000000000Sheds50.000         00000000000000Ashok Leyland 1116 drop-side deck170.000        00000000000000Soya Threshers824.000       00000000000000Pick-up vehicle170.000        00000000000000Motor bikes48.000          00000000000000Tricycles247.000        00000000000000Industrial Scales20.120         34.880          00000000000000Tapauline24.000         -                 00000000000000Handheld stitching machine7.680           -                 0000000000000000000000000000Purchases:00000000000000soya14.871.608 17.585.677  20.659.653    21.961.211                                    23.278.884                                      24.675.617                   2467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617Sub-total15.747.408 18.255.557  20.659.653    21.961.211                                    23.278.884                                      24.675.617                   2467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617246756172467561724675617Direct Labour:00000000000000Warehouse Manager54.000         58.050          61.997            65.903                                            69.857                                              74.049                           74048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,8761974048,87619Procurement officers43.200         46.440          49.598            52.723                                            55.886                                              59.239                           59239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,1009659239,10096Assistant Warehouse Managers36.000         38.700          41.332            43.935                                            46.572                                              49.366                           49365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,9174649365,91746Drivers (production and sales)28.800         30.960          33.065            35.148                                            37.257                                              39.493                           39492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,7339739492,73397Security18.000         19.350          20.666            21.968                                            23.286                                              24.683                           24682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,95873Thresher Labour120.000       129.000        137.772         146.452                                          155.239                                            164.553                        164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582164553,0582Social Security Contribution(13%)23.400         25.155          26.866            28.558                                            30.272                                              32.088                           32087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,8463532087,84635Casual Labourers19.200         20.640          22.044            23.432                                            24.838                                              26.328                           26328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,48931Sub-total342.600       368.295        393.339         418.119                                          443.207                                            469.799                        469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812469798,9812Utilities & Other Prodn. Overheads00000000000000Warehouse Rent72.000         77.400          82.663            87.871                                            93.143                                              98.732                           98731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,83493Tractor hiring for threshing-                208.000        222.144         236.139                                          250.307                                            265.326                        265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613265325,8613Haulage520.921       681.939        868.533         868.533                                          868.533                                            868.533                        868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685868533,2685Electricity18.000         19.350          20.666            21.968                                            23.286                                              24.683                           24682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,95873Water12.000         12.900          13.777            14.645                                            15.524                                              16.455                           16455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,30582Fuel and Lubricants301.440       324.048        346.083         367.887                                          389.960                                            413.357                        413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822413357,2822Sub-total924.361       1.323.637     1.553.867      1.597.043                                      1.640.753                                         1.687.087                     1687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,5121687086,512Indirect Labour:00000000000000Managing Director96.000         103.200        110.218         117.161                                          124.191                                            131.642                        131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466131642,4466Deputy Managing Director72.000         77.400          82.663            87.871                                            93.143                                              98.732                           98731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,8349398731,83493Accountant48.000         51.600          55.109            58.581                                            62.095                                              65.821                           65821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,2232865821,22328Internal Auditor24.000         25.800          27.554            29.290                                            31.048                                              32.911                           32910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,61164Assistant Accountant24.000         25.800          27.554            29.290                                            31.048                                              32.911                           32910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,6116432910,61164Personnel Officer18.000         19.350          20.666            21.968                                            23.286                                              24.683                           24682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,9587324682,95873Marketing Officers31.200         33.540          35.821            38.077                                            40.362                                              42.784                           42783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,7951342783,79513Transport Officer19.200         20.640          22.044            23.432                                            24.838                                              26.328                           26328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,4893126328,48931MD's Secretary4.800           5.160             5.511              5.858                                              6.210                                                 6.582                             6582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,1223286582,122328Drivers (Admin.)8.400           9.030             9.644              10.252                                            10.867                                              11.519                           11518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,7140711518,71407Social Security Contribution44.928         48.298          51.582            54.831                                            58.121                                              61.609                           61608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,6649961608,66499Sub-total390.528       419.818        448.365         476.612                                          505.209                                            535.521                        535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726535521,4726Other Cost Estimates:00000000000000Office Rent3.600           3.870             4.133              4.394                                              4.657                                                 4.937                             4936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,5917464936,591746Administrative Cost (Stationery, Corresp'dence, etc.)6.000           6.450             6.889              7.323                                              7.762                                                 8.228                             8227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,652918227,65291Fuel and Lubricants (Admin.)16.668         17.918          19.137            20.342                                            21.563                                              22.856                           22856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,4197922856,41979Repairs and Maintenance131.150       140.986        150.573         160.059                                          169.663                                            179.843                        179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799179842,7799Consummables for Cleaning/Fumigation5.844           6.282             6.709              7.132                                              7.560                                                 8.014                             8013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,7339358013,733935Exhibitions and Travel12.000         12.900          13.777            14.645                                            15.524                                              16.455                           16455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,3058216455,30582Staff Medicals60.000         64.500          68.886            73.226                                            77.619                                              82.277                           82276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,529182276,5291Insurance Provision196.289       211.011        225.360         239.557                                          253.931                                            269.167                        269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508269166,7508Sub-total431.551       463.918        495.464         526.678                                          558.279                                            591.776                        591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764591775,764Total overhead2.089.040   2.575.668     2.891.035      3.018.453                                      3.147.448                                         3.284.183                     3284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,7293284182,729Total Cash Outflow1.378.000    17.836.449 20.831.225  23.550.688    24.979.664                                    26.426.332                                      27.959.800                   27959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,7327959799,73Net Cash Flow Before Financing(1.378.000)  (736.551)     734.555        1.416.059      1.559.988                                      1.705.699                                         3.468.353                     3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         3.468.353         Fixed Asset Loan693.664       542.880        00000000000000Aggregation Loan2.160.668   2.160.668     2.376.735      2.376.735                                      2.376.735                                         00000000000000Net Cash Flow Before Debt Servicing(1.378.000)  2.117.781   3.438.102     3.792.793      3.936.723                                      4.082.434                                         3.468.353                     3468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,4243468353,424Taxation(20.032)        299.639        -                  -                                                   282.598                                            471.934                        471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862471934,0862Interest Payment -Fixed Asset Loan45.089         98.413          76.457            21.173                                            -                                                     -                                 00000000000000Principal Repayment -Fixed Asset Loan147.230       409.687        524.913         230.453                                          -                                                     -                                 00000000000000Int & Principal pmt - Aggregation loan2.295.710   2.295.710     2.525.280      2.525.280                                      2.525.280                                         00000000000000Dividends Payment-                -                 -                  -                                                   169.559                                            283.160                        283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517283160,4517Net Cash Flow After Debt Servicing(1.378.000)  (350.216)     334.654        666.143         1.159.817                                      1.104.997                                         2.713.259                     2713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,8862713258,886Add.1.027.784   1.712.654     2.044.143      2.537.817                                      2.482.997                                         4.091.259                     4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         4.091.259         Nb farmers-                32                  56                    56                                                    56                                                      56                                   56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       56                       Nb farmers Cumul32                  88                    144                                                  200                                                    256                                312                     368                     424                     480                     536                     592                     648                     704                     760                     816                     872                     928                     984                     1.040                 add*nb farm-                23.505.750  79.299.297    87.359.338                                    95.519.170                                      194.227.792                194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     194.227.792     Discount rate12%NPV (GH c)1.753.536    IRR 32%CASHFLOW PROJECTIONS FROM TOTAL INVESTMENT PERSPECTIVE (In GH¢) 
7. Poultry
13 
Pro Forma Cash flow - 01234567891011121314151617181920GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢GH ¢Receipts-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Revenue-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Chicken 420.000     840.000         840.000       840.000         840.000       840.000              840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      840.000      Salvage Values-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Poultry-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Manual Shed with Fittings20.000          20.000                20.000         20.000        20.000        20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         Automated Shed20.000          20.000                20.000         20.000        20.000        20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         20.000         Deep Litter6.000            6.000                   6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           6.000           Drinkers & Feed Trough12.000          12.000                12.000         12.000        12.000        12.000         12.000         12.000         12.000         12.000         12.000         12.000         12.000         12.000         12.000         12.000         Feed Mill6.400            6.400                   6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           6.400           Miscellaneous Fixed Assets-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Stand-by Generator7.200            7.200                   7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200           7.200            - Overhead Water Tank (Polytank)2.250            2.250                   2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250           2.250            - Stand for water tank1.600            1.600                   1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600           1.600            - Sewerage Pump420               420                      420               420              420              420               420               420               420               420               420               420               420               420               420               420                - Water Hose80                  80                         80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                 80                  - Office Building9.600            9.600                   9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           9.600           Vehicles-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - KIA Truck46.875          46.875                46.875         46.875        46.875        46.875         46.875         46.875         46.875         46.875         46.875         46.875         46.875         46.875         46.875         46.875         TOTAL INFLOWS-                420.000     840.000         840.000       840.000         972.425       972.425              972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      972.425      Expenditure-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Investment-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Poultry-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Manual Shed with Fittings25.000         -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Automated Shed Structure25.000         -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Deep Litter10.000         -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Battery Cage20.000         -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Drinkers & Feed Trough2.000           -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Feed Mill8.000           -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Miscellaneous Fixed Assets-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Stand-by Generator 15hp12.000         -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Water Tank (Rambo 1000 Polytank)3.750           -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Stand for water tank2.000           -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Sewerage Pump700               -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Water Hose400               -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Office Building12.000         -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Vehicles-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - KIA Truck125.000       -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Production Costs-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                - Chicken 243.000     486.000         486.000       486.000         486.000       486.000              486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      486.000      Operating Expenses-                       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -                Salaries and Wages96.000       96.000           96.000          96.000            96.000          96.000                96.000         96.000        96.000        96.000         96.000         96.000         96.000         96.000         96.000         96.000         96.000         96.000         96.000         96.000          SSF-Employer's Contrib..12.480       12.480           12.480          12.480            12.480          12.480                12.480         12.480        12.480        12.480         12.480         12.480         12.480         12.480         12.480         12.480         12.480         12.480         12.480         12.480          Management Cost (Salaries)21.696       21.696           21.696          21.696            21.696          21.696                21.696         21.696        21.696        21.696         21.696         21.696         21.696         21.696         21.696         21.696         21.696         21.696         21.696         21.696          Vaccines250             300                 360               432                 518               518                      518               518              518              518               518               518               518               518               518               518               518               518               518               518                Transportation (Fuel)13.000       13.000           13.000          13.000            13.000          13.000                13.000         13.000        13.000        13.000         13.000         13.000         13.000         13.000         13.000         13.000         13.000         13.000         13.000         13.000          Vehicle Maintenance13.800       13.800           13.800          13.800            13.800          13.800                13.800         13.800        13.800        13.800         13.800         13.800         13.800         13.800         13.800         13.800         13.800         13.800         13.800         13.800          Utilities8.400          8.400              8.400            8.400              8.400            8.400                   8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400           8.400            Bank Charges1.200          1.320              1.452            1.597              1.757            1.757                   1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           1.757           TOTAL OUTFLOWS245.850       409.826     652.996         653.188       653.405         653.651       653.651              653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      653.651      NET CASH FLOW(245.850)     10.174       187.004         186.812       186.595         318.774       318.774              318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      318.774      Add.256.024     432.854         432.662       432.445         564.624       564.624              564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      564.624      Nb farmers-              32                   56                  56                    56                  56                         56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 56                 32                          88                                112                             112                                112                             112                                        112                             112                            112                            112                             112                             112                             112                             112                             112                             112                             112                             112                             112                             56                             add*nb farm-              5.984.128      10.461.472  10.449.309    17.851.326  17.851.326         17.851.326  17.851.326 17.851.326 17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  17.851.326  NPV @ Discount12%340.118       FIRR46%Paybackyrs2,3 
8. MG Rice RI Cluster 
14 
Rice - Matching GrantPortion 1 of the Rice Matching Grant is production costsProduction Costitemunitquantityunit costtotal (USD) unless mentioned otherwiseTotal Cost of production per ha (cidi)LS149084.908,0land rent, land preparation (plowing, tilling), weedicide, weedicide application, certified seeds, planting, fertilizes (NPK, Urea, application), agrochemicals (herbicides, labour, application), rodent control, birds control, harvestingUSD818,0Total cost of production per cluster (cidi)ha1004.908,0490.800,0GrantPer farmer share grantFarmers cashPer farmer share cashTotal Farmers InkindPer farmer share inkindGrantPer farmer share grantFarmers cashPer farmer share cashTotal Farmers InkindPer farmer share inkindGrantPer farmer share grantTotal Farmers cashPer farmer share cashTotal Farmers InkindPer farmer share inkindUSD81.800,0Avg 20 farmers per FBOhaUS$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$Portion #2 of the matching grant  is equipment5 FBOs10010099.80049.9004999.98010039.92039959.880598,89.98099,829.940299,469.8606999.98010019.960199,6Equipment Options Cost10FBOs200200199.60099.80049919.96010079.840399119.760598,87.98439,9259.880299139.720698,619.96099,839.92020013 FBOs250250249.500124.75049924.95010099.800399149.700598,89.98039,9274.85074.850174.65069924.95010049.900200unitquantityunit cost US$total US$Option #1 Equipment - Supplementry Irrigation:3331313131103250313131hand dug wells in the valley bottoms (3 meters depth). 10 wells  $ 1000 eachwell8,01.000,08.000,0By the farmers - middle belt and upper west, upper east. Cement and stones for five metersmanually drilled pore holessolar irrigation pump (3) for fifty pump4,01.500,06.000,0conveyance pipesLS0,410.000,04.000,0Total equipment18.000,0Total Cost99.800,0Grant-- 70%69.860,010% cont9.980,020% labor19.960,0Grant -- 60%59.880,010% cont9.980,030% labor29.940,0Grant -- 50%49.900,010% cont9.980,040% inkind39.920,0cash per farmer99,8inkind299,4Total399,2ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSISPROSPER GHANARICE1Hectares1Yield increase per year over project phase10%Cost increase per year over project phase15%Cost increase from inflation10%Cost increase from adaptation5%unitqty unit priceBase yearyr 1Yr2 yr 3yr 4yr 5yr 6yr 7yr 8yr 9yr 10yr 11yr 12yr 13yr 14yr 15yr 16yr 17yr 18yr 19yr 20GH ȼRevenues   Yield per hakg5000   PriceGHS/kg3   Revenue15.000      16.500         18.150   19.965                       21.962      21.962      21.962      21.962      21.962       21.962             21.962        21.962             21.962        21.962             21.962        21.962             21.962                   21.962             21.962        21.962             21.962                Production cost   Hiring of LandHa1300300           1.500           439           439           439           439            439                  439             439                  439             439                  439             439                  439                        439                  439             439                  439                     Mechanization-           -           -           -             -                   -             -                   -             -                   -             -                   -                        -                   -             -                   -                        PloughingHa1200200           230              265        304                            350           350           350           350           350            350                  350             350                  350             350                  350             350                  350                        350                  350             350                  350                        TilingHa1150150           173              198        228                            262           262           262           262           262            262                  262             262                  262             262                  262             262                  262                        262                  262             262                  262                        HarvestingHa1500500           575              661        760                            875           875           875           875           875            875                  875             875                  875             875                  875             875                  875                        875                  875             875                  875                        ThreshingHa1400400           460              529        608                            700           700           700           700           700            700                  700             700                  700             700                  700             700                  700                        700                  700             700                  700                     Inputs-            -              -        -                            -           -           -           -           -             -                   -             -                   -             -                   -             -                   -                        -                   -             -                   -                        Certified seed10 kg530150           173              198        228                            262           262           262           262           262            262                  262             262                  262             262                  262             262                  262                        262                  262             262                  262                        Weedicidelts7,515113           129              149        171                            197           197           197           197           197            197                  197             197                  197             197                  197             197                  197                        197                  197             197                  197                        NPK50 kg585425           489              562        646                            743           743           743           743           743            743                  743             743                  743             743                  743             743                  743                        743                  743             743                  743                        Urea50 kg2,580200           230              265        304                            350           350           350           350           350            350                  350             350                  350             350                  350             350                  350                        350                  350             350                  350                       1st weed control: Herbicide (superdupa)250 ml545225           259              298        342                            394           394           394           394           394            394                  394             394                  394             394                  394             394                  394                        394                  394             394                  394                     Labor-            -              -        -                            -           -           -           -           -             -                   -             -                   -             -                   -             -                   -                        -                   -             -                   -                        PlantingHa1450450           518              595        684                            787           787           787           787           787            787                  787             787                  787             787                  787             787                  787                        787                  787             787                  787                        Weedicide Applicationmanday7,520150           173              198        228                            262           262           262           262           262            262                  262             262                  262             262                  262             262                  262                        262                  262             262                  262                        Application of NPK fertHa1100100           115              132        152                            175           175           175           175           175            175                  175             175                  175             175                  175             175                  175                        175                  175             175                  175                        Application of UreaHa15050             58                66          76                              87             87             87             87             87              87                    87               87                    87               87                    87               87                    87                          87                    87               87                    87                          1st Weed control: Application of herbicide (superdupa)Ha1150150           173              198        228                            262           262           262           262           262            262                  262             262                  262             262                  262             262                  262                        262                  262             262                  262                         Rodent controlHa1100100           115              132        152                            175           175           175           175           175            175                  175             175                  175             175                  175             175                  175                        175                  175             175                  175                         Bird ControlHa1375375           431              496        570                            656           656           656           656           656            656                  656             656                  656             656                  656             656                  656                        656                  656             656                  656                         GatheringHa1300300           345              397        456                            525           525           525           525           525            525                  525             525                  525             525                  525             525                  525                        525                  525             525                  525                     Other operational cost-            -              -        -                            -           -           -           -           -             -                   -             -                   -             -                   -             -                   -                        -                   -             -                   -                     Sackspcs503150           173              198        228                            262           262           262           262           262            262                  262             262                  262             262                  262             262                  262                        262                  262             262                  262                     TransportHa1250250           288              331        380                            437           437           437           437           437            437                  437             437                  437             437                  437             437                  437                        437                  437             437                  437                     Extension and supervisionHa1125125           144              165        190                            219           219           219           219           219            219                  219             219                  219             219                  219             219                  219                        219                  219             219                  219                     Crop insuranceacre5%217           249              287        330                            379           379           379           379           379            379                  379             379                  379             379                  379             379                  379                        379                  379             379                  379                     Total37285.079        6.996           6.321     7.269                         8.359        8.798        8.798        8.798        8.798         8.798               8.798          8.798               8.798          8.798               8.798          8.798               8.798                     8.798               8.798          8.798               8.798                  Hired labor1.700        1.955           2.248     2.585                         2.973        2.973        2.973        2.973        2.973         2.973               2.973          2.973               2.973          2.973               2.973          2.973               2.973                     2.973               2.973          2.973               2.973                  Family labor1.225        1.409           1.620     1.863                         2.143        2.143        2.143        2.143        2.143         2.143               2.143          2.143               2.143          2.143               2.143          2.143               2.143                     2.143               2.143          2.143               2.143                  Income after labor cost9.921        9.504           11.829   12.696                       13.602      13.163      13.163      13.163      13.163       13.163             13.163        13.163             13.163        13.163             13.163        13.163             13.163                   13.163             13.163        13.163             13.163                Income before labor cost11.146      10.912         13.449   14.559                       15.745      15.306      15.306      15.306      15.306       15.306             15.306        15.306             15.306        15.306             15.306        15.306             15.306                   15.306             15.306        15.306             15.306                Incremental net income(417)            1.909     2.776                         3.682        3.242        3.242        3.242        3.242         3.242               3.242          3.242               3.242          3.242               3.242          3.242               3.242                     3.242               3.242          3.242               3.242                  Nb farmers-              400        400                            400           600           600           600           400            3.400               3.400          3.400               3.400          3.400               3.400          3.400               3.400                     3.400               3.400          3.400               3.400                  -            Nb farmers cumul.400              800        800                            1.000        1.200        1.200        1.000        3.800         6.800               6.800          6.800               6.800          6.800               6.800          6.800               6.800                     6.800               6.800          6.800               3.400                  add*nb farm-                       763.461  1.110.217                           1.472.687  1.945.493  1.945.493  1.945.493  1.296.995    11.024.460          11.024.460  11.024.460          11.024.460  11.024.460          11.024.460  11.024.460          11.024.460                  11.024.460          11.024.460  11.024.460          11.024.460              NPV19.473     IRR498%Discount rate12,25%70 percent grant50 percent grantTotal CostAreaFaemers60 percent grant 
15 
Portion 1 of the Maize Matching Grant is production costsunitquantityunit costtotal (USD) unless mentioned otherwiseLS143544.354,0land rent, land preparation (plowing, tilling), weedicide, weedicide application, hybrid seeds, planting, fertilizes (NPK, Urea, application), agrochemicals (herbicides, labour, application), rodent control, harvesting725,7ha1004.354,0435.400,0GrantPer farmer share grantFarmers cashPer farmer share cashTotal Farmers InkindPer farmer share inkindGrantPer farmer share grantFarmers cashPer farmer share cashTotal Farmers InkindPer farmer share inkindGrantPer farmer share grantTotal Farmers cashPer farmer share cashTotal Farmers InkindPer farmer share inkindUSD72.566,7Avg 20 farmers per FBOhaUS$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$US$5 FBOs10010078.23339.1173917.8237831.29331346.940469,47.82378,2333323.470234,754.7635487.8237815.647156,466710FBOs200200156.46778.23339115.6477862.58731393.880469,415.64778,2333346.940235109.527547,633315.64778,2333331.29315612.5 FBOs250250196.15098.07539219.6157878.460314117.690470,7619.61578,4658.845235137.30554919.6157839.230157unitquantityunit cost US$total US$Option #1 Equipment - No Supplementry Irrigation:Grant -- 70%well0,01.000,00,0By the farmers - middle belt and upper west, upper east. Cement and stones for five metersGrant -- 60%Grant -- 50%pump0,01.500,00,0LS0,010.000,00,00,0unit5,01.000,05.000,0By the farmers - middle belt and upper west, upper east. Cement and stones for five metersnumber5,0133,3333666,75.666,75.666,778.233,354.763,310% cont7.823,320% labor15.646,746.940,010% cont7.823,330% labor23.470,039.116,710% cont7.823,340% labor31.293,3per farmer31,293332110%13%10%3%unitqty unit priceBase yearyr 1Yr2 yr 3yr 4yr 5yr 6yr 7yr 8yr 9yr 10yr 11yr 12yr 13yr 14yr 15yr 16yr 17yr 18yr 19yr 20GH ȼkg4000GHS/kg1,56.000             6.600     7.260                 7.986                 8.785                 8.785                 8.785                 8.785                 8.785                 8.785                 8.785                 8.785                 8.785     8.785     8.785     8.785     8.785     8.785     8.785     8.785     8.785     Ha1100100                550        146                    146                    146                    146                    146                    146                    146                    146        146        146        146        146        146        146        146        146        -         -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -        Ha1240240                271        306                    346                    391                    391                    391                    391                    391                    391                    391                    391                    391        391        391        391        391        391        391        391        391        Ha1300300                339        383                    433                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489        489        489        489        489        489        489        489        489        Ha1600600                678        766                    866                    978                    978                    978                    978                    978                    978                    978                    978                    978        978        978        978        978        978        978        978        978        Ha1300300                339        383                    433                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489        489        489        489        489        489        489        489        489        -                -         -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -        1 kg2530750                848        958                    1.082                 1.223                 1.223                 1.223                 1.223                 1.223                 1.223                 1.223                 1.223                 1.223     1.223     1.223     1.223     1.223     1.223     1.223     1.223     1.223     lts31751                 58          65                      74                      83                      83                      83                      83                      83                      83                      83                      83                      83         83         83         83         83         83         83         83         83         50 kg585425                480        543                    613                    693                    693                    693                    693                    693                    693                    693                    693                    693        693        693        693        693        693        693        693        693        250 ml545225                254        287                    325                    367                    367                    367                    367                    367                    367                    367                    367                    367        367        367        367        367        367        367        367        367        -                -         -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -        manday7,520150                170        192                    216                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245        245        245        245        245        245        245        245        245        Ha1100100                113        128                    144                    163                    163                    163                    163                    163                    163                    163                    163                    163        163        163        163        163        163        163        163        163        Ha1150150                170        192                    216                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245                    245        245        245        245        245        245        245        245        245        Ha1300300                339        383                    433                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489                    489        489        489        489        489        489        489        489        489        -                -         -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -                     -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -        -        pcs403120                136        153                    173                    196                    196                    196                    196                    196                    196                    196                    196                    196        196        196        196        196        196        196        196        196        Ha1250250                283        319                    361                    408                    408                    408                    408                    408                    408                    408                    408                    408        408        408        408        408        408        408        408        408        Ha1125125                141        160                    180                    204                    204                    204                    204                    204                    204                    204                    204                    204        204        204        204        204        204        204        204        204        Ha5%185                209        236                    266                    301                    301                    301                    301                    301                    301                    301                    301                    301        301        301        301        301        301        301        301        301        4.371             5.376     5.453                 6.162                 6.963                 7.109                 7.109                 7.109                 7.109                 7.109                 7.109                 7.109                 7.109     7.109     7.109     7.109     7.109     7.109     7.109     7.109     7.109     1.440             1.627     1.839                 2.078                 2.348                 2.348                 2.348                 2.348                 2.348                 2.348                 2.348                 2.348                 2.348     2.348     2.348     2.348     2.348     2.348     2.348     2.348     2.348     700                791        894                    1.010                 1.141                 1.141                 1.141                 1.141                 1.141                 1.141                 1.141                 1.141                 1.141     1.141     1.141     1.141     1.141     1.141     1.141     1.141     1.141     1.629             1.224     1.807                 1.824                 1.822                 1.676                 1.676                 1.676                 1.676                 1.676                 1.676                 1.676                 1.676     1.676     1.676     1.676     1.676     1.676     1.676     1.676     1.676     2.329             2.015     2.701                 2.834                 2.963                 2.817                 2.817                 2.817                 2.817                 2.817                 2.817                 2.817                 2.817     2.817     2.817     2.817     2.817     2.817     2.817     2.817     2.817     (405)       177                    195                    192                    46                      46                      46                      46                      46                      46                      46                      46         46         46         46         46         46         46         46         46         0400400400600600600400340000000000000400                    800                    800                    1.000                 1.200                 1.200                 1.000                 3.800                 3.400                 3.400                 3.400     3.400     3.400     3.400     3.400     3.400     3.400     3.400     3.400     -        -            70.994                     77.834                     76.852                     27.679                     27.679                     27.679                     18.452                     156.845                  -                           -                           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           264.235      #NOMBRE!12,25%70 percent grantFaemersAreaTotal Cost50 percent grant60 percent grant 
9. MG Maize RI Cluster  
16 
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSISMaize3Hectares1Yield increase per year over project phase10%Cost increase per year over project phase15%Cost increase from inflation10%Cost increase from adaptation5%unitqty unit priceBase yearyr 1Yr2 yr 3yr 4yr 5yr 6yr 7yr 8yr 9yr 10yr 11yr 12yr 13yr 14yr 15yr 16yr 17yr 18yr 19yr 20GH ȼRevenues   Yield per hakg3750   PriceGHS/kg1,4   Revenue5.250                   5.775         6.353                      6.988        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        7.687        Production cost   Hiring of LandHa1100100                      550            146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           146           Mechanization   HarrowingHa1240240                      276            317                         365           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420           420              PlantingHa1250250                      288            331                         380           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437              HarvestingHa1600600                      690            794                         913           1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049        1.049           ThreshingHa1250250                      288            331                         380           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           437           Inputs   Certified seed1 kg4510450                      518            595                         684           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787           787              Weedicidelts31751                        59              67                           78             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89             89                NPK50 kg485340                      391            450                         517           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595           595             1st weed control: Herbicide (superdupa)250 ml545225                      259            298                         342           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           394           Labor   Weedicide Applicationmanday7,550375                      431            496                         570           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656           656              Application of NPK fertHa1100100                      115            132                         152           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175           175              1st Weed control: Application of herbicide (superdupa)Ha1150150                      173            198                         228           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262           262               GatheringHa1300300                      345            397                         456           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           525           Other operational costSackspcs304120                      138            159                         183           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           TransportHa1260260                      299            344                         395           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           455           Extension and supervisionHa1120120                      138            159                         183           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           210           Crop insuranceHa5%172                      197            227                         261           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           300           Total4.103                   5.153         5.293                      6.087        7.000        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        7.146        Hired labor1.340                   1.541         1.772                      2.038        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        2.344        Family labor925                      1.064         1.223                      1.407        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        1.618        Income after labor cost1.147                   622            1.059                      900           686           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           540           Income before labor cost2.072                   1.686         2.282                      2.307        2.304        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        2.158        Incremental net income(387)          210                         235           231           85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             85             Nb Farmers0400400600600600600400360036003600360036003600360036003600360036003600Nb Farmers cumul04008001400200026003200360072001080014400180002160025200288003240036000396004320046800add*nb farm-                    83.996                              93.892          138.852       51.252          51.252          51.252          34.168          307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       307.515       NPV1.058.336     IRR46%Discount rate12,25% 
IV. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS AT DIFFERENT LEVELS (CROPS, MG, RI) 
17 
Economic analysis1.Total crops (GHc)Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20soy19.781             (50.437)            72.569             72.569             72.569             58.055             58.055             58.055             5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               5.806               Maize(129.994)         (168.938)         117.816           385.963           385.963           289.472           289.472           289.472           28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             28.947             Rice(697.586)         (1.607.900)      (177.899)         319.339           805.085           603.814           603.814           603.814           423.814           603.814           603.814           603.814           750.814           423.814           603.814           867.814           867.814           867.814           687.814           867.814           Total crops (GHS)(807.799)         (1.827.276)      12.486             777.871           1.263.617       951.341           951.341           951.341           458.567           638.567           638.567           638.567           785.567           458.567           638.567           902.567           902.567           902.567           722.567           902.567           1.Total crops (GHc)(807.799)         (1.827.276)      12.486             777.871           1.263.617       951.341           951.341           951.341           458.567           638.567           638.567           638.567           785.567           458.567           638.567           902.567           902.567           902.567           722.567           902.567           2.MG Crops SMEs (GHc):MG Rice SME-                    (45.499.123)    (49.221.975)    (34.581.994)    (2.524.312)      6.735.631       15.829.242     26.412.333     35.141.984     43.735.928     42.782.725     42.782.725     42.782.725     42.782.725     42.782.725     42.782.725     42.782.725     42.782.725     42.782.725     42.782.725     MG Maize SME(4.178.105)      (2.309.583)      (8.167)              (182.912)         (375.131)         (586.572)         (819.157)         (1.075.000)      3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       3.991.047       MG  Soy SME-                    23.505.750     79.299.297     87.359.338     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     95.519.170     MG  Poultry-                    5.984.128       10.461.472     10.449.309     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     17.851.326     total MG (GH c?)(4.178.105)      (18.318.827)    40.530.627     63.043.741     110.471.053   119.519.555   128.380.581   138.707.829   152.503.527   161.097.471   160.144.268   160.144.268   160.144.268   160.144.268   160.144.268   160.144.268   160.144.268   160.144.268   160.144.268   160.144.268   3. Loans Cluster of Rural InstitionsMG Rice RI Cluster -                    763.461           1.110.217       1.472.687       1.945.493       1.945.493       1.945.493       1.296.995       11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     11.024.460     MG Maize RI Cluster-                    70.994             77.834             76.852             27.679             27.679             27.679             18.452             156.845           -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    MG Soy RI Cluster-                    83.996             93.892             138.852           51.252             51.252             51.252             34.168             307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           307.515           Total Rural Institions-                    918.451           1.281.944       1.688.392       2.024.424       2.024.424       2.024.424       1.349.616       11.488.820     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     11.331.975     Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20Total bene fits (GHS)(4.985.904)      (19.227.652)    41.825.057     65.510.004     113.759.094   122.495.321   131.356.346   141.008.786   164.450.914   173.068.012   172.114.810   172.114.810   172.261.810   171.934.810   172.114.810   172.378.810   172.378.810   172.378.810   172.198.810   172.378.810   total Benefits in $(826.850)         (3.188.665)      6.936.162       10.864.014     18.865.521     20.314.315     21.783.805     23.384.542     27.272.125     28.701.163     28.543.086     28.543.086     28.567.464     28.513.235     28.543.086     28.586.867     28.586.867     28.586.867     28.557.017     28.586.867     Proejct eco costs ($)4.748.118       14.558.546     18.109.646     22.756.248     21.894.989     16.311.451     13.459.338     7.301.235       730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           730.123           Cash flow(5.574.968)      (17.747.211)    (11.173.483)    (11.892.234)    (3.029.468)      4.002.864       8.324.468       16.083.307     26.542.001     27.971.039     27.812.963     27.812.963     27.837.341     27.783.112     27.812.963     27.856.744     27.856.744     27.856.744     27.826.893     27.856.744     NPV ($)43.139.365     ERR22,3% 
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5: SECAP Review Note  
Introduction 
This Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP) review note has 
been  prepared  for  the  Promoting  Rural  Opportunities,  Sustainable  Profits  and 
Environmental  Resilience  (PROSPER)  project.  PROSPER’s  overall  goal is  to  contribute  to 
sustainable poverty reduction, healthy rural population and reduced income uncertainties 
due to climatic change with an objective to increase target households’ income, nutrition 
and  food  security  by  engaging  them  in  profitable  agribusiness  linkages,  increasing 
productivity  and  improving  crop  quality  using  climate  smart  cropping  technologies.  The 
project’s duration is eight years. 
Situational analysis and potential project impacts 
The population of Ghana is estimated to 29,767,108 people in 2018, 49.3% female and 
51.7% male (World Bank, 2019b). The population has more than tripled in fifty years with 
an average annual growth rate of 2.5% in the last decade.  The Ashanti Region has the 
highest  population  in  the  country,  followed  by  Greater  Accra  and  Eastern  Regions. 
According to the time series analysis, within the period 1960 to 2010, the proportions for 
the  Upper  West  and  Upper  East  regions  declined,  pointing  to  out-migration  to  other 
regions, especially Greater Accra and Ashanti. 
The country features a diverse and culturally rich population with eight main ethnic groups 
(Akan,  Ga-Dangme,  Ewe,  Guan,  Gurma,  Mole-Dagbani,  Grusi,  and  Mande)  distributed 
across  the  ten  administrative  regions.  The  largest  is  the  Akan,  with  47.5%  of  the  total 
population and mainly residing in the central and coastal areas of the country; followed by 
the Mole-Dagban characterising the North of the country and the Ewe who are predominant 
in the Volta region (UNDP, 2016). 
In Ghana, the classification of a locality as urban or rural is based on population size. More 
than half of Ghana's population (56.6%) live in urban areas and 44.4% in rural areas in 
2018  (World  Bank,  2019b).  Ghana’s  economy  before  2005  relied  heavily  on  agriculture 
but  the  industry  and  services  sectors  have  become  increasingly  important  and  have 
outpaced  agriculture,  with  the  services  sector  becoming  the  largest  contributor  to  GDP 
accounting  for  46.3%  of  the  GDP  in  2018.  Agriculture  accounts  for  19.7  %  of  Ghana’s 
Gross Domestic Product in 2018 (GSS, 2019). Nevertheless, the agriculture sector employs 
nearly half of the workforce and is the main source of livelihood for the majority of the 
country’s poorest households (World Bank, 2017). 
Ghana  has  substantially  improved  various  indicators  of  human  capital development  and 
access to services. Fertility declined from 6.2 births per 1,000 women to 3.9 between 1988 
and  2017  (World  Bank,  2019b).  The  percentage  of  births  attended  by  skilled  personnel 
rose from 40 to 71 % during the same period. Child health has also significantly improved. 
Stunting in children under 5 years of age dropped and the share of underweight children 
under  5  years  of  age  substantially  declined  between  2004  and  2017.  There  were  also 
significant improvements in access to sanitation, electricity, and clean drinking water. 
Poverty 
Poverty rates. Ghana attained significant poverty reduction and shared prosperity in the 
last 25 years, and has been at the forefront of poverty reduction in Africa since the 1990s. 
Poverty (GH¢1,314.0) has reduced from 31.9% in 2005 to 23.4% in 2017 and extreme 
poverty (GH¢792.05) from 16.5% in 2005 to 8.2%, which is much lower than the mean 
poverty  rate  of  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (GSS,  2018).  Nevertheless,  decline  in  poverty  and 
extreme poverty shows signs of slowing down. Much greater progress in poverty reduction 
was achieved between 1992 and 2006, when poverty declined by 23.2 % age points and 
the incidence of extreme poverty halved, declining from 37 % in 1992 to 18 % in 2006 
(GSS, 2018). 
1 
Poverty (right) and extreme poverty (left) incidence per locality in Ghana in 2017 (GSS, 
2018) 
Rural  vs.  urban.  This  positive  development  in  poverty  reduction  is  mainly  driven  by 
decreasing urban poverty rates. Poverty and extreme poverty in Ghana are predominantly 
a  rural  phenomenon.  Apart  from  the  coastal  belt  which  exhibited  a  similar  pattern  of 
poverty within rural and urban areas, the patterns of the savannah and forest areas are 
quite distinct. In 2017, the poverty rate was 49.6% in rural savannah and 25.3% in rural 
forests. The geographic variations of extreme poverty incidence are also more pronounced 
than overall poverty incidence, with extreme poverty being the highest in rural Savannah 
(36.1% in 2017). Poverty remains endemic in the northern regions of the country, with 
the  poverty  rate  standing  at  70.9%  for  Upper  West,  54.8%  for  Upper  East,  61.1%  for 
Northern respectively in 2017, recording significant increases in poverty rates, by 10.7% 
for Upper East and 10.4% for Northern region (GSS, 2018). It is not surprising that poverty 
in  Ghana  is  a  rural  phenomenon  and  in  particular  a  rural  savannah  phenomenon  since 
agriculture is the major economic activity in the rural savannah area of Ghana. In 2017, 
the  poverty  incidence  was  highest  (42.7%)  among  households  whose  heads  are  self- 
employed  in  the  agricultural  sector.  While  people  migrate  to  escape  from  rural 
unemployment,  under-employment,  poverty,  and  to  search  for  better  socio-economic 
opportunities, the reality they face in cities like Accra is very high unemployment rates, 
and lack of access to housing and basic services such as water and sanitation. 
Gender,  age  and  living  with  disabilities.  Households  are  31.4%  are  female-headed 
and  78.6%  are  male-headed.  In  2017,  the  poverty  incidence  among  male-headed 
households  was  higher  (25.8%)  than  among  female-headed  households  (17.6%), 
following the trends since 1992 (GSS, 2018). However, using asset poverty data, gender 
distribution of wealth in Ghana is biased in favour of males and this is true for both urban 
and rural communities. About 62% of female headed households fall into the two poorest 
wealth quintiles compared with 39% of male headed households. The proportion of poor 
female-headed  households  in  the  cities  in  northern  Ghana  also  rose  between  1992  and 
2006, though it declined in rural areas in northern Ghana and in both the urban and rural 
areas in southern Ghana during the same period. Poverty was lowest among households 
headed  by  retired  persons  (1.6%).  In  2011,  the  Ministry  of  Health  discontinued  the 
collection  of  data  on  persons  with  disabilities.  Concrete  disaggregated  data  as  well  as 
government  policies  or  programmes  targeting  persons,  and  in  particular  children  with 
disabilities are lacking (UNDP, 2016). 
Child poverty. Child poverty rates are especially problematic with 3.65 million, or 28.3% 
of all children, living in poverty. A child is almost 40% more likely to live in poverty than 
an adult, compared to only 15% more likely in the 1990s. One child in ten lives in extreme 
poverty, meaning 1.2 million children live in households that are unable to provide even 
2 
adequate food (GSS, 2018). 
Inequalities. Just as poverty, inequality represents a growing challenge in Ghana with 
multiple  implications  for  the  realization  of  economic  and  social  potentials  and  the 
achievement of the SDGs. Inequality in Ghana has been growing while poverty levels are 
declining. Nationally, the Gini coefficient has increased slightly from 41.9% in 2006 to 43% 
in 2017 (GSS, 2018). The redistribution effect was negative and partially offset the growth 
effect  by  1.4%.  Thus,  poverty  reduction  would  have  been  higher  without  the  worsened 
redistribution  or  increased  inequality,  an  indication  that  the  nation’s  income  is 
concentrated among a few groups of people. If the challenge with inequality in the country 
is not resolved, all efforts aimed at spurring up economic growth may not translate into 
poverty reduction at the expected rate (GSS, 2018). 
Determinants  of  poverty.  Looking  at  the  transformation  of  Ghana’s  economy,  the 
agriculture sector, upon which the economy of the country has traditionally depended, is 
being replaced by a rapidly expanding services sector. This shift has resulted in widening 
the  income  and  infrastructure  gaps  between  rural  and  urban  dwellers  as  industries  and 
jobs become more concentrated in higher-skilled sectors, often located in the urban south. 
Education.  One  strong  determining  factor  for  poverty  is  the  level  of  education.  The 
contribution to national poverty incidence by households headed by an uneducated person 
is  72.4%,  whilst  the  highly  educated  accounts  for  less  than  1%.  The  level  of  poverty 
reduces as the educational level of the household head rises. 40% of household heads with 
no education are poor compared with 12.4% with BECE, 7.5% with secondary education 
and 0.9% among those with tertiary education (GSS, 2018). This is partly because they 
have  acquired  the  skill  that  could  make  them  employable  and  productive.  In Ghana 
therefore, educational attainment could contribute to poverty reduction. 
Slowdown of the agriculture sector. 44% of the country’s population continue to live 
in rural areas and depend on agriculture, and rapid urbanisation is beginning to compound 
the issues of weak rural resources and stretched urban capacity. Despite having become 
a  lower  priority  for  the  government,  agriculture  employs  a  huge  number  of  unskilled 
workers and provides livelihoods for more than 70% of the rural population, including a 
large share of the country’s poorest households. The agricultural sector provides a critical 
source of employment for the 300,000-350,000 new workers who enter the Ghanaian labor 
force each year (World Bank, 2017). Inclusive agricultural growth remains so effective in 
reducing poverty, especially when large numbers of the poor depend on farming. 
Climate vulnerability. Among rural communities where poverty is prominent, the poverty 
incidence has been much higher in those living in the rural savannah zone. According to 
Participatory  Development  Associates  (2011),  the  factors  driving impoverishment  in  the 
Northern  Region  are  varied  and  inter-linked.  In  their  view,  the  increasingly  discordant 
climate,  with  extremes  of  drought,  flooding  and  windstorms  are  perhaps  the  most 
significant among the multiple burdens shaping population wellbeing in Northern Ghana. As 
the seasons become distorted due to climate change, the dependence of the majority of the 
population on a single annual harvest of subsistence crops exacerbates the population’s 
vulnerability. While some of these impoverishing factors are primarily caused by external 
factors, there are also aspects which derive from actions of local and national institutions 
(e.g. non-inclusive governance practices and policy guidance, as well as tardiness among 
some duty bearers when it comes to provision of seeds, credit and agriculture extension 
services) (UNDP, 2016). 
Informal employment. Furthermore, the 2010 Population Census found that just over 
86% of Ghana’s workforce are employed in the informal sector, making both job security 
and  revenue  generation  a  substantial  challenge  (UNDP,  2014).  The  informal  sector  is  a 
dominant  part  of  the  Ghanaian  economy,  including  being  the  largest  employer  but 
information on it is not collected and thus unavailable to policy makers to properly address 
the situation. 
3 
Gender. Ghana is among the champions of gender equality in ECOWAS. It ranks second 
in its Gender Inequality Index in 2018 (0.538, higher than Sub-Saharan African average 
of 0.569, 140th place globally). Such an indicator measures various dimensions of gender 
inequality  in  access  to  education,  employment,  health  and  political  empowerment. 
However,  gender  inequality  remains  high  and  gender  is  still  an  important  dimension  of 
poverty and food insecurity in Ghana. Women and girls have fewer opportunities than their 
male counterparts in almost all aspects of public life and quality of life. 
Education. Compared to most Sub-Saharan African countries, Ghana has relatively high 
literacy and net primary school enrolment with more girls attending primary school than 
boys. At national level primary school enrollment is at 85.3% for female (vs. 83.9% for 
male), with 95.1% completion of primary school for female in 2017.When progressing to 
lower  secondary  school,  the  rate  goes  down  to  38%  of  female  completion  of  lower 
secondary school in low income bracket which is below national average of 73% for females 
(World Bank, 2019a). According to the SDG progress report, while Ghana has been able 
to provide access to education for the majority of children, quality of education is lagging 
behind. Poor learning outcomes are evidenced by proficiency in learning and pass rates. 
Maternal  health.  Although  fertility  remains  relatively  high  in  Ghana  (3.9  children  per 
woman in 2017), it should be noted that it has declined significantly from seven children 
per woman to just under four over the last 30 years (World Bank, 2019a). Rural women 
(5.45), married women (4.97) and women with no formal education (5.51) reported the 
highest  mean  number  of  children  ever  born  (UNDP,  2016).  Contraceptive  prevalence  is 
still  low  at  30%.  High  fertility  exposes  women  of  childbearing  age  to  greater  risk  of 
morbidity and mortality. 
Child  marriage.  Ghana  has  made  considerable  progress  in  addressing  early  child 
marriages.  The  proportion  of  children  who  marry  before  age  15  and  18  has  fallen 
significantly between 2006 and 2017. While the proportion of girls who married before age 
15 has declined from 1.1% in 2006 to 0.4% in 2017, the proportion of those who married 
before  age  18  has  also  fallen  from  12%  to  8.1%  during  the  same  period.  Early  child 
marriage  is  reported  to  be  most  prevalent  in  the  rural  regions  of  Upper  West  (1.3%), 
Northern (1.2%) and Volta (1.1%) regions, however Ashanti, Brong Ahafo and Western 
regions recorded no early marriages before age 15 (GSS, 2018). 
Gender based violence (GBV). Different forms of violence against women is reported to 
be  common  in  Ghana  (UN  Women).  Some  of  the  key  indicators  regarding  prevalence 
include lifetime physical and/or sexual intimate partner violence (24%), physical and/or 
sexual intimate partner violence in the last 12 months (19%), lifetime non-partner sexual 
violence  (4%),  and  child  Marriage  defined  as  girls  marrying  at  age  below  18  years  old 
(21%),  female  genital  mutilation/cutting  (4%).  Psychological  violence  has  the  highest 
incidence among ever partnered women in Ghana particularly among divorced, separated 
or  widowed  women.  24.8  %  of  divorced,  separated  or  widowed  women  suffered  from 
psychological  violence  compared  with  21.3  %  in  the  category  married/living  together 
(GoG, 2019). It is reported that women and girls with disabilities are at least two to three 
times more likely to experience gender-based violence and abuse at a magnitude greater 
than women without disabilities1. 
Ghana  has  enacted  laws  aimed  at  addressing  gender-based  violence;  namely  Domestic 
Violence Act, 2007 (Act 732) which defines the crime of domestic violence and provides 
for  arrest  and  prosecution  of  perpetrators  of  domestic  violence  as  well  as  creation  of  a 
fund to support abuse victims. 
The Domestic Violence  and Victim Support Unit (DOVVSU) is a unit in the  Ghana Police 
Service, which has the mandate to oversee matters of domestic abuse against women and 
1 Rashida Manjoo, Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its 
causes and consequences: women with disabilities, para. 31, U.N. Doc. A/67/227 
(Aug. 3, 2012) (hereinafter Manjoo, Women with Disabilities). 
4 
children.  The  unit  provides  support  and  protection  for  victims  of  domestic  abuse  by 
interrelating activities with the Department of Social Welfare, the International Federation 
of Women Lawyers and the Legal Aid Board. DOVVSU operates under the Police Service 
Act, the Criminal and other Offences Act, Act 29/60, the Children’s Act, Act, 560 /98, the 
Juvenile Justice Act,  Act 653/2003, Ghana Domestic Violence Act (Act 732) 2007. 
While  the  above  legislation  was  deemed  as  important  step  forwarded,  it  is  criticized  by 
some that it does not adequately provide for training of law enforcement personnel nor 
does  it  provide  support  for  certain  categories  of  abuse  victims;  such  as  women  with 
disabilities. 
Ghana’s  constitution  and  legal  framework  are  in  theory  in  line  with  IFAD  policy  on  zero 
tolerance  policy  on  Sexual  Harassment/Sexual  Exploitation  and  Abuse,  however 
implementation remains subject to awareness, capacity building and enforcement. 
Access  to  land.  In  spite  of  a  progressive  land  ownership  system,  customary  land  use 
systems prevail whereby property rights of the assets is normally with the household heads 
(FAO, 2018). Household heads are most often men in Ghana and women have temporary 
usufruct rights that can be lost when they marry or lose their husband. Significant gender 
disparities exist in land holdings, with men holding 3.2 times more of the total farms than 
women and 8.1 times more of the medium-large farms (of 5 acres and more) (FAO, 2018). 
Female headed households have less access to land for farming (89% in Northern Ghana 
vs  a  96%  national  average).  Female  headed  households  are  also  more  likely  to  be 
smallholders  (farming  five  acres  or  less).  87%  of  female  headed  households  are 
smallholders compared with 60% of male. 4% of farms are more than 11 acres compared 
with 16% of men heading a household (IFAD, 2019). Limited access of women to land (i.e. 
collateral) also results in more limited access to financial services. 
Division of labour. Statistics traditionally reveal that domestic tasks are primarily carried 
out by women. This means that women are less likely to be able to take full advantage of 
economic opportunities, to respond to changing market opportunities, and to participate 
in income-generating activities (FAO, 2018). 65 % of men spend on average from 0 to 10 
hours per week in domestic activities, while 89 % of women spend more than 10 hours a 
week (FAO, 2018). The share of men and women with a primary employment in agriculture 
is  similar,  but  women  are  more  often  contributing  family  workers  rather  than  self- 
employed in farm enterprises compared to men (FAO, 2018). Women are mainly engaged 
in producing about 70% of food crops, such as rice, maize, cassava, cocoyam, groundnuts, 
soybean and vegetables. Although women are able to feed their families by producing food 
crops,  they  are  disadvantaged  when  it  comes  to  benefiting  from  cash/industrial  crop 
interventions  to  promote  income  (FAO,  2018).  Agricultural  produce  traders  are  mostly 
women. 
Youth. Ghana’s population has a youthful structure with a broad base consisting of large 
numbers  of  children,  adolescents  and  young  people.  Youth  are  a  diverse  and 
heterogeneous group defined by the UN as women and men in the age group from 15 to 
24 years. The definition of youth in Ghana is broader and regards persons between 15 and 
35 years of age to be youth. Youth constitute 35.9% of the population; 44% of the youth 
live in rural areas (GoG, 2019). Youth are concentrated in four regions: Ashanti (20.2%), 
Greater Accra (17.9%), Eastern (11.4%) and Western (11.0%). 
Medium  youth  development.  The  Youth  Development  Index  of  the  Commonwealth 
Secretariat compares the youth development of 183 countries. Ghana has a medium Youth 
Development Index of 0.581 in 2016, mainly because of a low health and well-being and 
education score. Other areas such as education and employment are in the medium range 
while civil (0.599) and political (0.802) participation score in a high range. The total score 
has improved since 2010 (0.565) (The Commonwealth, 2016). 
Education: The quality of pre-primary education is still low. Even after several years of 
basic  schooling,  many  students  lack  basic  literacy  and  numeracy  skills.  34%  of  youth 
5 
between  the  ages  of  15  and  24  score  below  the  minimum  literacy  proficiency  in  urban 
areas (Darvas et al., 2017). 
Poverty and unemployment: The youth unemployment rate in Ghana is estimated at 
26.4% in 2017 representing an increase of 15.5% from 2013. Given the high labour under- 
utilisation  rate  of  42%,  the  proportion  of  unemployed  youth  could  be  more.  Youth 
unemployment is high among females and is largely an urban phenomenon (GSS, 2018). 
The  proportion  of  youth  that  are  neither  in  employment,  education  nor  training  also 
increased from 21.5% in 2010 to 27.1% in 2015. The rate is higher among females than 
males  suggesting  a  higher  level  of  inactivity  outside  the  school  system  among  females 
(GoG,  2019).  According  to  UNDP,  high  unemployment  youth  is  linked  to  a  number  of 
factors including: 
Weak linkage between the educational system and productive sectors of the 
economy 
Mismatch of skills acquired by the youth vis-à-vis what is required by the job market; 
Weak support systems for entrepreneurship and small-scale business development 
for self-employment. 
Unemployment rate in percent by sex, locality and age 
in 2013 and 2017 (GoG, 2019) 
Limited  services  and  infrastructure.  Many  preconditions  for  successful  youth 
engagement are not well developed in rural areas of Ghana, including difficult access to 
markets and financial services, travel to urban centers and costly access to internet. 
Child labour. Child labour continues to be prevalent in Ghana; every fifth child is directly 
affected  and  more  than  one-in-ten  (14.2%)  engaged  in  the  worst  forms,  particularly 
hazardous  work  (GSS,  2014).  Apart  from  the  Greater  Accra  and  Central  Regions,  each 
region has more than 20% of children as victims. In rural communities many children are 
involved in agriculture including livestock and fisheries, doing work which by its nature or 
circumstance  is  injurious  to  their  health.  Ghana  has  ratified  the  UN  Convention  on  the 
Rights  of  the  Child  as  well  as  all  key  Conventions  of  child  labour;  such  as  the  ILO 
Conventions on Minimum Age and on Worst Forms of Child Labour. The country also has 
a comprehensive legal framework including the 1992 Constitution; Children’s Act, 1998; 
Child Rights Regulation, 2002; Human Trafficking Act, 2005; and the Amendments to the 
Criminal Code, 1998. Key stakeholders and partners include The Child Labor Unit (CLU) of 
the Ministry of Employment and Labour Relations (MELR), National Steering Committee on 
Child Labour (NSCCL), and Department of Children (DOC) of the Ministry of Gender, 
6 
Children  and  Social  Protection  (MoGCSP)  as  well  as  development  partners;  namely  ILO 
and UNICEF. 
People living with disabilities 
About  one-fifth  of  Ghana’s  population  is  estimated  to  be  living  with  either  a  physical, 
intellectual or emotional disability. Despite constitutional and legislative guarantees on the 
rights of persons with disability, the laws have not been adequately implemented and they 
therefore  continue  to  face  discrimination.  Social  stigma  and  inequalities  in  access  to 
employment, education and healthcare and to public facilities remain challenges to people 
with  disabilities.  In  2011,  the  Ministry  of  Health  discontinued  the  collection  of  data  on 
persons with disabilities. Concrete disaggregated data as well as government policies or 
programmes targeting persons, and in particular children, with disabilities are lacking. 
Children.  Approximately  one  in  every  five  children  aged  2-17  years  has  a  functioning 
difficulty related to seeing, hearing, walking, fine motor skills, and learning among others. 
Children with disabilities are often less likely to attend school, access medical services, or 
have  their  voices  heard  in  society.  They  are  at  risk  of  physical  and  emotional  abuse, 
neglect, violence and exploitation (GoG, 2019). 
Unemployment. Persons living with disability who are unemployed constitute 13% of all 
unemployed  persons  in  2017.  Unemployment  is  highest  among  those  with  emotional 
disability, followed by sight, hearing and physical disabilities (GoG, 2019). 
Nutrition 
Food  insecurity.  Significant  regional  disparities  exist  concerning  nutrition  and  food 
security  in  Ghana.  Food  insecurity  is  a  major  contributing  factor  to  the  poor  nutritional 
status of the population in the northern regions of Ghana. Among the regions of greatest 
concern, which include Upper East, North Eastern, Savnnah, Upper West, Northern, Brong- 
Ahafo,  Ahafo,  Bono,Bono  East  and  Ahafo,  Oti  and  Volta,  16%  of  households  were 
considered food insecure. Food insecurity is linked to the inability of households to produce 
sufficient quantities of staples to meet their food needs. This can be attributes to poor soil 
quality,  unfavourable  weather  conditions,  constrained  access  to  inputs,  and  limited 
financial resources to expand production (USAID, 2018a). Also, food insecurity is a highly 
seasonal  phenomenon  in  the  north,  as  there  is  only  one  rainy  season  and  a  long  dry 
season. July is the peak of the lean season, with 90% of households experiencing issues 
of  access  to  food  which  is  pricier  and  less  available,  while  poor  agricultural  households 
have often exhausted their food stocks and need to buy food on the market at high prices 
(harvest around September-December). 
Chronic  malnutrition.  The  prevalence  of  stunting  (chronic  malnutrition  or  low  height- 
for-age) is 19% nationally, but rises to 33% in Northern region. The prevalence of acute 
malnutrition (wasting or weight-for-height) is also much higher in the northern regions, 
and  at  9%,  is  highest  in  Upper  East  region.  Central  region  also  has  high  levels  of  both 
stunting  and  wasting,  at  22%  and  8%,  respectively  (UNICEF,  2017).  Differences  in 
stunting levels can be seen according to maternal education and wealth levels—only 16% 
of children whose mothers have secondary education are stunted, while the rate rises to 
26% for children whose mothers had no formal education. Similarly, 9% of children in the 
highest wealth quintile are stunted, while 25% of children in the lowest wealth quintile are 
stunted (UNICEF, 2017). 
7 
Prevalence of stunting among children under 5 years by regions, 2011 and 2017 (GoG, 
2019) 
Childbearing  begins  early  in  Ghana.  By  age  19,  36.1  %  of  adolescents  had  begun 
childbearing in 2014 which is an increase from 28.9 % in 2008 (UNICEF, 2017). This has 
serious consequences because, relative to older mothers, adolescent girls are more likely 
to  be  malnourished  and  have  a  low  birth  weight  baby  who  is  more  likely  to  become 
malnourished and be at increased risk of illness and death than those born to older mothers 
(UNICEF, 2017). 
Micronutrient  deficiencies.  In  Ghana,  micronutrient  malnutrition  continues  to  affect 
many children under five years of age and women. 
Children.  Vitamin  A  deficiency  affects  about  20%  of  children  in  Ghana,  with  a  higher 
prevalence in Ghana’s northern belt (31%), and lower among children residing in wealthier 
households (9%) (UNICEF, 2017). Anemia is markedly higher in the Northern belt (53.2%) 
compared to the Middle (28.2%) and Southern (32.3%) belts. Although rates of anemia 
have declined from 78% in 2008 to 66% in 2014, the rate is still far above the 40% WHO 
threshold for a severe public health concern. A similar disparity was observed with ID and 
IDA as the prevalence in the Northern belt was substantially higher than in the other strata. 
About 35% of anemic children had concurrent iron deficiency (UNICEF, 2017). 
Women.  One  in  five  women  is  anemic,  and  about  14%  and  9%  has  ID  and  IDA, 
respectively. Among anemic women, 40% had concurrent ID (UNICEF, 2017). 
Overweight  prevalence.  Overweight  and  obesity  are  increasingly  important  issues  in 
Ghana  33%  to  40%  increase  since  2003  for  overweight  in  ECOWAS)  and  affect  women 
disproportionately. In Ghana, 41% of women are overweight against 22% of men. Gender 
disparity  is  stronger  for  obesity,  with  4.5%  of  men  being  obese  compared  to  16%  of 
women being considered obese. Furthermore, prevalence of overweight/obesity is almost 
double in urban areas compared to rural areas, and is strongly positively associated with 
socio-economic status (USAID, 2018a). 
Status of environment and climate change 
Climate.  Ghana  has  a  warm,  humid  climate.  Mean  annual  rainfall  of  the  country  is 
estimated at 1187 mm. Mean annual temperatures range from 26.1°C near the coast to 
28.9 °C in the extreme north. Annual potential open water evaporation has been estimated 
as  ranging  between  1350  mm  in  the  south  to  about  2000  mm  in  the  north.  The  actual 
amount  of  evaporation  depends  on  a  number  of  factors  including  water  availability, 
vegetation cover and prevailing weather conditions among others. Most of Northern Ghana 
falls  within  the  Guinea  Savanna  Ecological  Zone,  which  is  associated  with  total  annual 
rainfall  of about 1000-1300 mm/annum. The rainy season is 140-190 days in duration. 
The  Middle  Belt  falls  within  the  transition  ecological  zone  with  rainfall  of  up  to 
1300mm/annum  and  the  deciduous  forest  ecological  zone  with  rainfall  up  to 
1500mm/annum. 
Land cover. Ghana reporting to the UNCCD shows a detailed land use classification for 
2015 (GoG, 2018). Cropland is prevalent (47%) and a valuable resource for Ghana while, 
8 
tree-covered areas (35%) are still remaining despite showing signs of decrease. 
km2 
% of total land 
Tree-covered 
83852 
35% 
Grassland 
31591 
13% 
Cropland 
Wetland 
Artificial surfaces 
2289 
113067 
47% 
296 
0% 
1% 
Other land 
69 
0.03% 
Land cover 2015 (GoG, 2019) 
Agro-ecological  zones.  There  are  six  agro-ecological  zones  defined  on  the  basis  of 
climate, reflected by the natural vegetation and influenced by the soils (FAO, 2005). 
Agro-ecological zones of Ghana (FAO, 2005) 
9 
Agro-ecological zones (left) and averages temperatures (right) in Ghana (IFAD, 2019) 
Agro-ecological  specificities  and  key  value  chains.  Agricultural  activities  in  Ghana 
follow  the  agro-ecological  specificities  of  the  country.  While  in  Northern  Ghana  and  the 
Middle  Belt  the  potential  for  agriculture  is  high,  smallholders  suffer  due  to  inadequate 
marketing infrastructure (e.g., rural roads, processing and storage facilities), limited post- 
harvest  support  and  most  importantly  lack  of  access  to  sustainable/profitable  output 
markets. 
Most  of  Northern  Ghana  falls  within  the  Guinea  Savanna  Ecological  Zone,  which  is 
associated with total annual rainfall of about 1000-1300 mm/annum. The rainy season is 
140-190  days  in  duration.  Smallholders  in  Northern  Ghana  grow  mainly  soya,  maize, 
sorghum and millet. Also, in this region rice cultivation in the valley bottoms has emerged 
with  great potential  to  reduce  poverty  levels.  MoFA  has  increased  its  support  to  rice 
production in the northern region through the Planting for Foods and Jobs (PFJ) initiative 
with the goal of making Ghana self-reliant in rice production by 2023. Evidence shows that 
rice yields can increase from 15 bags to 50 bags per acre through timely planting, proper 
agronomic practices, certified seeds and fertilizers. Nevertheless, the lack of appropriate 
agricultural machinery and inadequate linkages to markets paying reasonable prices, affect 
the wider adoption of rice production by smallholders in the region. Shea nuts are also an 
important source of income for smallholders in the north. Shea trees cover around 77,670 
square kilometers in this region and support the livelihood of approximately 900,000 rural 
women2.  Over  the  past  decades  trade  in  shea  butter  has  been  on  the  rise  because  of 
increased  demand  in  the  European  Union,  Japan,  India,  Canada  and  the  United  States. 
International buyers are increasingly becoming stringent with the quality and traceability 
of  the  nuts  and  butter.  Processing  is  predominantly  done  manually  through  traditional 
methods  but  also  mechanically  using  semi/fully  mechanized  industrial  systems.  Manual 
production, done mainly by women, is usually organized through groups and cooperatives. 
Manual extractive processes are labor intensive and inefficient as far as the usage of water, 
energy and time is concerned. 
2 SNV, 2011 
10 
The  Middle  Belt  falls  within  the  transition  ecological  zone  with  rainfall  of  up  to 
1300mm/annum  and  the  deciduous  forest  ecological  zone  with  rainfall  up  to 
1500mm/annum. In the Middle Belt smallholders grow mainly cassava, plantain, maize, 
and yam, soya and rice cultivation in valley bottoms is prevalent in the Eastern region and 
the erstwhile Volta region (now divided as the northern Oti region and the southern Volta 
region). However, the productivity for these crops is often less than 50% of potential due 
to  outdated  technologies,  mechanization  shortage  and  limited  extension  outreach.  The 
cashew value chain has also emerged as an important source of smallholders’ livelihood in 
the  Middle  Belt,  mainly  in  the  erstwhile  Brong-Ahafo  and  Ashanti  regions.  The  Eastern 
region  and  the  erstwhile  Volta  region  include  parts  with  forest  savannah  and  coastal 
savannah climatic conditions which support cashew production – the majority of cashew is 
produced in this region. Cashew generates income for about 350,000 smallholder farmers. 
The planted acreage of cashew trees in Ghana is around 325,000 Ha. The total Raw Cashew 
Nut  (RCN)  production  (2018)  across  Ghana  is  estimated  to  be  115,000  metric tons 
comprising approximately 3.1% of the global production. The main cashew growing areas 
are the erstwhile Brong Ahafo region producing more than 40,000 metric tons of RCN, the 
erstwhile  Northern  region  producing  more  than  10,000  metric  tons  and  the  Ashanti 
Region3. The main destinations of RCN exports are India and Vietnam while kernels are 
exported mainly to the European Union, USA, Brazil and Canada. Around 88% of cashew 
farms  are  owned  by  smallholders  with  farm  sizes  ranging  from  0.8  to  3.0  ha4.  Cashew 
trees start fruiting in the seventh year which continues for 15 to 20 years. The average 
production is around 400 kg/ha compared to the potential yield of more than 1 tonne/ha. 
Production is affected by factors such as difficulty in accessing good planting materials and 
improved farm inputs, inadequate extension services, pest infestations, incidences of bush 
fire, loss of soil nutrients and inadequate soil moisture due to erosion and lack of suitable 
conservation  measures  and  the  reduced  fruiting  due  to  impact  of  harmful  agricultural 
chemicals on pollinators. The cashew producers are also affected by the lack of access to 
credit, weak farmers’ organizations and lack of effective marketing mechanisms. Cashews 
can grow on even marginal lands and can stabilize the soil in which it grows; they help to 
alleviate  the  pressure  on  local  vegetation  and  increase  soil  fertility  thus  mitigating  the 
effects of drought and desertification. In addition, the use of cashew shells to fire boilers 
and  ovens  during  processing  reduces  the  need  for  cutting  down  trees for  fuelwood,  and 
hence  reduces  the  pressure  on  surrounding  forests.  Cashew  trees,  as  any  other  trees, 
serve as carbon sinks. 
Vegetables such as tomato, pepper, okra, garden eggs, and cabbage are grown usually as 
backyard production for subsistence and supplementary income in both the Northern and 
the  Middle  Belts.  Most  vegetables  are  produced  under  rain-fed  conditions  which  makes 
their  availability  highly  seasonal,  with  the  peak  season  occurring  between  June  and 
September.  However,  productivity  is  usually  less  than  50%  of  attainable  yields  due  to 
traditional cultivation practices, the lack of irrigation systems and limited use of improved 
inputs. Nevertheless, in the rainy season there is usually a glut in the supply of vegetables 
and  farmers  experience  high  post-harvest  losses  due  to  lack  of  processing  and  storage 
facilities. 
In comparison to the rainy season, there is a significant drop in production volume during 
the dry season. During this period, the supply of vegetables in the rural areas is affected 
by poor transportation and cold storage infrastructure, the lack of adequate refrigeration 
facilities in local markets, and the limited supply of processed and preserved vegetables. 
The limited supply of vegetable leads to increased prices with those vegetables that are 
perceived  to  be  local  (kontomire,  okra,  roselle,  garden  eggs)  being  more  affordable, 
3 Nitidae, 2018Africa 
4  Cashew Initiative, 2010 
11 
compared  to  vegetables  that  are  perceived  as  foreign  or  exotic  (lettuce,  cabbage, 
cucumber, cauliflower, beetroot)5. 
Biodiversity: Ghana is relatively rich in biodiversity with 3,600 plants species, 221 species 
of  amphibians  and  reptiles,  748  species  of  birds,  225  mammalian  species,392  marine 
species of organisms and a high endemism of butterfly species (GoG, 2016). The country’s 
biodiversity is under threat from several human-induced pressures, including habitat loss 
and degradation resulting from farming, urbanisation and extractive industries as  well  as 
over-exploitation.  Other  threats  include  climate  change,  invasive  species  and  pollution, 
particularly with regard to aquatic habitats. There are indications that the populations of 
almost all animal species, including invertebrates such as snails, are on the decline and that 
rodents are now dominating the species exploited as bushmeat. 
Water. Almost half of the water used in Ghana originates from three international rivers 
(Volta, Bia and Tano), which flow in from outside its borders, putting the country at risk of 
water insecurity if political tensions arise over declining water availability. Tension exists 
between Ghana and Burkina Faso as a result of Burkina Faso’s decision to withdraw water 
from the Volta Basin, reducing water levels required for hydropower generation in Ghana 
(USAID, 2018b). A recent study projected flows in the Volta Basin could fall by 24  % by 
2050 and 45 % by 2100 due to reduced rainfall and increased evaporation. About 25 % of 
the population does not have access to clean water. Declining rainfall levels, drought and 
rising temperatures are straining available water resources amidst increased demand from 
high rates of urbanization and industrialization (University of Ghana, 2014). 
Fisheries. Seafood is an important part of the Ghanaian diet and economy, making up 
40–60 % of protein intake and contributing 4.5 % to national GDP (World Bank,  2017). 
The sector primarily comprises marine fisheries with some inland, freshwater fisheries in 
Lake Volta, Lake Botsumtwi and other  reservoirs. Rising sea  surface temperatures alter 
migratory  patterns  and  reproductive  cycles  of  key  species  such  as  anchovies,  sardines, 
tilapia and catfish. The decline in fisheries sector productivity from climate variability and 
overfishing forces Ghana to spend over $200 million per year on seafood imports to satisfy 
domestic demand (FAO, 2016). 
Climate change 
ND-GAIN  index,  an  index  measuring  a  country's  vulnerability  to  climate  change  in 
combination  with  its  readiness  to  improve  resilience,  lists  Ghana  as  the  68th  most 
vulnerable  and  the  81th  least  prepared  country  (ND-GAIN,  2019).  This  implies  that  the 
country has both a great need for investment and innovation to improve readiness and a 
great urgency for action. 
Increasing temperature. The increase in Ghana’s mean annual temperature since the 
1960s was an average annual temperature of approximately 1°C (an average increase of 
0.21°C  per  decade)  while  the  average  number  of  “hot”  nights  per  year  (73)  increased, 
with the rate of increase most pronounced from September to November. Climate changes 
projections  forecast,  and  increase  shows  an  increase  in  average  annual  temperatures 
between 1.4–5.8°C by 2080 and an increase in the frequency of hot days and nights of 
18–59 % by 2060, with the highest percentage between the months of July and September 
(GoG, 2015a). The increase is expected to be most severe in the north of the country. 
5 
HortiFresh, Research report on fruit and vegetable consumption, 2019 
12 
Maps of observed and project average temperatures 1980-2010 
(upper left), 2011-2040 (upper right), 2041-20160 (lower left) and 
2061-2080 (lower right) (GoG, 2015a) 
Rainfall  patterns.  Although  inter-annual  and  inter-decadal  rainfall  levels  were  highly 
variable, overall rainfall saw a well-defined cumulative reduction of 2.4 % per decade since 
1980. Based on the historical rainfall patterns (1980-2010), rainfall across the country has 
been projected to decrease by 2.9% in the near future (2040). This will be followed by a 
slight increase in the mid future (2060) by 1.1% and later decrease in the far future (2080) 
by 1.7% (GoG, 2015b). More erratic and intense rainfall will occur during the wet season 
while there will be lower precipitation levels during the dry season. As for temperatures, 
changes in rainfall are more intense towards the north than the south rainfall. 
13 
The uncertainty associated with rainfall increases farmers’ uncertainty as to when fields 
should be prepared and seeds should be sewn. 
Maps of observed and project average rainfall 1980-2010 (upper 
left), 2011-2040 (upper right), 2041-20160 (lower left) and 
2061-2080 (lower right) (GoG, 2015a) 
Increasing sea level and temperatures. Sea level has raised of 63 mm over the past 
30 years. Rise in sea surface temperatures is expected to be approximately 2–4°C and sea 
level rise of 75–190 mm by 2100 resulting in an average coastal erosion and shoreline loss 
of 0.38 m per year. Ghana’s coastal regions, including its largest city, Accra, are expected 
to face a sea level rise of 13-45 cm in 100 years and are especially vulnerable to flooding 
and waterborne disease (GoG, 2015a). 
Extreme events. These changes in rainfall and temperature will increase the frequency 
and intensity of extreme events. Ghana is most exposed to risks from floods and droughts, 
particularly  in  the  Northern  Savannah  belt.  The  duration  of  long-lasting  heat  waves  is 
expected to increase by 22 days by 2100, potentially causing more severe droughts. At 
14 
the same time, intensity  of heavy rains is expected to increase  (+4% by 2100) and the 
proportion of total annual rainfall that falls in such heavy rain events will also increase. 
This combination may intensify seasonal and inter-annual variation – with drought in one 
year and floods in the next, or even droughts and floods within the same season. Exposure 
to other risks related to coastal hazards, including storm surges and coastal erosion will 
also increase (GoG, 2015a). 
Land degradation 
Land cover change to agriculture. The most obvious land cover change in Ghana is the 
major  increase  in  agricultural  land  in  all  regions  of  the  country.  However,  the  largest 
increases can be seen in the northeast, east-central, and southwestern regions of Ghana. 
This rate of agricultural expansion is unprecedented in the country’s history, overrunning 
many of the other land cover types, including Ghana’s savannas, woodlands, and forests. 
Deforestation. Agriculture expansion has been one of the main drivers of deforestation, 
which is still a major challenge in Ghana. Having lost over 60% of its forest cover from 
1950 to the turn of the last century (2.7 million hectares), Ghana’s deforestation rate has 
been approximately 3% per year (320,803 ha/year) since 2000. Recent years have also 
seen  a  marked  increase  in  the  deforestation  rate.  From  2013  to  2015,  the  annual 
deforestation rate in Ghana rose to 794,214 ha per annum (GoG, 2017). Wood harvesting, 
population and development pressure as well as mineral exploitation and mining have also 
contributed to deforestation. Differences, however, exist between the high and forest zone 
and savanna areas. Fires and livestock have more important roles in the savanna grassland 
vegetation. The recognition of the savanna and transition as the main source of fuel wood 
and charcoal also makes charcoal production an important driver. 
Crop  land  degradation.  Crop  lands  are  also  subject  to  different  forms  of  land 
degradation, including soil erosion, soil fertility and productivity decline and reduced soil 
organic carbon stocks, soil physical deterioration, including soil structure, compaction and 
surface  sealing.  This  is  due  to  the  removal  of  natural  vegetation;  improper  soil 
management  practices;  poor  management  of  annual,  perennial  and  tree  crops; 
overgrazing;  depletion  of  soil  nutrients  without  replenishment;  slash-  and-burn 
agriculture; low input of mineral fertilizers and organic amendments (compost, manure, 
crop residues). These practices are closely resulting from poverty; lack of access to farm 
inputs  (including  access  to  credit)  and  infrastructure;  limited  education,  access  to 
knowledge  and  extension  services;  and  insecure  land  tenure,  and  increasing  population 
pressure (GoG, 2018). 
Impacts of land degradation and climate change 
Agriculture. Most agricultural production in Ghana relies on small, rain-fed plots that are 
highly  vulnerable  to  the  impacts  of  climate  change  and  land  degradation.  Improper  soil 
management  practices  combined  with  erratic  precipitation  patterns  have  severe 
consequences  on  production,  as  only  2  %  of  the  country’s  irrigation  potential  has  been 
tapped. Rising temperatures are projected to lower yields in major staple crops (cassava, 
yams,  plantains,  maize  and  rice).  Cassava  yields,  for  example,  are  projected to  fall  by 
29.6 % by 2080 and maize yields by 7 % by 2050 (USAID, 2018b). Total crop failure is 
expected to occur approximately once every five years in Ghana’s northern region due to 
delayed or diminished rains. Cocoa, a major cash crop and Ghana’s second leading foreign 
exchange earner, is sensitive to rising temperatures and drought. Areas suitable for cocoa 
production, which lie primarily along the coast, are contracting as temperatures rise, floods 
increase, and soil salinization and coastal erosion continue (USAID, 2018b). 
Even without climate change, agriculture in Ghana faces serious challenges such as low 
productivity due to low input usage (including fertilizers), water supply variability and high 
transactions costs. There are also market imperfections in the input markets and services 
including land, labour, credit and extension. The market failure in the agricultural sector 
therefore increases the vulnerability of resource-poor farmers and complicates the effects 
15 
of  climate-induced  shocks,  which  in  turn  makes  it  more  difficult  for  them  to  cope  with 
climate change (UNDP, 2014). 
Food security. The agricultural sector’s vulnerability to climate change effects threatens 
the food security and livelihoods of the majority who depend on the sector. According to 
a report by the World Bank, climate change is expected to adversely affect the stability of 
Ghana’s agricultural sector with the country’s millions of smallholder farmers. The report 
also highlights that climate change is projected to accentuate the rise in food prices in the 
future. While the price of rice is projected to increase 60% by 2015 without climate change, 
it could go up by as much as 121% once climate change is taken into account. Similarly, 
while the price of maize is projected to increase 60 % without climate change, with climate 
change this increase could be 153% (World Bank, 2015). 
Smallholder  and  women’s  vulnerability.  Climate  change  vulnerability  in  Ghana  is 
greatest for those who are strongly dependent on natural resources and have the lowest 
capacity to cope with these changes. As a result, the impacts of climatic events are more 
profound, and the recovery time is prolonged. This vulnerability is exacerbated by the poor 
market conditions for smallholder farming in Ghana. With their current assets, capacities, 
and connections to markets, smallholders are not equipped to deliver a regular supply of 
adequate volumes of quality produce required for sustainable market access. Smallholder 
farmers  (especially  female-headed  farming  households)  in  Ghana  are  particularly 
vulnerable  to  the  impacts  of  climate  change  and  variability  due  to  the  compounding 
impacts  on  yield  from  poor  lateritic  soils,  limited  irrigation,  and  limited  transport  to 
markets.  In  Ghana, women constitute 52% of  the agricultural labour force and produce 
70% of subsistence crops (NDESA, 2017). In addition, they depend on water and crops 
due to their responsibilities in the household. They are hampered in their adaptive capacity 
to climate change due to various factors, including inaccessibility of financial resources, a 
lack of information and technology, and unfavourable land tenure systems. 
Fisheries. Seafood is an important part of the Ghanaian diet and economy, making up 
40–60 % of protein intake and contributing 4.5 % to national GDP. The sector primarily 
comprises  marine  fisheries  with  some  inland,  freshwater  fisheries  in  Lake  Volta,  Lake 
Botsumtwi  and  other  reservoirs  (USAID,  2018b).  Rising  sea  surface  temperatures  alter 
migratory  patterns  and  reproductive  cycles  of  key  species  such  as  anchovies,  sardines, 
tilapia and catfish. The decline in fisheries sector productivity from climate variability and 
overfishing will not only affect fishermen and fish-mongers but all Ghanaian’s food security. 
Institutions and legal framework 
Institutions 
National development. In order to implement the 2030 Agenda and commitments under 
Ghana  Agenda  2063  consistently  and  sustainably,  Ghana  is  using  the  decentralised 
planning system as set out in the National Development Planning (Systems) Act, 1994 (Act 
480). This system assigns planning functions to ministries at national level, and to local 
authorities, namely Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies at sub-national level. 
Coordination  is  vested  in  the  National  Development  Planning  Commission  at  the  apex, 
supported by 16 Regional Coordinating Councils. The Ministry of Planning provides policy 
coordination  and  monitoring  support.  Collaboration  and  consultation  are  encouraged 
between  government  agencies  and  stakeholders  through  the  decentralised  planning 
approach.  Stakeholders  include  the  private  sector,  civil  society,  traditional  authorities, 
persons living with disability, development partners, academic and research institutions, 
and other interest groups. 
Nutrition. The food security agenda is led by the Ministry of Food and Agriculture while 
the nutrition policies are under the responsibility of the Ministry of Health, in coordination 
with  the  Ghana  Health  Agency,  an  executive  agency  responsible  for  implementation  of 
national  policies.  Ghana’s  Cross-Sectoral  Planning  Group  (CSPG),  a  multi-stakeholder 
16 
platform under the National Development Planning Commission, is working to introduce a 
nutrition baseline and identify trends in nutrition financing. The CSPG played an active role 
in the development of the 2013 National Nutrition Policy. 
Social protection and gender. Social protection and gender are under the responsibility 
of  Ministry  of  Gender,  Children  and  Social  Protection.  The  Ministry  is  mandated  to 
coordinate and ensure gender equality and equity, promote the survival, social protection 
and  development  of  children,  vulnerable  and  excluded  and  persons  with  disability  and 
integrate  fulfillment  of  their  rights,  empowerment  and  full  participation  into  National 
development.  The  Ministry  is  supported  by  gender  desks  in  other  sector  ministries, 
departments  and  agencies  to  mainstream  gender  issues  in  their  sector  plans  and 
programmes. 
Youth.  The  youth  development  agenda  is  under  the  leadership  of  the  National  Youth 
Authority,  a  statutory  body  created  to  co-ordinate  and  facilitate  youth  development 
activities  in  the  country.  A  Youth  Employment  Agency  was  established  under  the  Youth 
Employment Act 2015 (Act 887) to empower young people to contribute meaningfully to 
the socio-economic and sustainable development of the nation. Its objective is to support 
the  youth  between  the  ages  of  15  to  35  years  through  skills  training  and  internship 
modules to transit from a situation of unemployment to that of employment. 
Environment management and climate change. The Ministry of Environment, Science, 
Technology and Innovation is the sector ministry with responsibility to formulate, develop, 
implement, monitor and evaluate environmental policies in Ghana, including the National 
Climate  Change  Policy.  Under  the  Ministry,  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency acts  as 
the  National  Focal  Point  for  Climate  Change  and  is  responsible  for  all  National 
Communication to the UNFCCC. The management of natural resources is also shared with 
the Ministry of Lands, Forestry and Mines, the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, the Ministry 
of Local Government and Rural Development and the Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Development.  Regional  and  district-level  decentralized  departments  are  responsible  for 
implementation and have a dual reporting mandate to district and regional councils, and 
the  Ministries  of  Food  and  Agriculture.  Local  and  international  non-governmental 
organizations as well as research institutions play a critical role in the implementation of 
various environmental management projects. 
International agencies. Currently there are 26 agencies of the United Nations providing 
the country with technical assistance for sustainable economic, social, environmental and 
institutional development. The agencies work with government, civil society organizations, 
and  the  private  sector  to  address  critical  development  challenges  through  capacity 
development,  strengthening  of  accountability  systems  and  the  delivery  of  quality  social 
services, with a focus on the most deprived and vulnerable populations (GoG, 2019). There 
are  several  multilateral  (African  Development  Bank,  World  Bank)  and  bilateral  agencies 
(USAID, DFID, GIZ, SNV) operating in the nutrition, social protection, youth and climate 
and  environmental  management  at  various  levels  in  Ghana.  They  provide  financial  and 
technical  support  to  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders  to  contribute  towards  improving  the 
welfare and well-being of Ghanaians. 
Traditional  authorities.  Chieftaincy  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  highly  revered 
institutions  in  Ghana.  Traditional  leaders  serve  as  agents  of  development  due  to  their 
ability to mobilize people and resources for development projects such as health facilities, 
police stations, and schools. Since the adoption of the SDGs,  several traditional leaders 
have  initiated  programmes  and  projects  in  support  of  government  efforts  to  attain  the 
SDGs (GoG, 2019). The National House of Chiefs is a body of elected representatives from 
Ghana’s Regional Houses of Chiefs that is recognized by the Constitution. It is charged to 
advice on issues related to culture and chieftaincy, and works towards the codification of 
customary law. 
17 
Policy, legal and regulatory frameworks 
National  Development  Planning.  The  National  Development  Plan  Commission  has 
developed a 40-year development plan (the 2057 vision, to mark the 100th anniversary 
of  Ghana’s  independence).  The  long-term  plan  features  five  main  goals,  as  follows:  i. 
Create an equitable, healthy and disciplined society; ii. Build an industrialized, inclusive 
and resilient economy; iii. Build safe, well-planned and sustainable communities; iv. Build 
effective, efficient and dynamic institutions; v. Strengthen a Ghana’s role in international 
affairs. The “Coordinated Programme of Economic and Social Development Policies – The 
Agenda for Jobs: Creating Prosperity and Equal Opportunity for All, 2017-2024” serves as 
the basis for the preparation of the medium-term national development policy framework, 
which contained strategies consistent with the SDGs targets. 
Food  security  and  nutrition.  The  National  Nutrition  Policy  was  adopted  in  2013  and 
seeks  to:  (a)  reposition  nutrition  as  a  crosscutting  issue,  (b)  facilitate  integration  and 
mainstreaming of nutrition into all national development efforts, (c) provide a framework 
for  nutrition-specific  and  nutrition-sensitive  services  and  interventions,  (d)  guide  the 
implementation of high-impact interventions, and (e) strengthen sectoral capacity for the 
effective  delivery  of  these  interventions  (UNDP,  2016).  The  policies  translate  into 
government’s   flagship   initiatives,   such    as    Planting    for    Food    and    Jobs (PFJ) 
and  Infrastructure  for  Poverty  Eradication  Program  (IPEP),  seeking  to  contribute  to  the 
modernization  of  the  agricultural  sector,  the  structural  transformation  of  the  national 
economy  through  food  security,  employment  opportunities,  reduced  poverty  and 
infrastructure investment in agriculture sector assets (e.g., warehouses and small dams). 
Social protection. A number of programmes have been implemented in the last few years 
under  the  National  Social  Protection  Strategy,  including  the  National  Health  Insurance 
System, the school feeding programme, and the Livelihood Empowerment against Poverty 
cash  transfer  programme.  However,  there  are  still  gaps  in  the  overall  social  protection 
system  along  the  life-long  cycle  and  challenges  in  ensuring  that  all  in  need  can  access 
these  services,  including  IDPs  and  refugees  (UNDP,  2016).  Other  outstanding  issues 
include birth registration, early child (girl) marriages, domestic violence, violence against 
children, gender-based violence (UNDP, 2016). 
Youth. Measures to protect the well-being and welfare of Ghanaian children include the 
Children’s  Act,  1998  (Act  560);  Child  and  Family  Welfare  Policy  (2014),  and  the  Child 
Protection  Policy  (2013).  The  National  Youth  Policy  (2010)  and  its  Implementation  Plan 
prioritised  human  development  and  technology;  economic  empowerment;  youth 
participation,  governance  and  leadership;  culture,  sports  and  national  orientation.  The 
Child and Family Welfare Policy (2013) seeks to prevent and protect children from all forms 
of violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation; effectively coordinate. The objective for youth 
development under the medium term national development policy framework (2018-2021) 
is to create opportunities for effective and positive youth participation in national socio- 
economic development and political governance (GoG, 2019). The “Planting for Food and 
Jobs” initiative also aims at providing job opportunities for unemployed youth in agriculture 
and related sectors. 
Gender.  Ghana  has  enacted  legislation  to  prevent  all  forms  of  domestic  violence  and 
abuse, ensure access to justice and provide the necessary institutional support to affected 
women  and  men.  The  Domestic  Violence  Act  2007  (Act  732)  provides  comprehensive 
framework for the prevention of and protection against domestic violence and criminalizes 
various  forms  of  physical  and  sexual  violence,  economic  and  psychological  abuse  and 
intimidation. The act was translated into the 2009-2019 National Plan and Policy Action 
led  by  the  Domestic  Violence  Secretariat  at  the  Ministry  of  Gender,  Children  and  Social 
Protection.  Ghana  has  also  adopted 
international  gender 
conventions/treaties  in  its  legal  framework,  including  the  CEDAW.  In  May  2015,  the 
government  of  Ghana  published  a  National  Gender  Policy,  the  purpose  of  which  is  to 
mainstream gender equality in development processes through targeted interventions and 
improvements to the legal, social, political, cultural and economic conditions of Ghanaians, 
several  of 
the 
18 
particularly  women,  girls  and  children.  There  are  five  main  policy  commitments:  (1)  to 
improve women’s rights and access to justice (2) to improve women’s empowerment and 
livelihoods (3) targeted improvement to accountable governance structures and women’s 
leadership and participation (4) improve women’s economic justice and interrogate; and 
(5)  improve  gender  roles  and  relations.  The  Ministry  of  Gender,  Children  and  Social 
Protection is tasked with operationalizing the policy through a Strategic Implementation 
Plan  and  the  plan  makes  clear  the  protocols  and  guidelines  to  be  followed  by  relevant 
Ministries.  To  address  the  underlying  structural  barriers  to  women  and  girls’  economic 
empowerment,  government  is  taking  steps  to  pass  into  law  the  Affirmative  Action  Bill 
(GoG, 2019). 
Environment. The Ghana National Environmental Policy was launched in November 2012 
with  the  vision  to  manage  the  environment  in  a  sustainable  way  to  benefit  Ghanaian 
society. The objective of this policy is to promote healthy lifestyles and reduce risk factors 
that  arise  from  environmental,  economic,  social,  and  behavioural  causes  thereby 
promoting  healthy  lifestyles  in  a  healthy  environment.  The  policy  notes  that  proper 
management  of  Ghana's  resources  requires  that  efforts  should  be  redirected  into  more 
environmentally sustainable programs and practices. 
Climate  Change.  Ghana  has  formulated  a  Climate  Change  Mitigation  and  Adaptation 
Strategy and a National Climate Change Policy, in which it is also acknowledge the strategic 
priority of enhancing the country’s resilience to natural disasters. The primary challenge is 
that  the  country  relies  heavily  on  donor  support  in  direct  financing  of  climate  change 
mitigation  and  adaptation.  Of  the  over  $30  billion  pledged  for  climate  change-related 
actions globally, Ghana has successfully secured about $21.3 million from only four of the 
more  than  twenty-five  international  public  funding initiatives  since  2008  (UNDP,  2016). 
Ghana  submitted  its  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  in  2015  with  a  target  of  15% 
unconditional  emission  reduction  and  a  45%  conditional  emission  reduction  against 
Business as Usual by 2030. AFOLU figures strongly as part of the mitigation actions through 
the promotion of sustainable forest use through REDD+ is one of the five sectors identified 
for emission reduction. The adaptation policy actions focus on agriculture and food security 
through  climate-smart  landscapes,  sustainable  forest  resource  management, managing 
climate-induced  health  risks,  integrated  water  resource  management  and  building 
resilience for gender and vulnerable people (GoG, 2015b). 
Sustainable  Development  Goals.  In  June  2018,  the  Government  of  Ghana  and  the 
United Nations in Ghana jointly signed the UN Sustainable Development Partnership 2018- 
2022  (UNSDP),  a  five-year  strategic  framework  that  sets  out  the  collective  vision  and 
response of the UN system to national development priorities. Ghana submitted its report 
on progress towards achieving the SDGs in May 2019. In general, 67 of the 101 indicators 
Ghana is currently monitoring showed improvements since 2013, while about 20 worsened 
(GoG, 2019). 
Project Specific Considerations 
three  complementary 
types  of  climate-resilient 
1.  Supporting  Infrastructure  elements  under  PROSPER.  In  general,  PROSPER  will 
support 
infrastructures  under 
subcomponent  1.2,  namely off-farm/watershed  works  and  hazard  mitigation 
measures; feeder  roads  and  farm  tracks;  and communal  social  infrastructure.  These 
investments aim to improve the sustainability of NR-related livelihoods and to stimulate 
socioeconomic  advancements  in  the  participating  clusters.  The  NR  remediation 
infrastructures  may  comprise  soil  and  water  conservation  structures,  such  as  contour 
bunds, reforestation and shelterbelts, bench terraces, tied ridges, water harvesting and 
storage  ponds,  as  well  as  climate  resilience  measures  in  line  with  local  conditions.  The 
District Assembly will undertake all procedures as appropriate to acquire/lease any land 
needed for construction. PROSPER envisages expanding and rehabilitating road networks 
(feeder  roads  and  farm  tracks,  culverts  and  small  bridges),  as  well  as  shared  domestic 
water  supply  structures  (boreholes  with  hand  or  solar  pumps),  sanitation  facilities  and 
waste management systems, and alternative/green energy schemes (including resource 
19 
and energy recovery from waste). 
2.  Each  capital 
investment  plan  will 
include  appropriate  management,  operation, 
maintenance and ongoing financing arrangements, with overall responsibility resting with 
the  community  where  relevant.  In  each  case,  agreement  will  be  reached  between  the 
District  Assembly  and  the  community  leadership  on  the  post-construction  asset 
management  by  various  community  gender-balanced  committees,  building  on  previous 
local  norms  and  the  organizational  training  delivered  under  Subcomponent  1.1.  The 
off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation infrastructure and the Feeder roads/Farm 
tracks will be funded 100% by the project. For water supply, the current national practice 
is for communities to make a cash contribution equivalent to one-year facility maintenance 
costs that shall be deposited in a bank account to demonstrate commitment towards long-
term sustainability of the installation. For household toilet systems, the project will pay 
for the core element of the facility, such as the concrete slab or digni-loo unit, while the 
beneficiaries excavate the pit and build the superstructure with their own resources. 
3.  Off-farm/watershed  works  and  hazard  mitigation  infrastructure  will  be  community-
managed.  The  infrastructure  for  NR  remediation  and  environmental  protection  will  be 
maintained  by  a  Natural  Resources  and  Environmental  Management  Committee  to  be 
established under the project at the community level. Feeder roads and farm tracks will 
be maintained by the Department of Feeder Roads, who will be involved in implementation 
to  enable  them  to  take  over  post-construction  maintenance.  Water  harvesting,  water 
supply and waste systems will be managed by a Water and Sanitation Management Team 
(WSMT),  a  statutorily  recognized  body  operating  under  the  auspices  of  the  District 
Assembly Works Department. Water will be sold at the tap and revenue raised used to 
maintain  the  supply  systems.  Sanitation  and  waste  management  systems  will  be 
maintained  by  the  concerned  households.  Environmental  sanitation  and  waste  disposal 
and  recovery  systems  will  be  coordinated  by  the  WSMT  and  supervised  by  the  District 
Assembly  Works  Department.  An  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework 
(ESMF), which is prepared as part of the PROSPER design, will identify potential impacts 
of the infrastructure  elements under the  subcomponent and will integrate measures for 
addressing them. 
 Expansion into natural area. The project will support investments in both the Rice and 
Maize  value  chains.  It  is  important  to  note  that  since  2008,  farmers  have  more  than 
doubled the acreages of maize and rice in order to meet household consumption demand. 
On  the  other  hand,  Ghana  suffers  from  one  of  the  highest  rates  of  deforestation  in  the 
world, and reports estimate that the average annual rate of forest cover lost between 1990 
and 2010 was 1.96%. In addition, the rate between 2005 and 2010 was 2.24% and there 
are  identified  areas  of  high  biodiversity  outside  of  protected  areas.  Rice  production  in 
Ghana overlaps with two WWF Global 200 terrestrial priority ecoregions, one Conservation 
International  hotspot,  five  Ramsar  sites  and  35  Important  Bird  Areas.  Rice  is  grown  in 
some of the most vulnerable regions to climate change in Ghana. Specifically, the northern 
savannahs  experience  severe  soil  degradation  and  high  vulnerability  to  desertification, 
severely impacted by rice production. 
Use of Agrochemicals. There is documented evidence of highly toxic chemical pesticides 
and  insecticides  being  used  for  rice  production  in  Ghana.  Misuse  and  overuse  of  these 
agrochemicals  has  led  to  water  pollution  and  environmental  contamination,  making  the 
risk to biodiversity higher. 
Environmental and social category 
Based on the IFAD guideline, the environmental and social category for this project is B. 
The following actions will be undertaken by the project to maintain this category; (i) would 
not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss natural habitat and biodiversity, project 
intervention will be confined in existing cultivated lands; (ii) project activities will not be 
located in areas at high risk of geophysical hazards, thus the risk to agriculture, livestock 
and small-scale infrastructure are considered to be minimal; (iii) the project design will be 
directed  at  environmentally  sound  and  sustainable  agriculture  and  livestock: (a) priority 
20 
will be given to multiple  water use system for the water use  efficiency and  strong  water 
management; (b) use of fertilizers will be under the guidance and supervision of the related 
experts, smallholders will be encouraged to use the bio-fertilizer and  vermicomposting as 
far  as  possible;  (c)  ensure  adequate  mitigation  measures  are  in  place  to  minimize 
expansion of cultivations into natural/critical habitats, and that no deforestation will incur. 
(d) use of pesticide will be strictly monitored and will be under the support and guidance of 
related technicians, project will adopt integrated pest management; (e) project will work 
to minimize the  waste from  agriculture  or  livestock  and as  far  as  possible  these  will  be 
recycled; (f) alternative renewable technology will be used from the production to marketing 
level; (g) project supported infrastructure are small scale and are not envisioned to cause 
significant adverse impacts however all necessary measures will be taken to address any 
such impacts including construction related ones; 
(h)  carrying  capacity  assessments  will  be  conducted  before  and  during  the  project 
intervention to ensure that project intervention has well respected the carrying capacity 
and  does  not  further  deteriorate  the  environment;  (i)  project  will  actively  engage  and 
benefit the vulnerable and socially marginalized communities in project’s every activities 
hence the social risk are minimal. Women, youth, socially disadvantaged groups, disable 
people will be mainstreamed in value chains. 
Climate risk category 
Within Ghana, climate change is expected to have more significant effects on the Northern, 
Upper  West and Upper  East Regions (hereafter “northern  regions”)  of  Ghana, which fall 
within  the  Guinea  and  Sudan  Savanna  Zones.  Agricultural  production  in  the  area 
isdominated by rain-fed agriculture with low levels of irrigation development, confined to 
a single growing season. There is an increased reliance on chemical fertilisers, although 
these are rarely applied in appropriate quantities. Considering that the programme will be 
implemented  in  some  of  these  regions,  the  climate  risk  classification is  high.  A  detailed 
Environmental  and  Social  management  Framework  (ESMF)  is  attached  as  Annex  to  this 
SECAP  review  note.    It  provides  a  framework  for  the  development  of  site-specific 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plans  (ESMPs)  and  Environmental  and  Social 
Impact Assessments (ESIAs) as relevant.    
Recommendations for project design and implementation 
The  geographic  area  of  intervention  extends  to  eight  regions  in  the  North  of  and  three 
neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, Bono and Oti). PROSPER will actively 
collaborate with the newly approved AAFORD project in relation to financial services linkage 
development  and  access to  affordable  loans.  The  Project  has  3  components  including 
Component  1 Development  of  rural  institutions  and  socioeconomic  infrastructure, 
Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators 
around  selected  agricultural  value  chains  and  Component  3:  Project  management  and 
policy engagement.  
Subcomponents  include;  Subcomponent  1.1:  Capacity  building  of  rural  institutions, 
enterprises  and  households,  Sup-component  1.2:  Development  of  socioeconomic 
infrastructure,  Subcomponent  2.1:  Sustainable  marketing  linkages  and  business 
development,  Subcomponent  2.2:  Access  to  rural  financial  services.  New  value  chain 
clusters  will  be  developed  both  in  economically  backward  areas,  poverty  pockets  in  the 
relatively better off economic regions, as well as in climate change vulnerable areas. 
It  will  provide  services  to  70,000  poor  rural  households  (420,000  individuals  with  an 
average  of  6  members  per  household).  The  project  will target  the  most  vulnerable,  the 
poorest, women (40%) and youth (30%) and 5% PWDs. The project will focus on (i) field 
crops;  namely  maize,  rice,  and  soy  bean  that  are  already  supported  by  other  IFAD 
projects; (ii) value chains such as shea,  cashew, poultry will be targeted for livelihoods 
diversification at the household level; and (iii) vegetables will be supported for nutritional 
purposes.  Selection  of  value  chains  to  be  selected  in  a  given  area will  differ  from  one 
ecological zone to the other but not all value chains will be targeted at the same region. 
Climate-smart  agriculture.  Ghanaian  agriculture  and  food  systems  are  climate 
21 
dependent        and recognized as one of the most vulnerable sectors to climate change while 
significant productivity growth in agriculture is also required. IFAD’s funded projects can 
help  to  use scientific  and  technological interventions  to  address  the  challenges  posed  by 
climate change at the operational (farmer) level through the development of: 
a.  Climate-cropping  resilient  systems.  Climate  change  is  increasing  the 
unpredictability of rainfall in Ghana. Limited access to irrigation, low rates 
of technological uptake, and the limited use of modern production methods 
exacerbate output volatility and contribute to food insecurity. These trends 
will only intensify the vulnerability of the agricultural sector unless measures 
are  taken  to  mitigate  these  risks,  including  investment  in  irrigation,  the 
development and introduction of drought-tolerant and shorter-duration crop 
varieties—especially  staple  grains  such  as  maize  and  rice—and  improved 
water management techniques on rain-fed farmland. 
b.  Supporting  water  conservation  and  irrigation  systems.  Given  the 
multiple uses of water (such as for agriculture, power generation, transport, 
industry,  domestic  purposes,  ecosystems,  fisheries  and  livelihoods), 
addressing the problems of adaptation to the challenges that climate change 
poses need to be addressed. Water resources will be at risk of depletion with 
increased  temperatures  and  decreased  rainfall,  in  particular  in  northern 
Ghana. A substantial proportion of Ghanaians directly depend on agriculture 
for  their  livelihoods,  it  is  particularly  important  that  IFAD’s  projects 
contribute  to  improved  water  resources  management  in  combination  with 
sustainable land management land management is cultivated. 
c.  Alternative  livelihoods  systems.  There  is  over-reliance  on  rain-fed 
agriculture  and  livestock  in  the  northern  region  of  Ghana  that  makes 
communities vulnerable to climate change, with limited capacity to capture, 
manage  and  conserve  water.  Because  of  erratic  rainfall  patterns,  there  is 
limited  ability  to  increase  productivity  and  low  capacity  for  livelihood 
diversification.  Financial  resources  and  capacity  enhancement  will  be 
required  to  provide  the  knowledge  and  alternative  means  of  livelihood 
activities and the ability for agricultural intensification. The diversification of 
livelihood options into sectors that are not dependent  on rainfall could be 
supported  by  IFAD’s  projects.  This  could  include  options  such  as  food 
processing, small ruminants and tree seedling nurseries. These adaptation 
solutions would have a particular focus on supporting livelihood options for 
women,  who  are  very  often  most  vulnerable  to  the  impacts  of  climate 
change. 
d.  Narrowing  yield  gaps  by  increasing  per-hectare  productivity.  Poor 
management practices, including incomplete crop recovery (i.e., harvesting 
all suitable crop) and inadequate agronomic management are some of the 
main  factors  contributing  to  yield  gaps.  IFAD’s  funded  projects  should 
continue with farmers’ organizations to advise farmers on what to grow, how 
to grow it and how to market the produce. In particular, training could focus 
on  the  use  of  improved  seeds,  herbicides  and  fertilizers,  improved  post-
harvest  storage  and  processing,  inter-cropping  systems  and  water 
management practices. 
e.  Private  sector  engagement  to  develop  new  value  chains.  To 
farmers’  organizations  and 
strengthen  economic  opportunities 
cooperatives,  IFAD’s  projects  will  engage  potentially  new  private  sector 
actors as input and service providers and off-takers. They are essential to 
stimulate  markets  that  incentivize  farmers  to  produce  more  at  a  better 
quality.  Eliminating  unnecessary  requirements,  burdensome  procedures, 
and  other  administrative  barriers  to  testing  and  registering  new  crop 
varieties and improved agricultural inputs would foster private investment 
in agricultural research and promote the commercialization of technological 
for 
22 
innovations.  In  addition,  clarifying  and  reinforcing  intellectual  property 
rights,  strengthening  quality  assurance  in  seed  markets,  and  rigorously 
enforcing  seed-labelling  rules  would  further  support  private  investment  in 
agricultural  technology  and  the  elaboration  of  the  input  value  chain. 
Measures will be taken to ensure that the youth and women are integrated 
and benefit from these new value chains. 
Further studies needed 
A detailed Environmental and Social management Framework (ESMF is attached as Annex 
to this SECAP review note.  It provides a framework for the development of site-specific 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plans  (ESMPs)  and  Environmental  and  Social 
Impact Assessments (ESIAs) as relevant.    
Monitoring and evaluation 
The project’s M&E should well capture gender and household poverty disaggregated data. 
All the project reports will reflect issues of gender, youth, marginalized and disadvantage 
communities, and indigenous communities. The final project reports systematically identify 
gender gaps and gender related project success. The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will 
lead  in  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  process  in  close  collaborations  with  other 
implementing partners and stakeholders. A monitoring committee comprised of the project 
team,  representatives  from  corresponding  government  authorities,  other  financial 
organizations will be formed at central, provinces, district, municipality and cluster level. 
These committees will ensure regular monitoring and report delivery to the project office. 
23 
Appendix 1: Gender roles 
Value chain 
Women's Role 
Men's role 
irrigation 
Ploughing, partially engage in 
plantation, weeding, cleaning, 
and 
Purchase: Seed, fertilizers 
Contact     with      technician 
Link 
with 
Processing 
Dominate on decision making 
process 
market 
  work 
Shed and poultry form cleaning 
Purchase of related materials 
Contact     with     technicians 
Link 
with 
Support on processing work 
Dominate on decision making 
process 
market 
Men tend to work more with the 
hard labor associated with 
cashew production and other 
agricultural activities. 
Large traders/exporters and their 
agents generally tend to be men. 
Crops: 
Maize,  soybean, 
rice,  vegetables 
Planting, weeding, cleaning, 
watering, 
harvesting 
Connection with local resource 
persons 
Access up to the local market 
Processing work 
Livestock: 
Poultry 
and 
small ruminants 
Trees: Shea 
Trees: Cashew 
Poultry     form     cleaning 
Sell  to  the  local  buyer 
Assist to run the local meat 
shop 
Connection with local resource 
person 
The shea resource is the 
domain of women because 
within the household they are 
traditionally responsible for 
gathering non-agricultural 
products (e.g., wild fruits) and 
also because processing the 
shea nuts into butter is 
considered women’s work. 
Very significantly and unlike 
most cash-crops, women 
control the revenues from the 
sale of shea butter, which they 
use to cover the cash needs of 
their households and families. 
Women comprise 70% of the 
labor force and many women 
participate in the selling of raw 
nuts at marketing centers. 
Women make juice and 
alcohol from cashew apples, 
and are also highly involved in 
the processing of apples and 
nuts at the household level. 
Women show significant 
interest working in existing 
cashew processing companies 
Consequently, processing jobs 
are a favored alternative way 
of earning income for women 
in rural communities 
24 
Appendix 2: Environment, Social and Climate Risk Screening 
Screening for eligibility 
Letter of Interest  (Eligibility Screening Form)  
Please complete  all the  required spaces   in this form 
1. Name: Surname 
Other Names:  
Maiden name (for married women):  
2. Sex: (a) Male {  } 
(b) Female {  } 
3. Date of birth:   
4.  Highest Education Level: (a) No formal education {  } 
Secondary 
(b) Primary School {  }  (c) 
School {  } (d) Vocational school (e) Tertiary Education {  } 
5.  Which community do you belong to:   
6. How long have you lived in this community: ----------------------------------------------- 
7.  How do you belong to this community: (a) by birth { } (b) by marriage { } (c) other 
(specify): -- 
8. Chiefdom 
- 
District   
25 
9. What enterprise are you interested in   
10.  Do you have any experience in this enterprise: (a) Yes { } (b) No { }. If yes, how 
many years: 
11.  Do you belong to any youth or women organization: (a) Yes { } (b) No { }. If yes, 
what is the name:   
12.  Do you belong to any cooperative society: (a) Yes { } (b) No { }. If yes, what is the 
name: ------- 
13.  Do you have access to any land for the enterprise: (a) Yes { } (b) No { } 
14. If yes to question 13, where is the land located------------------------------------------ 
; and what is the area size of the land?   
15. What kind of title to you have to the land: (a) Government paper { } (b) Inheritance 
from parent {} (c) husband or wife’s consent {  } (d) family allocation { } (e) community’s 
allocation { } (f) 
Others (specify):  
 Endorsements: 
Applicant: I certify that the information provided here is correct 
Name:    
26 
Signature:   
Date:   
Community/traditional leader: 
Name:    
Sign:   
Date:   
Verifications: 
Comments by the Local Government Liaison Office:------------------------------------ 
Name of Officer:   
Designation:   
Sign and date:   
Comments by the District Project Coordination Office:--------------------------------- 
Name of Officer: 
Designation: 
27 
Sign and date:   
28 
Appendix 3: Screening for Agric Enterprises 
A: Screening Form for Agri-Enterprise Projects 
General Information 
Project Name: 
Name of applicant: 
Name of Cooperative: 
Name of Group: 
Project Location: 
Project  sector  (e.g.  rice  farming,  cocoa 
seedling processing, etc.) 
Estimated Cost: 
Proposed Date of Commencement: 
Expected Project duration: 
Site (estimated area in ha): 
Any equity/contribution brought into the  
Any plan for new construction: 
29 
B: Screening for Environmental and Social Issues for Sub-projects 
Additional 
explanation of 
1. Will the sub-project develop any wetlands? 
2. Would the sub-project result in economic displacement6 
(loss of assets or access to resources) or physical 
resettlement? 
3. Would the sub-project result in conversion and/or loss 
of physical cultural resources? 
4.  Will  the  sub-project  have  significant  social  adverse 
impacts (affecting access to and/use rights to land, access 
to  potable  water  and  water  for  other  uses)  on  local 
communities or other project-affected parties? 
5. Will the project trigger unsustainable natural resource 
management practices (fisheries, forestry, livestock, and 
significant increase in use of agrochemicals) that exceed 
the carrying capacity? 
6. Does the sub-project include conversion  of significant 
areas (above 50 ha) of natural forests/other wild lands? 
7. Would the project potentially cause significant adverse 
impacts to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services 
(e.g. habitat loss, erosion/ other form of land degradation, 
fragmentation, hydrological changes)? 
8.  Does  the  proposed  project  target  area  include 
ecologically  sensitive  areas7  of  global  significance  for 
biodiversity  conservation  and/or  biodiversity-rich  area; 
habitats depended on by endangered species? 
9.  Does  the  project  involve  fisheries  development  in 
situations  where  little  information  exists  on  sustainable 
yield? 
10. Could the project pose  a risk of introducing invasive 
alien species? 
11. Does the project involve the transfer, handling or use 
of  genetically  modified  organisms/living  modified 
organisms that may have an adverse effect on threatened 
biodiversity? 
12. Is the project site close to any oil and gas installation 
such as flow stations, oil terminal, oil or gas pipeline 
right of way? 
13.Has oil spill/ or pipeline fire ever been recorded 
around project site? 
14.  Does  the  project  involve  land  use  changes 
(agricultural  intensification  and/or  expansion  of  the 
cropping  area)  and  resources  that  may  have  adverse 
impacts on habitats, ecosystems, and/or livelihoods? 
15.  Will  the  project  result  in  increased  use  of 
agrochemicals  which  may 
natural 
environment/human health? 
affect 
the 
30 
6 
Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, 
income sources or means of livelihoods (see SECAP Procedure Guidance Statement 
13) 
7Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, 
biosphere  reserves); 
areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended 
on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, 
including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas 
most vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible 
to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas that 
include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or 
other cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to 
poverty, disease, ethnicity and race 
31 
16.  Does  the  project  include  small-scale  irrigation  and 
drainage  projects,  and  water  impoundment  including 
small dams (except in wetlands)? 
17.  Does  the  project  involve  agricultural  intensification 
and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas? 
18.  Do  the  project  activities  include  rangeland  and 
livestock development? 
19.  Does  the  project  involve  artisanal  fisheries  where 
there is information on sustainable yield? 
20. Do the project activities include aquaculture and/or 
mariculture? 
21.  Do 
management or rehabilitation? 
the  project  activities 
include  watershed 
22.  Does  the  project  include  large-scale  soil  and  water 
conservation measures? 
23.  Does the  project  include  small  and  micro enterprise 
development sub-projects? 
24.  Does  the  project  involve  credit  operations  through 
including 
financial 
for 
pesticide/other  agrochemicals, 
livestock  purchasing, 
irrigation, etc.? 
service  providers, 
credit 
25.  Do  the  project  activities  include  natural  resources- 
based value chain development? 
26. Would any of the project activities have minor adverse 
impacts on physical cultural resources? 
27. Would the project have low probability to have 
physical resettlement or economic displacement? 
28. Does the project include development of agro- 
processing facilities? 
29.  Will  the  project  require  a  migrant  workforce  during 
construction? 
30.  Will  the  project  require  seasonal  workers  to  plant 
and/or harvest produce 
31. Will the construction or operation of the project cause 
an increase in traffic on rural roads? 
Guidance for sub-project categorization: 
Sub-project 
ESIA is required for subproject 
"Yes" response to 
any 
of questions 1-11 
"Yes” response to 
Environmental and 
Sub-project 
questions 12-29 
Environmental and 
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the 
general 
ESMF 
32 
"No" response to 
almost 
all questions 
Subproject 
No further analysis is required 
Environmental and 
33 
Appendix 4: Screening for Market Infrastructure 
A: General Information for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-Projects 
Name of market infrastructure: 
Infrastructure type: 
Location: 
Proposed Date of Commencement: 
Expected Project duration: 
Estimated cost: 
Estimate  number  of  communities  to  be  
Estimated  number  of  entrepreneurs  to 
be served: 
B: Screening for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-projects 
Question 
1.  Will  the  project  activities  include  construction/rehabilitation  of  rural 
roads or other rural infrastructure in protected/sensitive areas?8 
Yes  No 
2. Does the project include construction of roads or other infrastructure 
that entail the total area being cleared of 50 ha or above? 
3. Does the project include construction of dam (s)/reservoir (between 5- 
15 m high with a reservoir exceeding 2 million m3)? 
4. Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes rehabilitation/ 
development (above 100 ha)? 
5. Does the project involve significant extraction of ground water 
(significantly above recharge capacity)? 
6. Does the project include water-based (ground or surface) development 
where  it  is  believed  that  significant  depletion  due  to  climate  change  or 
overutilization has occurred? 
7.  Does  the  project  involve  significant  extraction,  diversion  or 
containment of surface water? 
8. Does the project include drainage or correction of natural water bodies 
(e.g. river draining)? 
9. Will the project include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads that 
pass through oil infrastructure locations such as flow stations, tank 
farms or oil and gas pipelines?? 
8  Sensitive  areas’  include:  protected  areas  (national  parks,  wildlife/nature  reserves, 
biosphere  reserves);  areas  of  global  significance  for  biodiversity  conservation;  habitats 
depended  on  by  endangered  species;  natural  forests;  wetlands;  coastal  ecosystems, 
including  coral  reefs  and  mangrove  swamps;  small  island  ecosystems;  areas  most 
vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion 
and other forms of land degradation and areas that include physical cultural resources (of 
34 
historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social 
vulnerability due to poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
35 
10. Would  any  of  the  project  activities  have  minor  adverse  impacts  on 
physical cultural resources? 
11. Does the project include development of agro-processing facilities? 
12. Will the project require a migrant workforce during construction? 
13. Will the construction or operation of the project cause an increase in 
traffic on rural roads? 
14. Has the government or community guaranteed the lease of the land 
for the (market) infrastructure? 
15. Is there any plan in place for sustainability of the infrastructure during 
the project life time? 
16.  Does  the  project  include  specific  measures  to  protect  against  dust 
(such as dust masks and water spraying)? 
17.  Has  arrangement  been  made  to  pay  adequate  compensation  for 
private property that may be affected by the construction of the project? 
18. Will construction equipment with moderate decibels be used and the 
timing of use be so that people will experience less discomfort? 
19. Will tree and vegetation replanting be carried out to stabilize slopes 
and re-green road sides? 
Guidance for categorization: 
"Yes" response to 
any of 
"Yes" response to 
"No" response to 
almost 
all questions 1-13 
and 
Environmental and  ESIA is required 
Environmental and  Sub-project to adopt the general ESMP 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
in the 
No further analysis is required 
36 
Appendix 5: Climate Screening Form 
Climate Screening Form for Sub-Projects 
To be used with the environmental and social screening forms. 
Screening for Climate Issues 
Yes  No 
Additional 
Explanation of 'Yes' 
response* 
Question 
Is  the  project  area  subject  to  extreme  climatic  events 
1. 
such as flooding, drought, tropical storms, or heat waves?  
2.  Do climate scenarios for the project area foresee changes 
in  temperature,  rainfall  or  extreme  weather  that  will 
adversely affect the project impact, sustainability or cost over 
its lifetime? 
3.  Will  the  project  make  investments  in  low-lying  coastal 
areas/  zones  exposed  to  river  flooding  and  coastal  storm 
surge? 
4.  Will the project promote agricultural activity in marginal 
and/or highly degraded areas that have increased sensitivity 
to climatic events (such as on hillsides, deforested slopes or 
floodplains)? 
5. 
  Is the project located in areas where rural development 
projects have experienced significant weather- related losses 
and damages in the past?  
6.  Will  the  project  develop/  install  infrastructure  in  areas 
with a track record of extreme weather events? 
Is the project target group entirely dependent on natural 
7. 
resources (such as seasonal crops, rain-fed agricultural plots, 
and migratory fish stocks) that have been affected by in the 
last decade by climate trends or specific climatic events? 
likely  affect  agricultural 
8.  Will 
productivity  (crops/  livestock/fisheries)  or  the  associated 
incidence of pests and diseases for the project target groups?   
9.  Would  weather-related  risks  or  climatic  extremes  likely 
adversely impact upon key  stages  of identified value chains 
in the project (from production to markets)? 
10.  Is  the  project  investing  in  climate-sensitive  livelihoods 
that are diversified?  
climate  variability 
11.  Is the project investing in infrastructure that is exposed 
to infrequent extreme weather events? 
12.  Is the project investing in institutional development and 
capacity building for rural institutions (such as farmer groups, 
cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous areas? 
13.  Does  the  project  have  the  potential  to  become  more 
resilient  through  the  adoption  green  technologies  at  a 
reasonable cost? 
14.  Does  the  project  intervention  have  opportunities  to 
strengthen indigenous climate risk management capabilities? 
15.  Does the project have opportunities to integrate climate 
resilience  aspects  through  policy  dialogue  to  improve 
agricultural sector strategies/policies?   
16.  Does  the  project  have  potential  to  integrate  climate 
resilience  measures  without  extensive  additional  costs  (e.g. 
37 
improved crop variety, capacity building; or including climate 
risk issues in policy processes) 
17.  Based  on  the  information  available  would  the  project 
benefit  from  a  more  thorough  climate  risk  and  vulnerability 
analysis  to  identify  additional  complementary  investment 
actions to manage climate risks? 
Guidance for categorization: 
"Yes" response to any 
of 
Sub-project Climate 
risk is High 
Climate risk Analysis is required for sub- 
project 
questions 1-9 
"No" 
almost 
response 
all questions 
to 
Sub-project climate 
risk is moderate 
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the 
general 
ESMF 
38 
Appendix 6: Environmental and Social Management Plan  
Recommended 
Monitoring Indicator 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE & SOCIAL MONITORING 
Feasibility study for 
Socioeconomic 
feeder/track roads and 
Infrastructure  
causeways, dykes 
(Moderate) 
Baseline on status of the 
environmental climate and 
social conditions in the 
selected communities 
PCU / contractor/ 
Ministry of 
infrastructure 
(MOI) 
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Environmental 
and social 
baseline 
(Moderate) 
Land and soil 
degradation 
(Moderate) 
Surface and 
subsurface water 
quality 
(Moderate) 
Degradation of 
Forest and 
wetland 
(Moderate) 
Erosion and gully 
(Moderate) 
Conduct a baseline 
assessment to obtain 
baseline values of key 
environmental. Climate 
and social parameters in 
concerned communities 
Monitor quality of soil 
and other biological 
conditions 
Monitor sample quality of 
surface and subsurface 
water at random sites 
See environmental, 
climate and social 
indicators mentioned 
below 
PCU/ National 
Environment 
Agency (EPA) 
Soil micro-organism count 
Soil organic matter count 
Adopt use of climate 
friendly technics 
Water quality 
PCU (Safeguards 
and climate team) 
PCU 
PCU 
Monitor quality of forest 
and wetlands 
Changes in forest and 
wetland area 
Monitor quality of land 
Changes in area of bare 
surfaces  
PCU 
Bush and pipeline 
fire 
Monitor quality of 
vegetation 
Changes in vegetal cover 
PCU 
39 
Site-specific 
ESMP reports 
Adherence to 
laid legal and 
policy 
requirements 
(Category B) 
Field survey  
Field 
measurement, 
incl. soil sample 
analysis 
Field 
measurement 
and Laboratory 
test 
Remote sensing 
and field 
assessment 
Remote sensing 
and field 
assessment 
Remote sensing 
and field 
assessment 
Once, at the 
beginning of 
project 
Baseline, once at 
beginning of 
project 
Annual (or after 
cropping cycle) 
Annual (or after 
cropping cycle) 
Baseline, Mid-
Term, End- Term 
Baseline, Mid-
Term, End- Term 
Annual 
Loss of 
biodiversity 
(Moderate) 
Waste 
proliferation 
(High) 
Use of 
agrochemicals 
(Moderate) 
Flooding 
(High) 
GHG emissions 
(High) 
Socio-economic 
conditions 
(Moderate) 
Community 
conflict (internal) 
(Moderate) 
Youth violence 
(militancy and 
cultism) 
(Moderate) 
Resource-based 
conflict (farmers 
– pastoralists) 
(High) 
Loss of (access 
to) agricultural 
Monitor quality of 
biodiversity   
Changes in abundance of 
biodiversity 
PCU 
Field survey 
Annual  
Monitor quality of land, 
water, and air 
Changes in soil, air, and 
water quality 
PCU 
Monitor quality of plant, 
soil, and water 
Changes in quality of 
plant, soil, and water 
PCU 
Monitor quality of land 
Extent of land inundation   PCU 
Monitor quality of air 
Preponderance of GHG in 
the air 
PCU/ National 
Environment 
Agency (EPA) 
Field 
measurement 
and laboratory 
test 
Laboratory test 
Annual  
Annual  
Field survey and 
remote sensing 
Field 
measurement  
Quarterly  
Annually 
PCU 
Field survey 
Food security, assets, 
employment, income, 
production methods and 
volumes, access to 
markets and finance, 
social inclusion, disaster 
preparedness 
Conduct a combined 
sustainable livelihood 
analysis (SLA) / 
resilience assessment, 
providing baseline status 
of key socio-economic 
conditions in selected 
communities  
Monitor  the 
effectiveness of 
grievance redress 
mechanism  
Monitor youth violence 
situation 
Occurrence of violent 
conflicts within selected 
communities 
PCU/ Ministry of 
social affairs and 
local development  
Occurrence of youth 
violence within selected 
communities 
PCU/Ministry of 
Justice 
Field 
measurement 
(update) 
Community visit 
Community visit  Quarterly 
Monitor conflict situation  Occurrence of violent 
PCU 
Community visit  Quarterly 
Monitor land access and 
ownership 
conflicts between selected 
communities and external 
parties 
Change in land access and 
ownership for women and 
40 
PCU 
Community visit  Annually 
land 
(Moderate) 
Social exclusion 
(Moderate) 
Elite capture 
(High) 
Unsafe and non-
healthy working 
conditions 
(Moderate) 
Gender-based 
Violence 
including Sexual 
Exploitation, 
Abuse (High) 
Financing  
(Moderate) 
youth 
Percentage of women. 
PWD and youth 
represented in 
community-level decision-
making committees, 
associations and meetings 
PCU 
Number of cases reported 
and suspected of health 
impact due to use of agro-
chemicals, accidents due 
to use of production and 
processing machinery and 
related faulty wiring and, 
use of child labour.  
Percentage of people 
sensitized  
Number of MFIs partners 
that have integrated 
sustainability into their 
financing (ESMS of Fis 
such as RCBs) 
Monitor inclusion of 
women, PWD, and youth 
in decision-making 
Monitor (political) 
interference, conflicts of 
interest, corruption 
Monitor health impacts 
and child labour 
raise awareness or 
interventions on SEA 
Subscribe to the 
principles of  
sustainable 
environmental, climate 
and social 
management in the 
financing of business 
plans (ESMS of FIs 
such as RCBs) 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Justice 
Community visit  Annually 
PCU/ ministry of 
agriculture 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Heath  
Community visit  Annually 
Community visit  Annually 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Justice/ Gender 
and women 
Community visit  Annually  
PCU 
Community visit  Annually 
Socioeconomic 
Infrastructures 
(Moderate) 
Feasibility studies  
Reports 
PCU/ Ministry of 
infrastructures  
Community visit   First year 
41 
Business Plan 
Development per 
activity 
(Moderate) 
Screening of sub-activity 
+ Site specific E&S 
impacts Assessment 
(ESMP) 
Reports 
PCU 
Community visit  At the beginning 
prior to activity 
implementation 
42 
Appendix 7. ESMF 
REPUBLIC OF GHANA 
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL 
RESILIENCE – PROSPER 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK - ESMF 
Figure 0. 
Administrative 
Ghana 
-- DRAFT 
2021 
Map of 
REPORT -- 
September 
PREFACE  
This Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the 
Government of Ghana will be applied to all activities financed by the International Fund 
for Agriculture Development (IFAD) through the  leadership of  the Government of 
Ghana, more precisely the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) for technical and/or 
financial support to the “Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and 
Environmental Resilience - PROSPER”.   
PROSPER Project Coordination Unit (PCU), supported, both financially and technically by 
IFAD will, at the request of the MOFA be hosted at the national level in the field, most 
likely in Tamale, and responsible for the overall coordination of project activities, with 
field-based environmental, climate, and social safeguards compliance, as well as gender 
and social inclusion works directly led by the respective locally recruited Senior 
Safeguards and Climate Specialists - SSCS, and Senior Gender and Social 
Inclusion Specialist - SGSIS to ensure good compliance on safeguards, as well as on 
Gender and Social Inclusion mainstreaming so to foster                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and sustain an overall satisfactory project safeguards performance throughout its 
lifespan. They will frequently liaise with District level hired Focal Points (DFP) as part 
of the MOU with Local Authorities (DDAs) supported by Ghanaian Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) on all safeguards-related issues, consistently with both 
applicable national legislations, and IFAD SECAP procedures. The same goes also with 
regards to financial intermediaries aimed at supporting local farmers to access to 
fundings. APEX Bank, the designated entity, will also have a Safeguards and climate 
coordination unit at their level. An Environmental, Social, Climate Specialist and a Gender 
and Social Inclusion Specialists will be hired to ensure all funding proposal are screened 
and in full compliance prior to their funding. 
Until the physical footprints of proposed project activities are clearly defined by/after 
project approval1, this document will remain a living document and thus subject to 
subsequent modifications and changes in line with the evolving situation or scope of the 
project activities. As an iterative process, therefore, much closer participatory 
consultation with the IFAD, GoG, and formal clearance and public disclosure of this ESMF 
will be necessary. 
1 - This is also function of the variation of the current Project Development Objective (PDO), which is susceptible to variation before/by the 
Appraisal stage. Until then, the ESMF remains flexible and adaptable based on any changes that occur. 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
44 
Table of Content 
1 
PREFACE.………………………………………………………………………………………………2 
ABBREVIATIONS..…………………………………………………………………………………….5 
List of Tables……………..…………………………………………………………………………….7 
List of Figures..………………….……………………………………………………………………..7 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY..…….……………………………………………………………………….8  
I. INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………...…12 
  1.1   Country and Project Context and 
Rational…………………………………………………….13 
  1.2   Project Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Risk Rating and 
Category.………..16 
  1.3   Special aspects relating to IFAD's Corporate mainstreaming 
priorities………………….....17 
  1.4   Rationale and Objective of the 
ESMF..………………………………………………………..19 
  1.5   Stakeholder Consultation Approach & 
Methodology………………………………………...20 
  1.6   Information and Public Disclosure of the 
ESMF……………………………………………..20 
  1.7   Outline of the ESMF 
Report..……..…………………………………………………………...20 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION…………………………………………………………………………21Error! 
Bookmark not defined. 
  2.1  Project Development 
Objective…………….…………………………………………………..21 
  2.2  Theory of 
Change…………………………….…….…………………………………………...21 
  2.3   Project Components, Outcomes & 
Activities...………………………...………………..…...Error! Bookmark not defined. 
  2.4   Project geographic area of intervention and Target 
group….……………….…………..…..31 
III.  ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE & SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROFILES OF PROSPER AREAS..35 
  3.1   Physical 
Environment……………………..……………………………………………………35 
  3.2   Biological 
Environment….……………………..……………………………………………...40 
  3.2   Socio-Economic 
Environment………………………………..……………………………….41 
IV.   APPLICABLE POLICY, Legal & institutional framework GOVERNING THE 
ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE & SOCIAL RISKS, IMPACTS AND BENEFITS MANAGEMENT OF 
PROSPER………………………………… ………………………………………………………44      
  4.1  National Framework..…………………………………..…………… 
………………..….……44 
  4.2  International 
Framework………….…………………………….…………………..………….46 
  4.3  IFAD 
Policies/Strategies/Procedures……………………………………….…..…………....47 
  4.4  IFAD Climate Change Strategy (2010) 
………….………………………………………….…49 
  4.5  IFAD Environmental and Natural Resources Management (ENRM2011) 
Policy…………..49 
  4.6  IFAD Strategy and Action Plan on Environment & Climate Change (2019-
2025)…………..50 
V POTENTIAL SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL & CLIMATE RISKS, IMPACTS AND PROCEDURES 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
45 
IN ADDRESSING PROSPER COMPLIANCE……………………………..……... 51 
  5.1 Overview of PROSPER Environmental, Climate & Social Risks, Impacts & 
Benefits……...51 
  5.2 Breakdown of Risks, Impacts & Opportunities per 
Component...……………..………...…..51 
  5.3 Assessment of Cumulative 
Impacts…………………………………………………………….59 
  5.4 Potential impacts and for socioeconomic infrastructure project 
………………….………….60 
  5.5 Environmental, Climate and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)……………………...61 
  5.6 Analysis of 
Alternatives………………………………………………………………………….65 
  5.7 The Without project 
scenario…………………………………………………………………...67 
VI    ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN - 
ESMP.....................68 
  6.1  Mitigation Measures 
Checklist…………………………………………………………………68 
  6.2  Approach to Enhance Project 
Implementation………………………………………………..72 
  6.3 Integrated Pests and Pesticides Management 
Plan……………………………………………74 
  6.4  ESMF Monitoring and 
Evaluation……………………………………………………………..76 
  6.5  ESMF Implementation Timeline and 
Budget………………………………………………...78                                                                                   
VII.  CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL 
MANAGEMENT & MONITORING…………………………………………………….…80 
  7.1  Strengthening Capacity and Improving 
Resilience………………………………………..….80 
VIII.  PUBLIC CONSULTATION, PARTICIPATION & INFORMATION DISCLOSURE.......……82 
  8.1  Stakeholders Consultation and 
Participation……………………………………………..…...82 
  8.2  ESMF 
Disclosure…………………………………………………………………..…………...82 
IX.    GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM - GRM……….………………………………………83 
  9.1 Rationale for 
Grievances…………………………………………….…………………………..83 
  9.2 Managing 
Grievances……………………………………………………………………………83 
  9.3 Closing the Loop and Fostering 
Sustainability…………...……………………………………84 
X. CONCLUSION…………………………………………………………………………...………...85 
REFERENCE & BIBLIOGRAPHY…………………………………………………………...………87 
ANNEXES……………………………………………………………….……………….....………….89 
2 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
46 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Acronyms 
Meaning 
1D1F 
AAFORD 
ABP 
ASWG 
AU 
BAC 
BBP 
BoG 
BP 
BRC 
CSA 
COP 
DA 
DAES 
DDA 
DSF 
DDWS 
DNA 
EA 
EIA 
ESA 
ESMF 
ESMP 
ESRF 
ESIA 
ESS 
FARA 
FAO 
FMA 
FNS 
GADP 
GAIP 
GASIP 
GBV 
GCF 
GCX 
GEA 
GEWE 
GFD 
GHG 
GIRSAL 
GJSP 
GoG 
GRM 
GSI 
GSICS 
GVS 
ICO 
IFAD 
IFC 
IFR 
IGA 
One District One Factory 
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development Project 
Advanced Business Plan 
Agricultural Sector Working Group 
African Union 
Business Advisory Centre 
Basic Business Plan 
Bank of Ghana 
Business Plan 
Business Resource Centre 
Climate-Smart Agriculture 
Conference of the Parties to the United-Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change 
District Assembly 
Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services 
District Department of Agriculture 
District Stakeholder Forum 
District Department of Water and Sanitation 
Designated National Authority 
Environmental Assessment 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Assessment/Audit 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems Exposed to 
COVID-19 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
Agribusiness Learning Alliance 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United-Nations 
Financial Management Assessment 
Food and Nutrition Security 
Ghana Agricultural Development Plan 
Ghana Agricultural Investment Programme 
Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme 
Gender based violence 
Green Climate Fund 
Ghana Commodities Exchange 
Ghana Enterprises Agency 
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment 
Ghana Federation of the Disabled 
Greenhouse Gas 
Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing Agricultural Lending 
Ghana Jobs and Skills Project 
Government of Ghana 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Gender and Social Inclusion 
Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist 
Gender and Vulnerability Specialist 
IFAD Country Office 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
International Finance Corporation 
Interim Financial Report 
Income Generation Activities 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
47 
IGREENFIN 
IPM 
IPRM 
IWRM 
KAP 
LFM 
LULUCF 
MDDW 
MESTI 
MIYCN 
MLGRD 
MNDPF 
MoF 
MoFA 
MoGCSP 
MoTI 
MPI 
MSME 
MSP 
NCD 
NDC 
NFIDS 
NNP 
NOTUS 
NRGP 
NRM 
PERD 
PFI 
PFJ 
PRM 
PROSPER 
PWD 
PLWD 
RAFIP 
RCB 
RAMSAR 
REP 
RFSP 
RI 
RTIMP 
SBCC 
SC 
SCGV 
SCS 
SDG 
SSCS 
SGSIS 
UNSDP 
WEF 
WSMT 
Inclusive Green Financing Initiative 
Integrated Pest Management 
Integrated Project Risk Matrix 
Integrated Water Resources Management 
Knowledge Attitude Practice 
Logical Framework Matrix 
Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry  
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women 
Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation 
Maternal, infant, and young child nutrition 
Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development 
Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection 
Ministry of Trade and Industry 
Multidimensional Poverty Index 
Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise 
multi-stakeholder platform 
Non-communicable disease 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy 
National Nutrition Policy 
No Objection Tracking and Utilities System 
Northern Rural Growth Programme 
Natural Resources Management 
Planting for Export and Rural Development 
Participating Financial Institutions 
Planting for Foods and Jobs 
Procurement Risk Matrix 
Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental 
Resilience 
Person with Disability 
Person Living with Disability 
Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme 
Rural Commercial Bank or Rural Community Bank 
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance 
Rural Enterprises Programme 
Rural Financial Services Project 
Rural Institution 
Roots and Tubers Improvement & Marketing Programme 
Social Behaviour Change Communication 
Steering Committee 
Safeguards, Climate, Gender and Vulnerability 
Safeguards and Climate Specialist 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Senior Safeguards and Climate Specialist 
Senior Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist 
UN Sustainable Development Partnership 
World Economic Forum 
Water and Sanitation Management Team 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
48 
LIST OF TABLES & FIGURES  
FIGURES 
Figure 0 : Administrative map of Ghana  1 
Figure 1 : PROSPER Theory of change  
Figure 1 : PROSPER Intervention Areas (Upper West & Upper East 
Figure 2 : Topography and Elevatin of Ghana 
Typical Vegetation zone  and average temperature  of Ghana 
Figure 4 : Map of average annual temperatures, annual precipitations of Ghana 
Figure 5 : Annual rainsfall patterns of Ghana 
Figure 6 : Cereal production estimated at above levels in 2020  56 
35 
39 
32 
37 
22 
TABLES 
36 
38 
Table 1 : Data Snapshot: Key development indicators 
Table 2 : Data Snapshot Summary Statistics 
Table 3 : Data Snapshot cooupled inter-comparison program, No% (CMIOS)  38 
Table 4 : National applicable laws & Institutional framework 
Table 5 : International Regulations and conventions 
47 
Table 6 : Breakdown of risk, impacts and mitigation measures per component 55 
Table 7 : Environmental and social management framework (ESMF) for PROSPER 
Table 8 : Commodity Value Chain  65 
Table 9 : Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  69 
Table 10 : Definition of consequences 
Table 11 : ESMF Timeline and Budget 
Table 12 : Training activities and estimated budget 
Table 13 : Key Safeguards staffing for the PCU, PIU for PROSPER 
Table 14 : Grievance Redress Mechanism  83 
73 
78 
44 
81 
80 
39 
62 
49 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Ghana is a lower-middle-income country with an estimated per capita GDP (i.e., $2,221 
(2019), 6.5% one of the highest rates in the world). Ghana’s economy is heavily 
dependent on the export of specific commodities (i.e., gold, cocoa and oil), and remains 
vulnerable to commodity price shocks. Ghana is a country in a dynamic transition trend 
from extreme fragility to greater resilience to external and climate-induced shocks, but 
many development challenges remain despite the tangible sustainable development 
efforts initiated by both the current and previous Government authorities/regimes. In 
this challenging environment and context, Government is addressing the main drivers of 
country fragility, namely high rates of population growth and outmigration, limited 
access to resources, regional instability, unsustainable fiscal deficits, the limited capacity 
of the public administration, and structural vulnerabilities and shocks such as climate 
change and environmental degradation. These drivers of the country fragility are 
resulting in intensely negative socio-economic and environmental effects particularly in 
the agricultural sector. At present there are insufficient financial resources and technical 
capacity to build the resilience of organizations for transformative smallholder 
agriculture.  
While several reforms lead to a more conducive business environment, Ghana’s rank in 
the 2020 Doing Business Report was 118 among 190 economies. The impact of COVID-
19, still ongoing, has resulted in economic slowdown and socioeconomic challenges that 
are detailed below. 23% of Ghana’s population are monetary poor and 8.2% live in 
extreme poverty.  When it comes to multidimensional poverty (across three dimensions: 
education, health, and living standards). The highest concentration of extreme poor 
(36%) lives in the Savannah region.2 Poverty, in the Middle Belt and other areas is lower 
than in the North. Agriculture accounts for 21% of Ghana’s total GDP, 71% of 
employment in rural areas, over 40% of export earnings. Factors contributing to rural 
poverty include underdeveloped agricultural technologies, poor access to financial 
services (especially among women), lack of secured market linkages, inadequate 
marketing infrastructure, post-harvest losses, lack of advisory services, and cumulative 
environmental degradation. Most of Northern Ghana falls within the Guinea Savannah 
Ecological Zone. Here smallholders grow mainly soya, maize, sorghum, rice, millet and 
vegetables. The challenges affecting agricultural development are compounded by the 
negative effects of climate change, such as increasing dry spells and rising 
temperatures, and degradation of arable land and critical infrastructure. 
The Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience 
Project (PROSPER) aims to strengthen the integration, climate resilience and 
environmental sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority VCs in the 
Northern and Middle Ecological Belts of Ghana taking advantage of the increased 
demand created by the national agro-processing strategy. PROSPER aims to provide a 
framework for the long-term engagement with and financing for private sector-led, pro-
poor agricultural VC development tailored to the specific needs and potential of small-
scale producers and operators in targeted regions of Ghana.  
PROSPER is aligned with the development strategies set out in the Medium-Term 
National Development Policy Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021) and priorities set by MoF in 
the National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy (NFIDS 2017-23). MoFA's 
Ghana Agriculture Investment Plan (2018-2021) – Investing for Food and Jobs, Gender 
and Agricultural Development Strategy (2015), is aligned with the international 
development framework including the UN 2030 SDGs (2015), AU CAADP-Malabo 
Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for Shared Prosperity 
and Improved Livelihoods (2014) and the ECOWAS Vision 2050 (2021). PROSPER aligns 
with the MoGCSP’s National Gender Policy (2015), the Agenda for Jobs (2018-21) policy 
framework, National Youth Policy (2010) and Nutrition Policy (2014), while taking into 
2 Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018. 
50 
account changes in the socioeconomic landscape of the country and recent developments 
at the international level. 
The geographical targeting strategy of PROSPER considers (i) high rural population, 
(ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food and nutrition insecurity, (iv) strong 
concentration of female and male youth and (v) presence of economic opportunities 
relevant to the project in each district, combined with indicators of climate vulnerability 
and the level of cumulative degradation of the productive NR base (particularly soil, 
water and trees). 
The geographic area of intervention extends to eight regions in the above-mentioned 
Belts. All five regions in the Northern Belt, (Upper West, Upper East, North-East, 
Savannah and Northern), have a high poverty head count, the highest 92% (Wa West 
District, Upper West). The three neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, 
Bono and Oti) are relatively less poverty stricken on average than those in the Northern 
Belt but contain pockets with a markedly high poverty head count peaking at 78% 
Kintampo South District, Bono East. The number of regions has risen from five at 
Independence to the present 16, but the administrative divisions do not coincide with the 
environmental and socioeconomic conditions. Broadly, poverty is progressively deeper 
from South to North with the drier climate and increasingly challenging setting for 
agriculture with the negative impact of climate change. The poverty analysis 
underpinning the geographical targeting of PROSPER is presented in the PIM. 
Selection criteria will be developed and validated with communities. These criteria 
include: (i) poverty and food insecurity; (ii) community interest and demand; (iii) 
synergies with other donor-supported projects; (iv) site potential (including downstream 
effects, physical cultural resources, hydrogeological potential and saline-water intrusion 
dynamics in rice production schemes);(v) proximity to weekly rural markets and linkages 
with off-takers, and; (vi) land size of group members (not exceeding five hectares of 
land under rice/vegetables). The project targeting strategy, including gender equality 
and women’s empowerment. 
Key environmental, climate and social risk category classification and issues: 
--- 
In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Change Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP), PROSPER is classified as a Category B operation and equally falls under 
category B of Ghana’s Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) Guidelines 
and Procedures, implying that PROSPER is likely to cause limited environmental and 
social impacts which are mostly small in size, mostly site-specific and thus can be 
successfully managed by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures 
provided in this ESMF. Key risks, impacts and opportunities to environmental and social 
management are: poor governance and lack of institutional, technical and organizational 
capacity, implementation capacity by service providers for foreseen socioeconomic 
infrastructures; which will be addressed through the effective implementation of the 
ESMF/ESMP. As stated in component 1 (precisely subcomponent 1.2 ) community-driven 
socioeconomic infrastructure will be subject to feasibility studies/ESIA and approval by 
EPA. The project will not result in involuntary resettlement, or  impact on physical 
cultural resources. 
From a Climate Change Risk Assessment standpoint, the project is classified as High. 
The target communities are substantially dependent on climate-sensitive natural 
resources, especially rainfed agricultural plots and tree crops such as shea and cashew. 
Large parts of the project area are increasingly exposed to droughts and flash-flooding. 
GHG emissions through increased production and processing and climate variability, 
including unexpected dry spells, unpredictable rainfall and low/high temperatures, can 
affect the project risks, impacts, sustainability and returns on investments. However, the 
project has the potential to integrate climate resilience measures, such as improved 
techniques of growing and processing of tree crops (cashew and shea) and in the fight 
against deforestation through the systematic use of integrated agroforestry systems, 
51 
solar panels and/or biogas using efficient and usable friendly biodigesters, as well as the 
usage of biofertilizer. Systematic climate risk analysis will be undertaken by the project 
throughout implementation to ensure adequate and timely monitoring and management 
of climate change risks. 
Environmental management and monitoring plans 
Pertinent national legal, institutional, and regulatory frameworks were carefully reviewed 
to set in context the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for 
PROSPER. The environmental, climate and social context and present challenges for the 
targeted eight regions were reviewed. Some of the mitigation and adaptation plans 
recommended in the ESMF include, amongst others: 
 
 capacity building of multiple actors in technical, management and governance 
aspects, and strengthening of women’s and youth farmers organizations, 
  At household level, upgrading of vegetable gardens but also water infrastructure 
with solar or biogas powered irrigation pumping systems, intercropping, 
systematically introducing nutrient and vitamin-rich crops particularly for the 
selected VCs (rice, maize, soybean), agroforestry, promotion of sustainable land 
and water management practices and youth training support/youth incubation 
including on sustainable management of natural resources.  
  Infrastructure investments (feeder, track roads, causeways, culvert, small 
connecting bridges) will be subject to screening, feasibility studies and license 
approval by the relevant institutions to ensure that there is minimal social and 
environment impact but also the infrastructures withstand to climate change 
impacts (floods, salinity, wildfire, etc....).  
  Ecosystem preservation activities as the rehabilitation of thousands of hectares of 
mangroves and  community forests.  
  creation of solution-oriented inclusive platforms for high-level policy dialogue 
between private operators, FBO/RIs and public authorities and access to land and 
credit/loans. . 
  support climate resilient and smart infrastructure in the targeted areas  to expand 
arable land and water management productivity and reduce poor people's 
vulnerability to natural hazards, food insecurity and nutrition, the nature of risks 
and exposure to climate change.  
  Sustainable land use and forest ecosystems will contribute to reducing GHG 
emissions. Climate resilient infrastructure (land and water development) and 
upgraded household-level vegetable gardens will lead to secure production and 
reduce the risk of low yields while contributing to expanding the period of 
production from the 3 months of the rainy season to 6 to 9 months within the dry 
season.  
  Good climate resilient/smart agricultural practices in rice, maize, soybean, Shea 
and Cashew, and household-oriented horticulture will be promoted to address 
drought, flooding, salinization, locusts effects and harsh environments (land 
degradation).  
  Development of a capacity building strategy, the project will address the limited 
knowledge of climate change impacts on smallholder agricultural value chains and 
landscapes and effective adoption and implementation of adaptation 
interventions.  
  development of new modules on climate resilient agriculture, waste management 
and renewable energy for solar-operated boreholes/water pumps and other 
warehouses/workshop centers.  
  Improve collaboration with Ghana National Meteorological Agency to ensure 
production and dissemination of key agro-climatic information to farmers at 
regular intervals.  
  As much as is possible, discourage cultivation in areas that are very close to the 
major river systems to minimize overflow during normal flow seasons 
52 
  Improve collaboration with research institutes to introduce early maturing/short 
duration and flood resistant rice varieties to the farmers to reduce flood impacts 
  Support and strengthen Seed Labs/silos/warehouses to be able to carry out 
rigorous tests on seeds to ensure that only genuine foundation seeds are used by 
farmers 
  If any usage is foreseen, timely collaborate with regulating agencies to ensure 
that agrochemicals, soil fertility systems meet the approved FAO/WHO standards; 
training and certification of ‘spraying gangs’ to eliminate agrochemical 
misapplication; public health and safety concerns and soil and water pollution 
  Support Value Chain actors in conversion of rice wastes into briquettes and 
vegetable stalk to animal feeds  
  Improve community security arrangements by supporting dialogue and 
understanding between farmers and pastoralists to reduce resource conflicts. 
Support to   strengthening existing informal and formal existing grievance redress 
mechanisms proposed in the ESMF/ESMP and establishing new ones where they 
don’t exist. Such systems will address concerns that may be raised associated 
with other project activities. 
  Avoid farming along recognized grazing routes and demarcated grazing reserves, 
transhumance corridors or cattle ranches;  
  Support promotion of land governance and efficient land management as 
adaptation measures  
  Contractors will be required to comply with national and state regulations 
governing the environment, public health and safety and labor practice.  
Estimated Costs for Environmental and Social monitoring plans 
A total of $3 million USD has been estimated for the environmental and social 
monitoring for PROSPER. About $2,080,000 is expected to be expended at the base 3 
years while the rest is spread across the 4th to 8th year. The fund covers environmental 
and social monitoring plans including:  
  Site specific studies for socio-infrastructure rehabilitation and new infrastructure 
(including roads, causeways, markets infrastructures, etc.), will be conducted  
  Training including ‘spraying gangs’, draining of rice paddies, and construction of 
water harvesting structure for dry season irrigation ;  
  Support for conflict resolution including stakeholders’ dialogue on conflict 
management and land governance 
  Health and Safety including Health insurance for agro-entrepreneurs.  
A successful mainstreaming of ESMF into implementation of the PROSPER project also 
requires adequate sensitization and the strengthening of institutional capacities through 
capacity building programs. The sums of $920,000 and $2,080,000 respectively have 
been estimated for additional capacity building activities and the hiring of Focal points at 
local Government level in all the 85 districts of project areas. In total, both the 
Environmental and Social Monitoring costs and capacity building cost, and the cost of 
hiring key specialists account for $3,000,000 to enhance environmental, climate and 
social opportunities as well as and address any potential adverse impacts. 
. 
53 
1- INTRODUCTION  
To support its sustainable development strategy and program, particularly towards 
alleviating rural poverty of the most fragile and vulnerable populations by the end of 
2035, the Government of Ghana has requested and obtained the support of the 
International Food and Agriculture Development (IFAD) with the development of 
the "Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental 
Resilience (PROSPER)" project3. 
This ESMF has been prepared in support to the PROSPER project. The project has been 
screened against IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP) and deemed a Moderate Risk project for Social and Environmental safeguards, 
and High Risk thereby requiring appropriate avoidance and mitigation measures in place 
to ensure that all activities are carried out consistently with the SECAP and applicable 
national regulation and core requirements.  
This ESMF has been prepared in such a way as to set out the basic principles, rules, 
guidelines, and procedures for screening, assessing, and managing the likely potential 
social, environmental and climate risks and impacts of those proposed outputs and 
activities already been defined, as well as yet undefined interventions. It contains 
measures and plans to avoid, and where avoidance is not possible, to reduce, mitigate 
and/or offset adverse risks and impacts. The ESMF specifies the most likely applicable 
social and environmental policies, standards, protocols, and requirements and how those 
requirements will be met through procedures for the screening, assessment, approval, 
mitigation, and the robust monitoring and reporting of social, environmental and climate 
risks and impacts associated with the activities to be supported under PROSPER.  
For the project outputs that have been defined with a reasonable degree of certainty, 
this ESMF includes indicative provisions outlining the management plans required to 
addressing likely social, environmental and climate change related risks and impacts, as 
well as several of the requirements of applicable policies, standards, procedures, 
including the applicable national regulations. The preparation of the ESMF was 
consultative enough and inclusive of women, youth, and vulnerable groups and many 
other key stakeholders met during the field consultations, namely the Ministry of 
Agriculture (both in Accra and in Tamale and Kumasi) - District Directorates of 
Agriculture (DDA), the Ministry of Environment and forestry, The Environmental 
Protection Agency, the Ministry of Water, the District Directorate of Water Agencies 
(DDW), the local government, Municipalities/Mayors, Academia and Research centers, 
local Farmer-based Organization/FBO, farmers cooperatives, Women and/or Youth 
Associations, Private sectors active in the Agricultural field, local Banks, other 
government/donor funded operations, etc. Once completed, and consistently with IFAD 
requirements, the ESMF will be publicly disclosed both in-country and on the IFAD 
website, prior to the project approval to ensure project stakeholders and any other 
interested party has a free access to the documents. Both the Government of Ghana and 
IFAD will ensure all approved documents are available on their respective website to 
enable whoever is interested to freely and publicly access these documents and provide 
any inputs they found necessary. Since stakeholders’ consultation and engagement is an 
iterative process, this process will be continued and randomly monitored to ensure 
systematic consistency and transparency throughout the project lifecycle.  
1.1. Country and Project Context and Rationale 
A.  National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
a.  National Context 
3 - Moving forward and for simplification purpose, we will be most often using the term “The Project” in lieu and place of the full 
denomination of the "Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience (PROSPER)" project. 
54 
Economic context. Ghana is a lower-middle-income country with an estimated per 
capita GDP of USD 2,221 (2019). In 2019, GDP grew by 6.5%, up from 6.3% in 2018 – 
one of the highest rates in the world. Ghana’s economy is dependent on the export of a 
limited number of commodities such as gold, cocoa and oil, and remains vulnerable to 
commodity price shocks. In 2020, the inflation rate was 9.2%, unemployment at 4.53%, 
and national debt at 78% of GDP (64% in 2019).4 While several reforms lead to a more 
conducive business environment, Ghana’s rank in the 2020 Doing Business Report was 
118 among 190 economies. The impact of COVID-19 has resulted in economic slowdown 
and socioeconomic challenges that are detailed below. 
Poverty and food insecurity. 23% of Ghana’s population are monetary poor and 8.2% 
live in extreme poverty.5 When it comes to multidimensional poverty (across three 
dimensions: education, health, and living standards), the proportion increases to 45.6%, 
especially in rural areas, where it is far higher (64.6%) than urban areas (27.0%).6 
Wealth distribution is biased towards men: 62% of female-headed households fall into 
the two poorest quintiles – compared to 39% of male-headed households. The regions of 
the Northern Belt have the highest prevalence of poverty, up to 62% in the rural areas. 
The highest concentration of extreme poor (36%) lives in the Savannah region.7 Poverty, 
in the Middle Belt and other areas is lower than in the North. While some of the regions 
have lower poverty levels overall, there are persistent pockets of poverty, food 
insecurity, undernourishment and malnutrition. 
Persons with disabilities (PWD) represent 3% of the total population.8 More than half 
living in rural areas are concentrated in the Middle Belt and almost a quarter in the 
Northern Belt. Ghana has a prevalence of undernourishment of 7%, while moderate or 
severe food insecurity in the population stands at 49.6%. 
Agricultural and rural development context. Agriculture accounts for 21% of 
Ghana’s total GDP, 71% of employment in rural areas, over 40% of export earnings. 
Agricultural imports are substantial, mainly wheat, rice, chicken (frozen), milk and fish. 
Rain fed agriculture prevails in 96% of arable land. Around 85% of farming households 
own less than 10 ha of land and more than two-thirds own less than 2 ha cultivable land. 
Factors contributing to rural poverty include underdeveloped agricultural technologies, 
poor access to financial services (especially among women), lack of secured market 
linkages, inadequate marketing infrastructure, post-harvest losses, lack of advisory 
services, and cumulative environmental degradation. Only 37% of the rural population 
has access to accounts in formal financial Institutions (FIs). Furthermore, rural 
institutions are generally weak with limited capacity to support small-scale producers. 
The challenges affecting agricultural development are compounded by the negative 
effects of climate change, such as increasing dry spells and rising temperatures, and 
degradation of arable land and critical infrastructure. 
Most of Northern Ghana falls within the Guinea Savannah Ecological Zone. Here 
smallholders grow mainly soya, maize, sorghum, rice, millet and vegetables. Rice 
cultivation in the valley bottoms has great potential to reduce poverty levels. Dry season 
vegetable production is significant at irrigation sites. The productivity for these crops 
remains below potential, due in part to lack of access to inputs, mechanization and 
extension outreach. Shea trees cover around 77,670 square kilometres in the Northern 
zone and support the livelihood of approximately 900,000 rural women. Trade in shea 
butter has been rising with strong export demand. 
The Middle Belt falls within the transition ecological zone. Here smallholders grow mainly 
cassava, plantain, maize, yam and soya, with rice cultivation in valley bottoms. The 
cashew value chain (VC) generates income for about 350,000 smallholder farmers. 
4 Statisa, 2021. 
5 Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018. 
6 Ghana’s Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Report, UNDP, 2020. The indicators that contribute most to multidimensional poverty in 
Ghana are lack of health insurance coverage, undernutrition, school lag and households with members without any educational qualification. 
7 Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018. 
8 2010 Population and Household Census. 
55 
Cashews can grow on even marginal lands and can stabilize the soil in which it grows 
while serving as carbon sinks. However, production is affected by (less than 50% of 
potential) factors such as difficulty in accessing good planting materials and improved 
farm inputs, inadequate extension services, access to credit, weak RIs and lack of 
effective pricing and marketing mechanisms, pest infestations, incidences of bush fire, 
loss of soil nutrients and inadequate soil moisture. 
Vegetables such as tomato, pepper, okra, garden eggs and cabbage are grown mostly 
under rainfed conditions as backyard production for subsistence and commercial 
purposes in both the Northern and Middle Belts. Availability is highly seasonal, peaking 
June-September. Productivity is usually less than 50% of attainable potential due to 
traditional cultivation practices, the lack of irrigation systems, limited use of improved 
inputs and high post-harvest losses. 
The livestock sector is an important component of Ghana’s agriculture. In 2019, the 
sector contributed about 13.3% of agricultural GDP in direct products and had a growth 
rate of 5.4%, (SRID, 2020). Most rural households (41.5%) keep some form of 
livestock, livestock as an adjunct to crop farming. Small and large ruminants are kept as 
a form of security and not as a source of protein, so the direct contribution to household 
food and nutrition security is low. 
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a GDP growth of 1.1% in 2020 down from the pre-
pandemic levels of 4.8% in 2020. Petroleum receipts, import duties and other tax 
revenues were negatively affected, reducing the fiscal space for the GoG. 77.4% of 
households in Ghana have experienced declines in income. Reduced remittances to rural 
areas contributed to food insecurity. The country’s average monthly food inflation 
recorded an increase from 8.4% in March 2020 to 13.7% in July 2020. While food prices 
continued to rise into 2021, the overall economic crisis eased and growth is projected 
to increase to 4.0% in 2021 and 4.1% in 2022. 
To mitigate the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, the GoG took several measures, 
including: the establishment of the Coronavirus Alleviation Programme (CAP), starting 
with a USD 219 million contribution from the Ministry of Finance (MoF); a reduction in 
the inter-bank policy rate from 15.5% to 14% by the Central Bank of Ghana; lowering 
reserve requirements from 10% to 8% to increase credit availability and affordability. 
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) launched an Agricultural Response Plan 
increasing the supply of subsidized seeds and fertilizers to poor smallholders; IFAD’s 
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems Exposed to COVID 19 (ESRF) 
supported the GoG efforts in this area. 
Ghana’s economy showed signs of recovery in the second half of 2020 and is projected 
to grow by 4.2% in 2021 and 5.3% in 2022. However, volatile commodity prices and 
lingering uncertainty over the COVID-19 pandemic still present key downside risks.9 
National strategies, policies, and lead institutions. The Medium-Term National 
Development Policy Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021) recognizes the growth of agriculture 
as the main driving force for rural development and transformation. The Ghana 
Agricultural Development Plan (GADP) focuses on the development of the agricultural 
sector from 2018 to 2021 through modernization and transformation. MoFA has 
increased support to the production of field crops through the Planting for Foods and 
Jobs (PFJ) initiative for famers in the Northern and Middle Belts with 2-3 acres land to 
access improved seeds and fertilizers, with a 50% subsidy, extension services and 
marketing opportunities. GoG is implementing the PERD (2019-2023) programme for job 
creation and export diversification through tree-crops and has established the Tree Crops 
Development Authority. To ensure coordination and policy dialogue, MoFA chairs the 
Agricultural Sector Working Group (ASWG) established between the GoG and 
development partners including IFAD. 
The One District One Factory (1D1F) programme led by the Ministry of Trade and 
Industry (MoTI) aims at establishing at least one medium-to-large-scale industrial 
enterprise in every district to create quality jobs and achieve a balanced spread of 
industries. The programme established 104 companies so far, of which 68 were existing 
9 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/ghana/overview. 
56 
companies and 36 newly built, employing 150,975 people) As part of 1D1F, the IFAD-
supported Rural Enterprises Programme (REP) established 58 ENABLE Youth factories as 
a vehicle for employment creation for tertiary level graduates. In 2020, an MSME and 
Entrepreneurship Policy was approved, which led to the transformation of the NBSSI into 
the Ghana Enterprises Agency (GEA). A network of 166 Business Advisory Centres 
(BACs) and 57 Business Resource Centres (BRCs) has been established across the 
country under an arrangement between REP, GEA and participating District Assemblies, 
to provide high-value business development services to the business community. 
b.  Rationale for IFAD involvement 
The development challenge and prognosis. The underlying issue flagged is the 
persistence of intractable poverty in many rural communities dependent on agriculture in 
the drier Northern parts of the country. The prevailing low input-low output rainfed 
farming systems in the north and middle zones are suboptimal and neither financially 
nor environmentally sustainable. Additionally, with a long history of over-exploitation, 
the economic carrying capacity of the heavily depleted productive NR base is declining 
whilst the number of dependents increasing. The negative effects of rapid climate change 
are making bad conditions worse. The remedy is to uplift rural economies by 
transforming the bedrock of small-scale farming from predominantly subsistence to 
financially and environmentally sustainable systems tied into functioning markets. This 
rationale focuses on both the supply side – the scale and technical transformation of 
production – and a marked increase in the real demand for the produce, whilst ensuring 
that the most vulnerable people are not left behind in poverty. 
For the producers, individually and in groups, the imperative is the technical and 
organisational skills needed to progress to “farming as a profitable business” and to 
transition to agricultural and land management practices that reverse the depletion in 
the NR base, both on- and off-farm, crucially soil, water and trees. A key mindset 
change is to engage proactively with other private sector operators to build 
collaborations that are mutually beneficial and with balanced bargaining power. To this 
end, the critical linkage in the VC is the first, between producers and agribusinesses. 
On the demand side, the agricultural market prospects in the North and Middle Belts are 
promising, with strong global demand for maize, shea and cashew and rapidly increasing 
domestic demand and import substitution possibilities for rice, soya and poultry. GoG is 
investing heavily in the scale and capacity of “upstream” VC actors through 1D1F and 
other programmes. However, the mass of rural producers is not able to capitalise on the 
growth in demand, being effectively outside the mainstream economy. The development 
challenge for PROSPER is to broaden, deepen and extend the reach of these commodity 
VCs to engage with significant numbers of primary producer groups. The resulting 
“demand pull” is much stronger than “supply push” in driving local medium-term 
economic growth. The increased volume of business is expected to create opportunities 
for enterprises in agro-processing and value addition at all scales, fuel employment and 
incomes within local economies through a multiplier effect, and thereby raise the food 
security and nutrition security of whole communities. 
IFAD’s comparative advantage. The Fund has a wealth of technical expertise to 
partner countries in addressing rural poverty combined with the capacity to mobilise 
resources at a scale that can make a lasting impact on the lives of vulnerable people. 
IFAD has a strong record in Ghana in working with poor rural communities in the food 
and agriculture sector in the Northern and Middle Belts. A portfolio of projects has 
focused on various closely related aspects directly relevant to the design of PROSPER. 
Roots and Tubers Improvement & Marketing Programme (RTIMP) took an integrated 
commodity chain approach. Northern Rural Growth Programme (NRGP) combined 
commodity chain and rural infrastructure development with access to financial services. 
Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme (RAFIP) followed by Rural Financial Services 
Project (RFSP) have built up the microfinance subsector. Ghana Agricultural Sector 
Investment Programme (GASIP) is concentrated on agribusiness linkages and VC 
development, with measures to promote climate change resilience. Rural Enterprises 
Programme (REP) seeks to promote rural business, many of which are based on 
57 
agriculture and NRs. Most recently, Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural 
Development Project (AAFORD) is focused on smallholder access to formal credit. 
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems exposed to COVID 19 (ESRF) 
was a rapid response to support smallholders coping with the pandemic. 
PROSPER will scale up and build on this broad and deep experience, lessons learned, 
fruitful partnerships and cumulative development achievements of the above discussed 
IFAD projects in Ghana. Corporate knowledge of areas of direct relevance to the new 
initiative include: capacity, membership and sustainability of RIs and MSMEs; resilience 
building and the sustainable use of NRs; capacity of extension services to support VC 
producers and actors; creation of market linkages; capacity of BACs and BRCs to provide 
training to RIs and MSMEs; affordable loans in a market segment where FIs do not 
operate; partnerships with Apex Bank and other FIs to promote inclusive rural financial 
services; innovative cashless credit model10; and one-time Matching Grants (MGs) for 
beneficiary groups ensuring subsequent access to affordable credit to sustain their 
marketing partnerships 
1.2 Project Environmental, Climate and Social Risk Rating and Category 
1.2.1 Environment and social category 
The initial screening of proposed PROSPER activities reveals that the potential 
environmental and social risks rating is medium/moderate to low. The main risks relate 
to (i) value chains activities (rainfed and/or irrigated agriculture, cashew and shea trees 
cultivation, harvesting and processing, horticulture, rain/stormwater harvesting, 
nutrition, health and income generation related poultry: and (ii) basic socioeconomic 
infrastructure including NRM remediation works, feeder road rehabilitation and farm 
access tracks, and shared social infrastructure including human water supply systems, 
green energy and sanitation facilities. Most of these impacts are small in scale, very 
limited, mostly site-specific and readily avoidable if not considerably reduced with 
appropriate mitigation plans (ESMP), as stated in the project’s ESMF. 
From a social safeguards standpoint, because all agricultural lands are community owned 
there will be no new land acquisition aside from those land left as fallows so the project 
will not have any foreseen negative social and environmental impacts such as the 
involuntary taking of lands or restriction on access to and/or use of assets resulting in 
the physical and/or economic displacement of project affected persons (PAP). PROSPER 
is not foreseen to affect negatively local pastoral communities or sites of historic, 
religious or cultural significance, land development beyond 100 ha11, feeder roads with 
a length of lesser than 10 km linking communities or farm tracks. PROSPER is rated as a 
‘Category B’ project and its social and environmental risks is assessed to be 
Medium/Moderate to Low. 
As a Category B operation12, a formal Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIA) is required during project implementation. Sub-project screening will then reveal 
the depth of the site-specific instrument to prepare for compliance purpose. Further 
analysis of the conflict dimensions and site-specific Environmental and Social 
Management Plans (ESMP) will be mainstreamed throughout PROSPER implementation 
lifecycle. Moreover, to ensure safeguards compliance and project sustainability, a 
Safeguards and Climate Change Specialist and a Gender, social inclusion and 
Vulnerability Specialist (GBV/EASH/VAC) will be part of the PCU. Quarterly safeguards 
and climate compliance reports summarizing the level of compliance and performance of 
project activities implementation will be prepared and shared to inform IFAD and 
stakeholders. 
1.2.2 Climate Risk classification 
10 Eligible farmers receive inputs and services from vendors and providers; rural banks pay the sellers; after harvest and sale of the produce, 
farmers repay the loan. 
11 The project will not invest on land development beyond 100 ha contiguous. Most of the beneficiaries have on average less than 2 ha and even 
combined per site, it is less than 50 ha contiguous. 
12 The project will not invest in any category A subproject activities. 
58 
From a Climate Change Risk Assessment standpoint, the project is classified as High. 
The target communities are substantially dependent on climate-sensitive natural 
resources, especially rainfed agricultural plots and tree crops such as shea and cashew. 
Large parts of the project area are increasingly exposed to droughts and flash-flooding. 
GHG emissions through increased production and processing and climate variability, 
including unexpected dry spells, unpredictable rainfall and low/high temperatures, can 
affect the project risks, impacts, sustainability and returns on investments. However, as 
part of its Business Plans under Component 2.1 the project has the potential to integrate 
climate resilience measures, such as improved techniques of growing and processing of 
tree crops (cashew and shea) and in the fight against deforestation through the 
systematic use of integrated agroforestry systems, solar panels and/or biogas using 
efficient and usable friendly biodigesters, as well as the usage of biofertilizer. Such 
mitigation measure will be introduced through awareness raising campaigns and capacity 
building programmes in climate smart agricultural strategies, climate finance and strong 
collaboration with extension services, weather, and climate monitoring agencies to 
receive regular and timely agro-climatic information, and the adoption of appropriate 
unmechanized cultivation technologies, crops varieties, and climate resilient and low 
emissions practices. Systematic climate risk analysis will be undertaken by the project 
throughout implementation to ensure adequate and timely monitoring and management 
of climate change risks. 
1.3 Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities 
Gender. Women constitute 58% of the rural labour force. Despite Ghana ranking second 
in the ECOWAS Gender Inequality Index, the country is ranked 117 out of 156 countries 
in the WEF Global Gender Gap Report. Traditional culture and entrenched gender 
inequality limit women’s access to education, healthcare, good nutrition, credit, 
extension services, new technologies, inputs and output markets participation in the 
public sphere and community decision-making. Female-headed households have less 
access to land for farming and are more likely to be smallholders (87% compared with 
60% of male-headed households). The GoG adopted the National Gender Policy (2015) 
to mainstream gender, women‘s empowerment and social protection concerns into 
national development processes, NRs and agriculture. A Gender and Agricultural 
Development Strategy (GAD II) was developed in 2015 by the MoFA Women in 
Agriculture Directorate to support mainstreaming gender. 
Youth. The country has a youth bulge (15-35 years of age13) with 57% of the total 
population being below the age of 25. The rural community consists of 56% youth, 
compared to 44% in urban contexts. Youth contribute to family labour for agricultural 
production and engage in other activities such as processing, warehousing and 
transportation but are unable to pursue farming independently due to limited access to 
land, credit, quality inputs and sustainable profitable output markets. Due to limited 
access to jobs, inadequate training and illiteracy, youth unemployment and 
underemployment in Ghana reached 12% and 50% respectively14 resulting in growing 
youth migration from rural areas to urban centres. 
Initiatives to provide jobs, building capacities and opportunities for youth include the 
Medium-term National Development Policy Framework (2018-2021); the PFJ in 
agriculture and related sectors, the Initiative for Sustainability, Stability and Security 
(3S) under the IFAD managed Rural Resilience Trust fund and focusing on the Northern 
Belt; the IFAD-supported REP; and the Youth Agripreneurship Development Programme, 
jointly run by AGRA and Nestle. Despite these initiatives from GoG and development 
partners, the outreach to youth from semi-subsistence smallholder families remains 
limited. 
People Living with Disabilities (PLWD). Statistically, people with disabilities make up 
13 The National Youth Policy in Ghana (2010). 
14 Youth Employment Programmes in Ghana: Options for Effective Policy Making and Implementation, World Bank, 2020. 
59 
3% of the population. Disability in Ghana is considered both a human rights concern and 
a developmental issue due to its strong links to exclusion, discrimination and poverty. In 
2006, the Parliament of Ghana passed the Persons leaving with Disability Act, 2006 (Act 
715). The Act protects the rights of PLWDs and makes specific provisions to guarantee 
the right to education, healthcare, employment and movement of PLWDs. The Act also 
established the National Council on Persons with Disability. The Council is charged with 
the responsibility of proposing and evolving policies and strategies to enable PLWDs to 
integrate and participate fully in national development. 
However, despite efforts being made educating the public, PWDs are still stigmatized, 
discriminated against and socially excluded. There is strong correlation between 
disability and poverty. Poor health, limited schooling and employment opportunities are 
impacting negatively on the socioeconomic status of affected households. Households 
with disabled members may be vulnerable to poverty due to extra costs of living with a 
disability. 
Nutrition. Ghana is 'on course' to meet two targets for maternal, infant, and young 
child nutrition (MIYCN) reducing anaemia among women of reproductive age (46.4% of 
women aged 15 to 49 years still affected) and achieving the low-birth-weight target 
(14.2% of infants having a low weight at birth). No progress has been made towards 
achieving the exclusive breastfeeding target, with 42.9% of infants aged 0 to 5 months 
exclusively breastfed. Ghana is 'on course' to meet the target for stunting (chronic 
undernutrition), with 17.5% of children under 5 years of age affected but rises to 33% in 
the Northern Region. Some progress has been made towards achieving the target for 
wasting (acute undernutrition) but 6.8% of children under 5 years of age are still 
affected. The prevalence of overweight children under 5 years of age is 1.4% and the 
country is 'on course' to prevent the figure from increasing.15 Ghana has shown limited 
progress towards achieving the diet-related non-communicable disease (NCD) targets. 
The country has shown no progress towards achieving the target for obesity, with an 
estimated 16.6% of adult women and 4.5% of adult men living with obesity. Diabetes is 
estimated to affect 6.6% of adult women and 6.4% of adult men. The diet mainly relies 
on starchy roots, fruit and cereals. The diversity of diets remains low with limited intake 
of protein and a general reluctance to consume fruits and vegetables, causing stunting in 
preschool-aged children and anaemia amongst pregnant women. A long-term Food and 
Nutrition Security (FNS) Strategy has been developed which was used to review the 
National Nutrition Policy (NNP). 
The NNP aims to address nutrition related challenges of feeding practices for infants and 
young children and nutrition among women of reproductive age, as well as the 
promotion of nutritionally adequate safe diets among other nutrition services. Ghana 
joined the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement in 2011 and has established national, 
regional and district level multi-sectoral nutrition coordination mechanisms. Ghana’s 
multi-stakeholder platform (MSP), the Nutrition Cross-Sectoral Planning Group (CSPG), 
continues to expand, bringing together ten sectors today. The five northern regions have 
regional nutrition MSPs. 
Climate and environment. Climate change is projected to affect vital water resources, 
energy supplies, crop production and food security, with the Northern zone the most 
vulnerable. Ghana is already experiencing increased extreme weather conditions with 
higher incidences and prolonged periods of flooding and droughts. The country’s 
dependence on the production of crops that are sensitive to climate change (cassava, 
cocoa, and shea) and lack of agricultural diversification exacerbate Ghana’s vulnerability. 
Energy production meets demand, but rural communities continue to rely on fuelwood, 
resulting in forest depletion estimated at a 2% loss per annum. 
Agriculture is estimated to be the second largest contributor (10.05 MtCO2e) to Ghana’s 
greenhouse gas emissions after the energy sector (15.02 MtCO2e). Ghana is committed 
to implementing its National Climate Adaptation Policy, as highlighted in the National 
Climate Change Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) and its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Paris 
15 https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/africa/western-africa/ghana/. 
60 
Agreement. 
           In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, PROSPER qualifies as: 
☒ Climate finance: PROSPER will integrate adaptation and mitigation measures in the 
value chain packages, supported by special financial mechanisms adopted by the project. 
☒ Nutrition sensitive: PROSPER will select nutrition sensitive value chains, increase 
production of highly nutritious crops and animal sourced foods, promote food 
conservation, post-harvest processing and value addition, and promote better dietary 
patterns by providing nutrition education and Social Behaviour Change Communication 
(SBCC). 
☒ Youth sensitive: PROSPER will target male and female youth (50% each), adding their 
access to land as a precondition for community participation in the project. PROSPER will 
support the establishment of youth group-led enterprises along the selected value chains 
and will provide targeted financial inclusion, skills development, and capacity building. 
1.4 Rationale and Objectives of the ESMF 
Like its neighbouring countries, especially from the northern and southern (east and 
west) parts, Ghana is one of the world’s most vulnerable countries to adverse climate 
change impact, ranking 109th out of 181 countries according to the 2020 ND-GAIN index. 
Ghana is facing pronounced risks of higher temperatures, lower and more erratic rainfall, 
increased frequency of droughts and floods, significant loss of soil fertility and potential 
for submersion of large land areas given rising sea levels on its whole costal area. Land 
degradation, salinization, coastal erosion, land quality reduction, and low agricultural 
productivity are serious threats to national food security. Mean annual temperature has 
increased by 1.0°C since 1960. Linear trends indicate that wet season rainfall has 
decreased significantly between 1960 and 2006. Climate change projections predict an 
increase by 1.1 to 3.1°C by the 2060s, and 1.8 to 5.0°C by the 2090s (UNFCC,2016). 
The country is likely to experience increased incidence of drought and lengthened dry 
spells, particularly in the northern belt region (Upper West & Upper East). Combined, 
these factors are serious threats to agricultural productivity and national food security. 
By its nature, the project will contribute to meeting IFAD’s corporate commitment on 
mainstreaming areas which are environment and climate (25% of investment climate 
focused); nutrition (50% PLG nutrition sensitive), gender (25% gender sensitive), youth 
(50% youth focused). 
In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Change Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP), PROSPER is classified as a Category B Program and fall under category B and 
with ‘High’ Climate Risk. The most vulnerable areas from a climate change perspective 
will be the Northern region of the country where rain shortage and droughts are 
seriously affecting communities’ productivity and self-sufficiency on freshwater, the 
balance of which is determined by rainfall conditions and, increasingly, sea level rise 
from the southern region that will have tangible effect on watercourses in the middle and 
northern belt regions.  
The PDR and SECAP note have classified PROSPER as an environmental and social 
Category ‘B’ operation based on the adverse environmental and social effects, small in 
scale, mostly site specific and thus readily manageable by appropriate mitigation 
measures; and a ‘High’ Climate risk classification indicating the need for an in-depth 
climate risk analysis to be conducted during and throughout project implementation 
stages. The SECAP noted environmental and social risks mainly from: productive 
infrastructures and socioeconomic infrastructure, conflict and lack of ownership, 
unstainable agricultural practices, land development. The SECAP recommended an ESMF 
be developed to inform the design of PROSPER. 
The main objectives of the ESMF, as per the terms of reference of this study, are to 
define the principles, rules, guidelines, and procedures to develop the Environment and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF, inclusive of an ESMP) with adequate budgets to 
satisfactory guide PROSPER implementation team. 
The objectives of this ESMF are: 
61 
  To establish clear procedures and methodologies for the E&S and climate 
planning, review, approval, and implementation of sub-projects to be financed 
under the loan facility; 
  To specify appropriate roles and responsibilities and outline the necessary 
 
reporting procedures, for managing and monitoring E&S and climate concerns 
related to sub-projects;  
 To provide practical resources for implementing the ESMF, including general 
guidance on the development of E&S Management Plans (ESMPs) and their 
implementation 
1.5 Stakeholders Consultation Approach and Methodology:  
This ESMF builds on the Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP) 
note prepared for the concept note stage of the project  and field work during design 
stage with the objectives to:  evaluate the impact of current and future trends of climate 
change and environment on the programme's objective to reduce rural poverty and build 
the resilience of target groups; and propose adaptation/mitigation options for climate 
and natural resources management (NRM) issues with positive outcomes on project 
targeted groups in the northern and middle belt regions.  
In terms of the technical scope, the ESMF reviewed environmental, climate and social 
impacts, focusing on unsustainable agricultural practices, land development, likely 
impacts from land development (including irrigation infrastructure) climate change, and 
human conflicts and insecurity issues. It also reviewed several institutional, legal and 
policy documents and frameworks related to agriculture, environment, climate, access to 
land, and gender issues in Ghana. The IFAD’s Social, Environment and Climate 
Assessment Procedures (SECAP), IFAD’s new environment and climate strategy 2019-
2025, the Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment, Targeting and Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse policies were also consulted in developing this ESMF document. 
Consultations were made with stakeholders in the project targeted 2 regions/zones of 
the country during the design of the project. The field visit targeted the Northern and 
Upper East Regions, as well as in the middle Belt and Kumasi region, from 10th to 15th 
August 2021. The purpose of the field visit is to consult with stakeholders to collect 
relevant data and information to support the design of PROSPER. The consultations were 
participatory, inclusive, and proactive as they involved a broad range of stakeholders, 
farmers, RIs/CBO, academia, research institutes, GoG agencies (MOFA, DDA, EPA, MOW, 
MOI, ...) as well as private sector (RCB, SMEs, FIs). 
1.6 Information and Public Disclosure of ESMF 
IFAD’s Policy on the public Disclosure of Documents (2010) requires full disclosure to the 
public and includes information notes on projects being developed for Board 
presentation, agreements for approved loans and grants, and project/program design 
documents. This ESMF will therefore be publicly disclosed on both IFAD’s official website 
(http://www.ifad.org) and on the Government of Ghana’s website.  
1.7 Outline of the ESMF Report   
The ESMF report is structured as follows:  
Introduction 
 
  Project Description 
  Environmental, Climate and Socioeconomic Profile of the PROSPER Project 
Targeted Areas 
  Political, Strategic, Legal, and Institutional Framework Governing Environmental, 
 
Social and Climate Risk, Impacts and Opportunity Management  
Identification and Assessment of Potential Environmental, Social and Climate 
Risks, Impacts and Opportunities of PROSPER 
  Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
  Stakeholders Consultation, Participation and Engagement 
  Grievance Redress Mechanism 
  Conclusion  
62 
  Bibliography 
  Annexes 
2- PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
2.1 Project Development Objectives  
The PROSPER Project Development Objective is: Strengthen the integration, 
climate resilience and environmental sustainability of smallholders and 
businesses in priority VCs in the Northern and Middle Ecological Belts taking 
advantage of the increased demand created by the national agro-processing 
strategy. PROSPER aims to provide a framework for the long-term engagement with 
and financing for private sector-led, pro-poor agricultural VC development tailored to the 
specific needs and potential of small-scale producers and operators in targeted regions of 
Ghana. 
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, PROSPER qualifies as: 
☒ Climate finance: PROSPER will integrate adaptation and mitigation measures in the 
value chain packages, supported by special financial mechanisms promoted by the 
project. 
☒ Nutrition sensitive: PROSPER will select nutrition sensitive VCs, increase production 
of highly nutritious crops and animal sourced foods, promote food conservation, post-
harvest processing and value addition, and promote better dietary patterns by providing 
nutrition education and Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC). 
☒ Youth sensitive: PROSPER will target male and female youth (each group with a 
minimum of 50% eligible youth), adding their access to land as a precondition for 
community participation in the project. PROSPER will support the establishment of 
youth-led enterprises along the selected VCs and will provide targeted financial inclusion, 
skills development and capacity building. 
Geographical targeting. The geographical targeting strategy of PROSPER considers 
(i) high rural population, (ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food and nutrition 
insecurity, (iv) strong concentration of female and male youth, (v) presence of economic 
opportunities relevant to the project, (vi) the level of cumulative degradation of the 
productive NR base (particularly soil, water and trees) and (vii) indicators of climate 
vulnerability including evidence on the historical and projected impact of changes in 
temperature and precipitation. 
The geographic area of intervention extends to eight regions in the North of the country. 
All five regions in the Northern Belt, (Upper West, Upper East, North East, Savannah and 
Northern), have a high poverty head count, the highest being 92% for Wa West District, 
Upper West. The three neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, Bono and Oti) 
are relatively less poverty stricken on average than those in the Northern Belt but 
contain pockets with a markedly high poverty head count peaking at 78% for Kintampo 
South District, Bono East. The number of regions in Ghana has risen from five at 
Independence to the present 16, but the administrative divisions do not coincide with the 
environmental and socioeconomic conditions. Broadly, poverty is progressively deeper 
from South to North given the drier climate and increasingly challenging setting for 
agriculture with the negative impact of climate change. The poverty analysis 
underpinning the geographical targeting of PROSPER is presented in the PIM. 
Food insecurity prevalence as reported is not necessarily corresponding to the poverty 
head count. WFP food security and nutrition monitoring updates (June 2020) show high 
levels of moderate and severe food insecurity in the target regions, including the worst-
off districts in the nation in terms of food insecure households. Main barriers to food 
security are food availability and accessibility. This affects access to micronutrients, 
especially for women and children. 
There are significant regional disparities concerning nutrition security in Ghana. Northern 
63 
Region is worst off when it comes to rural (extreme) poverty, rural child stunting 
(chronic undernutrition) and the prevalence of anaemia among women and children. The 
national child wasting (acute undernutrition) rate stands at 7%, with the highest 
prevalence reported for Northern Region (10.9%). The presence of persons with 
disabilities also has marked regional differences. The Ghana Micronutrient Survey (2017) 
reports that the proportion of women (15 to 49 years) not meeting the Minimum Dietary 
Diversity for Women (MDDW) score ranged from 37.9% to 42.4% in the target regions, 
with a high national average of 40.2%16. The prevalence of PWDs by district ranges from 
3.0% to 8.3% in the Northern Belt and from 7.3% to 12.4% in the Middle Belt. 
This will be achieved through the implementation of three complementary components, 
two of them mutually supportive as described below. 
2.2 Theory of Change 
 Developmental challenges. The main development challenges in the project area 
are high levels of rural poverty, youth and women unemployment, food insecurity, 
malnutrition in all forms, climate change and accelerating environmental degradation. 
Most poor farmers are engaged in low input-low output production in the small-scale 
rainfed field-crop sector, which is neither financially nor environmentally sustainable. In 
the absence of linkages to VCs, marketing tends to be haphazard even in good years. 
There are significant numbers of vulnerable people – women, youth, people with 
disabilities –excluded from the rural agricultural economy. 
These challenges are compounded by accelerating NR scarcity and degradation 
exacerbated by climate change and a growing rural population. Traditional farming 
systems and diminishing access to energy in rural areas leads to soil erosion, 
deforestation and loss of command over water; the productive land becomes 
progressively less fertile, and yields decrease. These factors expose rural livelihoods to 
external shocks, limiting the ability of households to meet their basic needs. The lack of 
access to healthy and diversified diets leads to compromised diets, particularly for 
pregnant/lactating women and children under two years. 
On the demand side, VCs are suboptimal with progressively less market offtake in 
remote areas. Farmers sell any surplus produce in local markets or to traders and 
middlemen straight after harvest when prices are low. In these circumstances, there are 
few opportunities for individual households and whole communities to accumulate the 
human, physical and financial resources needed to modernize production and progress 
from subsistence. Women and youth are most affected due to many factors including 
socio-cultural exclusion. The absence of public investment over many years has resulted 
in a lack of basic infrastructure, such as reliable potable water supplies, which places 
constraints on both livelihoods and living standards. 
 Opportunities. PROSPER will tackle these formidable challenges with a market 
approach. On the supply side, the project will invest not only in the technical capabilities 
of primary producers and processors but also in the organisational and business skills 
required to enter lasting commercial arrangements. Climate change has drawn attention 
to the cumulative depletion of the NR base, with much formerly productive land and 
forest already beyond the point of no return. The aim of the work with farmers will be to 
increase productivity and profitability rather than short-term production, in ways that 
slow and then reverse the rapid deterioration of the productive land, both on- and 
off-farm. Advice and demonstrations of climate-resilient farming practices such 
Conservation Agriculture will be supported by purposeful remediation works in the wider 
landscape after years of neglect. The key success factor in this regard is progress 
towards proactive NR management arrangements, with acceptance of community 
responsibility for the fragile land. Environmental sustainability is a necessary condition 
for successful “farming as a business”. Even limited additional profit coming into a poor 
community can trigger growth in the local economy, including opportunities for new 
16 Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) is an indicator for the adequacy of the diet in a household 
64 
enterprises to provide support services to the farmers. This requires access to rural 
climate finance to incentivize the sector to adopt best adaptation and mitigation 
practices. 
The project recognises fully that stimulating field and tree crop production alone, 
however well the agronomy is adjusted to the environment, will not benefit the target 
population without a substantial increase in the real demand for the produce, in terms of 
volume, prices that at least cover production costs and access to the multi-step markets. 
The argument hinges on the efficacy of demand pull rather than supply push. PROSPER 
takes a VC approach for the selected commodities, in which the smallholders are linked 
into the existing private sector VCs. The key link for a primary producer group is a 
contract arrangement with an agribusiness or aggregator. PROSPER is oriented to 
facilitate such private sector arrangements by guiding and coaching the emergent RIs 
and MSMEs, developing business plans as appropriate for groups with differing levels of 
maturity, engaging with larger-scale VC actors (“drivers”) and arranging access to 
affordable financial services as needed. These mainstream business interventions are 
complemented with measures to include marginalised and vulnerable people and to 
invest in shared public socioeconomic infrastructure to improve the living conditions of 
whole communities. 
Success with the growth in agricultural production in the framework of rapidly expanded 
value chains will drive up the incomes of the whole economy in the target rural 
communities and stimulate local demand for increased and additional support services 
both in the sector and in the wider population. It is this secondary demand that will 
provide opportunities for youth to escape from the under- and unemployment prevalent 
in the project area. PROSPER is designed to help youth along an authentic pathway from 
poverty by providing general training on running a business, helping to set up micro-
enterprises of all types (related to the six PROSPER value chains) and linking the 
emergent MSMEs to affordable finance. The new enterprises then contribute themselves 
to the recovery of the local economy. 
PROSPER will promote women’s participation and empowerment by addressing barriers 
prevalent in the geographical context of the project. Major constraints are represented 
by low level of education among poor women, already existing workload, and lack of 
willingness of spouses and other family members to support full participation of women 
in project activities. PROSPER will mitigate these constraints by increased participation in 
training (e.g. Financial Literacy) and promotion of educational and income generation 
activities; labour - saving and women-friendly technologies to address workload; 
community awareness on gender equality as a vehicle for prosperity and the introduction 
of GALS approach. PROSPER will advocate for different male role models by encouraging 
men to support women’s participation through guarantee of land and other resources 
required. Gender targeting in PROSPER will include the inclusion of young women 
(youth) and women with disabilities (PWDs).  
Training and meetings with PWDs will be organized in close-by locations in the 
communities, in sensitive teaching and learning environments. To cater to the special 
needs of the PWDs with visual, hearing, physical and speech impairments, PROSPER will 
train them in braille, sign and audio languages. 
In PROSPER nutrition and health will be promoted through several pathways, including 
selection of value chains that are nutrition- and climate sensitive or that will make a high 
contribution to nutrition; food conservation, post-harvest processing and value addition; 
promotion of vegetable gardens; and nutrition education. Specific trainings and a Social 
Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) strategy will be developed to promote non-
discriminatory intra-household food distribution, adequate diets for adolescent girls, 
consumption of diversified diets, food hygiene and safety, and improved WASH practices 
as well as the discrimination of negative socio-cultural habits like teenage marriages and 
early pregnancies resulting in low-birth weight babies as major risk factors for 
malnutrition. 
Figure 1: Theory of Change 
65 
The project recognises fully that stimulating field and tree crop production alone, 
however well the agronomy is adjusted to the environment, will not benefit the target 
population without a substantial increase in the real demand for the produce, in terms of 
volume, prices that at least cover production costs and access to the multi-step markets. 
The argument hinges on the efficacy of demand pull rather than supply push. PROSPER 
takes a value chain approach for the selected commodities, in which the smallholders are 
linked into the existing private sector VCs. The key link for a primary producer group is a 
contract arrangement with an agribusiness or aggregator. PROSPER is oriented to 
facilitate such private sector arrangements by guiding and coaching the emergent groups 
and enterprises, developing business plans as appropriate for groups with differing levels 
of maturity, engaging with larger-scale VC actors (“drivers”), and arranging access to 
affordable financial services as needed. These mainstream business interventions are 
complemented with measures to include marginalised and vulnerable people and to 
invest in shared public socioeconomic infrastructure to improve the living conditions of 
whole communities. 
66 
2.3 Project Components, Outcomes and Activities 
PROSPER comprises two mutually supportive components concentrated on increasing the 
real demand for sustainably grown produce by significant numbers of people living in 
poor rural communities while enhancing their capacity to meet this demand through 
more efficient climate-resilient agricultural practices and natural resource management 
to mitigate the negative impact of climate change. The intended outcomes are increased 
incomes, greater food and nutrition security, and improved health status. 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
infrastructure.  
The expected component outcome is: Improved and sustainable livelihoods in target 
areas supported by strengthened rural institutions and improved socioeconomic 
infrastructures. These actions are concentrated on investing in “public goods” within and 
for the benefit of the targeted 100,000 beneficiaries in the project areas. 
Subcomponent 1.1 Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and 
households comprises a range of institution-building and skills development activities to 
enable target communities to take ownership of and accountability for their own 
development initiatives, to promote sustainable community-based NR management, to 
strengthen their ability to implement modern sustainable and climate resilient farming, 
and to adopt healthier diets. 
Community mobilisation, cluster identification and planning. The project will seek 
to secure community interest in PROSPER and the approaches it is promoting with a 
series of interactive workshops and consultations at regional and district levels, starting 
with three regions in the first phase. The list of districts for project engagement will be 
finalized in discussions with local and national authorities. In each selected district, the 
project will identify and form clusters of neighbouring communities through a screening 
of NRM and socioeconomic conditions and mobilisation meetings at village level.17 Where 
interest is strong, the community leadership decides to commit to PROSPER and 
opportunities exist around the target value chains, a Cluster Committee will be 
established to interact with the project and manage implementation. 
Cluster Planning. For each participating cluster, PROSPER will facilitate the collaborative 
development of a bespoke community-driven Cluster Plan (CP). Each CP will set out local 
priorities for communal socioeconomic investments and identify potential production and 
related business opportunities that may be realized by RIs and MSMEs under 
Component 2 and/or with community resources. The CP will inform the agenda for 
PROSPER action in each location, concentrating on investments responding directly to 
climate change mitigation and adaptation, and supplementing any existing development 
plans of local authorities or other development partners. The CP will underpin the local 
three-year PROSPER-community partnership and remain with the cluster leaders and 
Local Authorities as a live document to guide development planning during and after 
implementation. 
Capacitation of rural institutions and enterprises. This action entails bolstering both 
the governance and management structures and the technical capacities of active rural 
bodies, (including farmer/producer-based organisations and other economic interest 
groups such as VSLAs and MSMEs), and thereby their capacity to function as effective VC 
partners. It is envisaged as a purposeful major investment in human resource capital to 
develop a more conducive environment for the economic activities of the rural 
population. Within this drive to grow the rural economies by expanding business activity 
for groups, the poverty focus of PROSPER entails extending the group-based 
opportunities to substantial numbers of vulnerable and economically marginalised 
people. 
The programme of training, skills development and related demonstrations will be 
17 In this document, a “cluster” is a term for several neighbouring settlements sharing natural resources. It has no administrative significance but 
locates the combined population in the specific land area upon which they depend and provides the project with a convenient unit for planning 
and operational purposes. Each cluster will include various common economic interest groups, such as Farmer Based Organisations and VSLAs, 
alongside non-profit community structures. To avoid confusion and excessive use of acronyms, the term Rural Institution (RI) is used here for a 
production-related group and Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise (MSME) for any business set up for other purposes. 
67 
delivered by district extension services backed up by MoFA technical departments and 
other line ministries as well as PROSPER technical assistance. In preparation for the 
work, the project will reinforce the technical skills of public service frontline field staff, 
reorientated to a modern business approach to farming including the adoption of 
climate-friendly agronomic practices and natural resource remediation. The action will be 
launched with an awareness-raising workshop in each district on opportunities for Youth 
in and around the smallholder agriculture sector and the PROSPER value chains. Cluster-
level surveys will identify groups and MSMEs, both pre-existing and potential, interested 
in and likely to benefit from capacity building. The group identification process will be 
gender sensitive with a special focus on women, youth and PWD. 
The District Department of Agriculture (DDA) will lead an extension campaign organised 
around group organisational skills, climate-smart demonstrations and practical training 
sessions on topics such as conservation agriculture, agronomical practices and “farming 
as a business” tailored to the local agroecological conditions and main VCs in the cluster. 
Financial literacy, orderly record keeping and the basics of business conduct will be 
addressed to complement instruction on the technical aspects of sustainable production. 
Emphasis will be placed on the need for a marketing plan for every planting: “production 
with a purpose”. An estimated 4,500 RIs and 800 MSMEs will be trained over the life of 
PROSPER. Off-farm, the training will centre on the remediation and proper management 
of the depleted shared NRs which are key to the livelihoods of farming communities. 
Best practices in soil and water conservation, tree planting and NRM, (to be supported in 
many target clusters with remedial works under subcomponent 1.2 below), will be shown 
to be beneficial to all the present and future users of the landscape. The capacity-
building campaign will extend to non-producer economic interest groups who will be 
given training on enterprise development, particularly value addition and support 
services. Many will be Youth-based and start-ups stimulated by the project. 
Household nutrition and healthy diet. Alongside the measures to capacitate target 
groups to generate and sustain income and to manage and remediate their NRs, 
PROSPER will deliver an inclusive community-wide nutrition and healthy diet agenda to 
benefit all households, in synergy with the promotion of nutrition-sensitive farming and 
vegetable cultivation. This initiative serves as a counterbalance to the drive to produce 
food for sale, shifting attention to the nutritional value of the food consumed. The action 
will start with a Participatory Needs Assessment in each target community and entail 
training on household methodologies (HHM) and domestic financial literacy for up to 
2,400 selected households. The Gender Action Learning System (GALS) as part of HHM 
will be introduced to enhance Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment (GEWE) in 
PROSPER. GALS will create the togetherness in self-selected families to develop a vision 
and strategy to get themselves out of poverty. A Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) 
study will be conducted to understand better local issues around nutrition and diet, and 
to serve as a baseline for the Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) strategy. 
At the centre of nutrition activities will be a household education programme delivered 
through care groups by peers comprising demonstration nutrition gardens for healthy 
diversified diets, dedicated training on post-harvest management, nutrition education 
and SBCC for communities. 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. This 
development activity seeks to realize some of the “public goods” investments prioritized 
and chosen by local communities through the Cluster Planning process. Three 
complementary types of climate-resilient infrastructure will be eligible: Off-
farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation measures; Feeder roads and farm tracks; 
and Communal social infrastructure. These investments aim to improve the sustainability 
of NR-related livelihoods and to stimulate socioeconomic advancements in the 
participating clusters. 
The NR remediation infrastructures may comprise soil and water conservation structures, 
such as contour bunds, reforestation and shelterbelts, bench terraces, tied ridges, water 
harvesting and storage ponds, as well as climate change mitigation measures in line with 
local conditions. The District Assembly will undertake all procedures as appropriate to 
acquire/lease any land needed for construction. PROSPER envisages expanding and 
68 
rehabilitating strategic road networks (feeder roads and farm tracks, culverts and small 
bridges), as well as shared domestic water supply structures (boreholes with hand or 
solar pumps), sanitation facilities and waste management systems, and 
alternative/green energy schemes (including resource and energy recovery from waste). 
Each capital investment plan will include appropriate management, operation, 
maintenance and ongoing financing arrangements, with overall responsibility resting with 
the community where relevant. In each case, agreement will be reached between the 
District Assembly and the community leadership on the post-construction asset 
management by various community gender-balanced committees, building on previous 
local norms and the organisational training delivered under Subcomponent 1.1. The 
off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation infrastructure and the Feeder 
roads/Farm tracks will be funded 100% by the project. For water supply, the current 
national practice is for communities to make a cash contribution equivalent to one-year 
facility maintenance costs that shall be deposited in a bank account to demonstrate 
commitment towards long-term sustainability of the installation. For household toilet 
systems, the project will pay for the core element of the facility, such as the concrete 
slab or digni-loo unit, while the beneficiaries excavate the pit and build the 
superstructure with their own resources. 
Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation infrastructure will be community-
managed. The infrastructure for NR remediation and environmental protection will be 
maintained by a Natural Resources and Environmental Management Committee to be 
established under the project. Feeder roads and farm tracks will be maintained by the 
Department of Feeder Roads, who will be involved in implementation to enable them to 
take over post-construction maintenance. Water harvesting, water supply and waste 
systems will be managed by a Water and Sanitation Management Team (WSMT), a 
statutorily recognised body operating under the auspices of the District Assembly Works 
Department. Water will be sold at the tap and revenue raised used to maintain the 
supply systems. Sanitation and waste management systems will be maintained by the 
concerned households. Environmental sanitation and waste disposal and recovery 
systems will be coordinated by the WSMT and supervised by the District Assembly Works 
Department. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which is 
prepared as part of the PROSPER design, will identify potential impacts of the 
infrastructure elements under the subcomponent and will integrate measures for 
addressing them. 
Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small 
operators around selected agricultural value chains. The expected outcome is: 
Smallholders and small businesses draw greater benefits from the increasing market 
outlets for agricultural produce through comprehensive financial, capacity and marketing 
support.18 
Whereas the first component will invest in the human, physical and natural resources of 
the target communities, the second component is concentrated on investing in the 
“private goods” of the population to bring about a sustained uplift in the earning capacity 
of agricultural producer groups and related enterprises. The aim is to expand business 
activity both within the target communities and in lasting agreements with other actors 
in the selected VCs. The project is realistic in recognising the differing prospects of the 
targeted beneficiary groups and the extent to which access to finance is the main 
constraint they face. In this context, the PROSPER emphasis on climate-friendly business 
development must be balanced with social and welfare considerations for the most-
disadvantaged households. 
The distinction between smallholders and small operators in this analysis is important. 
The project’s drive to modernise agriculture in and extend the reach of the key value 
chains to economically marginalised communities is centred on the small-scale farmers 
but intended to reduce the poverty of the whole population. Alongside the capacity 
18 Small businesses comprise enterprises and organised groups engaged in income generating activities other than primary production. The 
members are drawn from the same population. 
69 
building of smallholders, PROSPER is geared to promote real economic opportunities for 
the substantial numbers of underutilised people in the same population, particularly the 
youth, not all of whom want to be in farming anyway. PROSPER is not intended to create 
jobs directly, but it is capacitated to help entrepreneurs to set up enterprises and 
facilitate access to appropriate finance, providing regular income for the “small 
operators”, the growing number of rural people not directly dependent on primary 
production. The project will make existing smallholders better off but will create new 
jobs and enduring earning opportunities for presently unemployed youth. 
Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development. 
This subcomponent comprises three activities. In the first, Value chain analysis, 
PROSPER will build on the preliminary value chain analysis conducted during project 
design. It will examine in depth the status and characteristics of each selected national 
value chain– soya, rice maize, cashew, shea and poultry – and map the VC actors 
located close to the target communities, particularly the first stage market linkages 
between producers and others in the chains. The general presumption is that most 
smallholder farmers and their groups in remote areas have no established marketing 
arrangements and interact opportunistically with buyers and middlemen only as and 
when they harvest a surplus. The number and location of private sector operators, 
including larger agribusinesses working with contracted outgrowers, is not well 
documented. PROSPER will commission a detailed structural examination of each VC, 
including an estimation of the value added at each link, to provide a sound platform for 
project interventions. 
The practical and intensive developmental activity Promotion of linkages between 
producers and value chain actors is aimed at generating enduring partnerships between 
producers engaged in climate-resilient farming and larger-scale agribusinesses within 
locally appropriate forms of robust and equitable contract relationships in the private 
sector. PROSPER itself will not enter business relations with the parties at any stage. 
This second activity will concentrate on those eligible RIs and MSMEs that demonstrated 
interest and potential in the Component 1 capacity building interventions. Group 
eligibility for PROSPER support centres on meeting membership criteria regarding the 
minimum proportion of specified disadvantaged groups: women, female and male youth, 
PWDs and landless or near-landless households. These criteria allow for and, for practical 
reasons, encourage a minority of non-eligible members with productive land holdings of 
up to 10 ha in each group. 
With the support of the Business Advisory Centres (BACs)/Business Resource Centres 
(BRCs) and DDAs, the project will engage with VC actors in each participating district 
with an information-gathering and analysis exercise. An initial assessment will be 
conducted of the organisational status and maturity of the targeted groups (RIs and 
MSME), building on the cluster profiling at project inception, (Component 1.1). Groups 
will be evaluated in terms of their organisational proficiency, level of capitalization, 
acquired skills in financial management and potential to establish business agreements 
with VC actors such as traders and processors. The producer groups will be categorized 
broadly into two streams going forward: those deemed ready to advance to formal 
business arrangements with larger VC actors and external financial services; and those 
needing more time and coaching to consolidate their organisational and financial 
capacity to engage in business. This objective evaluation will be instrumental in proper 
targeting and sequencing to access further project support and appropriate financial 
services. 
It is expected that 50% of those disadvantaged individuals targeted under Component 1 
(50,000 people) by PROSPER will qualify for assistance under this subcomponent. The 
marginalised, poorer and most vulnerable RIs (composed of more than 50% members 
with access to land of 1 ha or less and 40% women, 30% youth and 15% people with 
disability) and smaller MSMEs (fewer than 9 employees) progressing from Component 1 
will be offered training sessions backed up by demonstrations and events at the cluster 
level on climate risk mitigation, resilience and integration into business plans and on VC 
linkages and green bankable propositions, with particular attention to potential MSMEs 
dedicated to women, youth and PWDs. Meetings will raise awareness, share information, 
70 
bring together potential partners, and seek to conclude RI and MSME agreements with 
VC actors. These beneficiaries will be assisted in the preparation of a basic Business Plan 
(BP) to aid the consolidation of their income-generating activities and consideration for 
financing, (see below). 
The relatively better-off RIs that: (i) have a larger proportion of well-off beneficiaries 
(less than 50% of the members have access to an area of 1 ha of land and no more than 
10% have access to 5-10 ha of land) and a lesser proportion of vulnerable people (40% 
women, 30% youth and 5% PWDs); and (ii) meet the organisational and financial 
literacy requirements will be offered a more advanced version of the trainings and 
demonstrations leading towards the establishment of business partnerships in each 
target district. MSMEs (with up to 29 employees) will be engaged in the same 
developmental processes if their business can be shown to contribute to increasing the 
offtake from the primary target group and extending the reach of the VCs in remote 
locations. These beneficiaries will be assisted in the preparation of a more advanced 
version of an orthodox Business Plan to support an application for external commercial 
credit. Those poorer RIs and MSMEs that perform well in the entry level scheme are able 
and encouraged to progress to this advanced level activity. 
The centrepiece of the third activity, Development of business plans, is the generation of 
a sound, achievable and fully costed plan appropriate to the resources and prospects of 
each concerned entity. For the less mature RIs and MSMEs referred to above, a simple 
but realistic BP will be prepared with the support of BRCs, BACs, DDAs and PFIs as 
available. The Cluster Committees from Component 1.1 will be strengthened and 
upgraded to include PFIs and other VC actors to participate in BP development and 
realisation. Each basic BP should include inputs, simple tools and equipment, and 
whatever other cost items are required, set against a realistic estimate of returns. It 
should be green in design and address effectively climate and NR degradation risks and 
impacts. BPs could be developed by individual or multiple RIs and standalone MSMEs 
with the prerequisites of potential formal market linkages (supported by the project or 
pre-existing), proper organisational skills and an adequate level of internal capital. The 
BPs will be evaluated by an independent agent/service provider (to avoid elite capture or 
any risk of political interference) and, if acceptable, used to support a request for 
financial support. 
For stronger RIs and MSMEs, the project will provide the opportunity for professional 
support by technical assistance and the BACs/BRCs in close collaboration with the PFIs in 
preparing a fully fledged BP and facilitating access to affordable finance, (see 
Subcomponent 2.2 below).19 The strengthened Cluster Committees will participate in 
devising workable local collaborative arrangements to implement the BPs. The PFIs 
themselves will be receiving capacity building and mentoring support from PROSPER to 
extend their outreach and are expected to engage fully with their potential customers 
early in the business planning stage. An advanced BP may include working capital as well 
as capital items such as inputs, mills, machinery, vehicles, tools, equipment and minor 
infrastructure. Each BP should be green in design and address effectively the climate 
change adaptation and mitigation challenges and NR degradation risks. 
For PROSPER, the imperative is to promote and expand businesses operating an 
aggregator-primary producer model that is prepared to engage with the IFAD target RIs 
and related enterprises to become their interface with the market. This VC chain 
development is key to moving the sector on from the failing unsustainable smallholder 
farming systems. Such businesses are likely to comprise a substantial VC actor led by an 
entrepreneur “driver” and multiple producer groups under contract, all active in the 
private sector. The project is also geared to preparing and facilitating the BPs of larger 
standalone MSMEs (up to 29 employees). 
Subcomponent 2.2 Access to rural financial services. The objective is to promote a 
savings culture among PROSPER’s beneficiaries, facilitate realization of the cluster-level 
Business Plans and improve enduring access to suitable financial resources for the 
19 The concept of supporting “flexibility to achieve sustainability” in financing rural poor people is central to IFAD’s new Inclusive Rural 
Finance Policy, with less emphasis on commercial (market-priced) finance at the entry level. 
71 
beneficiaries to engage in profitable agribusiness. Expected outcomes: farmers through 
RIs and related local MSMEs are integrated step-by-step into the formal financial system 
and have lasting access to adapted and affordable financial services to develop their 
agribusinesses, including green investments. Such access is a necessary though not 
sufficient condition for rapid sectoral development. 
PROSPER financial services are structured around three instruments appropriate to the 
various situations prevailing in rural areas as regard capacities and professionalization: 
(1) Saving and Loan Groups (VSLA model) for sparking the saving habit within 
communities; (2) a Matching Grants fund for capitalizing emergent RIs to engage in 
commercial agriculture and smaller MSMEs around the selected VCs and supporting food 
and nutrition security promotion schemes for the most vulnerable groups; and (3) a 
Blended Finance Facility operated as a refinancing facility (RF) by PFIs to ensure 
sustainable access to financial services for growing FIs and MSMEs, (see details in 
respective sections below). These instruments form a global graduation process by which 
beneficiaries will be able to increase their access to financing solutions over time as they 
build their financial and management capacities and develop their business relationships 
with other VC actors. 
Savings mobilisation/Saving and Loan Groups. Within the array of institution 
building activities under Component 1 concentrated on promoting income generating 
activities for RIs and MSMEs, the project will emphasise the need for savings 
mobilisation and internal capital formation by all beneficiary groups as a prerequisite for 
forming sustainable businesses and, as and when appropriate, accessing external 
financial services. 
In that context, PROSPER will support the creation and strengthening of savings and 
credit groups, based on the VSLA model that various IFAD-funded projects have been 
using with success.20 The objectives are: to promote the saving habit and culture as a 
way to increase self-financing capacities for farmers and other VC actors, thus reducing 
their dependency on external resources; and to build internal capital in order to reduce 
the need for and cost of credit in the longer term. Savings and credit groups will be 
identified through the initial profiling process, preferably with all members engaged in 
the same activity, such as trading or processing. 
As they form the group and start transactions, members will be trained in financial 
literacy and banking activity management. Savings deposited will constitute initial capital 
that will be leveraged in subsequent investment in equipment on credit with project 
support. Through the financial education programme, PROSPER will encourage groups to 
save for future needs, such as raising their counterpart contribution to access Matching 
Grant funding. Participating PFIs will be trained in product development to incentivise 
saving. The project will help to create or strengthen 5,300 VSLAs in the targeted regions. 
MSMEs will be targeted by the same programme. After one year in operation, groups will 
be assessed on their level of savings, member participation and commitment to 
developing business activities. The best rated groups will qualify to apply for and benefit 
from the Matching Grant (MG) fund or Blended Finance Facility (BFF). 
Matching Grants. As a second stage, PROSPER will operate a MG fund to capitalize less 
mature FIs and MSMEs toward raising their production and value addition capacities as 
part of a business agreement with VC actors, including nucleus farmers, offtakers, 
processors, traders, aggregators and agroindustry.21 Eligibility for a MG will entail more 
demanding performance criteria. It is expected that participating groups will enhance 
their business proficiency and become more reliable in the eyes of potential VC partners. 
PROSPER will promote the adoption of innovative, climate smart and resilient 
technologies and practices to achieve financial and environmental sustainability in the 
context of climate change and NR depletion. The MG as a one-off support will help RIs to 
finance the investments described in their BP. 
Three MG funding channels are proposed, for RIs, MSMEs and Nutrition and other 
20 CARE has also had successful experience in developing the concept for women in Ghana. 
21 This systematic objective selection approach and self-targeting mitigate potential elite capture of the MG fund. 
72 
poverty initiatives. The level of grant/contribution required will vary according to the VC 
and the profile of the beneficiaries targeted. For women groups, youth groups and PWD 
eligible for the Nutrition and other poverty initiatives funding channel, no BP will be 
required for small income-generating schemes focused on promoting diversification 
towards nutrition and food security, (for example, year-round vegetable production 
schemes). RIs will be assessed against the realization of their BPs and capacity to 
expand business with their offtaker partner. Similarly, stand-alone MSMEs will be rated 
on their performance against their BP. The best rated RIs and MSMEs will qualify to 
prepare an advanced BP with project assistance (under Subcomponent 2.1) and to 
access an affordable loan from PFIs through the BFF. It is expected that 30% of MG 
recipients will graduate to BFF financing during the project timeline. 
Blended Finance Facility (BFF). The BFF will develop, test and rollout green financial 
products to finance advanced BPs by the more developed RIs and MSMEs that have the 
potential to undertake commercial agriculture with climate mitigation and adaptation 
interventions in partnership with other VC actors.22 The Facility is set up to contribute to 
the opening up of the climate finance market in Ghana.23 The BFF will be made available 
as the third financial product for eligible groups some of whom may not have accessed 
an MG. BFF will direct the financing only to qualified PROSPER RIs and MSMEs who 
present bankable BPs with climate mitigation and adaptation interventions. Under the 
condition of being linked formally with VC actors under contract arrangements, qualified 
RIs and MSMEs will gain access to BFF credit at a blended on-lending rate for financing a 
more sophisticated BP that has a strong focus on adaptation and mitigation in the face of 
climate change impacts on small-scale agriculture. Selected RIs within the same cluster 
and along the same VC will be helped to come together to develop and finance an 
advanced BP, which could include support to the VC actor as needed, provided that the 
BP show clear benefits of such support to the IFAD target group taking part. Another BFF 
funding channel will be made available to BPs developed by small enterprises, (up to 
20 employees). 
The project will provide this affordable financing solution to the best RIs and MSMEs 
capacitated to invest on a larger scale (heavy equipment, working capital, inputs, TA) 
and to grasp other business opportunities. The BFF will operate as a refinancing facility 
(RF) beyond PROSPER closure to continue providing sustainable access to affordable 
finance for groups to maintain and develop their business activities with focus on climate 
mitigation and adaptation. 
The BFF will be developed through combining/blending at least five different loanable 
resources with the objective to foster the development of a climate lending market.24 
The BFF will mix concessional funds from development institutions with commercial 
private resources. The five resources are: (i) two lines of credit from the Green Climate 
Fund (GCF)/IGREENFIN Phase I, with both lines at highly concessional cost of funds (0% 
for climate mitigation and 1% for climate adaptation activities); (ii) one line of credit 
from IFAD resources at a concessional cost of funds of 2%; (iii) the Association of Rural 
Banks (ARB) Apex Bank of Ghana and its Rural Commercial Bank (RCB) members, who 
will engage their own resources at a treasury bond rate (reference cost of funds) of 
12%; and (iv) resources from other private sector investors and/or other development 
agencies, at a market cost of funds of at least 20%.25 
22 Only for the six main VCs: rice, maize, soya, poultry, cashew and shea. 
23 Currently, there is almost no demand for climate finance in Ghana because uptake of climate mitigation and adaptation technologies is still in 
its very early stages. BFF will be one of the very first funds set up by IFAD in Ghana to contribute to climate finance market 
development. 
24 A dedicated technical team of IFAD experts, private sector independent consultants and Apex Bank bankers and economists carried out a 
joint exercise to determine the blended affordable on-lending rate. Details of the adopted approach to the interest rate determination are 
documented in a “Technical guidance note on determining the on-lending rate from blending and structuring a mixture of highly concessional 
and commercially-priced loans”. 
25 The ARB Apex Bank in collaboration with PROSPER will look for investors and other development partners. A technical guidance note (in 
the PIM) shows that the average cost (wholesale rate) of the blended funds will be in the single digits (less than 10%) and the average structured 
interest rate applied to the clients (on-lending or retail rate) will also be in single digits. This latter is compared to the current market rate of 
between 26% and 28% applied by Apex Bank’s network of RCBs. 
73 
PROSPER will support access by the above-mentioned groups to credit lines for green 
agricultural investments, leveraging the Inclusive Green Finance Initiative (IGREENFIN-I) 
under the GCF Great Green Wall Umbrella Programme (GGWUP). IGREENFIN-I will 
support (i) Mitigation measures for reducing/mitigating GHG emissions and 
(ii) Adaptation activities to strengthen climate resilience of the Project beneficiaries. 
Through IGREENFIN-II, PROSPER will build RIs and MSMEs’ capacities to understand 
climate threats, identify and implement adaptation and mitigation solutions, design 
viable/profitable business plans, improve financial education, business management and 
development, and access green loans from banks and MFIs. IGREENFIN-II will also: 
strengthen the commitment to green and inclusive financing by financial intermediaries, 
MSMEs and others; contribute to climate resilience-strengthening activities in production 
and processing in addition to those activities required by SECAP for climate proofing; and 
support adaptation and mitigation activities included in beneficiaries’ BPs through 
IGREENFIN-II adaptation Window I and IGREENFIN-I mitigation Window II respectively. 
The BFF will be established at and managed by the ARB Apex Bank. The Apex Bank, as 
the Investment Fund Manager, will provide wholesale liquidity on blended terms to its 
RCB members and other interested retail financial institutions operating with reasonable 
outreach in the PROSPER project area, for on-lending for smallholder agricultural 
production and MSMEs development.26 The Apex Bank relies on its due diligence 
processes to select its partner retail RCBs and other qualified FIs. This blended financing 
arrangement will leverage existing derisking tools, including GIRSAL’s partial credit 
guarantee scheme, GAIP’s smallholder insurance scheme and GCX market access and 
warehouse receipt systems. 
To contribute to mitigating the risk averseness of participating RCBs and other FIs, 
PROSPER will contribute 50% of the premium to be paid by these FIs to the GIRSAL 
partial credit guarantee fund for a coverage of up to 70% loss.27 In addition, to 
encourage beneficiaries to take up high value but risky climate mitigation and adaptation 
interventions, PROSPER will contribute 50% of the insurance premium paid by clients to 
GAIP.28 To ensure optimal participation from the clients, the agricultural insurance 
product solicited (weather index insurance and/or area yield index insurance) will be 
bundled with the credit requested from the PFIs. Among the multiple uses of the TA 
associated with the BFF, part will be used to address key bottlenecks, including the risk 
averse nature of FIs in Ghana to finance smallholder agriculture, lack of affordable 
liquidity in the banks and unaffordable interest rates for smallholder producers. The BFF 
will be developed and set up at the Apex Bank by an external expert sourced by 
PROSPER. At inception, BFF PROSPER will be linked with BFF AAFORD. 
Partner RCBs and other retail FIs selected to channel BFF financing to beneficiaries will 
have to commit to offering the predetermined single digit on-lending interest rate 
negotiated between the Apex Bank and the project, while ensuring a reasonable return 
and sustainability to the participating RCBs and FIs. In addition to contributing to the 
credit guarantee fund and the agricultural insurance, a cash contribution of around 25% 
of the cost of the BP will be required from the RIs, including a contribution from the 
partner offtaker, the loan being limited to the remaining amount. IGREENFIN technical 
assistance to RCB staff will be deployed towards climate change capacity building and 
financial product development. The BFF will have a dedicated unit in the ARB Apex Bank 
to run the day-to-day activities of the BFF in coordination with PROSPER. The BFF will be 
supported by the project’s M&E core team. 
Component 3. Project management and Policy engagement.  
The expected outcome of the support component: Efficient and timely delivery of 
26 For purposes of flexibility to achieve sustainability (IRF Policy 2021), the evolution and performance of the innovative blended fund will be 
closely monitored by a dedicated GCF/IGREENFIN TA-supported M&E Unit lodged at the Apex Bank. The dedicated M&E team will collect 
and analyse data that will be used to inform recommendations and/or decisions to be taken at midterm (MTR) on whether to make any 
adjustments to the blended fund and its operations. 
27 The premium is currently estimated at 1% of loan portfolio to PROSPER clients. 
28 Details of the premium determination will be worked out with GAIP in time for the beneficiaries to access BFF. 
74 
PROSPER development results and support to evidence-based sectoral policy 
formulation. 
Subcomponent 3.1 Project management. PROSPER will be facilitated by an 
implementation support structure embedded in the host GoG agency providing liaison, 
physical and financial project management, reporting and accounting, proactive 
knowledge management and learning activities, and monitoring and evaluation 
functions. Details are set out in section Ka below and in the PIM. 
Subcomponent 3.2 Policy engagement. PROSPER will support developing an enabling 
policy environment that will help achieve the project’s goals and objectives through the 
provision of technical assistance, organising high-level round table discussions, 
establishing policy dialogue fora, holding conferences and advocacy as appropriate. This 
will be underpinned by analytical work and KM products from PROSPER, IFAD and other 
development partners. 
Top of the agenda are the policy ramifications of the large-scale trial of the new financial 
sector product “climate/green finance” as a potentially important development 
instrument in Ghana in coping with climate change. Without substantial incentives, the 
private sector is unlikely to borrow at scale to remediate NRs at landscape level that 
have long been neglected, under-invested, over-exploited and regarded as “free goods” 
by traditional agriculturalists and pastoralists. However, there are potential policy 
alternatives for public-private partnerships to invest in an ambitious NR recovery and 
reconstruction programme. Properly managed with appropriate technology, such an 
approach could provide employment for large numbers of people. Climate/green finance 
could leverage massive public investment in adaptation and mitigation if a conducive 
policy framework were devised. 
Other areas of policy engagement include (i) focus on creating an enabling environment 
for investment in agriculture, including access to productive land and improving 
effectiveness of public expenditure in agriculture, and (ii) financial policies to enhance 
smallholders’ access to financial services and formalize MSMEs, strengthening their role 
along different value chains. Salient sectoral policy issues identified during 
implementation will be supported as well. The project will commission ad hoc studies on 
policy issues related to the IFAD Ghana COSOP and the scope of PROSPER. 
75 
2.4 Project geographic area of intervention and target groups 
2.4.1 Geographical targeting. The geographical targeting strategy of PROSPER 
considers (i) high rural population, (ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food 
and nutrition insecurity, (iv) strong concentration of female and male youth and 
(v) presence of economic opportunities relevant to the project in each district, combined 
with indicators of climate vulnerability and the level of cumulative degradation of the 
productive NR base (particularly soil, water and trees). 
The geographic area of intervention extends to eight regions in the above-mentioned 
Belts. All five regions in the Northern Belt, (Upper West, Upper East, Northeast, 
Savannah and Northern), have a high poverty head count, the highest 92% (Wa West 
District, Upper West). The three neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, 
Bono and Oti) have significant poverty levels and contain pockets with a markedly high 
poverty head count peaking at 78% Kintampo South District, Bono East. The number of 
regions has risen from five at Independence to the present 16, but the administrative 
divisions do not coincide with the environmental and socioeconomic conditions. Broadly, 
poverty is progressively deeper from South to North with the drier climate and 
increasingly challenging setting for agriculture with the negative impact of climate 
change. The poverty analysis underpinning the geographical targeting of PROSPER is 
presented in the PIM. 
Food insecurity prevalence as reported is not necessarily corresponding to the poverty 
head count. However, the latest food security and nutrition monitoring updates of WFP 
(June 2020) show high level of food insecurity (moderately and severe) in the target 
regions, including the worst-off districts in the whole nation in terms of food insecure 
households. Main barriers to food security are food availability and accessibility. This 
affects access to micronutrients, especially for women and children. 
There are significant regional disparities concerning nutrition security in Ghana. The 
Northern region is worst off when it comes to rural (extreme) poverty, rural child 
stunting (chronic undernutrition) and the prevalence of anaemia among women and 
children. The national child wasting (acute undernutrition) rate stands at 7%, with the 
highest prevalence reported for Northern region (10.9%). The presence of persons with 
disabilities also has regional differences. Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) 
is an indicator for the adequacy of the diet in a household. The Ghana Micronutrient 
Survey (2017) reports that the proportion of women (15-49 years) not meeting the 
MDDW score ranged from 37.9% to 42.4% in the target regions, with a high national 
average of 40.2%. The prevalence of PWDs by district ranges from 3.0% to 8.3% in the 
Northern Zone and from 7.3% to 12.4% in the Middle Belt. 
Figure 2: PROSPER Intervention Areas 
76 
2.4.2 Target groups.  PROSPER’s primary target groups will be: (1) the poorest and 
77 
poor households, identified at inception through participatory methodologies appropriate 
to their circumstances; and (2) vulnerable people who have little access to assets and 
economic opportunities due to social exclusion, marginalization and the negative impact 
of climate change, targeted for participation in economic groups (RIs and MSMEs) 
promoted by the project.29 
The poorest households hold not more than 1 ha cultivable land or are landless whilst 
poor households comprise smallholders with less than 2 ha cultivable land whose 
livelihoods are vulnerable to NR degradation and climate change risks. Vulnerable people 
within the poor rural population include women (40%), unemployed female and male 
youth between 18-35 years (30%) and persons with disability who are economically 
active (5%), many being part of the poor/poorest households. Market-oriented farmers 
with 2-10 ha cultivable land will also benefit from project support as minority members 
of the eligible groups and enterprises. The combined total number is estimated at 
100,000 beneficiaries. Market-oriented-farming households with more than 10 ha of 
arable land and larger private sector entities may participate in project activities such as 
capacity-building only if they offer employment or business opportunities to the primary 
target group. 
PROSPER is highly gender sensitive. Overall, 40% women outreach will be targeted. 
PROSPER will address the barriers to women’s participation and empowerment prevalent 
in the geographical context of the project. Involvement in training, educational and 
income generating activities will be promoted by ensuring there is enough time to reach 
everybody through community meetings and that activities are arranged in a way 
convenient to women’s lives. PROSPER will include activities expected to attract women’s 
participation, such as shea and savings and credit groups. The project will work with 
local media and trusted local NGOs. Gender targeting in PROSPER includes the inclusion 
of young women (youth) and women with disabilities (PWDs). 
Both male and female unemployed youth (18-35 years) will be targeted, particularly for 
off-farm opportunities in MSMEs related to primary production along the selected value 
chains, such as the provision of mechanised land preparation services, the use of by-
products for animal feed, and crop aggregation. Each MSME would have a 60% minimum 
membership requirement of eligible youth. PROSPER will concentrate on potential 
vulnerabilities affecting specific sections within the youth category, for examples: 
ensuring that young women have the same opportunities as their male counterparts to 
participate in and benefit from the project; and inclusion of female and male youth with 
disabilities. The steady migration of youth from the rural areas to towns, observed in 
many countries, is a rationale response to the lack of earning opportunities. The country 
cannot afford to waste the resource of unemployed young people. A key part of the 
remedy is supporting individual entrepreneurs in setting up any business they choose 
with their own resources, thereby creating authentic local employment. PROSPER is 
designed to be as flexible as possible in responding to the energy and aspirations of 
youth in setting up enterprises from the bottom up. 
In sensitizing communities about the project, PROSPER will create awareness about 
PWDs and the differing nature of impairments. The participatory identification of 
households with PWDs will be carried out while developing Cluster Plans. The needs 
assessment of the PWDs will follow tailored approaches for capacity building, economic 
engagement and social protection depending on the nature of impairment. PROSPER will 
aim to mainstream women, youth and PWDs through their inclusion in the project-
supported RIs, MSMEs and other activities. 
2.4.3 Phased approach. Selection of all eight proposed PROSPER regions is based on 
exhaustive analysis of available poverty, food insecurity and socioeconomic data in the 
Northern and Middle Belts. The plan is to start with three of the poorest regions to 
conduct the various project-wide inception activities without over-extending Government 
and management resources and to align with the pattern of project financing. The 
29 The socially sensitive household methodologies to be employed, as recommended strongly by GASIP supervision missions, are mentioned in 
the Household nutrition and healthy diet campaign section under Subcomponent 1.1 below and in detail in the PIM. 
78 
project will start implementation in three adjacent regions in the Northern Belt 
(Calibration Phase): Northern, Upper West and either Savannah or North East. The 
original concept envisaged this cautious approach, with all project activities tried from 
inception and scaled up when modalities are shown to be effective. The project structure 
is flexible and phasing can and should be adjusted in the light of experience gained in 
the first years, particularly with lessons learned from piloting the innovative Blended 
Finance Facility (BFF). 
The project will be scaled up to the remaining five target regions, (Replication and 
Scalability Phase), by the middle of the third year of implementation according to four 
trigger conditions: (i) filling the financing gap (currently estimated at USD 38.4 million), 
in part or in full from IFAD-12 (IFAD); (ii) Government meeting its PROSPER cofinancing 
commitments during the Calibration Phase (GoG); (iii) MoUs with implementing partners 
established and progressing well (PROSPER management); and (iv) satisfactory 
arrangements in place with regard to the operation of the Matching Grants and Blended 
Finance Facility (PROSPER management). The worst-case scenario if the financing gap is 
not filled by year three is a reduction in project scope for the remaining period. If other 
triggers related to overall performance are not met, this could lead to restructuring of 
the project to or any other possible remedies to address the underlying issues. 
79 
3 ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL PROFILE OF PROSPER TARGET 
AREAS 
3.1 Physical Environment  
  Topography and Relief  
The Ghana landscape topography is predominantly undulating and of low relief with 
slopes of less than 1%. Despite the gentle slopes, about 70 % of the country is subject 
to moderate to severe sheet and gully erosion. The highest elevation in Ghana, Mount 
Afadjato in the Akwapim-Togo Ranges, rises 880m above sea level. There are five 
distinct geographical regions:  
• The low plains, stretching across the southern part of the country.  
• The Ashanti Uplands, stretching from the Côte d’Ivoire border in the west to the 
elevated edge of the Volta Basin in the east.  
• The Akwapim-Togo Ranges in the eastern part of the country consist of a generally 
rugged complex of folded strata, with many prominent heights composed of volcanic 
rock. The ranges begin west of Accra and continue in a north-easterly direction, finally 
crossing the border into Togo.  
• The Volta Basin occupies the central part of Ghana and covers about 45 percent of the 
nation’s total area. The basin is characterized by poor soil, generally of Voltaian 
sandstone.  
• The high plains in the northern and north-western part of Ghana, outside the Volta 
Basin, consist of a dissected plateau. Soils in the high plains are more arable than those 
in the Volta Basin  
The relief of Ghana has been influenced considerably by its geological history. The land is 
generally below 600m. A ridge and furrow topography is evident on Pre-Cambrian rocks 
reflecting the fold trends. The lowest lying areas occur in the middle Volta Basin and in a 
broad belt along the coast. Physiographic regions include the coastal plains, the Buem-
Togo ranges, the forest dissected plateau, the southern Voltaian Plateau, the Savanna 
High Plains and the Gambaga scarp. The topography will largely inform the design of 
physical component of the Project, especially the likely small earth dams, dugouts to 
harvest storm waters. 
Figure3: Topography and elevation for Ghana 
Ghana, located along the south-central coast of West Africa, shares borders with the 
Republic of Togo to the east, Burkina Faso to the north and Cote d’Ivoire to the west. 
Ghana has an area of 239,460 km2 and its territorial coastal waters extends 200 nautical 
miles off the coast. Ghana’s territory has many water bodies, which include the Lakes 
80 
Volta and Bosomtwe, which occupy 3,275 km2, as well as other seasonally flooded lakes 
that occupy another 23,350 km230. The country has two broad ecological zones: forest 
zone, which cover 30% of the southern region and the Northern Savannah Ecological 
Zone, which covers the remaining, drier, 70%. More than 70% of the country’s land area 
is dedicated to agriculture31. Figure 2 shows the topography and elevation for Ghana. 
Ghana is a lower middle-income, developing country with a stable and democratic 
government. In 2019, 
the country’s population was 30.4 million people with an annual population growth rate 
of 2.2%. Projections suggest that the population will increase to 37.3 million people by 
2030 and 51.2 million people by 205032.  
Over 55% of Ghanaians reside in urban areas, which are expected to experience 
considerable growth, with 63% and 73% of the population residing in urban areas by 
2030 and 205033. The country has a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$66.9 billion 
(2019) and had an annual growth rate of 6.5%34. The impacts of climate change on 
Ghana’s overall economic growth are predominantly negative (Table 1). Since 2010, 
economic growth has been fueled by high commodity prices and newly developed 
offshore oil resources. Despite a recent transition to an industry and services-oriented 
economy, 45%of the workforce still relies on work dependent upon rainfed agriculture. 
The fisheries sector contributes 4.5% to GDP and is another important source of income 
and nutrition, providing livelihoods for as many as 2.2 million people. Ghana’s Northern 
Savannah Ecological Zone, where agricultural production is centered and where poverty 
rates are most severe, will see increasing risks as the climate changes35. The risks posed 
by climate change in Ghana include risks for the health and agriculture sectors, primarily 
due to altered rainfall patterns and coastal area flooding36. 
Table 1.  Data snapshot: Key development indicators 
Indicators  
Life Expectancy at Birth, Total (Years) (2019)  
64.1 
Population Density (People per sq. km Land Area) (2018)  
130.8 
% of Population with Access to Electricity (2018)   
GDP per Capita (Current US$) (2019)  
Source: Ghana Country Profile, The World Bank Group, 2021 
  Drainage and Water Resources 
82.4% 
$2,202.10 
Ghana’s water resources potential is divided into surface and groundwater sources. 
Surface water resources are mainly from three river systems that drain Ghana, namely: 
the Volta, Southwestern and Coastal River systems. The Volta system is made up of the 
Red, Black and White Volta Rivers as well as the Oti River. The Southwestern River 
system is made up of the Bia Tano, Ankobra and Pra Rivers. The Tordzie/Aka, Densu, 
Ayensu, Ochi-Nakwa and Ochi-Amissah comprise the Coastal River systems. These river 
systems make up 70%, 22% and 8% respectively of Ghana’s total land area of about 
240,000 km2. In addition to these, the only significant natural freshwater lake in Ghana 
30 -UNDP (2019). Climate Change Adaptation Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.adaptation-undp.org/explore/western-africa/ghana 
31 -Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ 
ghanc3.pdf  
32 -World Bank (2019). Internal Climate Migration Profile – Ghana. 
33 -World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: Population Estimates and Projections, Ghana. URL: https://databank. 
worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=health-nutrition-and-population-statistics:-population-estimates-and-projections  
34 -World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: World Development Indicators, Ghana. URL: https://databank. 
worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&country 
35 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
36 -UNDP (2019). Climate Change Adaptation Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.adaptation-undp.org/explore/western-africa/ghana 
81 
is Lake Bosomtwi. This is a meteoritic crater lake located in the forest zone, with a 
surface area of 50 km2, and a maximum depth of 78m (i.e. Ministry of Water Resources, 
Works and Housing, 2007).  
  Climate and37 Vegetation  
Ghana has a warm, humid climate. Mean annual rainfall of the country is estimated at 
1,187 mm. Mean annual temperatures range from 26.1 °C near the coast to 28.9 °C in 
the extreme north (Figure 3A). Annual potential open water evaporation has been 
estimated as ranging between 1,350 mm in the south to about 2,000 mm in the north. 
The actual amount of evaporation depends on several factors including water availability, 
vegetation cover and prevailing weather conditions among others. 
There are six agro-ecological zones defined based on climate, reflected by the natural 
vegetation, and influenced by the soils (Figure 3B). Rainfall distribution is bimodal in the 
forest, transitional in coastal zones, giving rise to a major and a minor growing season. 
In the remaining two agro-ecological zones, the unimodal rainfall distribution gives rise 
to only one growing season. Only in some parts of the country is the climate favourable 
for non-irrigated agriculture. Rainfall exceeds potential evaporation during relatively 
short periods. Even in the southern forest zone where rainfall is at its highest, irrigation 
is essential for short season crops during the dry period. The unreliability of rainfall is a 
cause of concern. Complete crop failures can be expected in most northern areas in 
about one in every five years. This risk can rise to one in every three years during low 
rainfall periods. The lean season would be targeted by the Project to engage the poor in 
the public works component. 
          Figure 4. Typical vegetation zones (left) and average temperatures (right) in 
Ghana 
The ND-GAIN Index38 ranks 181 countries using a score which calculates a country’s 
vulnerability to climate change and other global challenges as well as their readiness to 
improve resilience. This Index aims to help businesses and the public sector better 
identify vulnerability and readiness in order to better prioritize investments for more 
37 -World Bank (2021). DataBank – World Development Indicators. URL: https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-
developmentindicators 
38 -University of Notre Dame (2020). Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative. URL: https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/ 
82 
efficient responses to global challenges. Due to a combination of political, geographic, 
and social factors, Ghana is recognized as vulnerable to climate change impacts, ranked 
109 out of 181 countries in the 2020 ND-GAIN Index. The more vulnerable a country is 
the lower their score, while the more ready a country is to improve its resilience the 
higher it will be. Norway has the highest score and is ranked 1st. Figure 2 is a time-
series plot of the ND-GAIN Index showing Ghana’s progress. 
Ghana submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC in 2016, in 
support of the country’s efforts to realize its development goals and increase its 
resilience to climate change. Ghana also published its Fourth National Communication to 
the UNCCC in 2020. Ghana is particularly focused on increasing its resilience through the 
development of sustainable land use practices, including food security, climate-proof 
infrastructure, energy security, sustainable forest management and urban waste 
management. Key sectoral focus is on energy, industry, agriculture, waste, and forestry 
sectors to reduce the country’s carbon footprint39. 
Ghana’s generally tropical climate is strongly influenced by the West African monsoon 
winds, which varies slightly along with the country’s varied topography. Across Ghana, 
annual rainfall ranges from 1,100mm in the north to approximately 2,100 mm in the 
southwest. The northern part of the country has one rainy season, which extends from 
May to September; the south has two rainy seasons: the first from April to July and the 
second from September to November. The dry season (December to March) brings the 
arid and dusty harmattan winds that blow from the Sahara Desert, and is marked by low 
humidity, hot days (T >25°C) and cool nights (T <20°C) Average annual temperatures 
are approximately 27°C, with higher temperatures generally exhibited in the north and 
during the country’s dry season. The area between the forest in the southwest and the 
savannah in the north is vital for domestic food production, due to more reliable rains 
and an extended growing season40. 
Ghana is highly vulnerable to climate variability and change, which continues to pose a 
threat to future growth and development. Rising sea levels, drought, higher 
temperatures, and erratic rainfall negatively impacts infrastructure, hydropower 
production, food security and coastal and agricultural livelihoods. Approximately ¼ of the 
population lives along the coast in rapidly expanding urban areas like Accra and are 
especially vulnerable to flooding and waterborne diseases. Drought and reduced rainfall 
threaten access to reliable power sources, already erratic and insufficient. The climate 
and socio-economic environment in semi-arid, coastal and wetland areas across Ghana 
make communities vulnerable to food insecurity and unstable livelihoods as well as 
leading to unsustainable agroecological systems, crop failure and unproductive 
rangelands41. 
Analysis of data from the World Bank Group’s Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP) 
(Table 3) shows historical information for 1901–2020. Mean annual mean temperature 
for Ghana is 27.3°C, with average monthly temperatures ranging between 25°C–26°C 
(June to September) and 28°C–29°C (February to April). Mean annual precipitation is 
1,189.9 mm, with highest rainfall occurring May to September, with extremely low 
precipitation falling between November to January, for the most recent climatology, 
1991–202042.  
39 -Republic of Ghana (2016). Nationally-Determined Contributions. URL: https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/ 
Ghana%20First/GH_INDC_2392015.pdf 
40 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
41 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
42 -WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/ 
climate-data-historical 
83 
Table 2.  Data snapshot: Summary statistics43 
Climate Variables:   
Mean Annual Temperature (°C)  
Mean Annual Precipitation (mm)  
mm 
Mean Maximum Annual Temperature (°C)   
Mean Minimum Annual Temperature (°C)    
          1901–2020 
27.3°C 
1,189.9 
32.5°C 
22.1°C 
Table 3.  Data snapshot: Coupled Inter-comparison Project No.5 (CMIP5) ensemble 
projection 
Cmip5 Ensemble Projection                                                2020–2039              
2040–2059                 2060–2079                2080–2099 
Annual Temperature Anomaly (°C)                                   +0.6 to +1.5              +1.2 
to +2.7              +1.7 to +3.8              +2.3 to +5.3 
                                                                                              (+0.9°C)                    
(+1.7°C)                     (+2.7°C)                   (+3.6°C) 
Annual Precipitation Anomaly (mm)                                  -16.7 to +22.0            -
22.2 to +30.4          -22.9 to +38.9       -29.7 to +45.2 
                                                                                             (+0.9 mm)                 
(+0.3 mm)                 (+2.9 mm)             (+1.6 mm) 
Note: The table shows CMIP5 ensemble projection under Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCP8.5). Bold value is the range (10th–90th Percentile) and values in 
parentheses show the median (or 50th Percentile).  
Figure 5.  Map of average annual temperature (°C) (left); annual precipitation (mm) 
(right) of Ghana, 1991–202044 
Figure 6.  Annual Rainfall Patterns 
43 -WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/ 
climate-data-historical 
44 -WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana. URL: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana 
84 
Temperature 
Temperatures in Ghana have risen by approximately 1°C since the 1960s (an average 
increase of 0.21°C per decade) (Figure 5). The number of very hot days (Tmax >35°C) 
have increased by over 13% per year, and hot nights (Tmin >26°C) increasing by 20% 
per year; with the most pronounced increase occurring between September and 
November45. Overall, the rates of increase have been more rapid in the north of the 
country, and minimum temperatures in the southern regions (rainforest and coastal, 
agro-ecological areas) have increased. However, the rate of temperature rise for the 
middle and northern parts of Ghana (savannah zones) were +37%46. 
Precipitation 
Precipitation in Ghana, and the West Africa region, experience a high degree of 
interannual and interdecadal variability. However, since the 1960s, an overall reduction 
in cumulative rainfall of 2.4% per decade was observed47. Changes in decadal rainfall 
declined in the middle of the country, with more intense rainfall events occurring in both 
the north and south of the country, indicating an increase in the intensity of rainfall 
45 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
46 -Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ 
ghanc3.pdf 
47 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
85 
events and possibility of increased dry spell durations48. 
3.2 Biological Environment  
  Ecology  
There are six broad ecological divisions in Ghana that are rich and varied. The project 
area has savanna ecology, which extends into the neighboring countries. It is classified 
into the Guinea savanna and the Sudan savanna ecological zones.  
  Flora  
The Guinea savanna covers more than 90% of the land surface area of the Northern 
Savanna 
Zone but not restricted to it. It stretches from the upper regions down south to the 
forest fringes. The zone includes the grassland of the north and the derived savannaon 
the fringes of the forests.  
The interior savanna contains 1,519 vascular species known to be native or naturalised 
to the savanna zones of Ghana. Six species including Ceropergia gemmifera, 
Commiphora dalzielii, Ptleopsis habeensis and Eugenia coronta are rare in Ghana and 
internationally. The Guinea Savanna consists generally of fire tolerant, deciduous, broad‐ 
leaved trees interspersed in a ground flora of mainly grass, sometimes more than 1.5m 
high. The more important grasses of grazing value include Andropogon gayanus and in 
densely populated areas, Diectomis fastigiata, Pennisetum pedicellatum and Loudetia 
togoensis are common. Other species that occur are Hetropogon contortus, Schoenfeida 
gracilis and Aristidaa hordeacea. The common trees include Vitellaria paradoxa (shea), 
Parkia biglobosa (dawadawa), Piliostigma thonningli, Combretum glutinosum, Anogeissus 
sp., Detariums p., Afzelia sp., Prosopiss p., Pterocarpuss p., Butyrospermums p., Antiaris 
sp., Vitex sp., Piliosstigmas p., Lonchocarpuss p. and Acacias p.  
The Sudan Savanna occurs mainly in the Bawku East, Bawku West and Bolgatanga 
districts at the extreme northeastern corner of the Northern Savanna Zone. Its total 
coverage is less than 10% of the zone. The vegetation is made up generally of open 
savanna with short grass interspersed with relatively short low branching deciduous, 
broad, and thin‐ leave trees. The common trees include species of Adansonia Digitata, 
Butyrospermum, Acacia Albida and Parkia Biglobosa. The vegetation in most of the 
project area is characterized by a mosaic of forest, savanna, marshes and grassland. The 
ecology is for the most part severely altered. This is a reflection of prolonged 
unregulated grazing, burning, and intensive cultivation.  
There are 72 forest reserves in the northern savanna made up of 23, 33 and 16 in the 
Northern, Upper East and Upper West in that order. They range in size from 0.4km2 to 
1,116 km2. However, many of these areas are under pressure from subsistence farmers, 
livestock herders and others who engage in illegal activities in the reserves 
(Acheampong, 2001).  
  Fauna  
Many of the large wildlife species, which are common to tropical Africa, are also found in 
Ghana. They live mostly in the savanna eco‐system and include Panthera leo (lions), 
Panthera pardus (leopards), Loxodonta aficana (elephants), Syncerus caffer (buffalo), 
Neotrigus pygmaeus (royal antelope) and Colobus and Cercopithecus sp (monkeys), 
Hippopotamus amphibius and Crocodilus sp. Snakes include pythons and poisonous ones 
such as Naja nelanoleuca (cobra), Bitis gabonica (gaboon viper), Lizards, e.g. Veranus 
niloticus, often of striking colours are common, as are large snails, spiders and scorpions 
which are found in large numbers. The insect fauna is also very rich. The bird species 
include Francolinus sp (bush fowl) Falconidae sp (falcons, hawks, and eagles) Psittacus 
erithacus (grey parrot), Neophron sp. (vultures), Guttera edouardi (guinea fowl) and 
many more.  
48 -Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ 
ghanc3.pdf 
86 
Savanna fauna comprises at least 93 mammal species, about half of which can be 
considered to be large ones, over 350 bird species, 9 amphibians and 33 reptiles. About 
13% of the 860 recorded butterfly species in Ghana are associated with the savanna. 
The Wildlife Conservation Regulations of 1971, (LI. 685) has schedules which contain 
lists of wild animals found in Ghana. Fifty‐five of these are completely protected 
(Acheampong, 2001). 
  Rare or Endangered Species  
Populations of many wildlife species found in the savanna have dwindled as a result of 
human‐induced interventions, mainly through over hunting, inappropriate agricultural 
practices and expansion of agricultural land, road construction and bush burning 
(Appendix IV). The demand for wild animal meat (popularly called bushmeat in Ghana) 
is ever increasing, resulting in widespread hunting. As human populations in the 
northern parts of the country increases, exerting enormous pressure on the finite good 
"land" and creating land hunger among mostly the rural people, intact savanna 
woodlands and secondary groves which provide wild animals refuge and source of food 
become fragmented and unable to hold large populations of animals (Acheampong, 
2001).  
  Wild Animal Migration  
Wild animal movement between reserves, groves and sanctuaries in the northern 
savanna may be limited because these are either fragmented or interspersed with 
farmlands. Studies have shown that wild animals move from Togo into Ghana and vice 
versa, using gallery forests along the Red Volta River. It is also on record that wild 
animals move from the GEF supported Nazinga Game Ranch in Burkina Faso to farms on 
the Ghana side of the Ghana‐Burkina Faso border. Communities outlying protected areas 
have occasionally had their farms and property destroyed by wild animals mainly 
elephants that move outside the reserves, particularly in the dry season, in search for 
water and food. In 1997 elephants invaded some villages including Widinaba, Zongoiri, 
Nangodi, Sekoti and Datoko, all at the fringes of the Red Volta Forest Reserve, which is a 
natural trail for elephants moving from Togo into Ghana. Where villages received no help 
from the staff of Wildlife Division in driving these animals back into the reserves (or 
gallery forests) they resorted to killing the rampaging animals (Acheampong, 2001).  
3.3 Socio-Economic Environment  
  Demographic Characteristics  
As stated above, Ghana is a lower middle-income, developing country with a stable and 
democratic government. Ghana’s population as at 2010 stood at 24,658,823, comprising 
12,024,845 (48.8%) males and 12,633,978 (51.2%) females, culminating into a sex 
ratio of 95.2. In 2018, the county’s population is estimated at 30,000,000. On regional 
basis, Ashanti Region is the most populous, with a population of 4,780,280, representing 
19.4 percent of the country’s total population followed by Greater Accra, with a 
population of 4,010,054 (16.3%). The least populous regions are Upper West with 
702,110 persons constituting 2.8 percent of the total population and Upper East with 
1,046,545 persons or 4.2 percent of Ghana’s population. Population density stood at 103 
persons per square kilometer in 2010. Average household size also stood at 4.4 (Ghana 
Statistical Service, 2012).  
Most recent data show that in 2019, the country’s population was 30.4 million people 
with an annual population growth rate of 2.2%. If this trend continues, projections 
suggest that the population will increase to 37.3 million people by 2030 and 51.2 million 
people by 205049.  
Ghana has a youthful population, thus consisting of a large proportion of children under 
15 years, and a small proportion of elderly persons (65 years and older). The proportion 
of the population living in urban areas in 2010 was 50.9%, with the level of urbanization 
49 -World Bank (2019). Internal Climate Migration Profile – Ghana. 
87 
varies from region to region. Nowadays, it is estimated that over 55% of Ghanaians 
reside in urban areas, which are expected to experience considerable growth, with 63% 
and 73% of the population residing in urban areas by 2030 and 205050. 
In terms of ethnicity, Akans are the predominant ethnic group in Ghana (47.5%), 
followed by the Mole 
Dagbani (16.6%), the Ewe (13.9%), Ga-Dangme (7.4), Gurma (5.7%), Guang (3.7 %), 
Grusi (2.5%). The Mandes (1.1%) and other groups (1.4%) form the smallest ethnic 
group in Ghana. For religion, 71.2 percent of the population profess the Christian faith, 
followed by Islam (17.6%). Only a small proportion of the population either adhere to 
traditional religion (5.2%) or are not affiliated to any religion (5.3%).  
Literacy in Ghana is quite high, with majority (74.1%) of the population 11 years and 
older being literate. A large proportion (67.1%) of the population can read and write in 
English. About one-fifth (20.1%) can read and write in the English language only while 
53.7 percent of the population can read and write in at least one Ghanaian language 
(Ghana Statistical Service, 2012).  
  Indigenous Groups  
Indigenous peoples, also known as first peoples, aboriginal peoples or native peoples, 
are ethnic groups who are the original settlers of a given region, in contrast to groups 
that have settled, occupied or colonized the area more recently. According to the World 
directory of minority and indigenous people in Ghana published by the Minority Group 
International, there are no groups in Ghana identified as indigenous people51.  
In relation to DFI requirements such as IFAD, there are no groups in Ghana that will 
meet the definition of ‘indigenous groups’52. As part of the implementation of PROSPER 
activities, it is not therefore foreseen to be any risk associated with indigenous groups 
that may trigger the requirement for the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) 
for compliance purposes.  
  Economic Characteristics  
Of population aged 15 years and older, 71.1% are economically active and of these, 
most are employed (94.7%). Only 5.3% are unemployed. Females in this age group are 
more likely to be unemployed (5.8%) than males (4.8%). Most of the regions have 
relatively high proportions of economically active persons. However, the highest 
proportion of economically active persons is in the Brong-Ahafo Region (74.4%) and the 
lowest is in the Ashanti region (69.4%). The proportion of unemployed population is 
highest in Greater Accra (7.8%) and lowest in Upper East (2.8%).  
About two-fifth (41.2%) of the economically active population aged 15 years and older 
are skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery workers. About 21% is also engaged as 
service and sales workers while 15.2% is craft and related trade workers. Skilled 
agricultural, forestry and fishery work remains the dominant occupation for both males 
(44.9%) and females (37.7%). However, a much higher proportion of females (31.7%) 
than males (10.2%) is engaged as service and sales work. In Ghana, this pattern is 
generally the same for most of the regions, with the three northern regions (Northern, 
73.3%; Upper West, 72.3%; Upper East, 70.1%) having relatively high proportions of 
the economically active population engaged as skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery 
workers.  
According to Ghana Statistical Service, 2015, there is a high concentration of poverty in 
the North-Western part of Ghana. Though incidence in the districts of the South-Western 
50 -World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: Population Estimates and Projections, Ghana. URL: https://databank. 
worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=health-nutrition-and-population-statistics:-population-estimates-and-projections  
51
 - https://minorityrights.org/   
52 - As per the requirements of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
UN, World Bank Environmental and Social Standard (ESS7) and IFC Performance Standard (PS 7). 
88 
parts is very low, there are however few districts with relatively high incidence. The 
concentration of poor persons is mainly observed in the northern than the southern 
districts of Ghana. Among the districts in Ghana, East Gonja in the Northern Region 
stands out as the district with most of the poor persons. Districts in the Southern Ghana 
on the other hand show very low concentration of poor persons, there are few districts 
with high number of poor persons, but these numbers cannot be compared to what 
pertains to districts in the northern and middle belts regions.  
Aside poverty incidence rate and number of poor persons, high depth of poverty is 
marked in districts in the northern half of the country as well. Across the country, 
inequality exists but follows no pattern. The poverty mapping exercise has revealed a 
striking pattern that would not have been apparent. 
  Human Health and Safety  
In the Savannah region, the quality of life rests ultimately on the basic conditions which 
influence health, morbidity and mortality in the population. These factors include the 
biological make-up of individuals, prevalence and severity of specific diseases, social, 
economic, and environmental conditions as well as the availability, accessibility, 
affordability, and utilization of health care facilities. The safety and human health in the 
area is further determined by the recurrent floods and droughts regularly devastate 
communities, infrastructure, and livelihoods.  
Women are exposed to more dangers concerning safety and health, as a result of the 
high rate of illiteracy, lack of specialized services (family planning, reproductive health 
and maternal care) that is reflected in the high rate of early marriages and teenage 
pregnancy, inadequate access to health care due to lack of health facilities (both hard 
and soft) and greater vulnerability in access to food and nutritional insecurity. The 
livestock sector poses potential threat to human health due to lack of veterinary 
services, quarantine Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) facilities and conflicts 
emanating from the activities the settler cattle herdsmen popularly. The poor health of 
animals has significant adverse implications for human health.  
  Cultural Diversity  
Members of the same ethnic group share certain beliefs, values and norms that relate to 
a common cultural background. The majority of the heads of households within the 
savannah zone are Mole-Dagbani (14.2 %) followed by Ewe (13. 3%) whilst the Mande 
(1.1%) constitute the smallest ethnic group. The GLSS6 show that the majority of the 
household heads in Upper East (67.2%), Northern (67.1%) and Upper West (65.0%) are 
Mole-Dagbani and in Volta, Ewe (71.7%). Most of the household heads that belong to 
the Gurma ethnic group are located in the Northern (17.9%) and Volta (11.8%) regions.  
There is close relationship between family and household formation with regard to the 
type of socio-cultural practices that are prevalent in a particular society. The family 
system in any human society, whether it is the nuclear or extended type, depicts the 
type of kinship ties that hold the people together. Labour in the agriculture sector is 
influenced by cultural diversity among landowners, commercial famers and settler 
farmers. The agricultural sector is intrinsically associated with cultural practices, 
especially, the inland fishing, where in most communities is practiced at only specific 
times by the community as a group. The cultural aspect of people in the Savannah 
regions play part in the processing and preservation of traditional seeds and some plant 
species. Most agricultural activities are based on the cultural practices that prevent biotic 
and climatic hazards and contribute to food security. Cultural practices are further 
associated with the processing of food such as the shea butter, cassava flour, starch 
paste, “dawadawa” among others. 
89 
4 APPLICABLE POLICY, LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK GOVERNING 
THE SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE RISKS, IMPACTS AND BENEFITS 
MANAGEMENT OF PROSPER ACTIVITIES 
This section provides a review of the applicable policy, legal, and regulatory (PLR) 
framework related to the potential risks, impacts, and benefits of the implementation of 
PROSPER proposed activities. The PLR framework underpins how social and 
environmental safeguards, but also climate change issues will be gradually addressed 
and respected. It also compares national PLRs to applicable international law and, as 
appropriate, indicate institutional and operational weaknesses and capacities 
strengthening with recommendations to address identified gaps or weaknesses where 
appropriate and where indicated.  
In keeping with Ghanaian law, the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) is statutorily 
mandated to ensure that the implementation of all undertakings do not harm the 
environment and/or people and the ESMF and sites specific instruments to be prepared 
during project implementation will be in conformity with these core requirements. IFAD 
will work in tandem with the EPA and associated government agencies to ensure due 
compliance, although nature and level of impacts and risks will be managed in a manner 
consistent enough with IFAD’s SECAP requirements.  
Overall, the legal and institutional framework for environmental and social management, 
as well as climate change issues in Ghana includes, among many others, all of the 
below:   
4.1 National Framework 
Table 4. National Applicable Law and Institutional Framework 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant 
legislation and Clauses  
The 1992 
Constitution of 
Ghana 
Ghana Shared 
Growth and 
Development 
Agenda (GSGDA) 
Land Policies 
Article 36 (9): 
Safeguarding the 
national environment 
for posterity  
Article 258: Lands and 
Natural  
Resources 
Article 270(1): 
Chieftaincy  
Article 22: Property 
rights of spouses 
Vision for the 
Environment and 
Natural Resource Sector 
in Section 4.2.2  
National Land Policy, 
1999  
Administration of Lands 
Act of 1962 (Act 123) 
Lands Commission (LC) 
Act 2008, Act 767 
Office of the 
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
Parliament is yet to enact law to 
regulate the property rights of spouses 
as provided in article 22 (2). To avoid 
gender discrimination against women, 
benefit sharing arrangements will need 
to be formulated in detail, especially 
between husbands/wives or between 
partners.  
The GSGDA is consistent with REDD+, 
GCF principles and IFAD’s SECAP, and 
objectives and goes further to 
acknowledge the use of strategic 
environmental assessment to inform 
decision-making and mainstreaming 
environment into all sectors of the 
economy.  
The 1999 land policy does not appear to 
give support to off-reserve afforestation 
or reforestation programs as provided 
under Section 4.4 (d) of ensuring 
sustainable land use. A review of the 
1999 Land Policy to encompass off-
reserve afforestation/reforestation 
90 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant 
legislation and Clauses  
Administrator of Stool 
Lands Act 1994, Act 481 
Land Use and Spatial 
Planning Bill, draft 
October 2011 
Forest Policies 
and Regulations 
1994 Forest and Wildlife 
Policy  
2012 Forest and Wildlife 
Policy  
Forestry Commission 
Act of 1999 (Act 571)  
Forest Ordinance of 
1927 (Cap 157)  
Trees and Timber 
Decree of 1974 (NRCD 
273)  
Trees and Timber 
(Amendment) Law of 
1983 (PNDCL 70)  
Trees and Timber 
Amendment Act of 1994 
(Act 493)  
Forest Protection Decree 
of 1974 (NRCD 243  
Forest Protection 
(Amendment) Act of 
1986 (PNDCL 142)  
Forest Protection 
Amendment Act of 2002 
(Act 624)  
Concessions Act of 1962 
(Act 124)  
Timber Resources 
Management Act of 
1997 (Act 547)  
Economic Plant 
Protection Act of 1979  
Interim Measures for 
Controlling Illegal 
Harvesting Outside 
Forest Reserves of 1995  
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
programs, e.g. community 
forestry/dedicated forest etc. was 
recommended for REDD+ work.  
LVD Crop Compensation Rate: Current 
crop compensation rates do not cover 
timber tree species or naturally 
occurring trees or trees grown to 
provide ecosystem/environmental 
services.  
The Land Use and Spatial Planning Bill 
provides a comprehensive coverage of 
land use planning at national, regional 
and district levels relevant to REDD+, 
and agricultural and forestry lands. This 
Bill should be pushed to law. 
The 1994 Forest and Wildlife policy 
promotes collaborative management of 
forest resources with rural or forest-
based communities in Ghana. The 
Collaborative Wildlife Management 
Policy (2000), gave rise to CREMAs, 
devolving management authority to 
representative community institutions 
to create incentives for sustainable 
management of natural resources at the 
community level. The CREMA 
mechanism, is an innovative natural 
resource governance and landscape-
level planning tool that authorizes 
communities to manage their natural 
resources for economic and livelihood 
benefits. The aim was to encourage 
local people to integrate wildlife 
management into their farming and 
land management systems as a 
legitimate land-use option.  
The Timber Resources Management Act 
made it illegal for farmers and other 
users of off reserve lands to harvest 
any naturally growing trees for 
commercial or domestic purposes, even 
if it is growing on their land. It also 
prohibited logging without prior 
authorisation from concerned groups or 
individuals.  
Under the Timber Resources Act, 
farmers, and land owners have legal 
rights to planted trees. When Timber 
Utilization Contracts are granted off-
reserve, the contract holder is obliged 
to engage in a Social Responsibility 
Agreement (SRA) with the concerned 
91 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant 
legislation and Clauses  
Forest Plantation 
Development Fund Act 
of 2000 (Act 583)  
Wildlife Conservation 
Regulations of 1971 
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
communities in the proposed area of 
logging. According to the SRA, 5% of 
the stumpage fees should be directed to 
the community as compensation for 
damaged crops. However, this fee is 
often captured during the process and 
the SRAs have not been sufficiently 
effective in rewarding the farmers and 
communities for trees on their lands.  
In terms of legislation on off-reserve 
tree (both naturally-occurring and 
planted) harvesting and benefits to 
CREMAs, Timber Concessions Act of 
1962 (Act 124) and Article 267(6) of 
the 1992 Constitution. Per these, the 
following are true for CREMAs, which 
are off-reserve:  
•All naturally-occurring timber on any 
other land is vested in the President 
and belongs to him.  
•Revenue from the exploitation of 
naturally-occurring trees is shared 
between the beneficiaries in the manner 
and proportion outlined in Article 
267(6) of the 1992 Constitution.  
Presently, in the off-reserves, the 
revenue accruing from naturally-
occurring trees is split 50%-50% 
between the State and the following (i. 
the Stool through the Traditional 
Authority ii. the Traditional Authority 
and iii. the District Assembly). One of 
the implications for CREMAs is that in 
the off-reserve areas, the farmers are 
currently only expected to be consulted 
by the Stool whenever concessions or 
timber rights are being given out in 
respect of naturally-occurring trees on 
their farms but are not beneficiaries of 
sale proceeds. If they are to benefit, it 
will most likely lie largely on the Stool. 
This is currently being reviewed by the 
MLNR and the Forestry Commission.  
For planted trees (in off-reserves), in 
theory, plantations are currently the 
easiest for CREMAs to benefit from: 
100% for farmers who are also 
landowners and 66% (two-thirds) for 
tenant farmers. Planted trees which are 
on farms is a little complicated as the 
farmers (or CREMA members) would 
still have to register individual trees in 
order to benefit.  
On the Wildlife Bill, the last update, as 
92 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant 
legislation and Clauses  
Mining and 
Mineral Policies 
National Mining Policy  
Minerals Commission 
Act 1993, Act 450  
Mining and Minerals Act 
of 2006 (Act 703)  
Environmental 
Protection & 
Assessment 
Policies and 
Regulations 
Energy Policies 
Environmental 
Protection Agency Act, 
1994 Act 490  
National Environment 
Policy, 2013  
Environmental 
Assessment Regulations 
1999, LI 1652  
National Climate Change 
Policy, 2013  
Strategic National 
Energy Plan  
National Energy Policy, 
2010  
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
of December 2019, was that it was at 
the Cabinet level and is still not at 
Parliament.  
There are 3 ways timber can be 
harvested; i.e. by being issued a 
Timber Utilization Contract (TUC), 
Timber Utilization permit (TUP) and a 
Salvage permit. TUPs are given for 
large-scale harvests whiles TUC are for 
community/district/group harvests 
meant for social development. Timber 
harvested using a TUC (which happens 
to be given to community groups), 
cannot be sold. The best approach is to 
have community plantations/woodlots 
where they have a much better chance 
of profiting directly from its sale.  
Section 3 reveals that unless there is a 
law preventing the use of a land for 
some specified purpose, any land in the 
country may be the subject of 
application for a mineral right.  
Section 72 (1) gives the holder of a 
mining lease the upper hand with 
regard to the surface right. It is a 
source of conflict between mining firms 
and numerous farmers/farming 
communities with some surface rights 
within mining concessions.  
Current crop compensation rates cover 
known food/cash crops and some 
economic trees such as teak. There are 
no rates for naturally grown trees or 
timber species. Shade trees in cocoa 
farms are usually not counted as crops 
and so do not attract compensation. 
Forestry officials salvage or harvest 
such timber trees in cocoa farms prior 
to destruction by mining companies.  
The environmental protection/climate 
change policies and regulations are 
consistent with the IFAD SECAP and the 
REDD+ principles and objectives.  
Most of the rivers identified for small 
and medium scale hydro power projects 
(Ankobra, Tano and Pra) have forests or 
forest reserves along sections of the 
river banks. Careful planning and choice 
93 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant 
legislation and Clauses  
Energy Commission Act 
1997, Act 541 
Renewable Energy Act, 
2011, Act 832  
Water Resources 
Commission Act, 1996 
Act 522  
National Water Policy, 
2007  
Buffer Zone Policy, 2014  
Food and Agriculture 
Sector Development 
Policy (FASDEP)  
Ghana Irrigation Policy, 
June 2010  
Tree Crops Policy, 2012  
National Employment 
Policy  
Water Policy 
Agricultural Policy 
Investment, 
Employment, 
Labour, Gender, 
Local 
government, 
National Gender and 
Children Policy  
 Ghana Investment 
Promotion Centre Act 
1994, Act 478 
Local Government Act 
1993, Act 462  
Local Government 
Service Act, 2003, Act 
656  
Chieftaincy Act 759 of 
2008  
National Pensions Act, 
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
of technology is required during the 
development of any hydro-electric dam 
in order to minimize inundation of forest 
along these water bodies.  
The charcoal export license manual 
does not indicate clearly which offences 
warrant suspension and which offences 
warrant cancellation of licence. It is 
silent on how long a person can be 
suspended and if one’s licence is 
cancelled whether he/she is eligible for 
re-application. 
The Water Policy factors climate change 
issues into consideration and is 
generally consistent  
The National Labour Act of 2003 
provides information on public and 
private employment and sets out the 
objectives and procedures as well as 
the rights of workers. This Act will be 
followed by the CREMA Community 
Executive Management Committee for 
hire of a forester, community mobiliser, 
accountant and clerk under the 
Community Trust Fund; and the 
Forestry Commission in the hiring of 
labour for plantations through their co-
financing.  
The National Employment Act is skewed 
towards industrial or manufacturing or 
processing companies and does not 
provide health and safety coverage for 
afforestation/ tree plantation activities. 
There is need for a separate health and 
safety policy for the forestry sector.  
The ADR Act does not apply to matters 
on the environment as indicated in 
Section 1b. REDD+ type of project 
should push for amendment or inclusion 
of some environmental matters in the 
scope of application under ADR with 
regard to REDD+ related issues where 
94 
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
necessary 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant 
legislation and Clauses  
2008, Act 766  
The Labour Act 2003, 
Act 651  
Workmen’s 
Compensation Law 1987  
Intestate Succession 
Law, PNDC Law 111 
(1985)  
The Children’s Act 1998, 
act 560  
Factories Offices and 
Shop Act, 1970, Act 328  
Ghana National Fire 
Service Act 1997,  
Control of Bush Fires 
Law of 1983 (PNDCL 46)  
Control and Prevention 
of Bush Fires Act 1990  
Ghana Meteorological 
Agency Act, 2004, Act 
682  
Alternative Dispute 
Resolution Act 2010, Act 
798  
4.2.: International Framework 
Ghana is a signatory to several binding international agreements on the environment 
and social. Among the international commitments, conventions and agreements, the 
following protocols interfere with the PROSPER project's activities. 
Table 5: International Regulations and Conventions 
INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS  
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  
International Covenant on Economic, Cultural and Social  
International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination  
Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women  
Convention on the Political Rights of Women  
Convention on the Rights of the Child  
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment  
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict  
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and 
child pornography  
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights of 1981  
International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169  
Convention concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour  
Convention on Equal Remuneration Convention  
Convention on Abolition of Forced Labour Convention  
Convention Concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation  
Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention  
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  
95 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights  
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (with clarification on 
indigenous peoples)  
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP)  
Convention on Biological Diversity  
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change - Decision 1/CP.16-  
Paris Agreement  
Convention on the Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage 
Convention on the International Trade of Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
(CITES  
Ramsar Convention (the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance as 
Waterfowl Habitant)  
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its amendments 
United-Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) 
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer 
Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCC 
Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) 
African convention on the protection of nature and natural resources 
4.3 IFAD policies/strategies/procedures 
SECAP 
The IFAD’S ten Environmental and Social Values and Principles are relevant to the 
PROSPER project.53 These social, environmental and climate values and principles are: 
  Address the vulnerability and adaptation needs for the rural poor; 
  Promote the sustainable use of natural resources and protection of key ecosystems;  
  Focus on partnership-oriented initiatives for improved social and environmental 
quality;  
  Address environmental and social impact assessments of agricultural and non-
 
 
agricultural activities in an integrated manner; 
Incorporate externalities and minimize social costs; 
Implement participatory and inclusive approaches, with special emphasis on the role 
of women and youth;  
  Promote the development of Indigenous Peoples and other marginalized groups 
(pastoralists, hunters and gatherers);  
  Promote environmentally sound agricultural and manufacturing processes;     
  Ensure systematic environmental, social and climate monitoring;  
  Undertake Strategic Environmental, Social and Climate Assessments. 
 
IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and 
complaints with respect to alleged non-compliance of its environmental, social and 
climate policies and the mandatory aspects of its Social, Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedures. For more information, visit the IFAD webpage: 
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-complaints-procedure"; and 
IFAD SECAP Procedure54. 
The very objectives of the Environment, Social and Climate Impact Assessment in the 
IFAD’s SECAP procedure are to:  
 
identify key linkages between rural poverty and social climate and environmental 
management, and assess the potential environmental, climate and social impacts of 
the proposed project on the natural resource base and livelihoods of communities in 
the project targeted areas;  
53 https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/a5e3ffcc-0ed7-4bc6-b523-39c25dc1edd8 
54 https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/a36f992c-5e31-4fac-8771-404bea02796b 
96 
  explore and identify key options for advancing environmental, climate and social 
 
sustainability; and  
recommend key opportunities to influence IFAD support towards environmental and 
social sustainability and climate smart development.  
This ESMF is intended to provide options that would inform and thus improve decision 
making of PROSPER project design. The key environmental, climate change and social 
issues to be addressed include:  
  challenges faced to meet its rural development and food security goals;  
  the major environmental, climate change and social issues that have a bearing on 
IFAD operations in the country;  
  the direct impact and multiplier effect the mentioned issues have on the resilience 
of ecosystems and productivity of land and crops, natural resource management 
and rural livelihoods;  
  the scale of volatility and risks resulting from climate variability and change; and  
  regulatory frameworks which are related to rural development and environmental 
issues.    
The results of the ESMF and subprojects site specific ESMPs are:  
  an assessment of the environmental (and social/economic/institutional) issues 
particularly in the agricultural and rural development sector;  
  the identification of links with relevant ongoing initiatives;  
  the provision of specific measures, recommendations including opportunities to 
optimize adaptation, environmental and social management, and resource use; in 
the project area.  
These results will shed light on the important opportunities available to build resilience 
and adaptive capacity in the project under development.    
The Key Principles to guide the ESMF and the future subproject site specific ESMPs are 
to: 
  Look beyond the traditional ‘do no harm’ safeguards approach to mitigating 
environmental, climate change and social risks towards ‘doing good’ through 
greater focus on sustainability and management of environmental (rehabilitating 
degraded lands, seizing adaptation/mitigation opportunities and transforming the 
underlying inequalities that undermine inclusive development, etc.) and social 
impacts and risks;  
  Begin the environmental, social and climate impact assessment (ESCIA) with a 
scoping exercise with the objectives of identifying as much as possible the 
relevant social, environmental, and climate change issues, so that baseline data 
collection and impact assessment can focus on them; 
  Place strong emphasis on identifying opportunities and develop an appropriate 
management plan to enhance results and impacts;    
  Identify and compare alternative scenarios to recommend realistic proposals for 
 
design mission consideration;    
identify capacity needs required to effectively implement the environmental and 
social management plan;  
  Produce a realistic monitoring plan, including appropriate change management 
processes;    
  Engage affected communities and other interested stakeholders throughout the 
ESCIA process, from scoping to review and comment on the final draft report 
prior to decision-making. 
4.4 The IFAD Climate Change Strategy (2010)55 
The IFAD’s climate change strategy calls for IFAD to systematically respond to increasing 
demands from clients for technical support and innovation to better respond to climate 
55 https://www.ifad.org/topic/tags/climate_change/2154532 
97 
change. This means analyzing and addressing climate change challenges during the early 
stages of program and project design to build resilience and adaptive capacity. The 
strategy goal and purpose are to: 
  Support innovative approaches to helping smallholder farmers build their 
resilience to climate change 
  Help smallholder farmers take advantage of available mitigation incentives and 
funding 
  Inform a more coherent dialogue on climate change, rural development 
agriculture and food security 
The main strategy output is a more ‘climate-smart’ IFAD, where climate change – 
alongside other risks, opportunities and themes – is systematically integrated into core 
programmes, policies and activities: 
  On operations, climate change can be – and in many cases already is – factored 
into IFAD’s operating model. This means incorporating it into our toolkit for the 
early stages of country programme and project design and for implementation. 
  On knowledge, innovation, and advocacy- IFAD will explore new arrangements for 
sourcing climate-related expertise, share ground-level experiences to ensure their 
application throughout IFAD-supported programmes, and continue our work to 
shape the global dialogue on climate change for smallholders. 
  On resource mobilization, the focus is to make IFAD’s expanding overall portfolio 
climate-smart. Increased supplementary climate funds will continue to be sought 
to deepen the integration of climate change into IFAD’s core programmes and to 
cover the increased cost this implies.  
  On internal organization, IFAD will make greater use of existing in-house skills 
and people and will implement a new organizational structure that brings together 
and increases its staff capacity on climate and the environment. It will also 
continue to demonstrate the values of environmental awareness internally. 
4.5 The IFAD Environment and Natural Resource Management (ENRM, 2011) 
Policy56 
Sustainable environment and natural resource management (ENRM) lies at the heart of 
delivering poverty reduction for rural people. Poor rural people face a series of 
interconnected natural resource management challenges. They are in the front line of 
climate change impacts; the ecosystems and biodiversity on which they rely are 
increasingly degraded; their access to suitable agricultural land is declining in both 
quantity and quality; their forest resources are increasingly restricted and degraded; 
they produce on typically marginal rain fed land, with increased water scarcity; energy 
and agricultural input prices are on a rising long-term trend; and declining fish and 
marine resources threaten essential sources of income and nutrition. 
Environmentally damaging agricultural practices are a major driver of these challenges. 
There is growing concern over inappropriate approaches that drive excessive use of 
fertilizers and pesticides, pollution of waterways and aquifers, build-up of salt in the soil, 
water scarcity in major river basins, declining levels of groundwater and loss of crop 
biodiversity. Large parts of Africa rely on rainfed agriculture with little or non-existent 
use of organic or inorganic fertilizers, soil erosion and poor access to seed varieties. 
Weak governance, damaging policies and changing consumption patterns lie at the heart 
of this environmental degradation: poor rural people, including smallholders, are often 
disempowered and thus unable to sustainably manage natural resources; a lack of clear 
land access and tenure rights removes incentives to maintain natural assets; distorting 
trade policies and fossil-fuel and other subsidies are key drivers. The response requires 
an ‘evergreen revolution’, powered by sustainable agriculture that balances 
crop/livestock, fisheries and agroforestry systems, so that surplus inputs are avoided, 
and soil fertility and ecosystem services are not compromised, while production and 
56 https://www.ifad.org/topic/resource/tags/climate_change/2096936 
98 
income are increased. Building on a growing body of evidence of the success of 
sustainable agriculture investments, there is a huge opportunity to further scale up 
multiple benefits.  
IFAD’s ENRM stresses that project designs present new opportunities to improve 
systematic integration and scaling up of ENRM of the portfolio. Such integration can help 
IFAD to engage in new and strengthened partnerships with specialized entities for 
enhanced and effective responses to issues associated with natural resources and, 
climate variability and change. ENRM is at the core of delivering IFAD’s poverty reduction 
and sustainable agriculture mandate because its target groups rely directly on the 
environment and natural resources for their livelihoods, and client demand for support 
for ENRM is increasing. 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) Policy: IFAD prioritises no tolerance 
for SEAH in its supported operations. Ensure that appropriate precautionary and 
remedial measures to identify/receive/remedy/report (proportionate to level of risks and 
impacts) any occurrences of potential SH/SEA risks/complaints are incorporated in both 
the project design and PIM (see IFAD policy on SEAH). 
4.6 IFAD Strategy and Action Plan on Environment and Climate Change 2019-
2025 
This 2019-2025 Environment and Climate Change Strategy consolidates and updates 
IFAD’s strategy and policy frameworks on environment and climate change. It aligns 
with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and responds to commitments to the 
Eleventh Replenishment of IFAD’s Resources (IFAD11). This strategy consolidates and 
updates IFAD’s strategy and policy frameworks on environment4 and climate change5 in 
light of internal and global policy changes over the last several years. Its preparation 
was led by IFAD’s Environment, Climate, Gender and Social Inclusion Division. 
 The consultative process involved staff, Board members and partners through 
interviews, a survey, workshops and meetings. The process also included benchmarking 
IFAD’s policies and practices against those of selected organizations. The strategy’s 
purpose is to guide IFAD in addressing environment and climate change across all its 
policies, strategies and operations (see figure 1 below). The strategy aims to achieve the 
following: 
 The main objective underlying this strategy is enhanced resilience of smallholder 
farmers and rural communities to environmental degradation and climate change 
impacts. This will ultimately provide the foundation for more prosperous livelihoods 
today and in the future. IFAD will contribute to meeting this objective through the 
following outcomes:  
  Governments are increasingly effective in integrating environment and climate 
 
 
 
change objectives and considerations into smallholder agriculture and other rural 
development policies and programmes. 
IFAD has the skills, capacity, partnerships, systems and resources needed to fully 
support governments in integrating environment and climate change into rural 
development policies and programmes. 
 IFAD investments contribute to the generation of environmental assets and 
services, and global public goods that make the livelihoods of poor rural people 
more prosperous and resilient, and IFAD’s own operations more environmentally 
sustainable.  
IFAD becomes a global leader in generating knowledge on managing sustainable 
rural livelihoods – enabling IFAD to play a greater advocacy role in supporting 
global efforts to build a healthy planet 
99 
5. POTENTIAL SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE RISKS, IMPACTS AND 
PROCEDURES IN ADDRESSING PROSPER COMPLIANCE 
5.1 Overview of PROSPER Environmental, Climate and Social Risks, Impacts and 
Opportunities 
As stated earlier above, the screening of the foreseen project activities in each of the 
participating 8 regions, using IFAD’s Environmental, Climate and Social Screening Form 
(see Annexes X), revealed a rather moderate environmental and social risk rating, 
because of the low, site-specific nature, type and magnitude of the risks which are 
mostly reversible and easily manageable. The Project has been rated as a moderate 
risk and classified as a category B operation; however, given the level of greenhouse 
gas emission and the likely impacts of climate on both the physical (households, RIs, 
Livestock) and biological environment (fauna, flora, ecosystem, etc.), the climate risks 
was rated as High. Because at this very juncture the detailed footprints of foreseen 
projects sub-activities mainly in component 1 (precisely subcomponent 1.2) are not yet 
fully defined and known, and, will definitely not so be prior to project approval or during 
project implementation , therefore, as respectively prescribed by the IFAD’s SECAP and 
the applicable Ghanaian policies, standards and regulations, this environmental and 
social management framework (ESMF)57 is elaborated for due diligence in 
addressing identified impacts, risks and opportunities/benefits.  
Overall, the environmental, climate and social impacts of the PROSPER project will be 
positive, as well as generate series of opportunities for beneficiary communities, 
especially women, youth and disables. Besides the inequality in the labour market and 
presence of landless farmers in the project area who will be included in project activities; 
the project is expected to improve agricultural land, Community ecosystem, and the 
natural resources upon which Ghanaian farmers work is based, and on improved climate-
resilient agricultural practices as well as improved natural resources management, 
specifically water management technics across the northern and middle belts regions. 
More specifically, better functioning ecosystems, controlled transhumance practices, and 
a greater and collaborative stakeholders’ engagement and participation, will positively 
affect human health, nutrition, and well-being in the long run. 
Socially, the project will engage women, youth, disables and broader vulnerable 
communities through a Gender Action Plan (GAP), with a great emphasis on the 
proactivity and diversity of RIss and MSMEs that ensures proactive mainstreaming of 
women, youth, and vulnerable groups into all activities, empowering them with 
community-driven agricultural skills and knowledge (i.e. multiplication of multifunctional 
kitchen gardens, maintenance of farm tracks and/or feeder roads, etc.). Livelihoods are 
expected to improve greatly, based on increased adaptive and climate resilient capacities 
and practices within the target communities of each of the participating districts. 
Investments in better and more adaptable machinery, equipment, technology, and high-
quality agricultural inputs used on-farm and off-farm, as well as learning-by-doing 
technics through farmer-field schools/field demonstration practices, are expected to 
reduce impacts of climate change on agricultural productivity and production and yield 
better and more sustainable results in the northern and middle belts regions.  
Furthermore, the project is expected to positively impact government ministries and 
departments, facilitating improved coordination and planning of natural resources and 
agricultural extension services with a climate adaptation and mitigation focus. In addition 
to these positive impacts, the project incorporates special participatory training sessions 
and activities in farmer field demonstration and awareness raising campaigns, and 
similar formats under Component 1 to ensure that farmers are able to proactively 
enhance their livelihoods in ways that would not have occurred in a “without project” 
57- As mentioned earlier, the ESMF will serve to further guide project implementing agencies and stakeholders on environmental and social 
assessment, mitigation of impacts, and monitoring and reporting procedures during project implementation, including grievance redress 
mechanisms (GRM) and other corporate institutional requirements, such as gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, child labor, 
workers influx, citizen engagement, etc.    
100 
scenario. Under component 2, the Business Plans (subcomponent 2.1) will be 
encouraged to include measures to build resilience to climate impacts (supplementary 
irrigation, climate resilient inputs, conservation agriculture, etc) and mitigate emissions 
(use of renewables, solar panels, tree cultivation, regenerative agricultural approaches, 
reuse of crop residues and by-products as bio-fertilizer, livestock feed, biofuels, etc). 
Positive impacts of the project, namely increased indirect use of pesticides or 
incremental usage of biofertilizers will be mitigated and/or encouraged through gradual 
and sporadic training on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) practices to promote 
climate-smart and sustainable pest and pesticide management that reduces reliance on 
and overall use of pesticides on IFAD financed activities.  
In instances where pesticide use is unavoidable, training on the safe handling of 
pesticides will be provided and bio-pesticides and/or bio-fertilizers will be encouraged 
and promoted over other more hazardous and toxic varieties; with the end-view of 
protecting communities livelihoods resources (water bodies and forest and 
multifunctional kitchen gardens, etc.). The more people will be trained on the safe and 
secure usages of pesticides, the greater communities will be better off and the best for 
reconvening such knowledge sharing.  As enforced by IFAD’s protocols, there will be no 
pesticides procurement under PROSPER project, and highly hazardous pesticides will not 
be used in the project areas. The project is not focused on complex construction 
activities, though minor construction activities may be pursued for the sake of 
rehabilitating/constructing short distances feeder and/or track roads (7-9.5km of 
length), preparation of agricultural lands (mostly 2ha), constructing small earth dams to 
harvest stormwaters for the purpose of developing community-driven livelihood support 
activities (i.e. fish-farming, apiculture, tree nurseries, livestock drinking points, etc.), 
establishing new agro-met systems or some selected agriculture silos and/or 
warehouses; use of biodigesters and/or solar panel as green energy. Due to the small 
size of such water stations and/or community-driven infrastructures, potential negative 
impacts are expected to be minor and can be easily mitigated.  For example, biophysical 
environment risks (i.e. noise pollution during installation, air pollution due to dust, and 
health/safety risks, natural waste management, …) during installation of agro-met 
stations, warehouses, biodigesters, feeder and track-road, etc. are envisaged to be low-
to-moderate, localized, and temporary.    
5.2   Breakdown of Impacts per Component 
Complementary to what is stated here above, the key findings on the screening and field 
assessment of PROSPER project foreseen activities’ positive and negative risks and 
impacts in the participating districts of the project intervention areas could be 
summarized as follows:  
5.2.1 Positive Impacts: The project is expected to improve the natural resources and 
agricultural land 
upon which farmers work, based on improved, climate-smart and resilient agricultural 
practices and integrated natural resources management (specifically water, arable land 
use management across the 2 belts).  
 Environmentally and climate change, improved farming and poultry practices will 
support better functioning ecosystems, especially in these fragile and climate-weakened 
regions (i.e. Upper West and Upper East regions, Savannah region, etc.)  which, in turn, 
can positively affect human health, nutrition and social well-being in the long run. 
Investments in machinery and equipment, technology, and high-quality agricultural 
inputs (seed, trees, etc.), poultry productivity, both in terms of while meat and dunks for 
biofertilizer used on-farm and off-farm are expected to reduce impacts of climate change 
on and increase agricultural productivity and production in the PROSPER intervention 
areas. Special field demonstration sessions and activities under Component 1 will ensure 
that farmers are able to proactively “do better” than they would have done under the 
without-project scenario. For example, Integrated Pest Management (IPM) will be used 
101 
under the project to promote sustainable pest and pesticides management that reduces 
reliance on (and overall use of) pesticides, and rather promote the efficient and 
sustainable usage of bio-pesticides, and bio-fertilizers, that are climate sensitive and 
smart and respectful of both human and biological environments.  
Overall, the greatest positive benefits from the Value-chain crops (i.e., Rice, Maize, 
Soybeans  poultry, Shea and Cashew) production perhaps lies in the ability to convert 
their diverse wastes to somewhat useful products. Rice wastes are excellent for charcoal 
briquette making which can serve as alternative source of fuel for heating in rural 
households. The same goes also for the animal dunks for propane gas production via 
biodigesters. Available literature proves to show that this will reduce the pressure on 
firewood and forest resources degradation, especially in the climate affected PROSPER 
intervention areas. The harvested rice, maize, soybean straws, as well as shea and 
cashew shells could also be excellent for hay/silage to feed animals, especially during the 
dry-season and drought periods. Poultry production not only contributes to enhance 
nutrition quality, generate more income for households, but the dunks used are 
biofertilizer/manure contributes to increase agriculture bioproduction. However, without 
the transformation and conversion knowhow and both technical and material resources, 
the waste from the abovementioned PROSPER’s VC crops will most likely become a 
nuisance with their concomitant effects on human and environmental health.  
 Socially speaking, livelihoods are expected to improve based on increased adaptive 
capacities within the target communities. Aside from considerably/gradually improving 
the nutrition died intake and conversely the health conditions, especially for under-5 
years children, lactating new mothers and/or pregnant women, or malnourished and ill 
people; the project may also improve the living conditions of rural farmers, especially 
women and youth, both in terms of improved and affordable accessibility, but also in 
terms of climate smart usage of green energies (solar panels, solar pumps for water 
harvesting, and biodigesters through the usage of animal dunks, and biofertilizers, etc.). 
Demonstrations under sub-component 1-1 will be designed to include such technologies. 
The project may also positively reduce levels of migrant labor, given that increased 
productivity of land may reduce the need for farmers to migrate in search of work 
elsewhere, be it in nearby Kumasi or Accra (rural exodus) or to the nearby neighboring 
countries (immigration). The drive to implement climate resilient agriculture and to 
establish climate smart water and natural resources management information portal is 
expected to positively impact government ministries and departments, facilitating 
improved coordination and planning of natural resources and agricultural extension 
services with a climate resilience and adaptation focus. The project also engages women 
and youth through a highly participatory and inclusive Gender Action Plan that ensures 
proactive mainstreaming of women into all activities, empowering women with 
agricultural skills and knowledge, as well as facilitating their access to local markets and 
financing institutions (i..e income generation activities, etc.). 
5.2.2 Negative Impacts: Potential negative impacts are minor, mitigatable, and 
forecast only for the 
implementation stages.  
 From the social perspective, the project’s inclusion of landless farmers and tenants 
means that there is a potential risk of changes in tenant/landlord relationships due to 
increase in land value resulting from increased agricultural productivity. In addition to 
this, and as part of the wholehearted cultural induction/education of children, in Ghana, 
as in many other African countries, youth often assist their respective families with 
farming works, and there is therefore, a risk that those youth may work beyond what is 
age-appropriate, unless closely monitored. Likewise, given the climate impacts on the 
scarce natural resources, particularly animal/livestock feeding resources, there is a high 
potential of conflicts between farmers and herders due to animal divagation during 
transhumance periods; and as a worst scenario, which occurred not longtime ago given 
the proximity of the two major natural parks in both the Upper West and Upper East 
102 
regions, wild animal divagation into parks-adjacent farming plots may result in a deadly 
conflict between farmers/villagers and Elephants, Hippos and other wild-ruminants; 
henceforth causing more food shortage and famine in the affected regions. 
 From an environmental and climate perspective however, increased agricultural 
production may result in the generation of new environmental waste from, for instance, 
slow-release fertilizers that do not fully breakdown/decompose. Thus, increased 
production is also often a trigger for increased pesticides use, even if the pesticide use is 
indirect and not promoted under this PROSPER project. Provision of environmentally 
friendly seed and planting materials for the RIs and introduction of climate-resilient crop 
varieties also increases the project to medium risk, even though the inputs used, and 
varieties recommended would be registered/certified and already in use within the 
country (albeit on a smaller scale). Furthermore, the social issues described here above 
could also result in the increased usage of bush-meat hunting for survival purpose, 
which down the road may result in partially if not totally depleting the stock of wildlife in 
the project regions. Last of all, while the project is not focused on major construction 
activities, minor construction activities may however be pursued for the sake of 
establishing small water retention infrastructure (i.e. earth dams, boreholes, wells, etc.), 
agricultural warehouses (i.e. seed-banks, agricultural inputs, family-size silos, etc.) or 
feeder and/or track roads, other community-driven infrastructure (biodigesters, 
improved stoves, multifunctional kitchen gardens, etc.). Due to the small size of such 
infrastructures, potential negative impacts are expected to be minor, mostly site-specific 
and easily mitigatable, for example: noise pollution during installation, air pollution due 
to dust, and health/safety risks during installation and/or operationalization, etc.). All 
these negative impacts – most of which are linked to Component 1 – are envisaged to be 
low-to-moderate, localized, temporary, and thus mitigatable. 
5.2.3 Potential negative environmental impacts in the agricultural sector 
Despite being rated as a category B operation with limited environmental and social 
impacts, current available data reveal that a few potential negative environmental 
impacts have been experienced in Ghana and the subregion lately. Consequently, 
PROSPER has already planned some interventions that may benefit to other projects and 
country environmental, climate and social management. 
Some of the other issues are the low productivity, limited access to markets; limited 
access to financial services and products especially for young people and women, 
inefficient and limited farming technologies and unstainable practices (i.e., deforestation, 
shifting cultivation, slash and burn technics, poor rain-waters harvesting, etc.) ; lack of 
gainful employment opportunities, off-season and off-farm, which spurs youth migration 
and decreases labour availability during the production season; local land access and 
user rights that require official recognition and results in gender disparities; unclear 
systems of succession which discourage on-farm investments; climate shocks, high rural 
illiteracy rates that impede adoption of improved technologies low availability of 
financing for family farming; and lack of capacity to efficiently deliver essential rural 
services such as extension advice and land registration and management.  
A breakdown of the expected positive and potential negative impacts, by output (all risks 
being linked to solely Component 1), is provided in the following charts, based on 
components description from the available Project Development Report (PDR)58: 
5.2.4 Climate Change Issues 
Overall, Ghana is vulnerable to increasing aridity, droughts and extreme rainfall events 
and flooding59, and faces significant challenges from a changing climate change to its 
58 -As of September 9, 2021. 
59 -Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
103 
ecology, economy, and society. In addition, Ghana has a high degree of risk to natural 
hazards and disasters. The country is exposed to risks from multiple weather-related 
hazards, particularly those due to floods and droughts in the Northern Savannah belt. 
There are also risks related to coastal resources, including storm surges and coastal 
erosion as well as landslides, earthquakes, pest infestations, locusts’ invasion, and 
wildfires. Between 1991 and 2011 the country experienced seven major floods. In 2010, 
floods in the White Volta River Basin affected hundreds of thousands of people and 
destroyed many of their livelihoods. Urban floods also regularly impact major cities. 
Current development dynamics and demographic changes in Ghana further compound 
the risk of disasters. These dynamics are related to rural poverty, rapid urbanization, 
and environmental degradation. Agriculture and livestock, two sectors most impacted by 
weather-related hazards, constitute the foundation of Ghana’s economy and employ 
55% of the economically active population60. Climate change and variability are already 
affecting Ghana’s water resources damage and flood exposure is projected to result in 
$160 million annually, due to flooding61. Nevertheless, in Ghana there are already 
farming systems practices being undertaken by smallholder farmers that conform to the 
principles and strategies of sustainable agriculture (i.e. soil and nutrient management, 
water harvesting and use, pest and disease control, resilient ecosystems, genetic 
resources, multi-crops farming, etc.). 
a.  Overview of risks, impacts and mitigation measures per component, and ways for 
improvements 
Table 6: Breakdown of risks, impacts and mitigation measures per Component  
60 -GFDRR (2019). Ghana, Country Context. URL: https://www.gfdrr.org/en/ghana 
61 -UNISDR (2018). Disaster Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: http://africa.cimafoundation.org/documents/869 
104 
Risk identified 
Possible negative 
impacts 
Possible positive 
impacts 
Mitigation 
measures 
Responsibility 
Component 1 :  
Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
The project will 
underline the 
use of water by 
promoting small 
irrigation projets 
(the "drop by 
drop" system, 
for instance, and 
other small-scale 
earth dams, 
boreholes, wells, 
etc.) in the 
lowlands, which 
are traditionally 
aimed at  setting 
up small-scale 
family farming. 
- Increased risk of 
COVID-19 
contamination 
(gathering at RIs 
demos plots, 
warehouse, 
workshops) 
-Increased usage of 
pesticides (i.e. risk 
of contamination at 
a much larger scale 
if not contained); 
- soil salinisation 
- conflicts over the 
sharing of water 
-Poor quality 
maintenance of 
water infrastructure 
and 
waterworks (leakag
es, floods and 
pollution of 
waterbodies, …) 
-Likely risk of 
increase 
degradation of 
deforestation and 
natural resources 
- decrease in the 
quantities of water 
available 
downstream 
- EPA 
- DWS (District 
Water Services) 
- District and 
traditional 
authorities  
- Project 
coordination 
- DDA services  
- DWA (District 
Women Affairs)  
- Social 
discrimination (risk 
of non-selection 
and/or inclusion of 
gender aspects 
during the 
selection process 
of TOT, as well as 
during the 
certification of 
TOT. Even so, risk 
of them, not being 
respected when 
leading a group of 
male farmers, etc.) 
-Poor knowledge 
transfer 
(inconsistence, 
incomplete with 
local women 
(cultural barriers, 
etc.), 
-more effective 
water 
management 
- longer period 
during which water 
is available. 
-Unforeseen land 
acquisition (i.e. 
fallow lands, 
increased land 
grab, further slash 
and burn and 
deforestation) 
-Increased violent 
conflicts partly due 
to (i) increased 
transhumance 
trends; (ii) rapid 
acquisition of new 
lands; or as a 
consequence of 
food shortage (iii) 
animal divagation 
- Target 
smallholders in 
the lowland 
areas 
- Involve local 
water services 
in charge of 
water (not only 
extension 
workers)  
- Adopt plans to 
share and 
distribute water 
at the platform 
level 
- Training and 
awareness-
raising for 
producers on 
water-saving 
methods 
available 
(Integrated 
Water Resource 
Management, 
IWRM) 
105 
Risk identified 
Possible negative 
impacts 
Possible positive 
impacts 
Mitigation 
measures 
Responsibility 
Component 1 :  
Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
The project will 
regenerate or 
equip lowland 
areas for 
Multifunctional 
kitchen 
gardening or 
rice, maize, cow 
pea farming  
- increase in 
anthropogenic 
pressure on these 
areas 
- risks of conflicts 
arising between 
producers and new 
arrivals (agric. 
Migrants, etc.) 
- risk of conflict 
between crop 
farmers and 
livestock farmers; 
-Risks of poor 
maintenance of 
community 
infrastructure  
- crop 
diversification 
- increase in 
production and 
income 
- improvement in 
employment 
-improvement in 
farm field 
accessibility and 
transfer of 
harvested crops 
- Local 
MOFA/DDA 
services 
- Local platforms 
(RI, RCB, other 
FIs, 
- Project 
coordination 
- District and 
traditional 
authorities ; 
- Accessibility to 
local markets & 
support services, 
- Encourage 
dialogue 
between 
different parties 
- Support the 
operation of a 
land 
governance 
organization 
involving local 
communities 
and authorities; 
-promotion of 
climate-smart 
technics & tools  
106 
Risk identified 
Possible negative 
impacts 
Possible positive 
impacts 
Mitigation 
measures 
Responsibility 
Component 1 :  
Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
- 
MOFA/DDA/MOW/
EPA technical 
services 
- RIs/RCBs and 
al. 
- Project 
coordination 
(Safeguards & 
Climate & Gender 
team) 
- 
University/Acade
mia/Local 
institutes or 
training centers 
-Moving new, 
unsuitable, or 
invasive species 
from one area to 
another 
-Poor water 
infrastructure and 
civil works quality;   
-Pollution risk 
(biophysical & 
human 
environment) 
Accident risks 
during civil works 
(COVID-19, Ebola, 
physical, ...) 
-Risk of broader 
contamination of 
the surrounding 
watersheds, lands 
properties, air and 
atmosphere due to 
an excessive usage 
of uncontrolled 
pesticides.  
-Increased 
deforestation during 
water and/or 
road/tracks 
infrastructures 
construction/rehabili
tation,… 
-Risk of destruction 
of tree nurseries 
and/or agricultural 
crops prior to 
project appraisal 
due partially to (i) 
animal divagation, 
and (ii) transporting 
harvested crop out 
from the farm fields 
to the villages. 
- Agricultural 
diversification 
-Encourage native 
vegetables and 
tree species that 
are rural and of 
economic interest 
-Jobs creation for 
women, youth and 
vulnerable groups; 
-Gender 
Discrimination 
(due to frustrations 
generated from 
lack of 
transparency in the 
selection process 
of who the key 
beneficiaries could 
be for trainings 
and/or field visits 
or access to FIs, 
…),  
-Risk of persistent 
conflict between 
transhuman 
herders and 
farmers due to the 
poor visualization 
of 
existing/proposed 
transhumance 
corridors 
boundaries and 
schedules) 
- lack of 
transparency in  
-Promote local 
varieties and 
those adapted 
to the 
environment 
(those with 
short life cycles 
and/or 
drought/disease
-resistant) 
-Set up a 
programme to 
improve local 
species and 
varieties 
The project plans 
to promote the 
use of 
multifunctional 
kitchen 
gardening seeds 
as well as forest 
plants and fruit 
trees (nurseries, 
banks/silos, …)  
107 
Risk identified 
Possible negative 
impacts 
Possible positive 
impacts 
Mitigation 
measures 
Responsibility 
Component 1 :  
Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
The project will 
make sufficient 
amounts of 
seeds and local 
plants available 
-Introduction of 
untested plants and 
seeds  
-Seed issues would 
no longer be a 
problem 
(endogenous and 
sustainable) 
- Ensure that 
specifications 
are strictly 
adhered to as 
regards seed 
and plant 
purchases 
- Involve seed 
and plant 
testing service 
+ farming 
water services  
- MOFA/MOW/EPA 
technical services 
- Project 
coordination 
(SCT) 
- RIs/Grower 
associations 
- RCB/FIs 
services 
- Private 
Sector/Market 
b.  Potential Impacts and Recommended Mitigation for Agriculture public and private 
enterprise Projects 
PROSPER selected value-chain crops such as Rice, Maize, Cowpea, Horticulture 
(Vegetables) and tree crops (Shea and Cashew) production, processing and 
marketing/commercialization are supported by the program with additional value chains 
including transportation, agrochemical applications, waste conversion and reuse. 
Figure 7: Cereal production in 2020 estimated at above - average levels 
FAO Country Briefs: Ghana, Reference Date: 28-January-2021 
 Rice, Maize, Soybean Cultivation and Processing  
Rice is fast becoming the most important staple food in Ghanaian homes. Rice paddies 
are becoming a common sight across the Ghanaian regions and especially in the selected 
PROSPER regions with floodplains and major inland valleys. Lowland and highland rice is 
extensively cultivated along the tidal swamps along the riverbanks, which flood during 
the high tide in most of the regions or just irrigated.  
Although wetland rice is naturally suited to the flood plains and major river valleys, flood 
108 
and drought are the major environmental and climate impact on rice. In recent past, 
several rice farms in Ghana, such as in southern/costal and middle belts have been lost 
to floods across the regions. In some cases, such as in the northern belt regions, 
droughts and dry spells have also been responsible for additional replanting costs as the 
plant wilted from low water and high temperature. Both floods and dry spells effects are 
often aggravated by lack of agro-climatic information on key parameters including onset 
and cessation of the rains and duration and time of dry spells. These impacts can be 
mitigated through strong collaboration with the The Ghanaian Meteorological Agency 
(GMA) to prepare and disseminate place-specific forecasts for farmers. 
Besides being specific and most fragile amongst the selected crops, the same goes also 
for Maize and soybeans, and tree plants crops (Shea and Cashew) and poultry. Their 
cultivation also requires clearing of lands and removal of virtually all the trees and 
wetland plants to provide enough sunshine for the rice paddy or others crops. Rice and 
other VC crops production may also impact on biodiversity, especially birds and rodents’ 
population that feed on these chosen crops’ grains. These technics also lead to forest 
and woodland degradation through selective cutting of trees for rice parboiling by local 
rice processors. Particularly rice waste, which can constitute a nuisance to the 
environment, it has the potential of being converted into charcoal briquettes for rice 
parboiling and household cooking and heating purposes. Local farmers that cultivate 
tubercules (Yam, Cassava, Cocoa Yam, etc.) and other tuber crops have also found a use 
for rice waste in mulching. The harvested rice stems can also be used for feeding cattle.  
Rice, Maize, Soybean cultivation require agrochemicals and pesticides that can easily 
pollute surface and ground water bodies and environment. These are also vulnerable to 
pest infestations including stem borers which may lead to considerable loss of 
investment if not checked on time. The planted seeds are also important to the expected 
yield per hectare. Bad seeds can lead to substantial loss of investments. Thus, seeds 
quality control is imperative to lead to good productivity and maintain the expected 
return on investment.   
Emission of greenhouse gases (GHG - especially methane) from rice paddies remains a 
strong impact on climate. Although GHG emissions from rice, maize and/or soybean 
fields can be reduced by periodically draining for instance the rice paddies, farmers need 
to be trained in so doing. Furthermore, higher temperatures can make rice sterile with 
low productivity. Resource conflicts between farmers and pastoralists driven by climate 
change and poor land governance regimes poses significant threats to investments and 
human security in some of the project area. Most of the regions are tackling this by 
building mutual understanding and confidence between the two social groups – farmers 
and pastoralists. This is done through expanded community security and traditional 
committee that include representatives from the Farmers and pastoralists communities. 
However, mitigation measures including avoid farming on grazing routes and fencing of 
farms with crops that are repellent to grazing livestock are critically important. Poultry 
activities are seen not so as nutrition enhancement means, but also as both an income 
generation activity as well as climate-friendly resource for agricultural inputs. In fact, the 
use of poultry waste as biofertilizer/manure greatly contribute to reduce the use of 
chemical fertilizer, reduce GHG emission and increase agricultural productivity and yield 
; which is beneficial to farmers, especially in the horticulture sector.  
Some of the recommended mitigation measures for rice farming include: 
  Encourage the farmers to take risk transfer as loss mitigation measures – 
encourage and assist farmers to sign on to climate risk (including flood and 
drought) insurance with competent Agricultural Insurance institutions.  
  This will also mitigate possible losses from farm destruction occasioned by 
grazing livestock. A number of the projects implemented by some development 
partners in the regions are currently experimenting with this, but at limited 
scale.  
109 
 
Improve collaboration with the Ghanaian Meteorological Agency to ensure 
production and dissemination (using existing extension vehicles and on 
smartphones devices) of key agroclimatic information to farmers in local 
languages and at frequent intervals. The agency may be empowered through 
setting up at least one mini-meteorological (Ag-Met) station in each participating 
District Department of Agriculture to improve the density of their climate 
stations and forecasts. Such climate stations may be set-up to include flood 
gauge and monitoring systems in the critical DDAs along the waterbodies.  
  As much as is possible, discourage cultivation in areas that are very close to the 
major river systems to minimize overflow during normal flow seasons. Avoid 
deforestation and cultivation in areas of high biodiversity/critical 
habitats/wetlands significance as well as in dry highlands; 
Improve collaboration with research institutes (such as IITA, Cereal Research 
Institutes, etc.) to introduce early maturing/short duration rice varieties to the 
farmers. This may make the peak flooding or drought season coincides with 
post-harvest season rather than pre-harvest season as have witnessed in recent 
times. 
 
  Support for Seed lab – Equip and Strengthen seed labs to be able to carry out 
rigorous tests on seeds to ensure that only genuine foundation seeds are used 
by farmers to reduce loss or poor return on investment. 
  Ensure training and certification of ‘spraying gangs’ on what to apply, at what 
stage, and in what density, and human impacts (including need to wear personal 
protection gears) to safeguard the health of crops, soils, water and both the 
people and animals. 
  Collaborate with chemicals regulatory agencies to ensure that agrochemicals are 
genuine (eliminate expired and banned chemicals) and in training of spraying 
gangs and farmers 
  Encourage the use of organic manure in farms as much as possible 
  Make provision for conversion of rice wastes to briquette in all the rice 
processing units  
  Train-of trainers (TOT) for extension workers to step down training of farmers on 
methods for draining rice paddies in mid-season to reduce GHG emission; 
  Make provision for improved modern bird scaring-equipment on farms to reduce 
birds impact on rice farms and maintain avian population viability 
  Synchronized production timing for efficiency in bird management   
 
Improve community and neighborhood security arrangements by supporting 
dialogue and understanding between farmers and pastoralists to reduce resource 
conflicts 
  Avoid farming along recognized grazing routes/corridors and demarcated grazing 
reserves 
  Promote efficient land management as adaptation - Collaborate with other 
organizations such as USAID, FAO and government committees on Land Reform 
to support policy dialogue with the Regional Governments and processes to 
improve on land governance by instituting land regimes that ensures efficient 
land management and administration with agricultural land cadastration and 
security of tenure and ensure land capitalism through a systematic land titling 
and registration process. 
  Work diligently with Business Coaches to better plan agricultural activities that 
yield real revenues,  
c.  Gender Equality and women and youth empowerment:  
Gender inequality remains a challenge that hinders efforts to achieve inclusive human 
development and economic growth. In the absence of equity and equality, certain 
project envisioned actions could have some impacts on gender bias/relations in the given 
communities of the participating districts within the 8 targeted region of the northern 
and middle belts. Impacts could be the aggravation of tendential disequilibrium both in 
110 
terms of economic power between men and women, intellectual resources, and the 
know-how, and between local communities traditionally established or communally 
called/labelled “autochthones” and newly establish immigrant communities.  
Like everywhere in Africa, women in Ghana form a large proportion of the labour force in 
the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors (i.e., economic, business development, etc.) 
and are responsible for guaranteeing their family's nutrition and food security. The 
gender gap in agricultural productivity is linked to unequal access to essential 
agricultural inputs such as land, labour, techniques, and seeds, but also social, 
economic, and financial institutions and norms. These gender gaps are still very 
significant and that traditional gender norms remain tenacious, (the result being that 
women and girls are at a disadvantage in both the public and private spheres), including 
land ownerships. This limits opportunities for investments.  
  Youth:  The future of Ghana, as in any developing country around the world, 
depends heavily in the youth. In Ghana particularly, despite the tangible efforts 
the Government has been deploying lately, few young people see a future for 
themselves in agriculture or in the rural areas. Attracted by modernity and digital 
opportunities, rural Ghanaians millennials from families that are highly dependent 
on agriculture are migrating from rural areas to cities and abroad at an 
astounding rate. In most cases, once they reach their destination, they are forced 
to face unemployment, poor health conditions, social exclusion/inclusion, and 
inadequate living conditions in poor and unwelcoming slums. They are also highly 
vulnerable to radicalization by sex tourism, extremist/jihadist groups and human 
traffickers, especially in the Sahel with Boko Haram in the nearby Nigeria and 
Niger and Burkina Faso. Rural-urban migration can also be highly gender-biased. 
However, because of the size of the country, agriculture could be very attractive 
to the bulge of youth living in cities and working in rural areas or vice versa.  
  Resource Conflicts: As stated earlier, climate vulnerability is hitting hard on the 
available natural resources, especially in the PROSPER targeted areas. 
Henceforth, clashes between communities and pastoralists leading to heightened 
human insecurity remains one of the threats that should be considered during 
and throughout the implementation of PROSPER. This needs to be managed 
through iterative stakeholder engagement and strengthening of existing informal 
and formal grievance redress systems to build confidence and understanding and 
address any complaints raised in a fair, responsive, and timely manner. PROSPER 
should also pursue land governance and sustainable land management that 
guarantees land capitalism and security of tenure as a mitigation option to often 
growing land conflicts.  
  Unsafe and Non-Healthy Working Conditions: Working conditions across 
sectors are generally poor in the rural areas due to relatively weak extension 
systems, and limited awareness of and non-compliance with health and safety 
standards. In the agricultural sector, the drudgery faced by most farmers makes 
them more vulnerable to agro-chemical toxins from wrong methods of handling 
and overuse of fertilizer and pesticides. In addition, due to the high level of 
poverty, children often help in the production and/or processing of agricultural 
commodities. Although cases of water-borne diseases among rice farmers are not 
common in the project area, concerted efforts should be made to ensure that 
appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) are used while engaging in 
these activities, that PROSPER do not foresee to finance.  
  Managing expectations and Conflicts resurgence: Agriculture is now in the 
front burner of issues discussed in the whole country, more precisely in PROSPER 
targeted regions. Lately, there has been an increase in the awareness about 
agriculture and conflicts; and this has increased the expectation levels of local 
111 
beneficiaries. In managing expectations, the project should ensure that the 
beneficiaries are enlightened and sensitized about the various similar projects and 
their activities in the areas. It is also important that information pertaining the 
PROSPER is disseminated through credible persons or media, especially reliable 
community leaders and focal points 
  Elite and Political Capture: Weak and non-transparent governance structures 
as well as exclusionary and divisive politics poses the risks of PROSPER being 
hijacked or captured by the political and administrative elite to benefit only their 
cronies with significant impacts on the target beneficiaries. The approach which 
ensures that prospective beneficiaries are selected based on laid down criteria 
should be clearly implemented in the selected project districts and regions. 
Luckily, this has been taken care of in the design of PROSPER, precisely in the 
approach to targeting and profiling of RIs and beneficiaries 
  PROSPER  will not exploit children and will not hire ineligible migrant workers, 
defined as workers who are not legally authorized to work in the country and / or 
sector in accordance with national law, and when it does not conflict with other 
IFAD Standards. All jobs will be governed by contracts signed in accordance with 
national and international labor conventions. In addition, the project will promote 
information and sensitization of communities on the risks incurred in the event of 
child labor, education and training of children, education and awareness on the 
use of dangerous and toxic products which can have negative effects on children, 
the use of technologies, mechanization and agricultural and post-harvest 
practices to increase productivity and reduce the risks of child labor demand, 
improve access to the water point for avoid the work especially of young girls in 
collecting water but also for watering livestock, taking into account the prohibition 
of child labor in procurement procedures. Training and awareness-raising on 
gender-based violence for communities and local authorities 
  5.3      Assessment of Cumulative Impacts. 
Overall, the cumulative project impacts are expected to be positive, as the overall 
PROSPER project development objective is to “Strengthen the integration, climate 
resilience, social and environmental sustainability of smallholders and businesses in 
priority value chains in the Northern and Middle Ecological Belts taking advantage of the 
increased demand created by the national agro-processing strategy”. Even with these 
expected, major 
positive impacts, the project has been classified as moderate risk (i.e. Category B) 
largely due to inequality in the labor market and presence of landless farmers in the 
project area who will be included in project 
activities.  
In its efforts to improve the participating communities’ livelihoods and living conditions 
better off, the PROSPER Project equally carries on some important threats to the 
sustainability of the Environment (biophysical and human) in the northern and middle 
belts (NMB) areas. These cumulative impacts could be: 
  Agricultural pressure on the existing natural resources: land scarcity, loss 
of habitats, triggered wildfires, impactful climate change effects, the 
practice/implementation of certain activities that require huge agricultural lands 
(community wood-forest, nurseries, and plantations, and likely extensive usage 
of pesticides in the region that will/could further weaken land fertility and affect 
the overall quality of the NMB areas watershed could further increase the 
pressure over land in the riparian territories to PROSPER interventions areas. 
However, the established community-led co-management of certain natural 
resources and forest platforms and the development of income-generation 
activities (tree-nurseries, agroforestry, horticulture, honey production, 
aquaculture, etc. could surely help diversify communities’ source of income and 
safeguards the arable lands; and 
112 
  Transhumance with its downsize effects: The NMB regions are ground for a 
rich livestock capital. Henceforth, recurrent conflicts between herders and farmers 
that oftentimes leads/results in deadly and socioeconomically detrimental 
outcomes. The implementation of solution-oriented measures could further 
exacerbate these restrictions and negatively impact herders. This was extensively 
discussed during the field consultation and more constructive alternatives ought 
to be designed and found to ease and satisfactorily facilitate the sustainable 
implementation of the PROSPER within the NMB regions;   
5.4  Potential Impacts and Recommended Mitigation for Socioeconomic 
Infrastructure Projects 
The following are some of the socioeconomic infrastructure projects likely to be 
embarked upon by the project; 
1. Construction and rehabilitation of feeder/track roads, causeways and spillways  
2. Construction and rehabilitation of feeder/track roads, causeways and spillways  
2. Construction and rehabilitation of culverts and feeder/track roads 
3. Construction and rehabilitation of processing facilities   
4. Land development activities 
5. Construction of small scale (earthen) dams and irrigation schemes  
Some of the potential impacts of socioeconomic infrastructure development include:  
  Land Access 
Socioeconomic infrastructure will require the availability of land resource for their 
provision. Given the small scale and nature of construction/rehabilitation of 
socioeconomic infrastructure no land acquisition is foreseen, as most 
construction/rehabilitations of feeder road/track road vary between 7 to 9.5 km, 
agricultural plots are around 2ha and other socioeconomic infrastructure are small in size 
mostly localize on small portions of community lands, free of any claims62. The 
arrangement made for land will go a long way in determining sustainability of these 
socioeconomic infrastructure. Agriculture land development, irrigation activities and 
feeder/track roads construction or rehabilitation all may likely require some expanse of 
land. Some preconditions for socioeconomic infrastructure include assurance that 
Government or the community has guaranteed the lease of land to the beneficiaries 
during PROSPER lifespan, and the development of strategies for the maintenance and 
sustainability of the socioeconomic infrastructure by the concerned beneficiary/recipient 
parties.  
  Dust, Vibration and Noise 
The degree to which individuals perceive dust to be a nuisance depends on the 
frequency, intensity, and duration of a dust-generating event. Farmers usually engage in 
a variety of activities that uses equipment or practices that create dust. Most land 
clearing equipment generates some dust. Dust may also be generated as fugitive dust 
when fine particulates are lifted from fields, roads, buildings, and yards via air 
turbulence. The main mitigation measures recommended for mitigating dust including 
dust protection masks for machine operators and the spraying of water to reduce the 
level of dust during construction/rehabilitation, and/or transport activities.  
Heavy equipment used for feeder/track roads construction/rehabilitation create ground 
movement such that cracks can occur in adjacent buildings/facilities. These can also 
create some form of discomfort to inhabitants of the surroundings. If any an assessment 
of surrounding buildings around project intervention areas, would be carried out to 
ascertain the level of susceptibility to cracks because of ground movement. The buildings 
(warehouses, workshops) are to be strengthened and compensation paid for damages 
62 - The project will not invest on land development beyond 100 ha contiguous. Most of the beneficiaries have on average less than 2 ha and 
even combined per site, it is less than 50 ha contiguous. 
. 
113 
where it is unavoidable. Noise from the use of equipment is also a major concern. 
Operators should only use authorized construction equipment that produce a moderate 
decibel level and consider the times when people will experience less discomfort (i.e., 
daytime only). Feeder road construction and/or rehabilitation contractors will be 
expected to produce Contractors Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMP) 
for road construction and conduct environmental screening for the construction of farm 
tracks. 
  Deforestation 
The removal of vegetation cover and trees during construction/rehabilitation, depending 
on the scale and amplitude, can lead to deforestation and should therefore be avoided as 
much as possible. Where tree removal is unavoidable, this should be compensated by 
tree and vegetation replanting along the constructed roads. Trees removed from farm 
during land preparations should be equality compensated by planting trees in addition to 
hedges along the farm boundaries or nearby suitable community plots. 
  Surface and Ground Water Contamination 
Unchecked and unmonitored surface and underground exploration, for example during 
earth dams or dikes construction, can lead to ground water contamination if not properly 
planned. Appropriate impact studies/assessments should be conducted prior to the 
construction of such stormwater harvesting dams and/or irrigation structures. 
  Flooding/ Erosion/landslides/droughts 
Flooding, erosion, landslides and/or partial droughts can occur because of poor judgment 
and poor design and construction/rehabilitation practices. This is very evident during the 
stakeholders’ discussion for this ESMF. Adequate drainage should be provided for surface 
water run-off in all the roads and agriculture plots to be constructed or rehabilitated. 
Geotextiles and Vegetation cover should be   provided for slopes and indigenous grasses 
and shrubs with proven ability to stop erosion should be planted in areas undergoing 
erosion.  Unnecessary dug- outs and/or excavation of soil from its natural terrain should 
be avoided to reduce flooding or partial droughts. Replacement of dug out soils should 
be carried out when necessary. 
5.5 Environmental and Socio-Economic Management Framework (ESMF) 
Table 9 below provides a framework for managing the likely impacts of the various 
activities expected to be implemented during the key parts in the agricultural value 
chain, i.e.; preparation/production, processing, marketing, transport (and supply). It is 
important to emphasize that these management plans are relevant to the entire 
PROSPER project, including the MSMEs and related socioeconomic infrastructure 
114 
 Table 7: Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for proposed PROSPER Agricultural Value Chain Stages 
Key issue 
Affecting the 
Environment 
Part in 
value 
chain 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
Potential impact (negative) and 
Environmental 
positive) 
Social & 
Institutional 
Economic 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures 
Monitoring & indicators 
Preparatio
n/Producti
on 
 Land 
preparation – 
land clearing, 
cultivation, & 
other issues 
 Forest and 
Woodland loss 
 Land & soil 
degradation 
 Increased youth, 
 
women and men 
employment 
directly and 
indirectly  
 Use of 
 Water and soil 
 Increased sense 
pollution 
 Flooding 
 Erosion 
 Bush fire 
earth- moving 
machines, 
e.g. tractors 
for clearing 
 Use of 
agro- 
chemicals 
 Use of 
pesticides 
 Biodiversity loss 
 Waste 
management issues 
 GHG emission 
 Drought 
of pride and 
responsibility by 
participating youth 
and women 
 Resource 
conflicts 
 Possible 
agitation from 
youth not presently 
included in the 
programme  
 Social exclusion 
- women and youth 
and PLWD 
Increased household 
income and reduced 
poverty 
 As much as possible, 
discourage the opening of 
virgin or pristine forests 
 Number of farmers that 
received training on 
sustainable land 
preparation 
 Increased youth 
employment and social 
well-being 
 Improved nutrition and 
food security 
 Train farmers in 
sustainable land use 
management practices 
and agrochemical 
management empowering 
the use of biotechnologies  
 Change in forests area 
 Results from periodic 
soil and water analysis 
 Increased ability of 
 Deliver training and 
 Heath, safety, social 
and environment manual 
women and youth to 
manage their enterprises in 
productive and profitable 
manner, 
thereby increasing GDP and 
manpower development 
agricultural inputs to 
farmers on-time to enable 
them to adjust and adapt 
their planting and 
harvesting methods and 
timing 
 Number of value chain 
enterprises around soil 
testing and agrochemicals 
management  
  Use of 
child 
labour 
  Possible 
loss of 
cultural 
assets  
 Increased import 
substitution especially of 
rice. Maize, cowpea, but 
also shea and cashew 
products. 
 But increasing 
associated environmental 
and social costs 
115 
 Adopt and enforce 
health, safety and 
environment rules at 
production sites  
 Encourage full 
 Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Plan 
 Conflict resolution 
committee meetings 
exploration of the value 
chain including soil testing 
and agrochemical services  
 Lists of approved 
projects and their 
beneficiaries 
 Develop     a     clear     
and     simple Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), 
incl.  grievance redress 
mechanism, to manage 
expectations 
 Agreement on land 
access for women and 
youth and PLWD and land 
lease documents 
 Actively involve women 
Key issue 
Affecting the 
Environment 
Part in 
value 
chain 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
Potential impact (negative) and 
Environmental 
positive) 
Social & 
Institutional 
Economic 
Processing 
 Use of 
processing 
machine 
Parboiling of 
Rice  
 Waste generation 
 Unsafe and non- 
 Increased sales and 
 Air, water and 
land pollution 
healthy working 
conditions 
Possible use of 
 GHG emission 
from machines 
child 
Labourers 
  Use of wood 
  Migration 
for 
heating/parbo
iling 
influx to 
processing 
sites  
household income 
 Increased youth 
employment and social 
well-being 
 Improved processing 
capacity, value additions 
and value chain 
development 
 Improved nutrition and 
food security 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Encourage the use of 
renewable and low-carbon   
energy   sources   during 
processing operations 
 Number of operators 
adopting renewable low 
carbon technologies 
 Adopt health, safety, 
and environment rules at 
processing sites 
 Train farmers in 
sustainable agro- 
processing practices to 
reduce environmental, 
climate and social risks 
and impacts 
 Number of enterprises 
established focusing on 
processing 
 Number of 
entrepreneurs adopting 
sustainable processing 
operations 
 Knowledge 
management 
/communication plans, 
stakeholder meeting 
reports, communication 
project flyers/leaflets 
 Increased ability of 
youth to manage their 
enterprises in productive 
and profitable manner, 
thereby increasing GDP and 
manpower development 
 Step up knowledge 
management and 
information dissemination 
to showcase the 
achievement of the 
project 
 Increased import 
substitution of Rice 
 But increasing 
associated environmental 
and social costs 
116 
Key issue 
Affecting the 
Environment 
Part in 
value 
chain 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
Potential impact (negative) and 
Environmental 
positive) 
Social & 
Institutional 
Economic 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures 
Monitoring & indicators 
Marketing 
 Dust, smoke, 
 Better access to 
 Improved market 
 Use construction 
 Observation of 
Construction 
of 
socioeconomi
c 
infrastructure 
noise, ground 
movement / 
vibration 
 Deforestation 
 Water pollution 
 Flooding and 
erosion  from poorly 
constructed culverts, 
roads, etc. 
the 
Local market and 
FIs 
 Better access to 
production and 
processing sites by 
supervisory 
agencies 
penetration 
 Access to market 
information and market 
linkage and support 
services 
 Strengthened market 
value chain, with more 
profitable enterprises 
 Improved access 
to rural 
communities 
 Improved storage and 
reduced waste and 
postharvest losses 
 Conflict over 
land and demand 
for compensation 
where 
infrastructure is to 
be constructed 
117 
equipment with moderate 
decibel during 
construction 
construction equipment 
for dust, noise, smoke, 
vibration, etc. 
 Develop/adopt and 
 Work inspection report 
enforce health, safety and 
environment rules at 
construction sites 
on the environmental 
quality of market 
infrastructure 
 Lawful and willing 
 Health, safety and 
environment plans 
 Copy of consent of 
community /individuals on 
market infrastructure land 
site 
consent of community/or 
individuals on land site for 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure 
Roads must be 
constructed with 
drainages 
Develop contingency 
plans for dykes/spillways 
to manage  unexpected  
circumstances. 
 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Code of conduct for 
transport operators 
 Minutes of meetings of 
transport operators’ 
association 
 Organize transport 
entrepreneurs into an 
association for easy 
management 
 Develop a code of 
conduct, and health, 
safety, and environment 
regulation for transport 
operators 
Key issue 
Affecting the 
Environment 
Part in 
value 
chain 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
Potential impact (negative) and 
Environmental 
positive) 
Social & 
Institutional 
Economic 
Transportati
on 
 GHG emission 
from transportation 
 Use of 
motorized and 
heavy 
transportatio
n 
machines 
 Influx of rural 
Migrant workers  to 
agri- enterprise 
sites and 
processing areas 
 Increased ownership of 
motorized and other 
transport system 
 Increased number of 
service providers 
 Increased 
number of service 
providers, which 
boost the economy 
 Increased GDP 
 But increasing 
associated environmental 
and social costs 
118 
5.6 Analysis of Alternatives 
The traditional approach to PROSPER selected VC crops (i.e. Rice, Maize, Cowpea, 
Horticulture (Vegetables) and shea and cashew) in Ghana is to reuse inputs and make 
use of available cultural technics with little concern for quality control. Based on the 
analysis of the approach thus far, the outcome has been to focus on high-yielding 
varieties. Farmers will be encouraged to abandon the predominant agronomic practices 
to improved, efficient and climate-smart agronomic practices as enumerated on Table 9. 
Table8: Commodity Value-Chain + Household Level Activities 
Commodity  
Value 
chain 
Rice, Maize, 
Soybeans   
Predominant Practice 
Climate Smart Agriculture 
practices 
  Recycling of paddy and use of 
  Encourage paddy 
untested seeds 
  Wrong application of soil 
amendments and agrochemicals  
  Use of low yield and long 
gestation varieties 
  Fertilizer spreading 
  Tillage operations remove all 
trees 
  Use of inorganic crop protection 
chemicals 
  No risk transfer measures to 
mitigate losses 
transplanting and tested 
seeds from certified seed 
producers/suppliers 
  Encourage soil sample 
analysis and use of 
biofertilizers instead 
  Train and certify spraying 
gangs on the adequate usage 
of biofertilizer/biopesticides 
  Encourage the adoption of 
improved, pest resistant and 
early maturing varieties 
  No draining at mid-season 
  Encourage deep application of 
increases methane emission 
  Farming activities not guided by 
agro-climatic information  
  Waste poorly managed and 
constitute nuisance 
  Wood for parboiling causing 
woodland and forest degradation  
  Limited to rainy season farming  
  Use wood for parboiling 
119 
bio-urea at 6cm- 
  10cm depth 
  Encourage minimum or zero 
tillage 
  Encourage the use of organic 
crop protection solutions like 
Neem oil and other 
bionutrients 
  Encourage carbon 
sequestration activities 
  Fence farms with hedges and 
trees to reduce animal 
intrusions 
  Encourage farmers to sign-on 
to agric insurance for no 
greats and risk transfer  
  Strengthen collaboration to 
ensure Farming activities is 
guided by agro-climatic 
information for better timing 
(i.e. with GAMA) 
  Train farmers to drain paddies 
at mid-season to reduce 
methane emission 
  Value chain to be created for 
waste conversion to briquette 
and greener energy  
  Parboiling to be done with 
briquettes and other 
alternative efficient energy 
sources such a biogas from 
animal dunks 
Commodity  
Value 
chain 
Predominant Practice 
Climate Smart Agriculture 
practices 
Vegetables 
(Not a VC 
but a HH 
level 
Activitty) 
  Construct small earth dams to 
harvest stormwaters and use 
of drip irrigation scheme for 
dry season farming 
  Train farmers on construction 
of rainwater harvesting 
structure to retain water for 
dry season farming (i.e., fish 
farming and cattle drinking 
points) 
  Encourage farmers to use 
briquettes and clean cooking 
stoves, such as biogas from 
biodigesters supplied by 
animals. 
  Use of spent and low-quality 
  Encourage out grower 
stems 
schemes 
  Wrong application of soil 
  Encourage soil sample 
amendments and agrochemicals  
analysis 
  Use of low-yield varieties and 
long gestation  
  Fertilizer spreading 
  Tillage operations remove all 
trees  
  Use     of     inorganic    crop     
protection chemicals 
  Waste poorly managed and 
constitute nuisance in 
environment  
  No risk transfer mechanism 
  Production activities not guided 
by agroclimatic information  
  Trees and woods on land totally 
removed 
  Poor application of technology for 
erosion and flooding control 
120 
  Encourage the adoption of 
improved varieties 
  Encourage ring application at 
6cm-10cm depth 
  Encourage minimum or zero 
 
tillage 
the use of organic crop 
protection solutions like neem 
oil or bio-nutrients 
  Encourage carbon 
sequestration activities 
  Value chain to be created 
around waste conversion to 
animal feed 
  Wastewater to be properly 
channelled from to reduce 
odour 
  Farmers to be encourage to 
sign on to agric insurance for 
no regrets and risk transfer 
mechanism  
  Strengthen collaboration to 
ensure Farming activities is 
guided by agro-climatic 
information for better timing 
  Encourage agroforestry to 
maintain tree on farms, and 
replant trees along farm 
borders 
  Adopt techniques including 
terracing, bunding and 
contouring to control erosion 
and flooding in inland areas 
Commodity  
Value 
chain 
Predominant Practice 
Climate Smart Agriculture 
practices 
  Encourage conservation 
agriculture to reduce soils 
erosions and infertility 
Shea and 
Cashew 
Trees 
Poultry 
  Use of endemic seed with low 
  Adoption of climate smart and 
productive varieties  
  Bio fertilizer for greater 
productivity 
  Climate smart processing of 
trees and growth monitoring; 
  Use of shorter productivity 
cycle 
  Sustainable waste 
management 
  Use of biogas to de-shell and 
process 
  Use of shells as animal 
feeding supplements 
  Well-rounded VC practices  
  Provision of quality water 
services 
  Good feeding stations and 
grains 
  Use of proper stockage 
system 
  Good ventilation to reduce 
HS. 
Appropriate slaughtering stations 
Adequate waste management yield 
to transfer into agriculture fields 
(bio-fertilizer) 
productivity 
  Poor management of plants 
  Untimely replantation of plants 
  Poor usage of agrochemicals 
  Waste poorly managed and 
constitute nuisance in 
environment  
  No risk transfer mechanism 
  Production activities not guided 
by agroclimatic information  
  Unrationalized cutting of tree for 
wood fuel or de-shelving  
  Heat Stress (HS) 
  Poor management of facilities 
  Untimely replenishment of 
stocks/rupture 
  Poor usage of feeding ratios 
  Poor waste management and 
constitute likely nuisance to the 
environment  
  Unwelcoming/unbearable smell 
on site and in the vicinity of 
poultry farming 
  GHG production 
  Production activities not guided 
by scientific information  
  Water Pollution 
  Poor poultry farming with 
negative impact on the 
ecosystem 
121 
5.7   The Without Project Scenario: 
 As stated above, the overall vision of this project is to sustainably improve the livelihood 
and living conditions of Ghanaians farmers active in the participating districts of the NMB 
regions faced with growing and constraining climate change factors.  The project area 
context speaks volumes of the difficult conditions farmers are currently faced with in the 
project intervention areas. PROSPER contribution is foreseen to bring way more positive 
benefits than adverse risks and impacts, which, as determined by its moderate to low 
safeguards risk rating and category B stance as mostly site specific and easily 
manageable, albeit its high-risk climate change vulnerability. Consequently, the without 
project contribution will most likely further increase the current constraining factors in a 
context of impactful climate change regime and hinder more the future of theses 
beneficiary farmers livelihoods and living conditions. Moreover, this will add more 
difficulties on the Government’s efforts to alleviate rural poverty, especially in this NMB 
regions; which altogether will result in more rural exodus and immigration, especially 
from the working forces (youth); transformational changes from farmers to other more 
affordable work skills (mechanics, trader, security agents, porters, informal income 
generating businessmen/women, etc.); hence, further and further depleting the 
Agricultural wide-sector from its main workforce. As for the biophysical environment, 
available arable land, scattered natural resources, as well as quality of water and 
grassland will be further shrunk and depleted; thus, adding more burden on remaining 
rural households; increase land ownership and natural resources co-sharing more 
problematic with an exponential rise of transhuman-driven conflicts and detrimental 
consequences (malnourishment, poor nutrition diet, weak health conditions, etc.). 
This is to, simply further justify, the timeliness, and overall relevance of  the PROSPER 
project in supporting Government of Ghana’s efforts and recipient communities’ vision to 
foster a better future for their lives and that of their future generations. 
122 
6 - ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN (ESMP)  
For moderate risk projects, IFAD requires the development of an environmental and 
social management plan (ESMP) to set out the core measures and actions required for 
the project to manage and effectively mitigate environmental, climate and social risks 
and achieve compliance with SECAP.  
The environmental, climate and social management plans (ESMPs) presented below are 
relevant to the entire PROSPER project, including the agri-enterprise and related 
socioeconomic infrastructure sub-projects whose locations are not yet known, and will 
not be prior to project appraisal. However, for these subprojects, a separate screening 
as outlined herein is still required. The outcome of this screening and subsequent review 
may lead to the likely development of more detailed, site-specific ESMPs. In this case, 
the ESMP will list the commitments and actions PROSPER will undertake to achieve 
compliance with the relevant SECAP policies/standards throughout the entire project 
lifecycle.  
In case of a change management that leads to a reclassification of the project during the 
implementation stage of this project, and new risks are identified then, the ESMP will be 
reviewed accordingly. 
6.1 Mitigation Measures Checklist 
By design, PROSPER is expected to have far greater environmental, climate and social 
benefits than its foreseen adverse impacts. These potential adverse impacts from the 
project are likely to be small in scale and limited in size. Spatial and temporal 
distribution of impacts that would result from the project activities, as well as the sub-
projects requires specific attention particularly during project screening.  
However, it is recognized that such impacts, if they are not identified early enough 
during the planning and preparation stages, and their mitigation measures adequately 
integrated into the project planning and implementation, they can most likely accrue into 
larger impacts. Given the fact that minimum impact sub-projects are eligible and the 
level of available fund for each district, such impacts could be easily mitigated using 
sensible site selection criteria, good construction practices in harmony with the local 
culture and diligent management practices in the operational phase63.  
This section discusses the impacts and mitigation measures for component 1 activities 
mainly. The 
following table describes the impacts and mitigation measures from the agricultural 
production activities, mainly driven from foreseen activities in component 1. 
63-As mitigation measures must be taken into account as part of the sub-project design and costs, the ESMP does not need a separate budget 
allocation. However, it is imperative that activities’ costs reflect the resources needed to fully implement the ESMP.  
123 
Table 9: Environmental (incl. Climate Change) and Social Management Plan  
Recommended 
Monitoring Indicator 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE & SOCIAL MONITORING 
Feasibility study for 
Socioeconomic 
feeder/track roads and 
Infrastructure  
causeways, dykes 
(Moderate) 
Baseline on status of the 
environmental climate and 
social conditions in the 
selected communities 
PCU / contractor/ 
Ministry of 
infrastructure 
(MOI) 
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Environmental 
and social 
baseline 
(Moderate) 
Land and soil 
degradation 
(Moderate) 
Surface and 
subsurface water 
quality 
(Moderate) 
Degradation of 
Forest and 
wetland 
(Moderate) 
Erosion and gully 
(Moderate) 
Conduct a baseline 
assessment to obtain 
baseline values of key 
environmental. Climate 
and social parameters in 
concerned communities 
Monitor quality of soil 
and other biological 
conditions 
Monitor sample quality of 
surface and subsurface 
water at random sites 
See environmental, 
climate and social 
indicators mentioned 
below 
PCU/ National 
Environment 
Agency (EPA) 
Soil micro-organism count 
Soil organic matter count 
Adopt use of climate 
friendly technics 
Water quality 
PCU (Safeguards 
and climate team) 
PCU 
PCU 
Monitor quality of forest 
and wetlands 
Changes in forest and 
wetland area 
Monitor quality of land 
Changes in area of bare 
surfaces  
PCU 
Bush and pipeline  Monitor quality of 
Changes in vegetal cover 
PCU 
124 
Site-specific 
ESMP reports 
Adherence to 
laid legal and 
policy 
requirements 
(Category B) 
Field survey  
Once, at the 
beginning of 
project 
Baseline, once at 
beginning of 
project 
Field 
measurement, 
incl. soil sample 
analysis 
Field 
measurement 
and Laboratory 
test 
Remote sensing 
and field 
assessment 
Remote sensing 
and field 
assessment 
Remote sensing 
Annual (or after 
cropping cycle) 
Annual (or after 
cropping cycle) 
Baseline, Mid-
Term, End- Term 
Baseline, Mid-
Term, End- Term 
Annual 
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
fire 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
vegetation 
Recommended 
Monitoring Indicator 
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
Loss of 
biodiversity 
(Moderate) 
Waste 
proliferation 
(High) 
Use of 
agrochemicals 
(Moderate) 
Flooding 
(High) 
GHG emissions 
(High) 
Socio-economic 
conditions 
(Moderate) 
Community 
conflict (internal) 
(Moderate) 
Youth violence 
(militancy and 
cultism) 
Monitor quality of 
biodiversity   
Changes in abundance of 
biodiversity 
PCU 
Monitor quality of land, 
water, and air 
Changes in soil, air, and 
water quality 
PCU 
Monitor quality of plant, 
soil, and water 
Changes in quality of 
plant, soil, and water 
PCU 
Monitor quality of land 
Extent of land inundation   PCU 
Monitor quality of air 
Preponderance of GHG in 
the air 
PCU/ National 
Environment 
Agency (EPA) 
Food security, assets, 
employment, income, 
production methods and 
volumes, access to 
markets and finance, 
social inclusion, disaster 
preparedness 
Conduct a combined 
sustainable livelihood 
analysis (SLA) / 
resilience assessment, 
providing baseline status 
of key socio-economic 
conditions in selected 
communities  
Monitor  the 
effectiveness of 
grievance redress 
mechanism  
Monitor youth violence 
situation 
Occurrence of violent 
conflicts within selected 
communities 
PCU/ Ministry of 
social affairs and 
local development  
Occurrence of youth 
violence within selected 
communities 
PCU/Ministry of 
Justice 
125 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
and field 
assessment 
Field survey 
Field 
measurement 
and laboratory 
test 
Laboratory test 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Annual  
Annual  
Annual  
Field survey and 
remote sensing 
Field 
measurement  
Quarterly  
Annually 
Field 
measurement 
(update) 
Community visit 
Community visit  Quarterly 
PCU 
Field survey 
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
(Moderate) 
Resource-based 
conflict (farmers 
– pastoralists) 
(High) 
Loss of (access 
to) agricultural 
land 
(Moderate) 
Social exclusion 
(Moderate) 
Elite capture 
(High) 
Unsafe and non-
healthy working 
conditions 
(Moderate) 
Gender-based 
Violence 
including Sexual 
Exploitation, 
Abuse (High) 
Financing  
(Moderate) 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
Recommended 
Monitoring Indicator 
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Monitor conflict situation  Occurrence of violent 
PCU 
Community visit  Quarterly 
Monitor land access and 
ownership 
Monitor inclusion of 
women, PWD, and youth 
in decision-making 
Monitor (political) 
interference, conflicts of 
interest, corruption 
Monitor health impacts 
and child labour 
raise awareness or 
interventions on SEA 
conflicts between selected 
communities and external 
parties 
Change in land access and 
ownership for women and 
youth 
Percentage of women. 
PWD and youth 
represented in 
community-level decision-
making committees, 
associations and meetings 
PCU 
Number of cases reported 
and suspected of health 
impact due to use of agro-
chemicals, accidents due 
to use of production and 
processing machinery and 
related faulty wiring and, 
use of child labour.  
Percentage of people 
sensitized  
PCU 
Community visit  Annually 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Justice 
Community visit  Annually 
PCU/ ministry of 
agriculture 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Heath  
Community visit  Annually 
Community visit  Annually 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Justice/ Gender 
and women 
Community visit  Annually  
Subscribe to the 
principles of  
Number of MFIs partners 
that have integrated 
PCU 
Community visit  Annually 
126 
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
sustainable 
environmental, climate 
and social 
management in the 
financing of business 
plans (ESMS of FIs 
such as RCBs) 
Recommended 
Monitoring Indicator 
sustainability into their 
financing (ESMS of Fis 
such as RCBs) 
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Socioeconomic 
Infrastructures 
(Moderate) 
Business Plan 
Development per 
activity 
(Moderate) 
Feasibility studies  
Reports 
PCU/ Ministry of 
infrastructures  
Community visit   First year 
Screening of sub-activity 
+ Site specific E&S 
impacts Assessment 
(ESMP) 
Reports 
PCU 
Community visit  At the beginning 
prior to activity 
implementation 
Source: CATS-August 2021 
127 
Summary of Environmental and Climate Mitigation Measures: Indirect, increased use of 
pesticides will be mitigated against be proactively offering training on IPM. In instances where 
pesticides use is unavoidable, training on the safe handling of pesticides will be provided and bio-
pesticides and biofertilizer will be promoted in the BPs over other varieties. There will be no pesticides 
procurement under this project, and highly hazardous pesticides (HHP) would not be used in the 
project areas. Both the PCU and LPIU Safeguards specialists will work closely with recipient 
communities to ensure systematic compliance with these safeguards measures. 
Summary of Social Mitigation Measures: Risks associated with decent rural employment, 
GBV/SEAH, occupational health and safety, and land tenure will be mitigated with application of: (i) 
the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests 
(VGGT); (ii) sensitization training on safe, decent rural employment and age-appropriate work, given 
that youth often assist with the farming work of their respective families, including GBV and SEAH; 
and (iii) safe and secured use of pesticides. To further ensure social inclusion of vulnerable groups and 
citizen/stakeholders’ engagement, ongoing consultations, and participatory M&E will continue 
throughout the project lifecycle as a means of providing a feedback loop to foster stakeholders’ 
ownership and social accountability. The established grievance redress mechanism (GRM) will be 
conducted in line with the requests from community consultations and will be sensitive to the needs of 
vulnerable groups, especially widows, disadvantaged and disables. 
6.2  Approach to Enhance Project Implementation 
This ESMF, along with the Gender Action Plan (GAP), is not being used solely as a compliance process: 
it goes beyond compliance and takes a proactive approach in design. Similarly, the grievance redress 
mechanism included in this document is not just about being a last-resort mechanism; rather, the 
GRM is 
about creating a project culture of transparency with built-in feedback systems. Both the ESMF and 
the 
Gender Action Plan are taken as positive aspects that help the project implementation units (at central 
and local levels) in identifying and developing activities for greater environmental and social co-
benefits. To ensure, that the social, climate and environmental issues are addressed properly in 
accordance and in compliance with the IFAD’s SECAP, all project activities shall systematically undergo 
a thorough screening, assessment, review, and clearance process before the physical execution of 
project activities. 
This chapter describes the process for ensuring that environmental, climate and social safeguards 
concerns are adequately addressed through the proposed institutional arrangements and procedures 
used by the project for managing the identification, preparation, approval, implementation and 
reporting of sub-activities. The detailed environmental and social safeguard process is listed below:  
6.2.1 Screening and Review 
PROSPER Environment and Social Safeguards Risk Category is ‘B’ which means that ‘some adverse 
impacts can be readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation64. However, to 
remain a ‘B’ Category Project serious attention must be paid to land development (i.e., likely potential 
for deforestation and related secondary effects), and development of socioeconomic infrastructure 
including construction of feeder roads and small earth dams and irrigation schemes development. Loss 
of investments to floods, other natural hazards including drought is also very high across the 
participating 8 regions of the middle and north belts. By far the most important social risk is the 
resource-induced clashes between farmers and pastoralists given the rich livestock capital both natural 
regions are endowed with. All the project areas have the potential of being impacted by this risk.  
During implementation, it is essential that all sub-project proposals be screened, first on eligibility on 
the basis of the ‘letter of interest’ / application form (see Annex 1), and secondly on the basis of 
64
 Source: IFAD (2016) Managing Risks to Create Opportunities. IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) (IFAD: Rome), p.18  
128 
environmental, climate and social impacts using the more detailed screening forms (see Annex 2)). 
Project Screening for Project Screening for environmental, climate and social impacts will ensure that 
sub-projects with high and irreversible impacts on the environment or people that cannot be readily 
mitigated are not eligible for support by PROSPER . It is very important to ensure that before land is 
developed for any cluster or farmer organization, they should take the responsibility of planting trees 
at the perimeter of the land area and nurturing them. 
Sub-project proposals with medium (manageable) environmental and social impacts should include the 
following basic elements in the application and contain in the project-specific ESMP:  
a.  A summary and description of the possible adverse effects that specific sub-project activities 
may occur;  
b.  A description of any planned measures to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts, and how and 
when they will be implemented;  
c.  A system for monitoring the environmental and social effects of the project;  
d.  A description of who will be responsible for implementing and monitoring the mitigation 
measures; and  
e.  A cost estimate of the mitigation measures, which should be included in the sub-project 
proposal.  
The scope of any environmental and/or social review and related mitigation measures will be 
determined by the relevant PIU Environmental, Climate, Social Specialist (PIU- 1ECSS) in consultation 
with each of the two Zonal Officers (Northern Belt & Middle Belt – 2 ZECSO) and each of the 8 
Regional Safeguards and Climate Focal Points (8 RSCFP) and involved technical experts where needed, 
via the sub-project screening and approval process. Sub-project proposals with only minor or no 
adverse impacts do not need a separate review (or ESMP).  
  Screening for Eligibility  
Thus far, PROSPER’s PDR provides a detailed description of the targeting and selection process for 
project beneficiaries. Annex 1 provides the proposed format for the letter of interest/application form, 
which should be completed by each intended beneficiary and will be used as the primary tool for 
screening for eligibility.  
  Screening for Environmental, Climate and Social Impacts  
Based on relevant SECAP guidelines, two separate environmental and social screening forms have 
been developed: for agri-enterprise (Annex 2) and related socioeconomic infrastructure subprojects 
(Annex 3), and climate screening form for sub-projects (Annex 4).The intended beneficiaries are only 
required to complete the intention/application form in Annex 1 while the screening is done using the 
form in Annex 2, 3 and 4 by the PIU Environmental, Climate and Social Specialist (ECSS, assisted by 
the corresponding zonal ZECSO and corresponding RSCFP).  
Annex 5 provides an environmental and social guideline for contractors, especially those handling the 
construction of socioeconomic infrastructure such as the construction/rehabilitation of market-
connected rural feeder roads, irrigation facilities, dam’s construction, production platforms, etc. Sound 
environmental and social management of construction projects can be achieved only with adequate 
site selection and project design. As such, the ESMP for projects involving any new construction, or 
any rehabilitation or reconstruction for existing projects, should provide information as to screening 
criteria for site selection and design. The guidelines include the site selection, prohibitions, 
construction management measures, safety during construction, community relations, chance finds 
procedures and environmental supervision during construction. 
  Impact Significance Rating 
To determine the significance of impacts, the likelihood of an impact occurring is considered against 
the consequence or magnitude of the impact if it was to occur. Likelihood is defined as the frequency 
of an impact occurring.  
Table 10 Definitions of Consequence  
Consequence 
Definition 
129 
No Impact / No 
change 
Negligible 
Intermediate 
•  No impacts on biophysical and social environments / livelihood / 
health / gender  
•  No public concerns  
•  No legal issues  
• 
•  Minor social impacts  
•  No legal issues  
•  Some level of impact on environment / livelihood / health / 
Low/minor impact on environment / livelihood / health / gender  
Severe 
Unknown 
gender  
•  Social issues apparent  
•  May have legal implications  
•  High level impacts on environment / livelihood / health / gender  
•  High public concerns or perceptions  
• 
•  Extent of the impact cannot be determined at this point  
•  Apply precautionary principle  
Legal non- compliance  
  Projects that have low significance impacts may not require a new ESMP; in that case the 
standard ESMP in the ESMF report will suffice.  
  In the case of project with medium significance, the development of appropriate plans, in 
addition to the standard ESMP in this ESMF may suffice to manage the severity of the impacts.  
  In the case of projects with impacts of high significance, a separate ESIA is almost always 
required. 
6.2.2 Safeguards and Climate Implementation Arrangements (SCIA) 
Project Implementation Arrangement for Safeguards and Climate 
For safeguards implementation, the Project Coordinator leading the Project Coordination Unit 
(PCU) will have the overall responsibility and accountability for the implementation of the project, 
including environmental and social safeguards and climate change compliance. More specifically, a 
Safeguards and Climate Specialist as well as Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will be included in 
the PCU. They both will be the recipient of all project-related grievances at both the central and local 
levels, as detailed within the Grievance Redress Mechanism process in the below pages (i.e. section 9) 
of this ESMF. The roles and responsibilities of some of the PCU staffs are described in more details in 
both the project description in this document and in the Project Document Report (PDR). 
 Project Coordination Unit (PCU): A Project Coordination Unit, led and hosted by the MOFA, will 
be established in the project area (potentially in Tamale) to ensure political anchorage within the 
overarching decision-making structures, SECAP and strategies.  The Project Steering Committee (SC) 
will include EPA. A National Project Coordinator (NPC) will be responsible for the physical 
operational and administrative project implementation and coordination with all project stakeholders, 
and operational leadership of the PCU. Under the overall leadership of the NPC, and in close 
coordination with the PCU Senior Safeguards and Climate Specialist (SSCS), the Senior Gender 
and Social Inclusion Specialist (SGSIS) and likewise, financial intermediaries like APEX Bank will 
have both a Safeguards and Climate Specialist (SSCS), the Gender and Social Inclusion 
Specialist (SGSIS)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
the Executing Entity (MOFA), the PROSPER-PCU will be responsible for providing support to the 
implementation of the day-to-day activities at the national/central level  
Both the Senior SCS and the Senior GSIS will be hired by the PCU to spearhead the different 
Safeguards and Climate, as well as Gender and Social Inclusion compliance with the ESMF and ESMP 
core requirements, its implementation, and its regular reporting across all project activities. In order 
to retain close proximity to the project intervention areas, the SSCS and the GSIS will be based out at 
the PCU in the field and ensure that the staff on-the-ground in the project areas conduct a screening 
for sub-activities prior to implementation, and then mitigate for any medium-risk activities using site-
specific ESMPs developed during project implementation, based on that very screening checklist, once 
project activities footprints are known and clearer.  
130 
At local level, the BFF at the APEX Bank will include a Safeguards and Climate Specialist (SCS) and 
Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (GSIS)  who will ensure that the BPs are implemented in 
accordance with this ESMF/ESMP and IFAD SECAP guidelines. These two specialists will work in 
tandem with and report to the PCU’s Specialists.  
IFAD will have a designated Lead Safeguards and Climate Expert (LSCE) who will liaise with both PCU 
and APEX specialists to ensure constant brainstorming on the way the safeguards and climate as well 
as Gender and Social Inclusion dimensions agenda of PROSPER to ensure SECAP procedures are fully 
and adequately complied with. S/He will work in tandem with both the PCU and APEX Specialists. 
6.3 Integrated Pests and Pesticides Management Plan (IPPM) 
As stated in the tables above and some of the listed national laws and regulations, procurement of 
pest and pesticides is not envisaged under this project. However, the project could include sub-
projects relating to enhancement of agricultural productivity and introduction of high value crops, 
support seed banks and beekeeping. These activities could result in the use of pesticides. The ESMF 
has included a screening tool to identify subprojects that would need to prepare a simple integrated 
pest management plan (IPPMP). Such subprojects will prepare and publicly disclose an IPPMP before 
they are approved for physical implementation. The Project will include relevant training at the field 
level such as in pest management (PM), selecting disease free seeds, bee keeping, etc. A mechanism 
will be put in place to demonstrate Integrated Pest Management procedures and to develop a farmer 
education program that stresses good and safe practices for storage and application of pesticides.  
The project will use the Guidance document provided in Annex 11 for identifying the need to prepare 
an IPPMP for a sub-project. A separate IPPMP is needed if expected quantities of pesticides to be used 
are significant from health and environment (biophysical & human) standpoint; or if pesticides use or 
other non-indigenous biological control into an area will be introduced; or if hazardous products (WHO 
Class la & lb) will be financed. The IPPMP consists of the following components:  
  Activities  
  Actors and partners  
  Institutional arrangements for implementation  
  Phasing plan  
  Cost estimates  
The activities of the PMP are designed to ensure that implementation of PROSPER project in the 
selected 5 districts in each of the 8 regions of PROSPER intervention areas complies with both IFAD 
and corresponding national regulation. 
  Activity 1 – If feasible, study tours will be organized to similar programs/agency where farmers 
participatory Pest Management (PM) programs have been successfully implemented. The study 
tour will be organized for representatives of selected project district areas. A regional PM 
workshop (within the NMB) will be organized to cross fertilize and share experiences gained during 
the study tour and to facilitate the implementation of the IPMPs.  
  Activity 2 - Promoting the adoption of climate-smart PM practices  
  Supporting activities of the Community PM Action Committees  
  Developing PM training capacity in the extension services  
  Developing PM capacities amongst PIU and farmer Groups  
  Production of field brochures, PM posters, field guides and other IPM promotional materials; 
purchase of various PM Extension Guides publications.  
  Public awareness programs and PM networking amongst the project stakeholders  
  Activity 3 - Training in pesticides management; safe and secure use of pesticides  
  Making decisions to use pesticides  
  Transport, storage, handling, and distribution of pesticides  
  Safe application of pesticides  
  Risks in the handling and use of pesticides  
  Managing risks and pesticide poisoning  
  Protective gear; use and maintenance  
131 
  Public awareness raising on the safe use of pesticides; radio talks, social medias, etc.  
  Activity 4 - Strengthening national regulatory frameworks and institutional capacities  
  Support PCU to assist with national coordination of PMP activities of PROSPER project.  
  Support teams and beneficiaries to participate effectively in the implementation of the PMP  
  Activity 5 - Integrated Vector Management: surveillance of disease vector populations in the 
environment of small irrigation schemes. 
  Surveillance teams to be set up in villages around the water sources and irrigation sites to 
conduct regular surveys on the incidence of waterborne diseases.  
  Training in environment and social management for the control of waterborne diseases  
6.4 ESMF Monitoring and Evaluation  
The overall objective of environmental and social monitoring is to ensure that recommended mitigation 
measures are incorporated, and that activities carried out during sensitization (i.e., training and 
awareness-raising) and infrastructure construction/maintenance are environmentally and socially 
acceptable, and therefore sustainable. 
6.4.1 Project Monitoring & Evaluation   
Currently IFAD M&E conducts multiple impact assessment studies for the projects they implement: 
Baseline Surveys, Post-Distribution Assessments, and Impact Assessments, etc. The Baseline Surveys, 
conducted regularly, will employ a hybrid approach that uses IFAD Field Monitors. An Impact 
Assessment to evaluate the project performance and achievements will be conducted once all data 
have been analyzed, activities implemented, and results validated by IFAD-Ghana.  
6.4.2 Sub-Project Monitoring and Evaluation  
Monitoring and reporting will be supervised by IFAD staff. Associated Government agencies and 
members of the community, through their representatives, should be trained to undertake both 
compliance monitoring and impact monitoring. This will be done throughout the sub-project cycle 
namely:  
  During the planning phase, communities will participate in the identification of indicators for 
monitoring the mitigating measures;  
  During the implementation phase, monitoring the execution of any works with respect to 
environmental and social aspects,  
  During the operation and maintenance phase, the overall environmental, climate and social 
monitoring (including monitoring human-natural resources conflict) and alerting on any 
emerging environmental/climate hazards in conjunction with the ongoing sub-project activities. 
Communities will pass on their observations and concerns through the local Ghana-IFAD Project 
staff.  
Key Performance Indicators 
The key impact indicators for PROSPER are that: 
  Estimated corresponding total number of household members  
  Corresponding number of households reached  
  Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project (out of which 10% are PWD)  
  Number of people with greater resilience (including PWD) 
  Number of women and youth with access to good nutrition services   
  Percentage of households reporting an improved access to markets and a 30% income 
increase) 
, 
The key monitoring indicators/variables include:  
  Number of persons/households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs, technologies, or 
practices  
  Number of hectares of farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated  
  Number of upgraded women/youth-led vegetable gardens 
  Number of integrated market-oriented vegetable garden financed through matching grants 
  Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies  
  Number of rural producers accessing production inputs  
132 
  Number of Jobs created (100% youth-led agricultural service businesses)  
  Number of financial service providers supported in delivering outreach strategies, financial 
products and services to rural areas  
  Number of farmers’ organizations engaged in formal partnerships/agreements or contracts with 
public or private entities  
  Number of effective agricultural value chain interaction platforms (AVIP) 
  Number of rural farmers’ organizations supported  
  Number of 4P businesses supported 
  Number of feeder road/track roads (Km) rehabilitated/construction per districts 
  Number of feeder road/track-roads maintained per year in districts, 
  Number occupational health and safety sessions per RI organized per district 
  Number of market or storage facilities (warehouse, workshop, silos) constructed or 
rehabilitated  
  Number of agribusiness policy-dialogue (meetings, roundtables) between public, private and 
producers’ stakeholders conducted 
Various project impacts and aspects relate to these overall performance targets. When the activities 
and indicators are established, baseline data needs to be collected to serve as a benchmark and 
against which changes in the identified indicators can be measured. The types of parameters that can 
be monitored may include mitigation measures or design features, or actual impacts. In some cases, 
such as drainage structures and soil conservation interventions, monitoring is straightforward and can 
be done as part of routine or periodic maintenance.  However, other parameters, particularly those 
related to social, ecological and climate change issues can only be effectively assessed over a period of 
2 to 3 years. 
133 
ESMF Implementation Timeline and Budget  
6.5 
As outlined in the ESMF, the day-to-day implementation of the ESMF for the PROSPER project, will be 
led by two full-time project-recruited staffs, namely (i) a Senior Environmental, Climate and 
Social Safeguards Specialist (SECSSS) and a (ii) Senior Gender and Social Inclusion 
Specialist (SGSIS) at the PCU level in Tamale (indicatively), and supplemented by a Focal Point 
(FP) in each of the participating 85 districts of PROSPER in the 8 regions. These FPs will be 
hosted at the Local Authorities level with whom PROSPER management will sign an MOU 
(Memorandum of Understanding) to spearhead project implementation at local levels The foreseen 
duration of PROSPER is eight (08) years (2022-2029).. The total hiring of the proposed Safeguards 
et Climate + Gender and Social Inclusion team (1 SECSSS & 1 SGSIS), so to properly integrate 
gender and social inclusion mainstreaming in the safeguards management, especially at local level 
during the 8-years project duration, along with their provision for personal capacity strengthening 
each year is estimated to be $910,000 USD. This cost will be included in the project overall cost, 
notably in Component 3. 
At local level, the BFF at the APEX Bank will include a Safeguards and Climate Specialist (SCS) and 
Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (GSIS) who will ensure that the BPs are implemented in 
accordance with this ESMF/ESMP and IFAD SECAP guidelines. These two specialists will work in 
tandem with and report to the PCU’s Specialists.  
IFAD will have a designated Lead Safeguards and Climate Expert (LSCE) who will work as counterpart 
with all 4 specialists (2 for the PCU and 2 for APEX). To ensure safeguards and climate as well as 
Gender and Social Inclusion compliance agenda of PROSPER to ensure SECAP procedures are fully and 
adequately complied with. S/He will work in tandem with both the PCU and APEX Specialists. 
The monitoring plan in Table 12- lists the parameters to be monitored, activity that will generate the 
parameters, monitoring indicators, and responsibility, monitoring means, frequency and the estimated 
cost.  
Parameter 
Table 11-  ESMF Timeline & Budget for PROSPER Implementation  
Monitorin
g 
Indicator 
Responsibi
lity for 
monitoring 
Monitori
ng 
means 
Activity 
Recommen
ded 
frequency 
of 
monitoring 
Estimate
d 
Monitori
ng Costs 
(USD) 
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING  
Environment
Site-specific ESMPs 
al, Climate 
and Environmental, 
et Social 
Climate and Social 
Screening 
Screening for roads 
and impact 
(feeder and/or track) 
assessment 
construction/rehabili
tation,   
processing facilities 
construction, 
irrigation schemes 
development, 
commodity 
warehouse or 
workshop 
construction, and 
borehole/drinking 
water points 
construction/rehabili
tation 
Baseline 
on the 
status of 
the 
environme
ntal, 
climate 
and social 
conditions 
C-ESMP 
reports 
Adherenc
e to laid 
legal and 
policy 
requireme
nts 
(Categor
y B) 
PCUs  FP, 
EPA, MOFA, 
DDA, MOW, 
Infrastructu
re/ 
Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
Once 
(project 
specific – At 
least once 
each year, 
depending 
also on the 
needs on the 
ground) 
1,000,00
0 
($125,00
0 x 8) 
Environmental, 
Climate and Social 
Environment
al, Climate 
Baseline 
on status 
PCUs & FP, 
EPA, MOFA, 
Baseline 
reports,  
Baseline and 
end term  
200,000 
134 
Parameter 
Activity 
Monitorin
g 
Indicator 
Responsibi
lity for 
monitoring 
Monitori
ng 
means 
Biodiversi
ty 
surveys 
report 
Climate 
risk and 
flooding 
and 
erosion 
risk 
reports 
Pest 
infestatio
n 
prediction 
report  
Number 
of RIs 
that sign 
onto 
agric-
insurance   
Field 
observati
on 
Monitoring – include 
- baseline and end 
term survey, 
biodiversity surveys; 
monitoring of land, 
water, and soil 
degradation and 
agrochemicals; 
climate, flooding and 
erosion prediction; 
pest infestation 
prediction and 
management 
and Social 
Screening 
and risk & 
impact 
assessment 
of the 
social, 
environme
nt and 
climate 
conditions, 
risks, and 
vulnerabili
ties  
DDA, MOW, 
Infrastructu
re/ 
Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
Risk Transfer - Agric 
insurance 
Climate and 
conflicts risk 
transfer 
Farmers 
sign on to 
agriculture 
insurance 
Technical support 
and backstopping - 
includes support for 
GHANA Agrimet for 
agroclimatic weather 
production and 
dissemination and 
setting up mini 
weather station; 
seed labs/sillos; and 
bio waste 
valorization ( 
Biogas et/ou bio-
fertilizers production 
Support for 
the GHANA 
Agrimet 
to install 
weather 
station and 
produce 
agroclimatic 
data for 
periodic 
climate 
monitoring  
Support 
seed lab 
developmen
t 
Support rice 
and 
vegetable 
waste 
valorization 
Number of 
mini 
weather 
stations 
installed 
Periodic 
production 
and 
disseminat
ion of 
agroclimat
ic 
informatio
n 
Number of 
equipped 
seed lab 
Number of 
rice and 
vegetable 
waste 
valorizatio
n 
initiatives 
PCUs & FPs, 
EPA, MOFA, 
DDA, MOW, 
Infrastructu
re/ 
Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
PCUs & 
PFPs, EPA, 
MOFA, DDA, 
MOW, 
Infrastructu
re/ 
Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
135 
Estimate
d 
Monitori
ng Costs 
(USD) 
($25,000
x8) 
Recommen
ded 
frequency 
of 
monitoring 
Once for 
specialized 
reports 
(incremental
, based on 
needs on the 
ground) 
Annual  
Twice a year 
and on a 
random 
basis to 
ensure 
consistency  
350,000 
This is 
part of 
the 
original 
project 
activities 
600,000 
($75,000
x8) 
 Only 
AGRIMET 
included 
in the 
costabs 
explicitly, 
the rest 
are 
mainstre
amed in 
the BP. 
Recommen
ded 
frequency 
of 
monitoring 
Estimate
d 
Monitori
ng Costs 
(USD) 
Twice a 
year, on a 
random 
basis. 
200,000 
Once (more 
precisely the 
need is put 
forth  
300,000 
Annual 
Parameter 
Activity 
Monitorin
g 
Indicator 
Responsibi
lity for 
monitoring 
Monitori
ng 
means 
Training-includes 
training of spraying 
gangs, draining of 
rice paddies; and 
construction of water 
harvesting structure 
for both dry season 
irrigation and animal 
drinking point and 
fishfarming 
Number of 
those 
trained 
Field 
observati
on 
PCUs & FPs, 
EPA, MOFA, 
DDA, MOW, 
Infrastructu
re/ 
Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
Training of 
spraying 
gangs 
integrated 
pest and 
agrochemica
l 
managemen
t 
Training of 
farmers on 
water 
harvesting 
for dry 
season 
farming 
SOCIAL MONITORING  
Support for conflict 
resolution -  include 
support for 
stakeholders 
dialogue on conflict 
management and 
land governance 
Conflict 
resolution 
stakeholders 
support and 
land 
governance 
dialogue 
Other Social 
monitoring (GBV, 
SEAH vulnerability,  
Health and Safety 
GRAND TOTAL 
Include 
gender and 
People living 
with 
disabilities 
(PLWD) 
mainstreami
ng  
Health 
Insurance 
and 
outreach  
Activities 
of conflict 
resolution 
committee 
Organize 
land 
governanc
e dialogue 
Activities 
of 
Targeting 
committee  
PCU/FP, 
MOFA, EPA, 
Environmen
tal Officer, 
PCU/FP, 
MOFA, EPA, 
MOWA 
Environmen
tal Officer, 
Conflict 
resolution 
and land 
governan
ce 
dialogue 
reports  
Social 
Surveys, 
Beneficiar
ies 
assessme
nt  
DHS 
Reports  
Annual 
Number of 
farmers 
with 
health 
insurance 
contracts 
PCU/FP, 
MOFA, EPA, 
MOWA, 
MOH, 
Environmen
tal Officer, 
100,000 
100,000 
2,850,0
00 
NOTE: Most of these costs are already included in the project costab and already mainstreamed 
altogether with other related activities, carefully distributed between among sub-component 1-2 
($700K), Matching Grants Scheme of sub-component 2-2 ($100K) and Blended Finance Facility of 
sub-component 2-2 (200K).  
136 
7.  CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL 
MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLANS  
7.1 Strengthening Capacity and Improving Resilience  
A successful mainstreaming of climate change and the ESMF into implementation of the project 
requires the strengthening of institutional capacities, in particular those, of the Agricultural 
Development Program by setting up mini weather station, Farmers Organization and Women 
Organizations. Moreover, there is a strong need for context-specific, in-situ training sessions for 
farmers, and others in the value chain, for example on climate-smart agriculture and climate change 
adaptation, to improve their resilience to deal more effectively with climate-related weather events. 
The same is also true for the economic, social and environmental literacy of RI, especially women, 
youth, PLWDs and RCBs. 
7.1.1 Training Topics  
Proposed training topics include, at the very least:  
a.  Screening and rating as prescribed in the ESMF;  
b.  Requirements of IFAD’s SECAP and NRM, Gender/GBV/SEAH/VAC, Climate, Land, policies ;  
c.  ESMF processes, procedures and institutional arrangements to develop and implement required 
management plans;  
d.  Stakeholder consultation, participation, and public disclosure policies 
e.  Agroclimatic data and early warning (including pest infestation) capacity building 
f.  Environmental, social and climate risks and impacts assessment, and requirements ;  
g.  Preparation, implementation, monitoring and reporting of ESMPs ;  
h.  Community, RIs and agro-SMEs sensitization – including insurance and risk transfer 
mechanisms 
i.  RIs training on climate smart agriculture, environmental and social best practices, including: 
Sustainable land preparations, agrochemical application and pest and disease management, 
sustainable agronomic practices,                                                                                                                   
soil fertility management, low-impact farming methods,  
j.  Conflict resolution and grievance management mechanisms;  
k.  Sustainable agriculture waste management ; 
l.  Environmental (EMS-ISO.14001), social audit, and report writing  
7.1.2 Target Audience and Approach  
The target groups for training should include, at least:  
a.  Project Coordination Units Staffs (PCU+ SGIS + FP)    
b.  MOFA, EPA, DDAs, MOW/MOSF staff, and EAs 
c.  Service providers  
d.  Beneficiaries (i.e., incubators and apprentices)  
e.  Farmers Organizations  
f.  Economists 
The training topics will be delivered based on the needs of each training target group. As much as 
possible, Training the Trainers (TOT) will be encouraged, where applicable, to manage resources and 
effectively reach the target audiences. 
Table 12: Training Activity and Estimated Cost 
NB  Activity 
Global Stakeholders and District 
Communities sensitization 
workshops 
This is already factored in the 
project design under sub-
component 1-1 
1 
Year 
(2022-2029) 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8   
Budget 
(USD) 
Remarks 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  X  X 
350,000 
Local media stream 
(recurrent) +:  
137 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
NB  Activity 
Year 
(2022-2029) 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8   
Budget 
(USD) 
Remarks 
ToT Capacity building for uptake 
of agroclimatic information and 
early warming   DDAs including 
safeguards 
X 
X 
X 
  X   
120,000 
2-day -Training of ECS 
Officers and Focal Points and 
selected implementation 
staff, to downscale to farmers 
,( Included in ToT under 
subcomponent 1.1) – This is 
already mainstreamed in the 
costable. 
1day workshop ( In the policy 
dialogue sub-component 3-2 
Stakeholders dialogue on green 
financing and climate smart 
agriculture 
Capacity building in IFADs & EPA  
ESMPs processes, procedures, 
implementation, and monitoring  
RIs training on climate smart 
agriculture, environmental and 
social best practices,  
Stakeholders’ capacity building 
on Conflict resolution and 
grievance redress mechanism 
Environmental, Climate and 
Social Audit and report writing 
GRAND TOTAL 
X 
X    X 
  X    X 
75,000 
X    X 
X 
X 
X 
100,000 
3 days training (refresher 
courses) each other year 
X  X    X 
X 
X  125,000 
2day per each of the 8 
regions Under component 1-1 
85,000 
2day per each of the 8 
regions 
X 
X     X 
  X    X 
75,000 
3day workshop for ECS 
officers led by IFAD’s LSCS 
920,00
0 
Note: Generally, training is already mainstreamed across the different components65. Given the fact 
that PROSPER is a climate focused project and has a strong focus on the environment and the social, 
many of the training and ESMP measures are already mainstreamed in project activities. However, the 
abovementioned cost are just for safeguards purposes. The total training cost for the whole project 
duration is estimated at USD $920,000 of the project cost. The total cost of the 2 Specialists at the 
PCU level and the two from APEX offices. 
More specifically, a conservative estimate is that both the Environmental and Social Monitoring 
(including safeguards and Gender provision for the MOU with the Government, especially for the 85 
Focal Points pour les 8 années de fonctionnement du PROSPER, costs and Training cost accounts for 
USD $ 3 million.. 
Tableau 13: Key PCU, Safeguards and Climate Staffs estimated Budget. 
Designation 
Duration  Unit 
Total Cost 
Senior Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards 
Specialist – PCU (Temale) 
Senior Gender (GBV/SEAHVAC) Mainstreaming Officer 
(Temale) 
 Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Specialist –
(APEX) 
 Gender (GBV/SEAHVAC) Mainstreaming Officer (APEX) 
96 
96 
96 
96 
Cost/Year 
36,000 
550,000 
36,000 
500,000 
32,000 
450,000 
32,000 
430,000 
65 - These are distributed among sub-component 1-2 ($700K), Matching Grants Scheme of sub-component 2-2 ($100K) and Blended Finance Facility of sub-
component 2-2 (200K) 
138 
Capacity Building to enhance their technical performances 
Broader Miscellaneous (5%) 
Grand Total  
FF 
FF 
--- 
1,700 
10,000 
---- 
65, 000 
80,000 
2,080,000 
Note: We opted for a rather more inclusive approach. Therefore, the above estimate is for both the 
Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Specialist and the Gender and Social Inclusion at the 
PCU level in Tamalé (Most likely). . There will Safeguards focal point identified at the district level.  
To make it rather more inclusive and constructive, as it will surely yield more sustainable results, it is 
suggestable to:  
  (i) have both the (a) Senior Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Specialist (SECSSS) 
and the Senior Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (SGSIS) at the PCU level in the main office 
in Temale; and (b) an Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Specialist (ECSSS) and the 
Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (APEX level) to facilitate GSIS) at to oversee both 
Safeguards and Climate, and the Gender and Social Inclusion mainstreaming compliance. To that 
effect, for their hiring, the respective TORs will include that candidates have some solid/proven 
background and expertise in properly handling safeguards/climate and gender mainstreaming 
issues in development operations ; 
  (ii) have the District Focal Point (DFP) working to spearhead both safeguards and gender 
dimensions, and report directly to both the SECSSS and SGSIS at the PCU levels, together with 
the IFAD Lead International ECSS. 
139 
8. PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS, PARTICIPATION, AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE  
8.1 Stakeholder Consultations and Participation  
Experience with previous IFAD and other economic and social investment projects indicate that 
stakeholder engagement and sensitization are of critical importance to project success. In the absence 
of clear communication with relevant stakeholders and appropriate sensitization of local communities, 
rumors, misinformation and speculation thrive, and accusations and tensions easily boil over into 
(violent) conflict within and between communities. Therefore, for many of the potential environmental, 
climate and social impacts, the ESMF preparation included extensive stakeholder consultations and 
participation. Key project stakeholders were identified for consultations and these included Government 
Ministries, State Agencies / Organizations/and Departments, Project offices, academia, research 
institutions, Non-governmental organization and local communities, both the affected and host 
communities, including women, the poor and most vulnerable groups.  
Stakeholder consultations and participation is an iterative process that goes throughout the project 
lifespan. Thus, community sensitization (i.e., awareness-raising and training) activities need to be 
clear, timely and culturally appropriate; this means that key messages need to be communicated in a 
format and language that is easy to understand, preferably by someone who speaks the local language 
and is familiar with local customs and sensitivities, and during a time that is convenient and sufficient 
for all key community groups, particularly women, youth, people living with disabilities (PLWD). To 
ensure appropriate community entry and reach target groups most effectively and efficiently, it is 
advisable to also involve civil society organizations that are already active in and trusted by the 
selected communities. 
Henceforth, during the field mission in Kumasi and Tamale regions, meetings were held with key 
officials and opinion leaders to gauge level of awareness and involvement with the project, concerns of 
project implementation, and to obtain relevant documents or baseline information. The consultations 
and participation also served to gather information on the mandates and permitting requirements to 
inform the development of the Program. The list of stakeholders contacted and issues discussed are 
presented in the Stakeholder Meetings and Public Consultation annex here below. 
8.2 ESMF Disclosure  
As many international development agencies, IFAD policies require that environmental, climate and 
social reports for projects are made available to project affected groups, local NGOs, and the public at 
large. Public disclosure of environmental, climate and social information is also a requirement of the 
Ghana EPA’s procedures. However, there is no limitation as to the extent and scope of disclosure. IFAD, 
in collaboration with the Government line agencies and EPA will make available copies of the ESMF in 
selected public places as required by law for information and comments. Public notice in the media 
should be served for that purpose as well to ensure broader transparency in the design, preparation, 
and implementation of PROSPER intended activities. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the 
notification will be done through all available means of communication, a newspaper, radio 
announcement, internet and broader social medias.  
The notification should provide:  
  a brief description of the Project;  
  a list of venues where the ESMF report is on display and available for viewing;  
  duration of the display period; and  
  Contact information for comments.  
The EPA will assist to select display venues upon consultation with MoFA. These would be project sites 
specific and very much informative to beneficiaries  
9. GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM  
9.1 Rationale of Grievances: 
Grievance redress mechanisms (GRM) provide a formal avenue for affected groups or stakeholders to 
engage with the project implementers or owners on issues of concern or unaddressed impacts. 
Grievances are any complaints or suggestions about the way a project is being implemented. They may 
take the form of specific complaints for damages/injury, concerns about routine project activities, or 
perceived incidents or impacts. Identifying and responding to grievances supports the development of 
positive relationships between projects and affected groups/communities, and other stakeholders.  
140 
Like many international development agencies, the IFAD’s SECAP procedures outline requirements for 
grievance redress mechanisms for some projects. GRM should receive and facilitate resolution of the 
affected institutional or communities’ concerns and grievances. These concerns should be addressed 
promptly using an understandable and transparent process that is culturally appropriate and readily 
acceptable to all segments of project affected communities, at no cost and without retribution nor fear. 
Mechanisms should be appropriate to the scale of impacts and risks presented by a project.  
Grievances can be an indication of growing stakeholder concerns (real and perceived) and can escalate 
if not identified and resolved. The management of grievances is therefore a vital component of 
stakeholder management and an important aspect of risk management for a project.  
9.2 Managing Grievances: 
Projects may have a range of potential adverse impacts to people and the environment in general, 
identifying grievances ahead of time and ensuring their timely resolution in an amicable way is 
therefore very necessary. As such the ESMF has developed a grievance management process to serve 
as a guide during project implementation. This Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) builds pretty much 
on the one provided in the table below.  
Process 
Table 14. Grievance Management Guide 
St
ep 
1 
Description 
Identification of 
grievance  
Face to face; phone; letter, 
e-mail; recorded during 
public/community 
interaction; others 
Significance assessed and 
grievance recorded or 
logged (i.e. in a log book)  
2 
Grievance 
assessed and 
logged  
Timefr
ame 
1 Day  
3-7 
Days  
Other information 
Email address; hotline 
number  
Significance criteria  
* Level 1 – one off 
event;  
* Level 2 – complaint 
is widespread or 
repeated;  
* Level 3- any 
complaint (one off or 
repeated) that indicates 
breach of law or policy 
or this ESMF provisions  
3 
4 
5 
6 
Grievance is 
acknowledged  
Development of 
response  
Response signed 
off  
Implementation 
and 
communication of 
response  
Acknowledgement of 
grievance through 
appropriate medium  
- Grievance assigned to 
appropriate party for 
resolution  
-Response development 
with input from 
management/relevant 
stakeholders.  
Redress action approved at 
appropriate levels  
Redress action 
implemented and update of 
progress on resolution  
7-14 
Days  
3-7 
Days  
10-14 
Days  
3-7 
Days  
10-14 
Days  
IFAD/PCU/PIU should 
sign off  
Experience with previous IFAD and other economic and social investment projects indicate that 
stakeholder engagement and sensitization are of critical importance to project success. In the absence 
of clear communication with relevant stakeholders and appropriate sensitization of local communities, 
rumors, misinformation and speculation thrive, and accusations and tensions easily boil over into 
141 
(violent) conflict within and between communities. Therefore, for many of the potential environmental 
and social impacts, the management plans recommend the development of a stakeholder engagement 
plan with a clear communication strategy and the organization of community sensitization activities on 
a regular basis. 
A stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) when the exact location are known for ESIA  should include at 
least the following components66: 
a)  Principles, objectives and scope of engagement    
b)  Regulations and (institutional) requirements 
c)    Summary of previous stakeholder engagement activities 
d)   Stakeholder mapping and analysis 
e)    Strategies of engagement 
f)    Key messages and communication channels 
g)   Grievance mechanism (see also section 9.6 below) 
h)   Resources and responsibilities 
 i)    Monitoring and evaluation 
Community sensitization (i.e., awareness-raising and training) activities need to be clear, timely and 
culturally appropriate; this means that key messages need to be communicated in a format and 
language that is easy to understand, preferably by someone who speaks the local language and is 
familiar with local customs and sensitivities, and during a time that is convenient and sufficient for all 
key community groups, particularly women and youth. To ensure appropriate community entry and 
reach target groups most effectively and efficiently, it is advisable to also involve those civil society 
organizations that are already active in and trusted by the selected communities. 
Grievance Management 
Whenever a project causes negative environmental or social impacts there will be grievances 
(complaints) from people who are affected. “Having a good overall community engagement process in 
place and providing access to information on a regular basis can substantially help to prevent 
grievances from arising in the first place, or from escalating to a level that can potentially undermine 
project performance .In order to reduce conflicts, a robust grievance / complaints mechanism that 
meets at least the following ‘effectiveness’ criteria should be instituted:  
a) Legitimate: enabling trust from the stakeholder groups for whose use they are intended, and being 
accountable for the fair conduct of grievance processes;  
b) Accessible: being known to all stakeholder groups for whose use they are intended, and providing 
adequate assistance for those who may face particular barriers to access;  
c) Predictable: providing a clear and known procedure with an indicative time frame for each stage, and 
clarity on the types of process and outcome available and means of monitoring implementation; d) 
Equitable: seeking to ensure that aggrieved parties have reasonable access to sources of information, 
advice and expertise necessary to engage in a grievance process on fair, informed and respectful 
terms;  
e) Transparent: keeping parties to a grievance informed about its progress, and providing sufficient 
information about the mechanism’s performance to build confidence in its effectiveness and meet any 
public interest at stake;  
f) Rights-compatible: ensuring that outcomes and remedies accord with internationally recognized 
human rights;  
g) A source of continuous learning: drawing on relevant measures to identify lessons for improving the 
mechanism and preventing future grievances and harms; 
 h) Based on engagement and dialogue: consulting the stakeholder groups for whose use they are 
intended on their design and performance, and focusing on dialogue as the means to address and 
resolve grievances.  
 IFAD has established a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and 
complaints with respect to alleged non-compliance of its environmental and social policies and the 
mandatory aspects of its Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures in the context of 
66 Adapted from IFC (2007) Stakeholder Engagement: A Good Practice Handbook for Companies Doing Business in Emerging Markets (IFC: 
Washington, D.C.), pp.164-168 
142 
IFAD-supported projects. 
Complaints must concern environmental, social and climate issues only and should not be accusations 
of fraudulent or corrupt activities in relation to project implementation – these are dealt with by IFAD's 
Office of Audit and Oversight. 
  Eligibility criteria  
To file a complaint for alleged non-compliance with IFAD's social and environmental policies and 
mandatory aspects of its SECAP, IFAD will consider only complaints meeting the following criteria: 
  The complainants claim that IFAD has failed to apply its social and environmental policies and/or 
the mandatory provisions set out in SECAP. 
  The complainants claim that they have been or will be adversely affected by IFAD's failure to 
apply these policies. 
  Complaints must be put forward by at least two people who are both nationals of the country 
concerned and/or living in the project area. Complaints from foreign locations or anonymous 
complaints will not be taken into account. 
  Complaints must concern projects/programmes currently under design or implementation. 
Complaints concerning closed projects, or those that are more than 95 per cent disbursed, will 
not be considered. 
  The process 
The complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the government or non-governmental 
organisation responsible for planning or executing the project or programme (the Lead Agency), or to 
any governmental body with the responsibility for overseeing the Lead Agency. If the Lead Agency does 
not adequately respond, then the matter may be brought to the attention of IFAD. The issue may be 
brought straight to IFAD if the complainants feel they might be subject to retaliation if they went to the 
Lead Agency directly. 
The Regional Division will examine the complaint and, if necessary, will contact the Lead Agency, or the 
governmental body with the responsibility for overseeing the Lead Agency, to decide if the complaints 
are justified. If the complainants request that their identities be protected, IFAD will not disclose this 
information to the Lead Agency or anyone else in government. 
If the complaint is not justified, the Regional Division will inform the complainants in writing. 
If the Regional Division finds the complaint is justified and there is proof of actual or likely harm 
through IFAD's failure to follow its policies and procedures, IFAD will take action. This may consist of 
making changes to the project/programme, or requiring that the government observes its obligations 
under the Financing Agreement. IFAD's response will focus bringing the project/programme into 
compliance and no monetary damages will be available or paid in response to such complaints. The 
complainants will be informed of the outcome of the issue by the Regional Division.  
In all cases, if the complainants disagree with IFAD's response, they may submit a request 
to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org and request that an impartial review be carried out by the Office of the 
Vice-President. 
The Office of the Vice-President will decide on the steps to be taken to examine such complaints, 
including, if necessary, contracting external experts to review the matter. The complainants will be 
informed of the results of the review. 
IFAD will include in its Annual Report a list of received complaints and a summary of actions taken to 
address them. 
  How to submit a complaint 
A complaint relating to  non-compliance with IFAD’s Social and Environmental Policies and mandatory 
aspects of its SECAP can be submitted in any of the following ways: 
  Download the complaints form (Word) 
  Send an email to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org 
 If you email or mail your complaint, please include the following information: 
  Name, address, telephone number and other contact information 
  Whether the complainants wish to keep their identity confidential, and if so, why 
  Name, location, and nature of the IFAD project/programme (if known) 
  How the Complainants believe they have been, or are likely to be, adversely affected by the 
IFAD-supported project or programme 
Complaints sent by mail should be addressed to: 
IFAD 
SECAP Complaints (PMD) 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
143 
00142 Rome, Italy 
9.3 Closing the Loop and Fostering Sustainability 
While grievances are inevitable in sustainable development operations, and they are meant to weight 
the checks and balances as to how well the project is doing in terms of making beneficiaries lives 
“better-off”; however, one core lessons to be learnt is to always avoid triggering such grievances. 
Though there is never a better way to avoiding such triggering; inclusive and systematic stakeholder 
consultation not only at the very early stages of project formulation, and thereafter throughout the 
project lifespan, has always proven to avoid or minimize their occurrence. Therefore, one common 
sense is to always keep in mind that the earliest inclusive and participatory stakeholder consultation is 
started earliest enough in a project life cycle, the better beneficiaries ownership such project activities 
(i.e. feeling part and partial of the whole process), and foster social accountability behaviour towards 
that very project. Experience has shown that triggering these two pillars (i.e. Community Ownership & 
Social Accountability) often leads to fostering project Sustainability. Therefore, each grievance needs to 
be processed in due diligence; and once the process is satisfactorily completed, steps should be taken 
to properly close the loop by recording the whole process and ensuring that all issues at stakes are 
therefore taken car of in an amicably fashion, and that nothing is left behind.  
144 
10. CONCLUSION 
The field mission in the PROSPER intervention areas, precisely in Kumasi and Tamale enabled to clearly 
hear the collective voices of all farmers in the participating two regional zones, namely the Northern 
Belt and the Middle Belt. The teams was able to equally weight the welcoming and highly committed 
and capable-hands desperately waiting for the PROSPER project to materialize. It undoubtedly speaks 
volumes about both its timeliness and relevance for thousands of poor rural farmers in the participating 
8 regions.  It’s truly clear from them that this project will bring them the needed support to sustain 
their livelihoods.  
The Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience 
(PROSPER) development objective is “to strengthen the integration, climate resilience and 
environmental sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority value chains in the Northern and 
Middle Ecological Belts taking advantage of the increased demand created by the national agro-
processing strategy.”, by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improving the resilience and 
sustainable adaptation of vulnerable agroecosystems and of rural communities in the two concomitant 
belts in a context of climate change, aiming towards food, nutrition and water security.  
As stated from the onset, the initial screening of proposed PROSPER activities reveals that the potential 
environmental and social risks rating is moderate to low. Despite its high climate risk rating, the main 
risks associated with the implementation of project foreseen activities in component 1 are small in 
scale, very limited, mostly site-specific, and readily avoidable if not considerably reduced with 
appropriate mitigation plans (ESMP), as stated in the project’s ESMF. 
As a Category B operation67, a formal Environmental and Social Impact Assessment is required. 
Further analysis of the conflict dimensions and site-specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans (ESMP) will be mainstreamed throughout PROSPER implementation lifecycle. Moreover, to ensure 
safeguards compliance and project sustainability, a Safeguards and Climate Change Specialist and a 
Gender and Vulnerability Specialist (GBV/EASH/VAC) will be part of the PCU. Quarterly safeguards and 
climate compliance reports summarizing the level of compliance and performance of project activities 
implementation will be prepared and shared to inform IFAD and stakeholders. 
Overall, the cumulative project environmental and social impacts are expected to be positive, and 
generate series of opportunities for beneficiary communities, as the end objective of PROSPER is to 
increase climate resiliency of the most vulnerable farmers in the targeted northern and middle belts of 
Ghana. Besides the inequality in the labour market and presence of landless farmers in the project area 
who will be included in project activities; the project is expected to improve agricultural land and the 
natural resources upon which NMB communities farmers work is based, and on improved climate-
resilient agricultural practices as well as improved natural resources management, specifically water 
management technics. More specifically, better functioning ecosystems, controlled transhumance 
practices, and a greater and collaborative stakeholders’ engagement and participation, will positively 
affect human health, nutrition and well-being in the long run.  
During project implementation stage, once the physical footprints of subproject activities are known, to 
ensure, that the identified social, climate and environmental issues are properly addressed in 
accordance and compliance with the IFAD SECAP Policies, all project activities will systematically 
undergo (i) a thorough screening, assessment, review, and clearance process, and (ii) elaborate site-
specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prior to the physical execution of 
project activities in each of the selected  districts of the  regions of PROSPER. Hence, the elaboration of 
the ESMF allowed to identify series of environmental and social risks and impacts, and the elaboration 
of an environmental and social management plan (ESMP) that includes a comprehensive 
implementation arrangement scheme to help implement the identified series of safeguards mitigation 
measures.  
The estimated total budget for safeguards and climate change compliance and gender and social 
inclusion mainstreaming, including staffing the project over the foreseen eight (8) years duration of 
PROSPER is: three million ($3,000,000 USD). This cost is included in the project overall cost, 
notably in component 3.  
67 The project will not invest in any category A subproject activities. 
145 
11. REFERENCE & BIBLIOGRAPHY 
MoFA, (2007). Food and Agricultural Sector Development Policy (FASDEP II) First Draft-Second 
Revision. Ministry of Food and Agricultural, Government of Ghana, pp. 1-56.  
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), (2004). Ghana State of Environment Report. Republic of Ghana  
Government of Ghana, (2004). Environmental and Social Management Framework, Ghana Community 
Based Rural Development Project. Republic of Ghana  
Acheampong, A. B., (2001). Environmental Assessment of Northern Savanna Biodiversity Conservation 
Project (NSBCP)-Draft Report. Ministry of Lands and Forestry, Republic of Ghana.  
NDPC/ EPA (2002). Strategic Environmental Assessment of the Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy. 
Handbook for District Development Plan Sustainability Appraisals  
Centre for Environmental and Health Research and Training (CEHRT), (2010). Environmental and Social 
Management Framework, Social Opportunity Project-Draft Report. MLGRD, Republic of Ghana.  
MoFA and FAO, 2007. Draft Irrigation Policy, Strategies and Regulatory Measures. Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture and Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations, pp. 1- 27.  
STUDI International et al (2009). Environmental Impact Assessment, Draft Report. Feasibility Study of 
the Accra Plains Irrigation Project. 
IFAD (2016) Managing Risks to Create Opportunities. IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedures (SECAP) (IFAD: Rome), p.18  
UNDP (2019). Climate Change Adaptation Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.adaptation-
undp.org/explore/western-africa/ghana 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ 
ghanc3.pdf 
World Bank (2019). Internal Climate Migration Profile – Ghana. 
World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: Population Estimates and Projections, 
Ghana. URL: https://databank. 
worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=health-nutrition-and-population-statistics:-population-
estimates-and-projections 
World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: World Development Indicators, Ghana. 
URL: https://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&country 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20
Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
UNDP (2019). Climate Change Adaptation Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.adaptation-
undp.org/explore/western-africa/ghana 
World Bank (2021). DataBank – World Development Indicators. URL: 
https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-developmentindicators 
University of Notre Dame (2020). Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative. URL: 
https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/ 
Republic of Ghana (2016). Nationally-Determined Contributions. URL: 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Ghana%20First/GH_INDC_2392015.pdf 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20
Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20
Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-data-historical 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-data-historical 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana. URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20
Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
WB Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: 
146 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-data-historical 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20
Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
UNISDR (2018). Disaster Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: http://africa.cimafoundation.org/documents/869 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana Water Dashboard. Data Description. URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-sector-water 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Climate Data-Projections. Ghana. URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-sector-water 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
GFDRR (2019). Ghana, Country Context. URL: https://www.gfdrr.org/en/ghana 
UNISDR (2018). Disaster Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: http://africa.cimafoundation.org/documents/869 
EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database - Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL) - CRED, D. Guha–
Sapir, Brussels, Belgium. 
URL: http://emdat.be/emdat_db/ 
UNDP (2017). Advocacy and Capacity Building for Disaster Risk Reduction and Preparedness in Ghana 
Project. Final Project Report. 
URL: https://www.undp.org/content/dam/ghana/docs/Doc/Susdev/Final%20Project%20Report.pdf 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20
Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
https://minorityrights.org/   
GoTG. 2009. Agriculture and Natural Resources (ANR) Policy (2009-2015). 
Urquhart, P. 2016. National Climate Change Policy of the Gambia Final Report: Final Draft Policy 
Yaffa, S. 2011. Assessment of the Impacts of Climate Change on Gambian Smallholder Food Crop 
Production and Livelihood Conditions, ActionAid the Gambia. 
GNAIP. 2015. Republic of the Gambia National Agricultural Investment Plan (GNAIP). Banjul, the 
Gambia. 
See disaggregation of beneficiaries in the results framework. 
Based on the average of 8 persons per household. 
Adapted from IFC (2007) Stakeholder Engagement: A Good Practice Handbook for Companies Doing 
Business in Emerging Markets (IFC: Washington, D.C.), pp.164-168 
http://www.fao.org/giews/countrybrief/country.jsp?code=GHA 
12. ANNEXES 
Annex 1 – Eligibility Screening Form 
Annex 2 - Environmental and Social Screening Forms for PROSPER Subprojects 
Annex 3 - Environmental and Social Guidelines for contractors  86 
Annex 4 – Checklist for Construction Works 
Annex 5 - Social Inclusion Strategy 90 
Annex 6 – List of Stakeholders Consulted  95                                                                                                                                                                                  
90 
89 
81 
147 
Annex 1 – Eligibility Screening Form 
PROSPER PROJECT 
Letter of Interest (Eligibility Screening Form) 
Please complete all the required spaces in this form 
1. Name: Surname -------------------------------------------------Other Names:-----------------------------
---------Maiden name (for married women):------------------------------------------------------ 
2. Sex: (a) Male {      }         (b)  Female {       } 
3. Date of birth: ---------------------------------------------------- 
4. Highest Education Level: (a) No formal education {    }      (b) Primary School {    }   (c) Secondary 
School {   } (d) Vocational school   (e) Tertiary Education {    } 
5. Which community do you belong to: -------------------------------------------------------------- 
6. How long have you lived in this community: -------------------------------------------------------- 
7. How do you belong to this community: (a) by birth {    }    (b) by marriage {   } (c) other (specify):-
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
8. Local Government Area (LGA): ----------------------------------------------- State: ----------------------
--------- 
9. What enterprise are you interested in (see list of selected enterprises for the LGA): -------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
10. Do you have any experience in this enterprise: (a) Yes  {   }     (b) No {   }. If yes, how many 
years: -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
11. Do you belong to any youth or women organization: (a) Yes {   }   (b) No  {  }. If yes, what is the 
name: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------- 
12. Do you belong to any cooperative society: (a) Yes {  }   (b) No {  }. If yes, what is the name: -----
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------  
13. Do you have access to any land for the enterprise: (a) Yes  {  }  (b) No  {  }.  
14. If yes to question 13, where is the land located-------------------------------------------------------; 
and what is the area size of the land? ----------------------------------------------------- 
15. What kind of title to you have to the land: (a) Government paper {  }  (b) Inheritance from parent 
{  }   (c) husband or wife’s consent {    }  (d) family allocation {  }  (e) community’s allocation {  } (f) 
Others (specify):------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Endorsements: 
Applicant: I certify that the information provided here is correct  
Name: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Signature: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Date: --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Community/traditional leader:  
Name: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Sign: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Verifications:  
Comments by the Local Government Liaison Office:----------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------- 
Name of Officer: ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
148 
Designation: ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Sign and date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Comments by the RCU Office:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------- 
Name of Officer: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------- 
Designation: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------- 
Sign and date: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----- 
Screening:   
Comments by service providers:----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------Categorical comments (a) Applicant Eligible {    }  (b) Applicant Ineligible  
{   } 
149 
Annex 2 - Environmental and Social Screening Forms for PROSPER Subprojects 
A: Screening Form for SME/Socio-economic Infrastructure Projects 
General Information 
Project Name: 
Name of incubator / applicant: 
Name of Cooperative: 
Contact person’s details:  
Name of Apex Group: 
Contact person’s details: 
Project Location: 
Project sector (e.g. rice farming, 
vegetable processing, etc.) 
Estimated Cost: 
Proposed Date of Commencement:  
Expected Project duration: 
Site (estimated area in ha): 
Any equity/contribution brought into 
the project: 
Any plan for new construction: 
A1. Screening for Environmental and Social Issues 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of ‘Yes’ 
response  
1.  Will the sub-project develop any wetlands? 
2.  Would the sub-project result in economic displacement68 (loss of assets or access to 
resources) or physical resettlement  
3.  Would the sub-project result in conversion and/or loss of physical cultural resources? 
4.  Will the sub-project have significant social adverse impacts (affecting access to and/use 
rights to land, access to potable water and water for other uses) on local communities or 
other project-affected parties? 
68 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or means of livelihoods (see SECAP Procedure Guidance Statement 13) 
150 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of ‘Yes’ 
response  
5.  Will the project trigger unsustainable natural resource management practices (fisheries, 
forestry, livestock, and significant increase in use of agrochemicals) that exceed the 
carrying capacity? 
6.  Does the sub-project include conversion of significant areas (above 50 ha) of natural 
forests/other wild lands? 
7.  Would the project potentially cause significant adverse impacts to habitats and/or 
ecosystems and their services (e.g. habitat loss, erosion/ other form of land degradation, 
fragmentation, hydrological changes)? 
8.  Does the proposed project target area include ecologically sensitive areas69; areas of 
global significance for biodiversity conservation and/or biodiversity-rich area; habitats 
depended on by endangered species? 
9.  Does the project involve fisheries development in situations where little information 
exists on sustainable yield? 
10. Could the project pose a risk of introducing invasive alien species? 
11. Does the project involve the transfer, handling or use of genetically modified 
organisms/living modified organisms that may have an adverse effect on threatened 
biodiversity? 
12. Is the project site close to any oil and gas installation such as flow stations, oil terminal, 
oil or gas pipeline right of way? 
13. Has oil spill/ or pipeline fire ever been recorded around project site? 
14. Does the project involve land use changes (agricultural intensification and/or expansion 
of the cropping area) and resources that may have adverse impacts on habitats, 
ecosystems, and/or livelihoods? 
15. Will the project result in increased use of agrochemicals which may affect the natural 
environment/human health? 
16. Does the project include small-scale irrigation and drainage projects, and water 
impoundment including small dams (except in wetlands)? 
17. Does the project involve agricultural intensification and/or expansion of cropping area in 
non-sensitive areas? 
18. Do the project activities include rangeland and livestock development? 
19. Does the project involve artisanal fisheries where there is information on sustainable 
yield? 
20. Do the project activities include aquaculture and/or mariculture? 
69 ‘Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere  reserves); areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; 
coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas 
that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
151 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of ‘Yes’ 
response  
21. Do the project activities include watershed management or rehabilitation? 
22. Does the project include large-scale soil and water conservation measures? 
23. Does the project include small and micro enterprise development sub-projects? 
24. Does the project involve credit operations through financial service providers, including 
credit for pesticide/other agrochemicals, livestock purchasing, irrigation, etc.? 
25. Do the project activities include natural resources-based value chain development? 
26. Would any of the project activities have minor adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
27. Would the project have low probability to have physical resettlement or economic 
displacement? 
28. Does the project include development of agro-processing facilities?  
29. Will the project require a migrant workforce during construction? 
30. Will the project require seasonal workers to plant and/or harvest produce? 
31. Will the construction or operation of the project cause an increase in traffic on rural 
roads? 
Guidance for sub-project categorization 
"Yes" response to 
any of questions 1-
13 
"Yes” response to 
questions 14-31 
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
Sub-project 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
Sub-project 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Subproject 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
The project will not invest in Catgery A sub 
project and the screening is not required 
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the 
general ESMF 
No further analysis is required 
B: Screening Form for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-Projects 
Name of market infrastructure: 
Infrastructure type: 
Location: 
Proposed Date of Commencement:  
Expected Project duration: 
Estimated cost: 
152 
Estimate number of communities to 
be served: 
Estimated number of entrepreneur to 
be served:  
B1: Screening for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-projects 
Question 
1.  Will the project activities include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads or other rural infrastructure in 
protected/sensitive areas70? 
Yes 
No 
All road length 
< 10 km  
2.  Does the project include construction of roads or other infrastructure that entail the total area being cleared of 50 
ha or above? 
3.  Does the project include construction of dam (s)/reservoir (between 5-15 m high with a reservoir exceeding 2 
million m3)? 
4.  Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes rehabilitation/ development (above 100 ha)? 
5.  Does the project involve significant extraction of ground water (significantly above recharge capacity)? 
6.  Does the project include water-based (ground or surface) development where it is believed that significant 
depletion due to climate change or overutilization has occurred? 
7.  Does the project involve significant extraction, diversion or containment of surface water? 
8.  Does the project include drainage or correction of natural water bodies (e.g. river draining)? 
9.  Will the project include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads that pass through oil infrastructure locations such 
as flow stations, tank farms or oil and gas pipelines? 
10. Would any of the project activities have minor adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
11. Does the project include development of agro-processing facilities?  
12. Will the project require a migrant workforce during construction? 
13. Will the construction or operation of the project cause an increase in traffic on rural roads? 
14. Has the government or community guaranteed the lease of the land for the (market) infrastructure? 
15. Is there any plan in place for sustainability of the infrastructure during the project life time? 
16. Does the project include specific measures to protect against dust (such as dust masks and water spraying)? 
70 ‘Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere  reserves); areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; 
coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas 
that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
153 
17. Has arrangement been made to pay adequate compensation for private property that may be affected by the 
construction of the project? 
18. Will construction equipment with moderate decibels be used and the timing of use be so that people will experience 
less discomfort? 
19. Will tree and vegetation replanting be carried out to stabilize slopes and re-green road sides? 
Guidance for categorization 
"Yes" response to 
any of questions 1-9 
"Yes" response to 
questions 10-13 
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
1-13 and ‘Yes’ to 
questions 14-19 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
The project will not invest in Catgery A sub 
project and the screening is not required 
Sub-project to adopt the general ESMP in 
the ESMF  
No further analysis is required 
C: Climate Screening Form for Sub-Projects 
To be used with the environmental and social screening forms. 
Screening for Climate Issues   
Question 
18. Is the project area subject to extreme climatic events such as flooding, drought, 
tropical storms, or heat waves?  
19. Do climate scenarios for the project area foresee changes in temperature, rainfall or 
extreme weather that will adversely affect the project impact, sustainability or cost 
over its lifetime? 
20. Will the project make investments in low-lying coastal areas/ zones exposed to river 
flooding and coastal storm surge? 
154 
Yes 
No 
Additional Explanation of 'Yes' 
response* 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional Explanation of 'Yes' 
response* 
21. Will the project promote agricultural activity in marginal and/or highly degraded areas 
that have increased sensitivity to climatic events (such as on hillsides, deforested 
slopes or floodplains)? 
22.   Is the project located in areas where rural development projects have experienced 
significant weather- related losses and damages in the past?  
23. Will the project develop/ install infrastructure in areas with a track record of extreme 
weather events? 
24. Is the project target group entirely dependent on natural resources (such as seasonal 
crops, rain-fed agricultural plots, and migratory fish stocks) that have been affected by 
in the last decade by climate trends or specific climatic events? 
25. Will climate variability likely affect agricultural productivity (crops/ livestock/fisheries) 
or the associated incidence of pests and diseases for the project target groups?   
26. Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes likely adversely impact upon key 
stages of identified value chains in the project (from production to markets)? 
27. Is the project investing in climate-sensitive livelihoods that are diversified?  
28. Is the project investing in infrastructure that is exposed to infrequent extreme weather 
events? 
29. Is the project investing in institutional development and capacity building for rural 
institutions (such as farmer groups, cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous areas? 
30. Does the project have the potential to become more resilient through the adoption 
green technologies at a reasonable cost? 
31. Does the project intervention have opportunities to strengthen indigenous climate risk 
management capabilities? 
32. Does the project have opportunities to integrate climate resilience aspects through 
policy dialogue to improve agricultural sector strategies/policies?   
33. Does the project have potential to integrate climate resilience measures without 
extensive additional costs (e.g. improved crop variety, capacity building; or including 
climate risk issues in policy processes) 
34. Based on the information available would the project benefit from a more thorough 
climate risk and vulnerability analysis to identify additional complementary investment 
actions to manage climate risks? 
Guidance for categorization 
"Yes" response to any of 
questions 1-9 
Sub-project Climate 
risk is High  
Climate risk Analysis is required for sub-
project  
155 
"No" response to almost all 
questions 
Sub-project climate 
risk is moderate 
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the 
general ESMF 
156 
Annex 3 - Environmental and Social Guidelines for contractors71 
(for reference in contractor agreements/contracts) 
Sound environmental and social management of construction projects can be achieved only with 
adequate site selection and project design. As such, the ESMP for projects involving any new 
construction, or any rehabilitation or reconstruction for existing projects, should provide information as 
to screening criteria for site selection and design including the following:  
Site Selection  
Sites should be chosen based on community needs for additional projects, with specific lots chosen 
based on geographic and topographic characteristics. The site selection process involves site visits and 
studies to analyze: (i) the site’s, sub-urban, or rural characteristics; (ii) national, regional, or municipal 
regulations affecting the proposed sites; (iii) accessibility and distance from inhabited areas; (iv) land 
ownership, including verification of absence of squatters and/or other potential legal problems with land 
acquisition; (v) determination of site vulnerability to natural hazards, (i.e. intensity and frequency of 
floods, landslides, etc.); (vi) suitability of soils and sub-soils for construction; (vii) site contamination; 
(viii) flora and fauna characteristics; (ix) presence or absence of natural habitats and/or ecologically 
important habitats on site or in vicinity (e.g. forests, wetlands, rare or endangered species); and (ix) 
historic and community characteristics.  
The rules (including specific prohibitions and construction management measures) should be 
incorporated into all relevant bidding documents, contracts, and work orders.  
Prohibitions  
The following activities are prohibited on or near the project site:  
  Cutting of trees for any reason outside the approved construction area;  
  Hunting, fishing, wildlife capture, or plant collection;  
  Use of unapproved toxic materials, including lead-based paints, asbestos, etc.  
  Disturbance to anything with architectural or historical value;  
  Building of fires;  
  Use of firearms (except by authorized security guards); 
  Use of alcohol by workers.  
  Use of all forms of forced labor and child labor 
  Unfair treatment and discrimination of workers 
Construction Management Measures  
Solid, sanitation, and hazardous wastes must be properly controlled, through the implementation of the 
following measures:  
Waste Management:  
  Minimize the production of waste that must be treated or eliminated; 
 
Identify and classify the type of waste generated. If hazardous wastes (including health care 
wastes) are generated, proper procedures must be taken regarding their storage, collection, 
transportation and disposal;  
Identify and demarcate disposal areas clearly indicating the specific materials that can be deposited 
in each;  
 
  Control placement of all construction waste (including earth cuts) to approved disposal sites (>300 
m from rivers, streams, lakes, or wetlands). All garbage, metals, used oils, and excess material 
generated during construction should only be dispose in authorized areas, incorporating recycling 
systems and the separation of materials.  
Maintenance:  
 
Identify and demarcate equipment maintenance areas (>15m from rivers, streams, lakes or 
wetlands); 
71  Adapted  from  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Irrigation  and  Water  Development,  Republic  of  Malawi  (2015)  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Framework for Programme for Rural Irrigation Development in Malawi, pp.76-80. 
157 
  Ensure that all equipment maintenance activities, including oil changes, are conducted within 
demarcated maintenance areas; never dispose spent oils on the ground, in water courses, drainage 
canals or in sewer systems; 
Identify, demarcate and enforce the use of within-site access routes to limit impact on site 
vegetation; 
Install and maintain an adequate drainage system to prevent erosion on the site during and after 
construction.  
 
 
Erosion Control  
  Erect erosion control barriers around perimeter of cuts, disposal pits, and roadways; 
  Spray water on dirt roads, cuts, fill material and stockpiled soil to reduce wind-induced erosion, as 
needed; 
  Maintain vehicle speeds at or below 10mph within the work area, 15mph or below within 200m of 
the site, and abide by the relevant speed limits at all times to / from the work area.  
Stockpiles and Borrow Pits  
 
Identify and demarcate locations for stockpiles and borrow pits, ensuring that they are 15 meters 
away from critical areas such as steep slopes, erosion-prone soils, and areas that drain directly into 
sensitive water bodies; 
  Limit extraction of material to approved and demarcated borrow pits.  
Site Cleanup  
  Establish and enforce daily site clean-up procedures, including maintenance of adequate disposal 
facilities for construction debris.  
Safety during Construction  
The Contractor’s responsibilities include the protection of every person and nearby property from 
construction accidents. The Contractor shall be responsible for complying with all national and local 
safety requirements and any other measures necessary to avoid accidents, including the following:  
  Carefully and clearly mark pedestrian-safe access routes; 
 
  Maintain supply of supplies for traffic signs (including paint, easel, sign material, etc.), road 
If school children are in the vicinity, include traffic safety personnel to direct traffic; 
marking, and guard rails to maintain pedestrian safety during construction; 
  Conduct safety training for construction workers prior to beginning work; 
  Provide personal protective equipment (PPE) and clothing (such as goggles, gloves, respirators, dust 
masks, hard hats, steel-toed and –shanked boots, etc.,) for construction workers and enforce their 
use; 
  Post Material Safety Data Sheets for each chemical present on the worksite; 
  Require that all workers read, or have read, all Material Safety Data Sheets. Clearly explain the risks 
to them and their partners, especially when pregnant or planning to start a family. Encourage 
workers to share the information with their physicians, when relevant; 
  Ensure that the removal of asbestos-containing materials or other toxic substances be performed 
and disposed of by specially trained workers; 
  During heavy rains or emergencies of any kind, apply construction safeguards guidelines; 
  Brace electrical and mechanical equipment to withstand unexpected events during construction.  
Nuisance and Dust Control  
To control nuisance and dust the Contractor should:  
  Maintain all construction-related traffic at or below 15 mph on streets within 200 m of the site; 
  Maintain all on-site vehicle speeds at or below 10 mph; 
  To the extent possible, maintain noise levels associated with all machinery and equipment at or 
 
below 90db;  
In sensitive areas (including residential neighborhoods, health centers, schools, etc.) more strict 
measures may need to be implemented to prevent undesirable noise levels; 
  Minimize production of dust and particulate materials at all times, to avoid impacts on surrounding 
families and businesses, and especially to vulnerable people (children, elderly); 
  Phase removal of vegetation to prevent large areas from becoming exposed to wind; 
  Place dust screens around construction areas, paying particular attention to areas close to housing, 
commercial areas, and recreational areas; 
158 
  Spray water as needed on dirt roads, cut areas and soil stockpiles or fill material; 
  Apply proper measures to minimize disruptions from vibration or noise coming from construction 
activities.  
Community Relations  
To maintain cordial community relations, the Contractor should:  
  Following the country and ESMP requirements, inform the population about construction and work 
schedules, interruption of services, traffic detour routes, as appropriate; 
  Limit construction activities at night. When necessary ensure that night work is carefully scheduled 
and the community is properly informed so they can take necessary measures; 
  At least five days in advance of any service interruption (including water, electricity) the community 
must be advised through clearly visible posters at the project site and at central community 
locations; 
  Where possible, particularly for tasks that can also be performed through low-skilled manual labor 
(such as digging of shallow trenches, etc.), make use of labor from the local community. 
Chance Find Procedures for Culturally Significant Artifacts  
In case culturally valuable materials (incl. shrines, graves, etc.) are uncovered during excavation:  
  Stop work immediately following the discovery of any materials with possible archeological, 
historical, paleontological, or other cultural value, announce findings to project manager and notify 
relevant authorities;  
  Protect artifacts as well as possible using plastic covers, and implement measures to stabilize the 
area, if necessary, to properly protect artifacts; 
  Prevent and penalize any unauthorized access to the artifacts; 
  Restart construction works only upon the authorization of the relevant authorities.  
Environmental Supervision during Construction  
The bidding documents should indicate how compliance with environmental rules and design 
specifications would be supervised, along with the penalties for non-compliance by contractors or 
workers. Construction supervision requires oversight of compliance with the manual and environmental 
specifications by the contractor or his designated environmental supervisor. Contractors are also 
required to comply with national and state regulations governing labour, the environment, public health 
and safety. 
159 
Annex 4 – Checklist for Construction Works  
Based on the National Environmental (Construction Sector) Regulations (2011), at every construction 
facility the following checklist should be implemented:72 
(1) Every facility shall implement programmes on best practices as set out in Schedule I of the 
Regulations while taking recognition of workers organizations 
(2) Every facility shall provide base for ancillary equipment and bund wall for containment of waste oil 
in the event of any unanticipated discharge or spillage. 
(3) Every operator of construction facility/site shall ensure: 
(a) it has a functional, adequate and appropriate drainage system for the project; 
(b) the separation or diversion of clean water runoff to prevent it from mixing with water containing 
high solid particle content; 
(c) it minimizes the volume of water to be treated prior to release (same as storm water control 
system); 
(d) the use of color coding for the drainage system such as blue for surface water drains and red for 
foul water drains; 
(e) safe movement of materials and fuel to and from site; 
(f) tanks are clearly labelled with their contents and storage capacity; 
(g) workers are trained to carry out the outlined procedures in the Emergency Response Plan as 
specified in Schedule II to the Regulations; 
(h) absorbent materials and other containment equipment (e.g. spill kits) suitable for the construction 
type, are available in adequate quantity on site; and 
(i) all tanks are properly covered. 
(4) The operator shall ensure: 
(a) high standard of housekeeping; 
(b) that dust/particulate matter arising from loaded trucks entering or leaving the site is kept to a 
minimum level by the use of tarpaulin materials as cover and that water sprays or other dust 
suppression or collection methods are used at every dusty place where work is carried out; 
(c) appropriate use of Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) by all persons at construction site as in 
Schedule VI to the Regulations; 
 (5) Every facility shall have an Emergency Response Plan in accordance with the guide template 
specified in Schedule II to these Regulations. 
72 National Environmental (Construction Sector) Regulations (2011). S.I. No.19. 
160 
Annex 5 - Social Inclusion Strategy  
“In every country, certain groups (..) Confront barriers that prevent them from fully participating in 
their nation’s political, economic, and social life. These groups are branded by stereotypes, stigmas, 
and superstitions. They often live with insecurity. And such disadvantages not only preclude them from 
capitalizing on opportunities to lead a better life, they also rob them of dignity.”73 
Social inclusion means different things to different people. In its flagship publication on the topic, the 
World Bank defines social inclusion as “the process of improving the ability, opportunity, and dignity of 
people, disadvantaged on the basis of their identity, to take part in society.”74 A strategy for social 
inclusion should therefore both address the above-mentioned ‘barriers’ as well as strengthen the 
capacities that disadvantaged groups in society require to make the most of development opportunities 
and realize their full potential. 
The PROSPER will directly contribute to social inclusion by actively focusing on unemployed youth and 
women, which together with people with disabilities and widows remain among the most disadvantaged 
groups in The society.75 To ensure fragile areas are eas are not entirely excluded from project activities 
and left marginalized, PROSPER is advised to develop tailor-made solutions in those locations where 
there is at least a commitment to safe access for the project so that youth and women in such areas 
will still be able to participate in different value chain components.  
Using the World Bank’s advice to focus on three critical ‘inclusion domains’ of markets, services and 
spaces, PROSPER can help promote social inclusion in the project area through the following 
instruments and policies: 
1.  Markets (Land, Regulatory Framework) 
  Negotiate with traditional authorities in local communities for long-term land access by women 
and youth for agri-enterprise activities; 
  Negotiate with state governments to allocate larger plots of unused (but suitable) farmland and 
provide security of tenure for women and youth associations for agri-enterprise activities; 
  Support legislative reform establishing gender parity in land ownership and inheritance; 
  Closely monitor project progress, hold regular meetings with leaders/representatives of women 
and youth organizations to discuss project challenges, and provide additional (technical) support 
where needed. 
2.  Services (Training, Financial, Labour, ICT) 
  Provide refresher, advanced and/or top-up skills training on-site for women and youth (on any 
relevant topic that hinders progress in their agri-enterprises) in combination with intensive 
mentoring support; 
  Support opportunities for information sharing, whereby women and youth who are currently not 
part of the project can visit the agri-enterprise sites and whereby entrepreneurs can share their 
experiences (including reasons for failure and success); 
  Negotiate with agricultural banks to provide preferential credit arrangements for high-potential 
women or youth agri-entrepreneurs; 
  Encourage contractors / service providers to give employment preference to local community 
members (e.g. via ‘code of conduct’); 
  Organize a ‘hackathon’ together with a technology-oriented innovation centre to develop a 
special app for rural youth in the project area to promote farming and facilitate market access as 
well as create an online platform that allows women and youth to showcase their achievements 
and experiences with wider society and other relevant actors (e.g. government and donor 
agencies). 
3.  Spaces (Physical, Cultural, Social) 
  Liaise with local police to ensure security in farming areas, markets and access routes; 
73 World Bank (2013) Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity (WB: Washington, D.C.), p.xv. 
74 Idem, p.4. 
75 Widows are often dispossessed of their late spouses’ property including land by the spouse’s kinsmen. Special consideration and protection needs to be given to this 
category of vulnerable people to make sure they have access to land and other productive bases. 
161 
  Organize public awareness-raising campaigns in consultation with local CSOs to promote 
 
farming, encourage inclusive community-level decision-making, prevent intra-community conflict 
and reduce gender-based violence; 
In general, ensure that initial screening, selection and support to project beneficiaries by 
community leaders and others at the grassroots level is based on merit and need rather than 
lingering primordial considerations; 
  To prevent climate-induced exclusion, recommended climate change adaptation and mitigation 
measures should be given priority. Many beneficiaries may not be able to bounce back once they 
are affected by hydro-meteorological disasters such as flooding and erosion. 
162 
Annex 6 –Stakeholders Consultations  (evidence  from various locations – Design mission August 
10-15, 2021- Kumasi & Tamale)  
B.  Guiding questions for environment and social 
Yes/No  Comments/explanation 
screening 
Category A project: The project will not invest in Category A sub project and the screening is 
not required 
Project location 
32. Would the project develop any wetlands? (Guidance 
No 
statement GS1) 
33. Would the project cause significant adverse impacts 
to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services 
(e.g. conversion of more than 50 hectares of natural 
forest, loss of habitat, erosion/other form of land 
degradation, fragmentation, and hydrological 
changes)? (GS 1, 2 & 5) 
No 
34. Does the proposed project target area include 
No 
ecologically sensitive areas,76 areas of 
global/national significance for biodiversity 
conservation and/or biodiversity-rich areas and 
habitats depended on by endangered species? (GS1) 
35. Is the project location subjected to major 
No 
destruction as a result geophysical hazards 
(tsunamis, landslides, earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions)? 
Natural resources 
36. Would the project lead to unsustainable natural 
No 
resource management practices (fisheries, forestry, 
livestock) and/or result in exceeding carrying 
capacity. For example, is their development 
happening in areas where little up-to-date 
information exists on sustainable yield/carrying 
capacity? (GS 4, 5 and 6) 
37. Would the project develop large-scale77 aquaculture 
or mariculture projects, or where their development 
involves significant alteration of ecologically 
sensitive areas? 
No 
38. Would the project result in significant use of 
No 
agrochemicals which may lead to life-threatening 
illness and long-term public health and safety 
concerns? (GS 14) 
39. Does the project rely on water-based (ground 
No 
and/or surface) development where there is reason 
to believe that significant depletion and/or reduced 
flow has occurred from the effects of climate change 
or from overutilization? (GS7) 
40. Does the project pose a risk of introducing 
No 
potentially invasive species or GMOs which might 
alter genetic traits of indigenous species or have an 
adverse effect on local biodiversity? (GS1) 
76 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity 
conservation;  habitats  depended  on  by  endangered  species;  natural  forests;  wetlands;  coastal  ecosystems,  including  coral  reefs  and  mangrove  swamps;  small  island 
ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas that include 
physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability. 
77 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some 
countries have regulations on minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are 
no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as an aquaculture unit size to trigger ESIA. 
163 
Rehabilitation/construction 
of feeder roads and/or 
track roads will vary 
between 7 km to 9.50 km 
just to link villages to 
farming areas. 
41. Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. 
industrial, mining, sewage effluent)? (GS7) 
Infrastructure development 
42. Does the project include the construction/ 
rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s)/reservoir(s) 
meeting at least one of the following criteria? (GS8) 
-  more than 15 metre high wall or  
-  more than 500 meter long crest or  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity or  
incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
- 
43. Does the project involve large-scale irrigation 
schemes rehabilitation/development (above 100 
hectares per scheme)?78 (GS7) 
44. Does the project include 
construction/rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that 
entail a total area being cleared above 10 km long, 
or any farmer with more than 10 per cent of his or 
her private land taken? (GS10) 
45. Does the project include drainage or correction of 
natural water bodies (e.g. river training)? (GS7) 
46. Does the project involve significant 
extraction/diversion/containment of surface water, 
leaving the river flow below 20 per cent 
environmental flow plus downstream user 
requirements? (GS7) 
Social 
47. Would the project result in economic displacement79 
or physical resettlement of more than 20 people, or 
impacting more than 10 per cent of an individual 
household’s assets? (GS13) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
48. Would the project result in conversion and/or loss of 
No 
physical cultural resources? (GS9) 
49. Would the project generate significant social adverse 
No 
impacts to local communities (including 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and 
indigenous people) or other project-affected parties? 
(GS13) 
Other 
50. Does the project include manufacture and 
No 
transportation of hazardous and toxic materials 
which may affect the environment? (GS2) 
51. Does the project include the construction of a large 
No 
or medium-scale industrial plant? 
52.  Does the project include the development of large-
No 
scale production forestry? (GS5) 
Rural finance 
53. Does the project support any of the above (Q1 to 
Q22) through the provision of a line of credit to 
financial service providers? (GS12) 
No 
78 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some 
countries have regulations determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no 
standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
79 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or means of livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
164 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications 
which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
54. Does the project involve agricultural intensification 
and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive 
areas that may have adverse impacts on habitats, 
ecosystems and/or livelihoods? (GS1, 2 and 12) 
No 
Natural resource management 
55. Do the project activities include rangeland and 
TBD 
livestock development? (GS6) 
56. Does the project involve fisheries where there is 
No 
information on stocks, fishing effort and sustainable 
yield? Is there any risk of overfishing, habitat 
damage and knowledge of fishing zones and 
seasons? (GS4) 
57. Would the project activities include aquaculture 
No 
and/or agriculture in newly introduced or intensively 
practiced areas? Do project activities include 
conversion of wetlands and clearing of coastal 
vegetation, change in hydrology or introduction of 
exotic species? (GS4) 
58. Do the project activities include natural resources-
based value chain development? (GS 1, 6 and 12) 
Yes 
59. Do the project activities include watershed 
Yes 
management or rehabilitation? 
60. Does the project include large-scale soil and water 
No 
conservation measures? (GS 1 and 5)  
Infrastructure 
61. Does the project include small-scale irrigation and 
drainage, and small and medium (capacity < 3 
million m3) dam subprojects? (GS 7 and 8) 
Yes 
62. Does the project include small and microenterprise 
Yes 
development subprojects? (GS 12 and 13) 
63. Does the project include the development of agro 
Yes 
processing facilities? (GS 2, 6 and 12) 
64. Would the construction or operation of the project 
cause an increase in traffic on rural roads? (GS10) 
Social 
65. Would any of the project activities have minor 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
(GS9) 
66. Would the project result in physical resettlement of 
less than 20 people, or impacting less than 10 per 
cent of an individual household’s assets (GS13)? 
No 
No 
No 
165 
For nutrition and health 
improvement with small 
ruminant as IGA. 
Yes but only eligible 
activities under Category 
B criteria considered see 
(PDR and ESMF) with key 
mitigation measures 
Yes but only eligible 
activities under Category 
B criteria considered see 
(PDR and ESMF) with key 
mitigation measures 
Yes, mostly small scale 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure to support 
RIs and local farmers 
Yes but only eligible 
activities under Category 
B criteria considered see 
(PDR and ESMF) with key 
mitigation measures 
67. Would the project result in short-term public health 
No 
and safety concerns? (GS14) 
68. Would the project require a migrant workforce or 
No 
seasonal workers (for construction, planting and/or 
harvesting)? (GS13) 
Rural finance 
69. Does the project support any of the above (Q24 to 
Q37) through the provision of a line of credit to 
financial service providers? (GS12) 
Yes 
Yes but only eligible 
activities under Category 
B criteria considered see 
(PDR and ESMF) with key 
mitigation measures 
166 
167 
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex AWPB_NEW.xlsx
Republic of Ghana
PROSPER
Component 1
Subcomponent 1.1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions Enterprises [1.1]
Detailed Costs
(US$)
Unit
Quantity 2022
Quantity 2023 
(half)
Total (2022 + 
half 2023)
Plan (18 months)
TOT IFAD
GCF
GOG
PFIs
Beneficiaries
Private Sector
TOT GCF
TOT GOG
TOT PFIs
TOT Ben
TOT PS
Cumulative 
expenditure (000' 
USD)
Financier rule (2022 and 
half 2023, USD)
 I. Investment Costs
A. CapaCity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households
1. Community mobilisation, cluster identification and planning
a. Community mobilisation
Workshop/consultation with stakeholders at regional level
Workshop/consultation with stakeholders at district level
b. Cluster identification
Meetings at community level for identification of clusters
Training of trainers for extension staff /a
c. Cluster planning
Cluster consultation and synthesisation meetings
d. Support by RDAs/DDAs to Field Activities
Regional/national depts of MoFA and other line ministries
DDA support for community mobilization and cluster  planning
Subtotal
2. Community nutrition and healthy diet campaign
a. Nutrition
Participatory Needs Assessment
Nutrition Knowledge, attitude, and practice study (KAP)
Training on HH nutrition and household methodology
Nutrition education for communities /b
Training on Financial literacy - HH economics
Climate smart HH nutrition gardens; demos and training /c
Dedicated training on post-harvest management
DDA Extension Field Support /d
Regional / National of MOFA and Other Line Ministries for nutrition
b. capacitation of rural institutions
Awareness raising for Youth Farmership Development
Training on organisational capacity
Training on NRM Sustainability training
Training on Sustainable Use of Pesticides and Fertilizers (ESMP)
Climate adaptation and mitigation demonstrations (ESMP) /e
Training on farming as a business including climate/NRM
Training on enterprise Dev't including climate/NRM aspects
Training of trainers for extension staff including climate/NRM
Training of trainers for extension staff on IFAD SECAP and EPA Procedures
DDA Extension Field Support for nutrition
Support by Regional/national depts of MoFA and other line ministries /f
3. TA (national)
4. Gender, Vulnerability & Social Inclusion Specialist
5. Climate and Safeguard Specialist /g
6. Institutional support to Extension Services
workshop
workshop
meetings
training
cluster
days
days
LS
LS
HH
HH
cluster
HH
cluster
days
days
Workshop
group
Training
Training
demo
cluster
cluster
district
district
days
days
months
person/year
person/year
motorcycle
motorcycles for AEAs at district level
Laptops
unit
Assessment, categorization and creation of database of FBOs (including performance) /hunit
Protective gear
7. Mini-Weather Stations (ESMP) /i
II. Recurrent Costs
A. GoG staff pro rata time on PROSPER activities
1. Chief Director
2. Director Project Planning  M&E
3. Director of MOFA Extension Services
4. Regional Director of Agriculture
lumpsum
lumpsum
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
2
10
50
20
80
300
1200
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
200
100
10
30
30
15
15
15
15
10
0.2
1200
120
8
0.5
0.5
50
50
1
0.2
0
1
1
1
3
1
10
50
10
75
250
900
0
0.5
25
25
25
25
25
100
50
5
30
45
22.5
22.5
22.5
22.5
5
0
600
60
7.5
0.5
0.5
0
0
0
0.05
0.15
0.5
0.5
0.5
1.5
3
20
100
30
155
550
2100
3
0.5
25
25
25
25
25
300
150
15
60
75
37.5
37.5
37.5
37.5
15
0.2
1800
180
15.5
1
1
50
50
1
0.25
0.15
1.5
1.5
1.5
4.5
Page 1
31 787
42 559
21 279
47 681
82 424
29 226
22 304
51 530
15 762
4 039
5 386
2 693
2 693
6 732
6 732
3 179
7 947
9 536
51 070
63 996
31 998
79 995
59 996
31 998
47 681
21 016
19 072
9 536
57 697
43 282
53 624
110 334
27 584
105 080
27 722
67 859
954
922
1 526
4 577
30 198
40 431
20 215
45 297
78 303
27 765
18 958
46 723
13 398
3 433
5 116
2 558
2 558
6 395
6 395
3 020
7 549
9 059
48 517
60 796
30 398
75 995
56 996
30 398
45 297
19 965
16 212
9 059
49 043
0
0
93 784
23 446
89 318
23 564
57 680
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
36 790
45 580
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 589
2 128
1 064
2 384
4 121
1 461
3 346
4 807
2 364
606
269
135
135
337
337
159
397
477
2 554
3 200
1 600
4 000
3 000
1 600
2 384
1 051
2 861
477
8 655
6 492
8 044
16 550
4 138
15 762
4 158
10 179
954
922
1 526
4 577
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5. Senior Agric Officer (Regional Rep for PROSPER)
6. District Director of Agriculture
7. District Planning Officer
8. District Works Engineer
9. Management Information Officers (MISOs)
10. Accountants
11. Crop Officers
12. WIAD Officers
13. Agriculture Extension Officers
Total
Subcomponent 1.2. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure [1.2]
 I. Investment Costs
A. Development of socio-economic infrastructure
1. Off-farm/watershed works
2. Feeder roads and farm tracks
3. Communal social infrastructure
4. Site Monitoring of Environmental, Climate and Social Conditions [ESMP)
5. Infrastructure Engineer
6. District Staff Field Support
Total
Total Component 1
Component 2
Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development
 I. Investment Costs
A. Sustainable marketing linkages and business development.
1. Value chain analysis
a. Value chain studies and integration of climate risks /a
b. Scoping and mapping of operational VC actors in target areas /b
Subtotal
2. Establish and maintain value chain bodies
3. Promotion of linkages between producers and VC actors
a. Engagement with VC actors
Support by DDAs to collect information /c
District-level meetings
Discussions with interested VC actors
Subtotal
b. Creation of and support for partnerships
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
cluster
km
cluster
lumpsum
person/year
days
lumpsum
lumpsum
Lumpsum
field days
meeting
lumpsum
field days
DDA support for the trainings and demonstrations /d
cluster
Training of RIs and MSMEs on climate risks and integration into BPs /e
cluster
Training of RIs and MSMEs on VC linkages and green bankable BPs
Demonstrations on climate risks and green BPs
cluster
BRCs/BACs support for Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /fcluster
cluster
Demonstrations dedicated for women and youth on climate risks/green BPs
cluster
Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /g
Subtotal
Subtotal
4. Development of Business Plans.
a. Preparation of business plans for RIs & MSMEs - MG window
Call for preparation  BPs at cluster level
BRCs/BACs for Preparation of BPs under Matching Grant Window
DDAs Support for BPs Preparation
MoFA regional and central departments
Subtotal
b. Evaluation of business plans at RIs/MSMEs level - MG window
c. Preparation of business plans for RIs linked to VC Actors (BFF) /h
Call for preparation of ABPs for RIs
BRCs/BACs for Preparation of ABPs for RIs (BFF)
Subtotal
d. Preparation of business plans for SMEs (standalone) - (BFF)
Call for preparation of ABPs for MSMEs
BRCs/BACs for Preparation of ABPs for MSMEs (BFF)
Subtotal
Subtotal
5. Technical Assistance to Support to the BRCs/ BACs
cluster
cluster
days
days
LS
cluster
cluster
cluster
cluster
3
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
24
0
0
0
0
0.5
0
0.3
0.3
1
200
10
0.1
500
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
300
80
0.1
0
0
0
0
Annex AWPB_NEW.xlsx
1 287
16 426
7 253
14 612
7 253
4 480
18 132
18 132
69 116
1 416 169
277 091
554 181
254 471
47 124
53 624
646
1 187 138
2 603 306
88 260
95 962
182 832
63 535
3 020
44 302
32 646
79 082
2 649
79 079
148 265
125 508
104 475
103 440
201 709
752 910
859 134
3 276
65 685
8 489
7 328
81 264
13 301
767
30 738
33 081
1 656
767
15 389
16 924
138 366
8 358
1.5
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
10
10
10
0.5
0.5
60
0.35
0
0.5
100
7.5
0.1
375
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
200
60
0.1
15
15
0
0
15
15
0
0
0
4.5
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
60
0
10
10
10
0.5
1
60
0.65
0.3
1.5
300
17.5
0.2
875
65
65
65
65
65
65
65
65
500
140
0.2
15
15
0
0
15
15
0
0
0
Page 2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 051 119
235 527
471 054
216 300
40 056
45 580
614
1 009 132
2 060 250
88 260
80 387
168 647
33 774
3 020
44 143
30 323
77 486
2 649
23 584
43 238
35 377
29 481
29 481
196 537
360 346
437 831
3 276
65 512
5 041
7 063
80 892
9 044
767
30 698
31 466
0
767
15 349
16 116
137 518
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
82 370
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
82 370
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
55 030
100 889
82 545
68 788
68 788
0
382 221
382 221
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 287
16 426
7 253
14 612
7 253
4 480
18 132
18 132
69 116
282 680
41 564
83 127
38 171
7 069
8 044
32
178 006
460 686
15 575
14 186
29 761
5 960
159
2 323
1 596
4 078
465
4 138
7 586
6 206
5 172
5 172
10 344
39 082
43 161
172
3 448
265
372
4 257
1 596
40
1 616
1 656
0
40
808
848
8 358
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Design of assessment process
TA for support for partnership creation and preparation of BPs
Nat consultant
month
Subtotal
6. Value Chain Specialists
a. Senior Value Chain Development Specialist
b. Value Chain Development Specialist
Subtotal
7. Institutional support to Value Chains
Support to veternary services in MoFA and at dstricts
Support for the cocoa board for shea tree domestication program
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. GoG staff pro rata time on PROSPER activities
1. District Director of Agriculture
2. District Planning Officer
3. Crop Officers
4. WIAD Officers
5. Agriculture Extension Officers
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Subcomponent 2.2. Access to Financial Services
 I. Investment Costs
A. Access to Rural Financial Services.
1. Savings mobilisation
person/year
person/year
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
person/year
0
24
0
0
0.1
0.1
10
10
10
10
30
Training
Groups
RCB
2
850
0
a. Promotion of Savings and Credit Group Methodology
Training of trainers and mentors /a
VSLA training and mentoring /b
RCB training on VSLA and savings promotion /c
Subtotal
2. Activities Supported by Matching Grants
a. Business Plans with Matching Grants for Groups of RIs
BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Rice
BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Maize
BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Soy
BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Cashew
BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - shea
BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - Poultry
Subtotal
b. BP with Matching Grants with MSME (Standalone)
BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer)- Rice
BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Maize
BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Soy
BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Cashew
BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Shea
BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - Poultry
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Subtotal
c. Investment with Matching Grants for Nutrition and Other Poverty Initiatives
Investment with matching grants support for off-season vegetable production
Investment with matching grants support for post-harvest management (preservation/conservation)
Investment with matching grants support for small ruminants (goats)
Investment with matching grants support for poultry - egg production
Investment with matching grants support for MSME along the food system
group
group
group
group
group
Subtotal
lumpsum
d. Agricultural risk guarantee - GIRSAL (50% of Premium Cost) /d
e. Agricultural Insurance /e
lumpsum
f. Site specific monitoring of the environmental, climate and social conditions (ESMP)lumpsum
Subtotal
3. Blended Finance Facility
a. Development of the BFF
TA to APEX Bank to develop the BFF
Selection of the PFIs: TA to APEX Bank
Subtotal
b. PFI Capacity Building
lumpsum
lumpsum
0.5
0.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Annex AWPB_NEW.xlsx
22 889
136 747
179 015
27 458
23 072
41 316
66 890
21 278
25 033
46 310
1 425 969
132 852
0
10 281
22 836
45 672
45 672
43 301
1 586 220
3 168
337 741
1 616
342 524
149 700
117 000
28 875
24 063
81 675
63 885
465 198
40 390
29 725
35 160
34 987
23 600
34 400
198 262
0
22 500
0
27 000
11 250
11 250
72 000
6 250
17 500
8 078
767 288
52 540
71 522
124 062
0.5
18
0
0
0.5
1
0.05
0.05
15
15
15
15
45
0.5
425
1.5
3
3
3
0.25
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
0
2.5
2.5
2.5
0.05
0.05
0.5
0
0.1
0.5
42
0
0
0.5
1
0.15
0.15
25
25
25
25
75
2.5
1275
1.5
3
3
3
0.25
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
0
2.5
2.5
2.5
0.05
0.05
0.5
0.5
0.3
Page 3
22 889
132 708
155 596
0
23 072
37 245
60 317
21 278
21 278
42 555
1 036 238
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 036 238
3 010
320 853
1 535
325 398
149 700
117 000
28 875
24 063
81 675
63 885
465 198
40 390
29 725
35 160
34 987
23 600
34 400
198 262
0
22 500
0
27 000
11 250
11 250
72 000
6 250
17 500
6 867
766 077
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
382 221
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
382 221
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4 039
23 419
27 458
0
4 072
6 573
10 644
3 755
3 755
7 510
132 852
0
10 281
22 836
45 672
45 672
43 301
167 761
300 613
158
16 887
81
17 126
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 212
1 212
44 659
60 793
105 452
7 881
10 728
18 609
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
149 700
117 000
28 875
24 063
9 075
11 274
339 986
10 098
7 431
8 790
8 747
5 900
8 600
49 566
0
2 500
0
3 000
1 250
1 250
8 000
0
0
0
397 552
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Annex AWPB_NEW.xlsx
Awareness raising and training on climate agriculture
TA for PFIs to develop  financial products  (Green Lending) /f
Tools and instruments to assess BPs (safeguards, mitigation, adaptation)
TA to enhance governance and management of loan products
Subtotal
c. Management of the BFF at the APEX Bank
BFF manager
Two officers for north and middle belts
Adaptation and Climate Coordinator
Environment and Safeguard Specialist
Vehicle pickup
Subtotal
d. BP with  BFF loans to RIs (Groups) with Value Chain Actors
BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Rice
BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Maize
BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Soy
BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Cashew
BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - shea
BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - Poultry
Subtotal
e. BP with BFF Loans for standalone MSMEs BPs (up to 20 employees)
BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Rice
BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Maize
BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Soy
BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Cashew
BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Shea
BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs)- Poultry
Subtotal
f. GIRSAL Guarantee (50% of the premium cost) /g
g. Agricultural Insurance
Subtotal
4. Rural Financial Services Specialist
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
per annum
per annum
per annum
per annum
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
0.17
0.2
0.15
0.2
0.5
0.25
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
person/year
0.5
0.085
0.05
0.05
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.255
0.25
0.2
0.3
1
0.75
0.5
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.025
0.025
0.5
0.025
0.025
1
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
Total
Total Component 2
Component 3
Subcomponent 3.1. Project Management
 I. Investment Costs
A. Project Management
1. Infrastructure, vehicles and equipment
a. Office Building and Equipment
Office building
Computer sets
Computer sets-2
Multifunction Laser Printer
Multifunction Laser Printer-2
Office furniture
Air Conditioners
Office equipment, various
Subtotal
b. Vehicles
4WD pickup
4WD pickup
4WD station wagon
4WD station wagon
Subtotal
Subtotal
2. Project management and coordination
a. Support for IFAD Desks in MoFA and MoF
Vehicle
Trainings for Desk Officers
Trainings for Desk Officers
Equipment for IFAD Desks in MoFA and MoF
lumpsum
set
set
Unit
Unit
Sum
Unit
Sum
unit
unit
unit
unit
unit
LS
LS
LS
0.75
10
0
2
0
1
10
0.3
0
15
0
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0.75
10
0
2
0
1
10
0.3
0
15
0
2
0
2
3
3
2
Page 4
20 264
31 187
21 148
31 787
104 386
53 624
32 595
21 909
21 909
16 965
147 001
333 298
279 189
108 120
1 326 602
223 021
340 671
2 610 901
90 011
104 230
104 230
30 685
42 121
145 326
516 604
9 425
13 464
3 525 843
43 282
4 678 938
4 678 938
6 265 158
124 126
5 517
0
11 033
0
4 413
22 067
41 375
208 532
0
0
397 204
0
99 301
496 505
705 037
66 201
7 947
7 947
11 033
0
8 416
0
0
8 416
45 580
27 706
0
0
14 420
87 706
93 765
78 542
30 417
485 442
76 352
101 818
866 336
26 902
31 152
31 152
11 162
15 107
42 832
158 306
8 011
11 444
1 140 220
36 790
2 268 484
2 268 484
3 304 723
105 507
0
0
0
0
3 751
18 757
0
128 016
0
0
0
0
0
0
128 016
56 271
7 549
7 549
9 378
19 251
16 831
17 976
27 019
81 077
0
0
18 622
18 622
0
37 245
160 740
134 644
52 143
596 400
104 984
166 981
1 215 892
44 119
51 089
51 089
13 023
18 128
71 957
249 405
0
0
1 689 072
0
1 689 072
0
1 689 072
1 689 072
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 013
5 940
3 172
4 768
14 894
8 044
4 889
3 286
3 286
2 545
22 050
78 794
66 002
25 560
244 761
41 685
71 872
528 673
18 990
21 990
21 990
6 500
8 886
30 537
108 892
1 414
2 020
696 552
6 492
721 382
0
721 382
1 021 995
18 619
5 517
0
11 033
0
662
3 310
41 375
80 517
0
0
397 204
0
99 301
496 505
577 021
9 930
397
397
1 655
0
8 416
0
0
8 416
0
0
0
0
0
0
17 860
14 960
5 794
83 219
9 544
16 291
147 668
4 304
4 984
4 984
1 488
2 014
6 853
24 629
0
0
180 712
0
180 712
0
180 712
180 712
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
138 415
115 944
44 901
221 916
35 790
73 309
630 274
32 282
37 382
37 382
11 162
15 107
51 398
184 714
0
0
814 988
0
1 212 540
0
1 212 540
1 212 540
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
35 720
29 921
11 587
0
9 544
48 873
135 645
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
135 645
0
135 645
0
135 645
135 645
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Subtotal
b. Support for GIFMIS Implementation
Equipment for Internet Connectivity
c. Project support
Supervision missions
Implementation support missions
Unspecified studies and contract supervision
Subtotal
Subtotal
3. Audit
a. Internal audit
b. External audit
c. Meetings and workshops
Project steering committee meetings
Consultative stakeholder workshops
Consultative AWPB workshop
Subtotal
d. Staff development
Training
Subtotal
4. Knowledge management and learning
a. KM strategy formulation.
b. Studies and learning products including climate
c. Learning events and communications materials incl climate
d. Communications and publications
e. South-South and triangular cooperation - tours
f. Annual Sahel Award
g. Sahel Award replenishment
h. Develop Sahel Award protocols
i. Enrol women and Youth to compete for Sahel Award
Subtotal
5. M&E/MIS system
M&E software (PLAMES)
ArcGIS
ArcGIS licence
Specialist services
Subtotal
6. M&E studies and reviews
a. Baseline Study
b. Mid-Term Review
c. Completion Study
d. Outcome and Impact thematic studies
e. Environmental, Climate and Social Monitoring (ESMP)
f. Conflict Resolution and Land Governance Dialogue (ESMP) /a
g. Other Social Monitoring (GBV, SEAH Vulnerability) - ESMP /b
h. Health Insurance and Outreach Monitoring [ESMP] /c
i. Environmental, Climate and Social Audit /d
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries
1. Project Coordinator
2. KM/M&E Manager
3. KM/M&E Officer
4. M&E/MIS assistant
5. Financial Controller
6. Project Accountant
7. Project Accountant - GCF
8. Accountant Assistant
9. Procurement Manager
10. Procurement Assistant
11. Admin. Assistant
12. Office Assistant
13. Drivers
unit
0.4
mission
mission
LS
LS
LS
meeting
Workshop
Workshop
LS
consultancy
LS
Event
LS
Workshop
event
event
LS
LS
Software
Software
Licence
Month
Study
Study
Study
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
person/year
year
pers-year
pers-year
year
pers-year
pers-year
year
year
year
year
year
year
0
0
1
0
0
2
1
1
2
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
2
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.8
0.5
0.8
0.8
0.8
Annex AWPB_NEW.xlsx
93 128
55 444
8 078
5 386
31 787
45 251
193 823
2 693
8 078
15 894
15 894
23 841
55 628
14 383
80 782
10 508
16 157
16 157
15 894
0
0
0
0
0
58 715
22 067
47 444
0
66 004
135 515
157 621
0
0
0
39 734
0
19 867
19 867
26 928
264 017
1 437 890
82 752
69 512
56 106
19 561
69 512
56 106
56 106
10 852
69 512
10 852
14 068
13 808
13 808
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0
1
0.5
0.5
2.5
0
0.05
0.05
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0
0
0
0
0.5
0.5
0.5
1
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
1
1
0.5
0.5
0.5
1.5
0.5
0.5
0
3
1.5
1.5
4.5
1
0.05
0.05
1.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
2.5
0
0
1
0
0
0
1.5
0
1.5
1.5
0.5
0
0
0
0
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.8
1.3
1.3
1.3
1
1.3
1
1.3
1.8
1.8
Page 5
80 748
47 127
7 675
5 116
30 198
42 989
170 864
2 558
7 675
15 099
15 099
22 648
52 846
13 664
76 743
9 983
7 675
7 675
0
0
0
0
0
0
25 332
18 757
40 327
0
62 704
121 788
149 740
0
0
0
33 774
0
16 887
16 887
25 582
242 869
765 612
82 752
69 512
0
19 561
69 512
56 106
0
10 852
69 512
10 852
14 068
13 808
13 808
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7 675
7 675
15 099
0
0
0
0
0
30 448
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30 448
0
0
56 106
0
0
0
56 106
0
0
0
0
0
0
12 380
8 317
404
269
1 589
2 263
22 959
135
404
795
795
1 192
2 781
719
4 039
525
808
808
795
0
0
0
0
0
2 936
3 310
7 117
0
3 300
13 727
7 881
0
0
0
5 960
0
2 980
2 980
1 346
21 148
641 830
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14. PROSPER Liaison Officer
15. LO Assistant
Subtotal
B. Operating costs (Proj Mgt + Policy)
1. Staff Monitoring Activities
2. Stationary and Sanitary Supplies
3. Vehicle Running, Repairs, & Maintenance
4. Utilities
5. Computer & Equipment Maintenance, miscellaneous.
Subtotal
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Subcomponent 3.2. Policy Engagement
 I. Investment Costs
A. Policy Engagement
1. Sectoral policy support to GoG
Short Studies Related to ASWG
TA Support to Green Finance and Green Agriculture
Studies on Different Policy Topics
Dialogue and advocacy on policy Topics /a
Support to BoG on climate risk and green finance
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
Total
Total Component 3
Grand Total PROSPER
Annex AWPB_NEW.xlsx
year
year
LS
LS
vehicle/year
LS
LS
lumpsum
TA days
study
lumpsum
Lumsum
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5
17
1
0.5
1
1
0
1
0
0.5
0.5
0
0
0.25
0.25
8.5
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.25
1.3
1.3
0.75
0.75
25.5
1.5
0.75
1.5
1.5
0.5
1.5
0.25
56 134
14 068
612 758
47 681
19 867
135 096
63 575
11 920
278 139
890 897
2 328 787
3 973
19 867
5 386
11 920
18 850
59 996
0
59 996
56 134
14 068
500 546
40 529
16 887
114 832
54 038
10 132
236 418
736 964
1 502 576
3 377
16 887
5 116
10 132
0
35 513
0
35 513
0
0
112 212
0
0
0
0
0
0
112 212
142 660
0
0
0
0
16 022
16 022
0
16 022
0
0
0
7 152
2 980
20 264
9 536
1 788
41 721
41 721
683 551
596
2 980
269
1 788
2 827
8 461
0
8 461
2 388 783
1 538 089
158 683
692 011
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
11 257 248
6 903 062
1 930 124
2 174 693
180 712
1 212 540
135 645
Page 6
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Procurement Plan SUMMARY
Country:
GHANA
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
Project Name:
Project ID:
Version
1.0
Version Date
14-Sep-21
Prepared by:
Approved by:
Procurement 
Category
Plan
Actual
Currency
USD
LCU
USD
LCU
Goods
Works
Consulting 
Services
Non-Consulting 
Services
Grants
TOTAL
650 000.00 
2 386 500.00 
11 624 771.00 
-
-
14 661 271.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
The threshold tables below are based on the new LTB Template 2020. 
Please fill in the fields that are applicable based on the provisions in the LTB for the project.
Prior Review Thresholds
Category
Goods and goods-
related Non-
Consulting Services
Works and works-
related Non-
Consulting Services
Consulting Services 
and related Non-
Consulting Services 
and/or 
MoU/Agreements
Individual Consultants
Threshold
>= US$ 70,000.00
>= US$ 150,000.00
>= US$ 60,000.00
>= US$ 0.00
All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are  Prior Review  (in alignment with IFAD 
Procurement Handbook), or based on the thresholds stipulated in the LTB
The exchange rate at time of submission will be used for reviews.
Decisions concerning 
Abnormally Low Bids 
shall be subject to the 
No Objection of IFAD:
Only for procurement 
activities subject to prior 
review
OR
For all procurement 
activities
Procurement Method Thresholds
CQS
QBS/LCS/FBS
QCBS
Shortlisting
SSS - Firms
<= US$ 70,000.00
< US$ 0.00
>= US$ 100,000.00
>= US$ 0.00
<= US$ 0.00
(subject to prior review. 
Justification required if 
above threshold)
SSS - 
Individuals
<= US$ 0.00 
(or with a contract 
duration of 3 
months or less; 
subject to prior 
review)
Consulting 
Services and 
related Non-
Consulting 
Services
Direct 
Contracting
Goods and goods-
related Non-
Consulting 
Services
>= US$ 0.00
(subject to prior 
review. Justification 
required if above 
threshold)
Works and works-
related Non-
Consulting 
Services
>= US$ 0.00
(subject to prior 
review. Justification 
required if above 
threshold)
Shopping
NCB
ICB
Other Procurement Methods or 
Arrangements
<= US$ 70,000.00
>US$70,000.00 to  < 
US$ 200,000.00
>= US$ 200,000.00 Force Account
<= US$ 190,000.00
>US$190,000 to < 
US$ 800,000.00
>= US$ 800,000.00
Community 
Participation
Up to a maximum 
aggregate amount 
of:
US$ 0.00
(subject to prior 
review)
Allowed
OR
Not Allowed
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 1
Printed on: 28/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Goods
GHANA
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
Project ID: 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
USD
LCU
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
650 000.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Version
1.0
14-Sep-21
Basic Data
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
1
1
1
2
2
Motorcycles for AEAs at District 
Level
Laptop Computers to Support 
Extension Services
Protective Gear - Extension Services -
Protective Gear 
Various goods - Vertrinary Services 
at MoFA & Districts (Goods/Works)
Support Value Chains -Shea Tree 
Domestication (Goods)
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
COMPONENT 
2
Vehicle (Pick Up) for BFF Manager
ARB APEX 
Bank
ARB APEX Bank
COMPONENT 3
Project 
Management
Procurement of Computers, Printers, 
Airconditioner, Office Furniture and 
equipment for PCU
IFAD
PROSPER-PCU
M&E/MIS 
System
 ArcGIS Software plus 5 years license
IFAD
PROSPER-PCU
Support to 
GIFMIS
Procurement of equipment for 
Internet Connectivity 
IFAD
PROSPER-PCU
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
100 000.00 
-
25 000.00 
-
25 000.00 
-
150 000.00 
-
150 000.00 
-
60 000.00 
-
76 500.00 
-
3 500.00 
-
60 000.00 
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
13-Jun-22
20-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
6-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
6-Jul-22
13-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
6-Jul-22
13-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
17-Aug-22
24-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
24-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Oct-22
N/A
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 2
Printed on: 28/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Goods
GHANA
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
Project ID: 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
Procurement 
Methods
NS: National 
Shopping 
IS: International 
Shopping 
NCB: National 
Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International 
Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited 
(International) 
Bidding 
Version
1.0
14-Sep-21
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Submission of Draft 
Contract
No-Objection Date
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
6-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
26-Sep-22
3-Oct-22
100 000.00 
Date
Contract
Signature
7-Oct-22
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
1
1
1
2
2
Motorcycles for AEAs at District 
Level
Laptop Computers to Support 
Extension Services
Protective Gear - Extension Services -
Protective Gear 
Various goods - Vertrinary Services 
at MoFA & Districts (Goods/Works)
Support Value Chains -Shea Tree 
Domestication (Goods)
22-Jun-22
6-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
27-Aug-22
3-Sep-22
24-Jun-22
24-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
7-Aug-22
N/A
8-Jul-22
7-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
21-Aug-22
N/A
15-Jul-22
14-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
15-Jul-22
14-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
COMPONENT 
2
Vehicle (Pick Up) for BFF Manager
26-Aug-22
25-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
9-Oct-22
16-Oct-22
COMPONENT 3
Project 
Management
Procurement of Computers, Printers, 
Airconditioner, Office Furniture and 
equipment for PCU
26-Aug-22
25-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
9-Oct-22
N/A
M&E/MIS 
System
 ArcGIS Software plus 5 years license
29-Sep-22
29-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
12-Nov-22
N/A
Support to 
GIFMIS
Procurement of equipment for 
Internet Connectivity 
14-Oct-22
13-Nov-22
N/A
N/A
27-Nov-22
N/A
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
10-Aug-22
25-Aug-22
30-Aug-22
N/A
3-Sep-22
25 000.00 
24-Aug-22
8-Sep-22
13-Sep-22
N/A
17-Sep-22
25 000.00 
7-Sep-22
22-Sep-22
27-Sep-22
4-Oct-22
8-Oct-22
150 000.00 
7-Sep-22
22-Sep-22
27-Sep-22
4-Oct-22
8-Oct-22
150 000.00 
19-Oct-22
3-Nov-22
8-Nov-22
15-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
60 000.00 
12-Oct-22
27-Oct-22
1-Nov-22
N/A
5-Nov-22
76 500.00 
15-Nov-22
30-Nov-22
5-Dec-22
N/A
9-Dec-22
3 500.00 
30-Nov-22
15-Dec-22
20-Dec-22
N/A
24-Dec-22
60 000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 2
Printed on: 28/09/2021
Procurement Plan - WORKS
GHANA
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
Project ID: 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
USD
LCU
2 386 500.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Procurement 
Methods
NS: National 
Shopping 
IS: International 
Shopping 
NCB: National 
Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International 
Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited 
(International) 
Bidding 
Version
1.0
14-Sep-21
Basic Data
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
1-Sep-22
Submission of Draft 
Contract
No-objection Date
6-Sep-22
13-Sep-22
Date
Contract
Signature
19-Sep-22
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
400 000.00 
17-Aug-22
COMPONENT/SUBCOMPONENT 1.11
Construction of Mini Weather 
Stations
Off-farm Watershed Works - 
package no 1
Off-farm Watershed Works - 
package no 2
Off-farm Watershed Works - 
package no 3
Off-farm Watershed Works - 
package no 4
Off-farm Watershed Works - 
package no 5
Feeder Roads & Farm Tracks - 
package no 1
Feeder Roads & Farm Tracks - 
package no 2
Feeder Roads & Farm Tracks - 
package no 3
Feeder Roads & Farm Tracks - 
package no 4
Feeder Roads & Farm Tracks - 
package no 5
Off-farm Watershed Works - 
package no 5
Communal Social Infrastructure - 
package no 1
Communal Social Infrastructure - 
package no 2
Communal Social Infrastructure - 
package no 3
Communal Social Infrastructure - 
package no 4
Communal Social Infrastructure - 
package no 5
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation 
Demonstrations
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation 
Demonstrations
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation 
Demonstrations
Climate smart HH nutrition gardens; 
demos and training
Demonstrations on climate risks and 
green BPs
Demonstrations dedicated for 
women and youth on climate 
risks/green BPs
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT/SUB
COMPONENT 1.2 
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT 
COMPONENT
COMPONENT 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
3
Renovation of Office Building
IFAD
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER-PCU
PROSPER_PCU
Post-Qual
Pior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
400 000.00 
-
94 000.00 
-
94 000.00 
-
94 000.00 
-
94 000.00 
-
94 000.00 
-
196 000.00 
-
196 000.00 
-
196 000.00 
-
196 000.00 
-
196 000.00 
-
94 000.00 
-
90 000.00 
-
90 000.00 
-
90 000.00 
-
90 000.00 
-
90 000.00 
-
31 000.00 
-
48 000.00 
-
48 000.00 
-
13 500.00 
-
117 000.00 
-
97 500.00 
-
37 500.00 
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
22-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
24-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
7-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-May-22
N/A
3-May-22
2-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
16-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
18-Jan-23
17-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
3-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
18-Jan-23
17-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
3-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
18-Jan-23
17-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
3-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
18-Jan-23
17-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
3-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
18-Jan-23
17-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
3-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
21-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
22-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
6-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
21-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
22-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
6-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
21-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
22-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
6-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
21-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
22-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
6-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-Mar-23
N/A
29-Mar-23
28-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
12-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
7-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
16-Apr-23
16-May-23
N/A
N/A
30-May-23
6-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
28-Feb-23
N/A
2-Mar-23
1-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
15-Apr-23
N/A
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
19-Jun-22
4-Jul-22
9-Jul-22
N/A
13-Jul-22
94 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
94 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
94 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
94 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
94 000.00 
13-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
9-Apr-23
13-Apr-23
196 000.00 
13-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
9-Apr-23
13-Apr-23
196 000.00 
13-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
9-Apr-23
13-Apr-23
196 000.00 
13-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
9-Apr-23
13-Apr-23
196 000.00 
13-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
9-Apr-23
13-Apr-23
196 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
94 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
90 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
90 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
90 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
90 000.00 
27-Feb-23
14-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
N/A
23-Mar-23
90 000.00 
9-May-23
24-May-23
29-May-23
N/A
2-Jun-23
31 000.00 
9-May-23
24-May-23
29-May-23
N/A
2-Jun-23
48 000.00 
9-May-23
24-May-23
29-May-23
N/A
2-Jun-23
48 000.00 
9-May-23
24-May-23
29-May-23
N/A
2-Jun-23
13 500.00 
15-May-23
30-May-23
4-Jun-23
N/A
8-Jun-23
117 000.00 
9-Jun-23
24-Jun-23
29-Jun-23
6-Jul-23
10-Jul-23
97 500.00 
18-Apr-23
3-May-23
8-May-23
N/A
12-May-23
37 500.00 
-
-
-
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 1
Printed on: 28/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting
GHANA
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
Project ID: 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
Grants:
USD
LCU
11 624 771.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Selection Methods
QCBS: Quality and Cost-Based Selection
QBS: Quality-Based Selection
CQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications (shortlist is required for this method) 
LCS: Least-Cost Selection
FBS Fixed Budget Selection
ICS: Individual Consultants Selection (shortlist is required for this method)
SSS: Sole Source Selection
Selection (Design/PIM): Single Sourcing established in the project design or 
implementation manual
Version
1.0
14-Sep-21
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Component Ref
№
Description*
Grant
Non
Consulting
Funding
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection 
Date
REOI Launch 
Date
EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date Contract 
Award
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract
No-objection 
Date
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
COMPONENT  1-2/ 
Consultancy for 
designing 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure
COMPONENT  1-2/ 
Consultancy for 
designing 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure
COMPONENT  1-2/ 
Consultancy for 
designing 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure
COMPONENT 1-1/ 
Capacity buillding of 
community institutions 
and enterprises
COMPONENT 1-1/ 
Capacity buillding of 
community institutions 
and enterprises
COMPONENT 1-1/ 
Capacity buillding of 
community institutions 
and enterprises
COMPONENT/ 
Community Nutrition 
and Healthy Diet 
Campaign
COMPONENT/ 
Capitation of Rural 
Institutitions & 
Enterprises
COMPONENT/ 
Capitation of Rural 
Institutitions & 
Enterprises
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Design & supervision of off farm 
insfrastructure, farmtrack and 
Communal social infrastructure #1
Design & supervision of off farm 
insfrastructure, farmtrack and 
Communal social infrastructure #1
Design & supervision of off farm 
insfrastructure, farmtrack and 
Communal social infrastructure #1
MoUs with regional, MoFA and other 
line departments  forcluster planning, 
nutrition and farmers' capicitation 
(total 6 MoUs)  18 months
MoUs with DDAs  for cluster planning, 
nutrition and farmers' capicitation 
(total 7 MoUs)
MoUs with DDAs  for cluster planning, 
nutrition and farmers' capicitation 
(total 7 MoUs)
MoUs with DDAs  for cluster planning, 
nutrition and farmers' capicitation 
(total 9 MoUs)
Nutrition Knowledge, Attitudes and 
Practice Study
TA (National) for 1st region and rolling 
out work in 2nd region
TA (National) for three regions
COMPONENT/ 
Institutional support to 
extension services
1.1
Assessment, Categorization and 
Creation of Database of FBOs
COMPONENT/Develop
ment of Socio-
economic Infrastructure
1.2
Site Monitoring of Environmental, 
Climate and Social Conditions [ESMP)
Sustainable marketing linkages and business development.
COMPONENT/Value 
Chain Analysis
2.1
Value chain studies and integration of 
climate risks
COMPONENT/Value 
Chain Analysis
2.1
Scoping and mapping of operational VC 
actors in target areas
COMPONENT 
2.1
Evaluation of Business Plans at Ris/SME 
Level
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO SUPPORT BRCs/BACs
COMPONENT 
2.1
Design of Assessment Process as 
support to BRCs/BACs
COMPONENT 
2.1
TA for support for partnership creation 
and preparation of BPs (Various 
Individual Consultants)
PROMOTION OF SAVINGS AND GROUP CREDIT METHODOLOGY
COMPONENT 
2.2
Site specific monitoring of the 
environmental, climate and social 
conditions (ESMP)
 DEVELOPMENT OF THE BFF
COMPONENT 
2.2
TA to APEX Bank to develop the BFF
COMPONENT 
2.2
Selection of the PFIs: TA to APEX Bank
PFI CAPACITY BUILDING
COMPONENT 
2.2
Awareness raising and training on 
climate agriculture
COMPONENT 
2.2
TA for PFIs to develop  financial 
products  (Green Lending)
COMPONENT 
2.2
Tools and instruments to assess BPs 
(safeguards, mitigation, adaptation)
COMPONENT 
2.2
TA to enhance governance and 
management of loan products
MANAGEMENT OF THE BFF AT THE APEX BANK
COMPONENT 
3
Unspecified studies and contract 
supervision
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
32 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
32 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
32 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
66 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
27 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
20 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
33 000.00 
Actual
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
ICS
Actual
-
8 000.00 
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
30 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
CQS
57 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
100 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
CQS
85 700.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
97 500.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
90 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
15 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
50 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
223 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
15 000.00 
Actual
-
ARB APEX Bank
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
50 000.00 
Actual
-
ARB APEX Bank
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
67 500.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
19 125.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
CQS
37 500.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
20 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
30 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
30 000.00 
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
10-Jan-23
N/A
12-Jan-23
2-Feb-23
16-Feb-23
N/A
20-Feb-23
N/A
22-Feb-23
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
29-Mar-23
N/A
10-Jun-23
N/A
12-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
17-Jul-23
N/A
21-Jul-23
N/A
23-Jul-23
13-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
27-Aug-23
N/A
10-Jun-23
N/A
12-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
17-Jul-23
N/A
21-Jul-23
N/A
23-Jul-23
13-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
27-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-21
8-Jun-21
10-Jun-21
10-Jul-21
N/A
N/A
24-Jul-21
31-Jul-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-21
8-Jun-21
10-Jun-21
10-Jul-21
N/A
N/A
24-Jul-21
31-Jul-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2-Jan-22
9-Jan-22
11-Jan-22
10-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
24-Feb-22
3-Mar-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
10-Jun-22
10-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
24-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
10-Feb-23
17-Feb-23
19-Feb-23
12-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
10-Jun-22
1-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-22
22-Jul-22
14-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
23-Jan-23
13-Feb-23
27-Feb-23
6-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
23-Apr-23
30-Apr-23
20-Jan-23
27-Jan-23
29-Jan-23
19-Feb-23
5-Mar-23
12-Mar-23
16-Mar-23
23-Mar-23
25-Mar-23
15-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
29-Apr-23
6-May-23
9-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
18-Sep-22
2-Oct-22
16-Oct-22
23-Oct-22
27-Oct-22
3-Nov-22
5-Nov-22
20-Dec-22
3-Jan-23
10-Jan-23
24-Jan-23
31-Jan-23
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
23-Sep-22
14-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
4-Nov-22
8-Nov-22
15-Nov-22
17-Nov-22
8-Dec-22
N/A
N/A
22-Dec-22
29-Dec-22
21-Sep-22
28-Sep-22
30-Sep-22
14-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
4-Nov-22
8-Nov-22
15-Nov-22
17-Nov-22
1-Jan-23
15-Jan-23
22-Jan-23
5-Feb-23
12-Feb-23
21-Sep-22
28-Sep-22
30-Sep-22
14-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
4-Nov-22
8-Nov-22
15-Nov-22
17-Nov-22
1-Jan-23
15-Jan-23
22-Jan-23
5-Feb-23
12-Feb-23
21-Sep-22
N/A
23-Sep-22
14-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
N/A
1-Nov-22
N/A
3-Nov-22
24-Nov-22
N/A
N/A
8-Dec-22
N/A
28-Sep-22
N/A
30-Sep-22
21-Oct-22
4-Nov-22
N/A
8-Nov-22
N/A
10-Nov-22
1-Dec-22
N/A
N/A
15-Dec-22
N/A
28-Sep-22
5-Oct-22
7-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
11-Nov-22
18-Nov-22
22-Nov-22
29-Nov-22
1-Dec-22
22-Dec-22
N/A
N/A
5-Jan-23
12-Jan-23
5-Oct-22
12-Oct-22
14-Oct-22
4-Nov-22
18-Nov-22
25-Nov-22
29-Nov-22
6-Dec-22
8-Dec-22
29-Dec-22
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
5-Oct-22
12-Oct-22
14-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
11-Nov-22
18-Nov-22
22-Nov-22
29-Nov-22
1-Dec-22
15-Jan-23
29-Jan-23
5-Feb-23
19-Feb-23
26-Feb-23
12-Oct-22
19-Oct-22
21-Oct-22
4-Nov-22
18-Nov-22
25-Nov-22
29-Nov-22
6-Dec-22
8-Dec-22
22-Jan-23
5-Feb-23
12-Feb-23
26-Feb-23
5-Mar-23
12-Oct-22
19-Oct-22
21-Oct-22
11-Nov-22
25-Nov-22
2-Dec-22
6-Dec-22
13-Dec-22
15-Dec-22
5-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
19-Jan-23
26-Jan-23
19-Oct-22
26-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
18-Nov-22
2-Dec-22
9-Dec-22
13-Dec-22
20-Dec-22
22-Dec-22
12-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
26-Jan-23
2-Feb-23
19-Oct-22
26-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
18-Nov-22
2-Dec-22
9-Dec-22
13-Dec-22
20-Dec-22
22-Dec-22
12-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
26-Jan-23
2-Feb-23
19-Oct-22
26-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
18-Nov-22
2-Dec-22
9-Dec-22
13-Dec-22
20-Dec-22
22-Dec-22
12-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
26-Jan-23
2-Feb-23
26-Oct-22
2-Nov-22
4-Nov-22
25-Nov-22
9-Dec-22
16-Dec-22
20-Dec-22
27-Dec-22
29-Dec-22
19-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
2-Feb-23
9-Feb-23
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
N/A
4-Apr-23
18-Apr-23
23-Apr-23
N/A
27-Apr-23
32 000.00 
N/A
2-Sep-23
16-Sep-23
21-Sep-23
N/A
25-Sep-23
32 000.00 
N/A
2-Sep-23
16-Sep-23
21-Sep-23
N/A
25-Sep-23
32 000.00 
N/A
6-Aug-21
27-Aug-21
1-Sep-21
8-Sep-21
12-Sep-21
66 000.00 
N/A
6-Aug-21
27-Aug-21
1-Sep-21
8-Sep-21
12-Sep-21
27 000.00 
N/A
9-Mar-22
30-Mar-22
4-Apr-22
11-Apr-22
15-Apr-22
20 000.00 
N/A
6-Aug-22
27-Aug-22
1-Sep-22
8-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
33 000.00 
N/A
28-Jul-22
11-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
23-Aug-22
27-Aug-22
8 000.00 
N/A
6-May-23
20-May-23
25-May-23
1-Jun-23
5-Jun-23
30 000.00 
N/A
12-May-23
26-May-23
31-May-23
7-Jun-23
11-Jun-23
57 000.00 
3-Feb-23
18-Feb-23
5-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
21-Mar-23
100 000.00 
N/A
4-Jan-23
18-Jan-23
23-Jan-23
30-Jan-23
3-Feb-23
85 700.00 
15-Feb-23
2-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
29-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
97 500.00 
15-Feb-23
2-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
29-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
90 000.00 
N/A
14-Dec-22
28-Dec-22
2-Jan-23
N/A
6-Jan-23
15 000.00 
N/A
21-Dec-22
4-Jan-23
9-Jan-23
N/A
13-Jan-23
50 000.00 
N/A
18-Jan-23
1-Feb-23
6-Feb-23
13-Feb-23
17-Feb-23
223 000.00 
N/A
25-Jan-23
8-Feb-23
13-Feb-23
20-Feb-23
24-Feb-23
15 000.00 
1-Mar-23
16-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
5-Apr-23
12-Apr-23
16-Apr-23
50 000.00 
8-Mar-23
23-Mar-23
7-Apr-23
12-Apr-23
19-Apr-23
23-Apr-23
67 500.00 
N/A
1-Feb-23
15-Feb-23
20-Feb-23
27-Feb-23
3-Mar-23
19 125.00 
N/A
8-Feb-23
22-Feb-23
27-Feb-23
6-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
37 500.00 
N/A
8-Feb-23
22-Feb-23
27-Feb-23
6-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
20 000.00 
N/A
8-Feb-23
22-Feb-23
27-Feb-23
6-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
30 000.00 
N/A
15-Feb-23
1-Mar-23
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
30 000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 3
Printed on: 28/09/2021
Version
1.0
14-Sep-21
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection 
Date
REOI Launch 
Date
EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date Contract 
Award
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract
No-objection 
Date
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
AWPB/Component Ref
COMPONENT 
№
3
Description*
Grant
supervision
Non
Consulting
Funding
IFAD
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT & LEARNING
COMPONENT 
M&E/MIS SYSTEM
COMPONENT 
M$E STUDIES & REVIEWS
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
COMPONENT
POLICY ENGAGEMENT
COMPONENT 
COMPONENT 
COMPONENT 
COMPONENT 
COMPONENT 
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
TA for Studies and learning products 
including climate  (individual 
consultant)
Specialist Studies
Environmental, Climate and Social 
Monitoring (ESMP)
Conflict Resolution and Land 
Governance Dialogue (ESMP)
Other Social Monitoring (GBV, SEAH 
Vulnerability) - ESMP
Health Insurance and Outreach 
Monitoring [ESMP]
Environmental, Climate and Social 
Audit
Short Studies related to ASWG
TA support to Green Finance and Green 
Agriculture
Ad hoc studies on different Policy 
Topics
Dialogue and advocacy on policy 
Topics
Support to BoG on climate risk and 
green finance
MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING
COMPONENT 
1
Matching Grants for poorer / 
vulnerable RIs (in Clusters) and 
MSMEs business plans with Value 
Chain Actors
1
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
BPP Matching Grants with MSMEs
Disbursement of 
matching grants for 
MSME business plan 
(standalone)
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
6No. MOUs for Matching grants for 
poorer groups -  for rice (collective 
with group of RIs)
6No. MOUs for Matching grants for 
poorer groups -  for maize (collective 
with group of RIs)
6No. MOUs for Matching grants for 
poorer groups -  for soy (collective with 
group of RIs)
1No. MOU for Matching grants for 
poorer groups -  for cashew (collective 
with group of RIs)
6No. MOUs for Matching grants for 
poorer groups -  for shea (collective 
with group of RIs)
6No. MOUs for Matching grants for 
poorer groups -  for poultry (collective 
with group of RIs)
4No. MOUs for Matching grant for 
MSMEs in selected clusters (9 
employees and less) around rice value 
chain
4No. MOUs for Matching grant for 
MSMEs in selected clusters (9 
employees and less) around maize 
value chain
4No. MOUs for Matching grant for 
MSMEs in selected clusters (9 
employees and less) around soy value 
chain
4No. MOUs for Matching grant for 
MSMEs in selected clusters (9 
employees and less) around cashew 
value chain
4No. MOUs for Matching grant for 
MSMEs in selected clusters (9 
employees and less) around shea value 
chain
4No. MOUs for Matching grant for 
MSMEs in selected clusters (9 
employees and less) around poultry 
value chain
 Investment with Matching Grants for Nutrition and Other Poverty Initiatives
Disbursement of 
matching grants for 
nutrition and other 
poverty initiatives
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
10No. MOUs with Individual Groups as 
Matching grants for off-season 
vegetable production
5No. MOUs with individual Groups as  
Matching Grant for small ruminants 
(goats)
5No. MOUs with individual Groups as 
Matching Grant for poulty- egg 
production
5No. MOUs for individual Groups as 
Matching garnt for MSME along the 
food system
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
45 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
37 500.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
37 500.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
150 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
18 750.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
18 750.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
50 000.00 
Actual
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
Actual
-
3 750.00 
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Pior Review
ICS
18 750.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Pior Review
ICS
15 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
11 250.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
Yes
Pior Review
QCBS
35 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
598 800.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
468 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
115 500.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
96 250.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
181 500.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
150 320.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
100 970.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
74 310.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
87 900.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
87 470.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
59 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
86 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
50 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
60 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
25 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
25 000.00 
Actual
-
ABP with  BFF loans to RIs (Groups) with Value Chain Actors
2No. MOUs: ABP from groups of RIs 
financed by BFF loans - Rice
APEX BANK
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
975 360.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
26-Oct-22
2-Nov-22
4-Nov-22
25-Nov-22
9-Dec-22
16-Dec-22
20-Dec-22
27-Dec-22
29-Dec-22
19-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
2-Feb-23
9-Feb-23
26-Oct-22
2-Nov-22
4-Nov-22
25-Nov-22
9-Dec-22
16-Dec-22
20-Dec-22
27-Dec-22
29-Dec-22
19-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
2-Feb-23
9-Feb-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
12-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
16-Apr-23
N/A
20-Apr-23
N/A
22-Apr-23
13-May-23
N/A
N/A
27-May-23
N/A
10-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
16-Apr-23
23-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
4-May-23
6-May-23
20-Jun-23
4-Jul-23
11-Jul-23
25-Jul-23
1-Aug-23
22-Mar-23
N/A
24-Mar-23
14-Apr-23
28-Apr-23
N/A
2-May-23
N/A
4-May-23
25-May-23
N/A
N/A
8-Jun-23
N/A
22-Mar-23
N/A
24-Mar-23
14-Apr-23
28-Apr-23
N/A
2-May-23
N/A
4-May-23
25-May-23
N/A
N/A
8-Jun-23
N/A
21-Jun-23
N/A
23-Jun-23
14-Jul-23
28-Jul-23
N/A
1-Aug-23
N/A
3-Aug-23
24-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
7-Sep-23
N/A
15-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
24-Aug-22
14-Sep-22
28-Sep-22
5-Oct-22
9-Oct-22
16-Oct-22
18-Oct-22
8-Nov-22
N/A
N/A
22-Nov-22
29-Nov-22
18-Aug-22
N/A
20-Aug-22
10-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
N/A
28-Sep-22
N/A
30-Sep-22
21-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
4-Nov-22
N/A
23-Aug-22
N/A
25-Aug-22
15-Sep-22
29-Sep-22
N/A
2-Oct-22
N/A
4-Oct-22
25-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
8-Nov-22
N/A
30-Aug-22
N/A
1-Sep-22
22-Sep-22
6-Oct-22
N/A
10-Oct-22
N/A
12-Oct-22
2-Nov-22
N/A
N/A
16-Nov-22
N/A
4-Jan-23
11-Jan-23
13-Jan-23
27-Jan-23
10-Feb-23
17-Feb-23
21-Feb-23
28-Feb-23
2-Mar-23
16-Apr-23
30-Apr-23
7-May-23
21-May-23
28-May-23
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-May-22
29-May-22
31-May-22
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-May-22
29-May-22
31-May-22
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-May-22
29-May-22
31-May-22
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-May-22
29-May-22
31-May-22
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-May-22
29-May-22
31-May-22
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-May-22
29-May-22
31-May-22
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
10-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-May-22
29-May-22
31-May-22
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
10-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-May-22
29-May-22
31-May-22
30-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
10-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
10-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
10-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
10-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
5-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
5-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
5-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
5-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12-Jan-23
19-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
18-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Jan-23
1-Feb-23
3-Feb-23
5-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
19-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
N/A
15-Feb-23
1-Mar-23
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
45 000.00 
N/A
15-Feb-23
1-Mar-23
6-Mar-23
13-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
37 500.00 
N/A
2-Jun-23
16-Jun-23
21-Jun-23
N/A
25-Jun-23
37 500.00 
4-Aug-23
19-Aug-23
3-Sep-23
8-Sep-23
15-Sep-23
19-Sep-23
150 000.00 
N/A
14-Jun-23
28-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
N/A
7-Jul-23
18 750.00 
N/A
14-Jun-23
28-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
N/A
7-Jul-23
18 750.00 
N/A
13-Sep-23
27-Sep-23
2-Oct-23
N/A
6-Oct-23
50 000.00 
N/A
5-Dec-22
19-Dec-22
24-Dec-22
31-Dec-22
4-Jan-23
3 750.00 
N/A
10-Nov-22
24-Nov-22
29-Nov-22
N/A
3-Dec-22
18 750.00 
N/A
14-Nov-22
28-Nov-22
3-Dec-22
N/A
8-Dec-22
15 000.00 
N/A
22-Nov-22
6-Dec-22
11-Dec-22
N/A
15-Dec-22
11 250.00 
31-May-23
15-Jun-23
30-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
12-Jul-23
16-Jul-23
35 000.00 
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
598 800.00 
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
468 000.00 
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
115 500.00 
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
96 250.00 
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
181 500.00 
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
150 320.00 
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
100 970.00 
N/A
27-Jul-22
17-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
74 310.00 
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
87 900.00 
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
87 470.00 
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
59 000.00 
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
86 000.00 
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
50 000.00 
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
60 000.00 
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
25 000.00 
N/A
19-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
25 000.00 
N/A
1-Apr-23
22-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
4-May-23
8-May-23
975 360.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 3
Printed on: 28/09/2021
Version
1.0
14-Sep-21
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection 
Date
REOI Launch 
Date
EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date Contract 
Award
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract
No-objection 
Date
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Date
Contract
Completion
Remarks
AWPB/Component Ref
№
Description*
Grant
financed by BFF loans - Rice
Non
Consulting
Funding
APEX BANK
Actual
-
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP from groups of RIs 
financed by BFF loans - Maize
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP from groups of RIs 
financed by BFF loans - Soy
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP from groups of RIs 
financed by BFF loans - Cashew
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP from groups of RIs 
financed by BFF loans - Shea
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP from groups of RIs 
financed by BFF loans - Poultry
ABP with BFF Loans for standalone MSMEs BPs (up to 20 employees)
2No. MOUs: ABP supported by BFF 
Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Rice
1
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP supported by BFF 
Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Maize
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP supported by BFF 
Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Soy
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP supported by BFF 
Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Cashew
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP supported by BFF 
Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Shea
2.2
2No. MOUs: ABP supported by BFF 
Loans (standlone MSMEs) - Poultry
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
APEX BANK
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
817 014.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
316 400.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
3 029 800.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
516 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
889 670.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
235 066.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
272 200.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
272 200.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
80 466.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
110 000.00 
Actual
-
PROSPER-PCU
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
378 000.00 
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
18-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Jan-23
1-Feb-23
3-Feb-23
5-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
19-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-Mar-23
29-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
30-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
14-May-23
21-May-23
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-Mar-23
29-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
30-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
14-May-23
21-May-23
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-Mar-23
29-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
30-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
14-May-23
21-May-23
15-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
22-Mar-23
29-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
30-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
14-May-23
21-May-23
20-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-May-23
3-Jun-23
5-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
19-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
20-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-May-23
3-Jun-23
5-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
19-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
20-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-May-23
3-Jun-23
5-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
19-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
20-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-May-23
3-Jun-23
5-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
19-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
20-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-May-23
3-Jun-23
5-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
19-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
20-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27-May-23
3-Jun-23
5-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
19-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
1-Apr-23
22-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
4-May-23
8-May-23
817 014.00 
N/A
27-May-23
17-Jun-23
22-Jun-23
29-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
316 400.00 
N/A
27-May-23
17-Jun-23
22-Jun-23
29-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
3 029 800.00 
N/A
27-May-23
17-Jun-23
22-Jun-23
29-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
516 000.00 
N/A
27-May-23
17-Jun-23
22-Jun-23
29-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
889 670.00 
N/A
1-Aug-23
22-Aug-23
27-Aug-23
3-Sep-23
7-Sep-23
235 066.00 
N/A
1-Aug-23
22-Aug-23
27-Aug-23
3-Sep-23
7-Sep-23
272 200.00 
N/A
1-Aug-23
22-Aug-23
27-Aug-23
3-Sep-23
7-Sep-23
272 200.00 
N/A
1-Aug-23
22-Aug-23
27-Aug-23
3-Sep-23
7-Sep-23
80 466.00 
N/A
1-Aug-23
22-Aug-23
27-Aug-23
3-Sep-23
7-Sep-23
110 000.00 
N/A
1-Aug-23
22-Aug-23
27-Aug-23
3-Sep-23
7-Sep-23
378 000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 3 of 3
Printed on: 28/09/2021
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Submission of PreQual docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting/
Force Account
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
7
7
5
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
Selection Method
Submission of REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission Deadline
Submission of Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Submission of RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
SSS/
Selection (Design/PIM)
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
14
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
5
5
7
5
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
NOTE
1. Some procurement methods for low-value processes might require No Objections based on the Prior Review Thresholds. Where they do not require, No Objection number of days should be zero.
2. RFP: Request for Proposals: standard procurement document used for Services.
3. RCQ: Requests for Consultants Qualifications: Procurement document used for CQS and LCS. The RFP is used for all other procurement methods
4. Consulting services and Good/Works methods could either be used for Non-Consulting Services
5. All days are calendar days
Do not edit 
or delete 
these cells 
Validation List Source
Yes
Prior Review
Post Review
NS
IS
NCB
ICB
LIB
DC
Force Account
QCBS
FBS
LCS
QBS
CQS
ICS
SSS
Selection (Design/PIM)
1
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
No-objection
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting/
Force Account
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt/Bid Evaluation 
Report
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date Contract Award
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
30
45
45
30
45
45
7
30
45
45
30
45
45
21
45
70
70
45
70
70
30
45
70
70
45
70
70
14
30
45
45
30
45
45
14
30
45
45
30
45
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
21
21
14
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
3
3
3
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
14
14
14
14
14
14
7
14
21
21
14
21
21
7
14
14
14
14
14
14
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
14
14
14
14
14
14
4
14
14
14
14
14
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Selection Method
No-objection
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Proposal submission deadline
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of CER
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date Contract Award
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
SSS/
Selection (Design/PIM)
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
45
45
45
21
14
14
45
14
21
21
7
60
60
60
60
30
30
60
30
30
60
30
45
45
45
45
21
21
45
21
25
45
30
14
14
14
14
0
0
14
7
7
14
0
21
21
21
21
0
0
21
21
21
21
0
14
14
14
14
0
0
14
14
14
14
0
7
7
7
7
0
0
7
7
7
7
0
10
10
10
10
0
0
10
10
10
10
0
7
7
7
7
0
0
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
0
14
14
7
7
7
0
7
14
14
14
0
21
21
14
14
14
0
21
14
14
14
0
14
14
14
14
14
0
14
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
10
10
10
0
10
10
10
10
10
0
10
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
3
3
3
3
0
0
3
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
3
0
0
3
3
3
3
0
14
14
14
14
4
4
14
14
14
14
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Validation List Source
Yes
Prior Review
Post Review
NS
IS
NCB
ICB
LIB
DC
Force Account
QCBS
FBS
LCS
QBS
CQS
ICS
SSS
Selection (Design/PIM)
2
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Date Contract Award
Submission of Draft Contract
No-objection Date
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Approx 
Months/Days
1m 27d 
3m 3d 
3m 25d 
3m 25d 
5m 12d 
6m 4d 
6m 4d 
1m 27d 
3m 13d 
4m 16d 
4m 16d 
6m 3d 
6m 25d 
6m 25d 
Min
172
172
172
134
113
113
128
90
97
90
55
Totals
Max
Approx
Approx Months/Days
268
268
268
244
195
195
190
158
160
166
126
193
200
200
179
142
142
145
121
125
124
103
6m 11d 
6m 18d 
6m 18d 
5m 27d 
4m 21d 
4m 21d 
4m 24d 
3m 30d 
4m 4d 
4m 3d 
3m 12d 
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting/
Force Account
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
6
15
15
15
15
15
15
6
15
15
15
15
15
15
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Selection Method
Date Contract Award
Negotiations completed
Submission of Draft Contract and MoN
Date
No-objection Date
40
78
93
93
126
141
139
44
88
103
103
136
151
151
58
94
116
116
164
186
186
58
104
137
137
185
207
207
78
123
148
148
208
233
233
101
147
172
172
232
256
256
Date
Contract
Signature
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
SSS/
Selection (Design/PIM)
15
15
15
15
6
6
15
15
15
15
6
10
10
10
10
7
7
10
10
10
10
7
28
28
28
28
14
14
28
28
28
28
21
15
15
15
15
14
14
15
15
15
15
21
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
Validation List Source
Yes
Prior Review
Post Review
NS
IS
NCB
ICB
LIB
DC
Force Account
QCBS
FBS
LCS
QBS
CQS
ICS
SSS
Selection (Design/PIM)
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
3
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
PROSPER’s PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Map of the Project area ........................................................................................................................... 2 
Chapter 1: Introduction and background ................................................................................................ 3 
Chapter 2: PROSPER ............................................................................................................................... 13 
Chapter 3: Project components ............................................................................................................. 28 
Chapter 4: Project implementation structure and responsibilities ........................................................ 67 
Chapter 5: Project cost and financing .................................................................................................... 88 
Chapter 6: Financial management ......................................................................................................... 92 
Chapter 7: Procurement and contracting ............................................................................................ 114 
Annex 1: Terms of reference of key staff [Appendix to Chapter 4].......................................................... 0 
Annex 2. Logical framework ..................................................................................................................... 1 
Annex 3. Theory of Change Diagram ..................................................................................................... 10 
Annex 4a: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) ......................................................................... 11 
Annex 4b. Exit strategy and sustainability ............................................................................................. 20 
Annex 5. Institutional analysis ............................................................................................................... 28 
Annex 6: Institutional Aspects and Implementation Arrangements ...................................................... 39 
Annex 7. Marketing and selected commodities value chains ................................................................ 47 
Annex 8. Estimated single blended rate for apex Ghana ..................................................................... 125 
Annex 9. Rural finance environment in Ghana .................................................................................... 127 
Annex 10. Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households ................................... 141 
Annex 11a. Sample MOU between PROSPER and District Assembly ....................................................... 1 
Annex 11b. Sample MOU for the BRCs .................................................................................................. 17 
Annex 12. Sample MOU with APEX BANK .............................................................................................. 18 
Annex 13. Sample Business Plan ............................................................................................................ 19 
Annex 14. Targeting - Regional Information .......................................................................................... 20 
Annex 15.  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) ............................................... 21 
1 
Map of the Project area 
2 
Chapter 1: Introduction and background 
Economic context. Ghana is a lower-middle-income country with an estimated per capita GDP of 
USD 2,221 (2019). In 2019, GDP grew by 6.5%, up from 6.3% in 2018 – one of the highest rates in the 
world. Ghana’s economy is dependent on the export of a limited number of commodities such as gold, 
cocoa and oil, and remains vulnerable to commodity price shocks and climate change. In 2020, the 
inflation rate was 9.2%, unemployment 4.53% and the national debt 78% of GDP (64% in 2019).1 The 
impact of COVID-19 has resulted in economic slowdown and socioeconomic challenges that detailed 
below. 
Ghana’s performance towards the achievement of the SDGs is still lagging although some 
improvement is registered. The country is rated 114 among the 165 UN Member States on the 17 SDG 
in the 2021 SDSN Sustainable Development Report. The achievement of SDG 1 (No poverty) and SDG 2 
(Zero hunger) still faces important challenges, while performance on SDG 5 (Gender equality), SDG 6 
(Clean water and sanitation) and SDG 8 (Decent work and economic growth) is slightly improving. It is 
worth noting, however, that significant achievements were made on SDG 12 (Responsible 
consumption and production) and SDG 13 (Climate Action).2 Further, the Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture (MoFA) priorities are also in line with the 2003 Maputo Declaration, ratified by Ghana in 
2007. Key commitments of the declaration include increased investment finance in agriculture, 
reducing postharvest losses and boosting intra Africa trade.3 
Poverty and food insecurity. 23% of Ghana’s population are monetary poor and 8.2% live in extreme 
poverty.4 With multidimensional poverty (across the dimensions of education, health, and living 
standards), the proportion increases to 45.6%, especially in rural areas, where it is far higher (64.6%) 
than urban areas (27.0%).5 Wealth distribution is biased towards men: 62% of female-headed 
households fall into the two poorest quintiles – compared to 39% of male-headed households. The 
regions of the Northern Belt have the highest prevalence of poverty, up to 62% in the rural areas, and 
are the most vulnerable to climate change. The highest concentration of extreme poor (49%) lives in 
the Savannah region.6 Poverty, in the Middle Belt and other areas, is lower than in the North, but still 
considerable in some regions, such as in Oti (45%), Bono East (36%) and Bono (28%). While some of 
the regions have lower overall poverty levels, there are persistent pockets of poverty, food insecurity, 
undernourishment, malnutrition, and vulnerability to climate change. Ghana has a prevalence of 
undernourishment of 7%. Moderate or severe food insecurity stands at 49.6%. People with disabilities 
(PWD) represent 3% of the total population, with more than half concentrated in the Middle Belt and 
almost a quarter in the Northern Belt.7 
Agricultural and rural development context. Agriculture accounts for 21% of Ghana’s total GDP, 71% of 
employment in rural areas, and over 40% of export earnings. Agricultural imports are substantial, 
reaching GHS 13.2 billion in 2017 mainly through the imports of wheat, rice, chicken (frozen), milk and 
fish. Rain fed agriculture prevails in 96% of arable land. Around 85% of farming households own less 
than 10 ha and more than two-thirds own less than 2 ha of cultivable land. Factors contributing to 
rural poverty include underdeveloped agricultural technologies that damage the environment, poor 
access to financial services (especially among women) including green finance for adaptation and 
1 Statisa, 2021. 
2 SDSN Sustainable Development Report, Sustainable Development Solutions Network 2021. 
3 Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) For 2020-2023, Ministry of Food and Agriculture in Ghana, 
Programme Based Budget Estimates, 2020. 
4 Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018. 
5 Ghana’s Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Report, UNDP, 2020. The indicators that contribute most to 
multidimensional poverty in Ghana are lack of health insurance coverage, undernutrition, school lag and 
households with members without any educational qualification. 
6 Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018. 
7 2010 Population and Household Census. 
3 
mitigation, lack of secured market linkages, inadequate marketing infrastructure, post-harvest losses, 
lack of advisory services and cumulative environmental degradation. Only 37% of the rural population 
has access to accounts in formal financial Institutions. Rural institutions are generally weak with 
limited capacity to support small-scale production. These challenges are compounded by the negative 
effects of climate change, such as increasing dry spells and rising temperatures, and the degradation 
of arable land and critical infrastructure. 
Most of the Northern Belt falls within the Guinea Savannah Ecological Zone. Smallholders grow mainly 
soya, maize, sorghum, rice, millet and vegetables. Rice cultivation in the valley bottoms has great 
potential to reduce poverty levels. Dry season vegetable production is significant at irrigation sites. 
Productivity remains below potential due to lack of inputs, mechanization and extension outreach. 
Shea trees cover around 77,670 square kilometres in the Northern Belt and support the livelihood of 
approximately 900,000 rural women. Trade in shea butter has been rising with strong export demand. 
The Middle Belt falls within the Transition Ecological Zone. Smallholders grow mainly cassava, plantain, 
maize, yam and soya, with rice cultivation in valley bottoms. The cashew value chain (VC) generates 
income for about 350,000 smallholders. Cashews can grow on marginal lands, stabilize the soil in 
which it grows and serve as a carbon sink. However, production is less than 50% of potential with 
multiple constraints including difficulty in accessing improved planting materials and farm inputs, 
inadequate extension services, access to credit, lack of effective pricing and marketing mechanisms, 
bush fires, loss of soil nutrients and inadequate soil moisture. 
Vegetables such as tomato, pepper, okra, garden eggs and cabbage are grown mostly under rainfed 
conditions as backyard production for subsistence and commercial purposes in both the Northern and 
Middle Belts. Availability is highly seasonal, peaking from June-September. Productivity is usually less 
than 50% of potential due to traditional cultivation practices, the lack of irrigation systems, limited use 
of improved inputs and high post-harvest losses. The livestock sector is an important component of 
Ghana’s agriculture. In 2019, the sector contributed about 13.3% of agricultural GDP in direct products 
and had a growth rate of 5.4%, (SRID, 2020). Most rural households (41.5%) keep some form of 
livestock as an adjunct to crop farming. Small and large ruminants are kept as a form of security and 
not as a source of protein, so the direct contribution to household food and nutrition security is low. 
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in GDP growth of 1.1% in 2020 down from the pr-pandemic level of 
4.8% in 2020. Petroleum receipts, import duties and other tax revenues were affected negatively, 
reducing the fiscal space for the GoG. 77.4% of households in Ghana have experienced declines in 
income. Reduced remittances to rural areas contributed to food insecurity. The country’s average 
monthly food inflation recorded an increase from 8.4% in March 2020 to 13.7% in July 2020. While 
food prices continued to rise into 2021, the overall economic crisis eased and growth is projected to 
increase to 4.0% in 2021 and 4.1% in 2022. 
To mitigate the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, the GoG took measures including: the Coronavirus 
Alleviation Programme (CAP), starting with a USD 219 million contribution from the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF); a reduction in the inter-bank policy rate from 15.5% to 14% by the Central Bank of 
Ghana; and lowering reserve requirements from 10% to 8% to increase credit availability and 
affordability. MoFA launched an Agricultural Response Plan increasing the supply of subsidized seeds 
and fertilizers to poor smallholders. IFAD’s Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems 
Exposed to COVID 19 (ESRF) supported the GoG efforts in this area. Ghana’s economy showed signs of 
recovery in the second half of 2020 and is projected to grow by 4.2% in 2021 and 5.3% in 2022. 
Volatile commodity prices uncertainty over the COVID-19 pandemic still present downside risks.8 
National strategies, policies and lead institutions. The Medium-Term National Development Policy 
Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021) recognizes the growth of agriculture as the driving force for rural 
development and transformation. The Ghana Agricultural Development Plan (GADP) focuses on the 
development of the agricultural sector from 2018 to 2021 through modernization and transformation. 
MoFA has increased support to the production of field crops through the Planting for Foods and Jobs 
8 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/ghana/overview. 
4 
(PFJ) initiative for farmers in the Northern and Middle Belts with 2-3 acres land to access improved 
seeds and fertilizers, with a 50% subsidy, extension services and marketing opportunities. GoG is 
implementing the PERD (2019-2023) programme for job creation and export diversification through 
tree-crops and established the Tree Crops Development Authority. MoFA chairs the Agricultural Sector 
Working Group (ASWG) comprising GoG and development partners including IFAD to ensure 
coordination and policy dialogue. 
The One District One Factory (1D1F) programme led by the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI) aims 
at establishing at least one medium-to-large-scale industrial enterprise in every district to create 
quality jobs and achieve a balanced spread of industries. The programme established 104 companies 
so far, of which 68 were existing companies and 36 newly built, employing 150,975 people) As part of 
1D1F, the IFAD-supported Rural Enterprises Programme (REP) established 58 ENABLE Youth factories 
as a vehicle for employment creation for tertiary level graduates. In 2020, an MSME and 
Entrepreneurship Policy was approved, which led to the transformation of the NBSSI into the Ghana 
Enterprises Agency (GEA). A network of 166 Business Advisory Centres (BACs) and 57 Business 
Resource Centres (BRCs) has been established across the country under an arrangement between 
REP, GEA and participating District Assemblies, to provide high-value business development services to 
the business community. 
Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities 
Gender. Women constitute 58% of the rural labour force. Despite Ghana ranking second in the 
ECOWAS Gender Inequality Index, the country is ranked 117 out of 156 countries in the WEF Global 
Gender Gap Report. Traditional culture and entrenched gender inequality limit women’s access to 
education, healthcare, good nutrition, credit, extension services, new technologies, inputs and output 
markets, and participation in the public sphere and community decision-making. Female-headed 
households have less access to land for farming and are more likely to be smallholders (87% compared 
with 60% of male-headed households). GoG adopted the National Gender Policy (2015) to mainstream 
gender, women‘s empowerment and social protection concerns into national development processes, 
natural resources and agriculture. A Gender and Agricultural Development Strategy (GAD II) was 
developed in 2015 by the MoFA Women in Agriculture. 
Youth. The country has a youth bulge (15-35 years of age9) with 57% of the total population being 
below the age of 25. The rural community comprises 56% youth compared to 44% in urban contexts. 
Youth contribute to family labour for agricultural production and engage in other activities such as 
processing, warehousing and transportation, but are unable to pursue farming independently due to 
limited access to land, credit, quality inputs and sustainable profitable output markets. Due to limited 
access to jobs, inadequate training and illiteracy, youth unemployment and underemployment in 
Ghana reached 12% and 50% respectively by 2020, resulting in growing youth migration from rural 
areas to urban centres.10 Initiatives to provide jobs, capacity-building and opportunities for youth 
include: the MNDPF (2018-2021); the PFJ in agriculture and related sectors; the Initiative for 
Sustainability, Stability and Security (3S) under the IFAD managed Rural Resilience Trust fund (focused 
on the Northern Belt); the IFAD-supported REP; and the Youth Agripreneurship Development 
Programme, run jointly by AGRA and Nestle. Despite these initiatives from GoG and development 
partners, the outreach to youth from semi-subsistence smallholder families remains limited. 
People with Disabilities. Statistically, PWD make up 3% of the population. Disability in Ghana is 
considered both a human rights concern and a developmental issue due to its strong links to 
exclusion, discrimination and poverty. In 2006, Parliament passed the Persons with Disability Act, 2006 
(Act 715) protecting the rights of PWDs and guaranteeing the rights to education, healthcare, 
9 The National Youth Policy in Ghana (2010). 
10 Youth Employment Programmes in Ghana: Options for Effective Policy Making and Implementation, World 
Bank, 2020. 
5 
employment and movement of PWDs. The Act established the National Council on Persons with 
Disability charged with the responsibility of proposing and evolving policies and strategies to enable 
PWDs to integrate and participate fully in national development. However, despite efforts being made 
to educate the public, PWDs are still stigmatized, discriminated against and socially excluded. There is 
strong correlation between disability and poverty. Poor health, limited schooling and employment 
opportunities impact negatively on the socioeconomic status of affected households. Households with 
disabled members may be vulnerable to poverty due to extra costs of living with a disability. 
Nutrition. Ghana is 'on course' to meet two targets for Maternal, Infant and Young Child Nutrition 
(MIYCN) reducing anaemia among women of reproductive age (46.4% of women aged 15 to 49 years 
are still affected) and achieving the low-birth-weight target (14.2% of infants have a low weight at 
birth). No progress has been made towards achieving the exclusive breastfeeding target, with just 
42.9% of infants aged 0-5 months exclusively breastfed. Ghana is 'on course' to meet the target for 
stunting (chronic undernutrition), with 17.5% of children under 5-years affected but the proportion 
rises to 33% in the Northern Region. Some progress has been made towards achieving the target for 
wasting (acute undernutrition) but 6.8% of children under 5-years are still affected. The prevalence of 
overweight children under 5-years is 1.4% and the country is 'on course' to prevent the figure from 
increasing.11 Ghana has shown limited progress towards achieving the diet-related non-communicable 
disease (NCD) targets. However, the country has shown no progress towards achieving the target for 
obesity, with an estimated 16.6% of adult women and 4.5% of adult men living with obesity. Diabetes 
is estimated to affect 6.6% of adult women and 6.4% of adult men. The diet mainly on starchy roots, 
fruit and cereals. Dietary diversity remains low with limited intake of protein and a general reluctance 
to consume fruits and vegetables, causing stunting in preschool-aged children and anaemia amongst 
pregnant women. A long-term Food and Nutrition Security (FNS) Strategy has been developed and 
used to review the National Nutrition Policy (NNP). 
The NNP aims to address nutrition-related challenges of feeding practices for infants and young 
children, nutrition among women of reproductive age and the promotion of nutritionally adequate 
safe diets. Ghana joined the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement in 2011 and has established 
national, regional and district level multi-sectoral nutrition coordination mechanisms. Ghana’s multi-
stakeholder platform (MSP), the Nutrition Cross-Sectoral Planning Group (NCSPG), continues to 
expand, bringing together ten sectors; all five Northern regions have nutrition MSPs. 
Climate and environment. Climate change is projected to affect vital water resources, energy supplies, 
crop production and food security, with the Northern Belt the most vulnerable. Ghana is experiencing 
increased extreme weather conditions with higher incidences and prolonged periods of flooding and 
droughts. The country’s dependence on the production of crops that are sensitive to climate change 
(cassava, cocoa, shea) and lack of agricultural diversification exacerbate the vulnerability. Energy 
production meets demand, but rural communities continue to rely on fuelwood, resulting in forest 
depletion estimated at 2% loss per annum. Rural credit is a crucial factor in building climate resilience 
and improving productivity and lack of access remains a key constraint for producers and MSMEs, 
particularly in COVID-19 recovery efforts and for rural women and youth. Agriculture is estimated to 
be the second largest contributor (10.05 MtCO2e) to Ghana’s greenhouse gas emissions after the 
energy sector (15.02 MtCO2e). Ghana is committed to implementing its National Climate Adaptation 
Policy, as highlighted in the National Climate Change Communication to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC) to the Paris Agreement. 
The development challenge and prognosis. The underlying issue flagged is the persistence of 
intractable poverty in many rural communities dependent on agriculture in the drier Northern parts of 
the country. The prevailing low input-low output rainfed farming systems in the Northern and Middle 
Belts are suboptimal and, with a long history of over-exploitation, the economic carrying capacity of 
11 https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/africa/western-africa/ghana/. 
6 
the heavily depleted productive NR base is declining whilst the number of dependents is increasing. 
The negative effects of rapid climate change are making bad conditions worse. The remedy is to uplift 
rural economies by transforming the bedrock of small-scale farming from predominantly subsistence 
to financially and environmentally sustainable systems tied into functioning markets. This rationale 
focuses on both the supply side – the scale and technical transformation of production – and a marked 
increase in real demand for the produce, whilst ensuring that the most vulnerable people are not left 
behind in poverty. 
For the producers, individually and in groups, the imperative is the technical and organisational skills 
needed to progress to climate-resilient “farming as a profitable business” and to transition to 
agricultural and land management practices that lower emissions and reverse the depletion of the NR 
base (soil, water and trees), both on- and off-farm. A key mindset change for producers is to engage 
proactively with other private sector operators to build collaborations that are mutually beneficial and 
with balanced bargaining power. To this end, the critical linkage in the VC is the first, that between 
producers and agribusinesses. 
On the demand side, the agricultural market prospects in the Northern and Middle Belts are 
promising, with strong global demand for maize, shea and cashew and rapidly increasing domestic 
demand and import substitution possibilities for rice, soya and poultry. GoG is investing heavily in the 
scale and capacity of “upstream” VC actors through 1D1F and other programmes. However, the mass 
of rural producers is not able to capitalise on the growth in demand, being effectively outside the 
mainstream economy. The development challenge for PROSPER is to broaden, deepen and extend the 
reach of these commodity VCs to engage with significant numbers of primary producer groups. The 
resulting “demand pull” is much stronger than “supply push” in driving local economic growth. The 
increased volume of business is expected to create opportunities for enterprises in agro-processing 
and value addition at all scales, fuel employment and incomes within local economies through a 
multiplier effect, and thereby raise the food security and nutrition security of whole communities in 
the context of the changing climate. 
PROSPER will focus on climate-sensitive and nutrition-sensitive value chains, and will include training 
and awareness-raising activities promoting behavioural changes. The project will also introduce 
matching grants activities devoted to nutrition related activities and partner with nutritionists from 
the Ministry of Health for capacity-building, training on food preparation and consumption and so 
forth. 
IFAD’s comparative advantage. The Fund has a wealth of technical expertise to offer in addressing 
intractable rural poverty combined with the capacity to mobilise resources at a scale that can make a 
lasting impact on the lives of vulnerable people. IFAD has a strong record in Ghana in working with 
poor rural communities in the food and agriculture sector in the Northern and Middle Belts. A 
portfolio of IFAD funded projects has focused on various closely related aspects relevant to the design 
of PROSPER. Roots and Tubers Improvement & Marketing Programme (RTIMP) took an integrated 
commodity chain approach. Northern Rural Growth Programme (NRGP) combined commodity chain 
and rural infrastructure development with access to financial services. Rural and Agricultural Finance 
Programme (RAFIP) followed by Rural Financial Services Project (RFSP) have built up the microfinance 
subsector. Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (GASIP) is concentrated on agribusiness 
linkages and VC development, with measures to promote climate change resilience. Rural Enterprises 
Programme (REP) seeks to promote rural business, many of which are based on agriculture and NRs. 
The Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development Project (AAFORD) focuses on 
smallholder access to formal credit. Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems exposed 
to COVID 19 (ESRF) was a rapid response to support smallholders coping with the pandemic. 
PROSPER will scale up and build on the broad and deep experience, lessons learned, fruitful 
partnerships and cumulative development achievements of the IFAD projects in Ghana. Corporate 
knowledge of relevance to the new initiative includes: capacity of Rural Institutions (RIs) and MSMEs; 
resilience building and the sustainable use of NRs; capacity of extension services to support VC 
7 
producers and actors; creation of market linkages; capacity of BACs and BRCs to provide training to RIs 
and MSMEs; affordable loans in a market segment where FIs do not operate; partnerships with Apex 
Bank and other FIs to promote inclusive rural financial services; innovative cashless credit model12; 
and one-time Matching Grants (MGs) for beneficiary groups ensuring subsequent access to affordable 
credit to sustain their marketing partnerships. 
Concessional resources for green finance are beneficial in supporting smallholder producers and 
processors to adopt climate resilient agricultural and agribusiness practices. With its first successful 
experience in Niger, the Inclusive Green Financing for Low Emission and Climate Resilient Agriculture 
(IGREENFIN) initiative is stimulating a paradigm shift within the country’s financial system. IFAD is 
expanding this business model in thirteen countries of the Great Green Wall Initiative area, including 
Ghana. It will support local financial institutions, one in each country, in setting up green credit lines to 
finance green agricultural investments and align their portfolio towards meeting Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDC) targets in the Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) 
sector. PROSPER will leverage IGREENFIN to promote green investments by smallholder farmers and 
related enterprises. 
Lessons Learned 
The foregoing development interventions have yielded a range of pertinent lessons for the design of 
PROSPER, including the following. 
  Rural institution capacity building (training and skills transfer) is a priority from the outset to 
support enduring agribusiness partnerships and the creation of internal capital through 
savings. Many of the RIs supported by RTIMP, NRGP and GASIP were assessed as institutionally 
weak at completion, (lacking financial resources or bank linkages and requiring capacity 
support). For example, in NRGP, only 1,625 of the 8,127 farmer-based organisations 
established (20%) were assessed to be functional and only 4% were considered to be a Mature 
Cooperative. Following this lesson, PROSPER will provide relevant training and capacity 
building of sufficient quality to enable beneficiaries to enter and progress within the VCs. 
  RI/MSME internal financial assets, such as the creation of internal capital from savings 
mobilisation and retained earnings, is a necessary condition for RIs and MSMEs to engage with 
VCs. Many existing groups remain chronically undercapitalised as they lack the culture, 
orientation or assets to retain a part of current profits to finance inputs for the following year. 
Ghana has had success in the establishment of member-based savings common interest 
groups. Variations of the Village Saving and Loan Association model have proved effective in a 
group setting, particularly for women and PROSPER will build on this experience. 
  RI integration in value chains to facilitate farmers’ access to markets. PROSPER will learn from 
and build on the experience of previous projects with the common aim of integrating farmers 
into VCs and facilitating their access to markets. The District Value Chain Committees model of 
NRGP will be supported as a potentially valuable discussion medium for producers and other 
VC actors in each district. The Cluster Driver Approach of GASIP and the Anchor Agribusiness 
concept piloted under the PFJ initiative are reflected in the PROSPER design with the creation 
and expansion of stable agribusinesses linking medium-scale entrepreneurs with multiple 
smallholder producer groups. PROSPER will support market linkages between these initiatives 
and the Ghana Commodity Exchange (GCX).13 This is a big step up from enhanced subsistence 
farming. 
  Need to combine production, marketing and credit support to ensure maximum returns to 
developing producer groups. While the cashless credit model of NRGP was a successful 
innovation, the initiative was not integrated with marketing support. A total of 20,000 
households benefitted from credit linkages to increase production, but only half participated 
12 Eligible farmers receive inputs and services from vendors and providers; rural banks pay the sellers; after 
harvest and sale of the produce, farmers repay the loan. 
13 https://gcx.com.gh/. 
8 
in marketing groups and many farmers had to revert to traditional and less profitable 
marketing practices after one season, affecting their creditworthiness. The District Stakeholder 
Fora (DSF) developed under RTIMP were organized around supply chain leaders and facilitated 
business linkages for smallholders, but no formal credit linkages were established. GASIP 
demonstrated excellent integration between production support and marketing linkages for 
beneficiaries but was less successful in developing credit linkages for farmers already linked to 
the market. Consequently, PROSPER will build up the capacities of FIs both to increase the 
quantity, quality and profitability of production and to link into markets, negotiate prices and 
bargain for better services. The project is focused on the establishment of enduring contracts 
between producers and agribusinesses. 
  Need to develop functional capacity of PFIs through capacity building. The bottlenecks in 
extending access to finance include the risk-averse attitude of PFIs, limited outreach, lack of 
liquidity in rural banks, high interest rates and inadequate capacity for monitoring. The 
experience from credit lines for agricultural VCs and rural MSMEs financing since 2005 shows 
that PFIs will not be financially stable unless credit is backed by capacity building to undertake 
properly due diligence on loan requests and access to offtaker markets in long-lasting 
agreements with producers, loan and risk management, pragmatic scheduling of loan 
repayments linked to borrower business cash flows and the monitoring and recovery in full of 
due loans so that funds revolve. The project will collaborate with AAFORD to provide such PFI 
capacity building with adequate TA on financial literacy, productivity enhancement and 
responsible borrowing by servicing loans due. Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing Agricultural 
Lending (GIRSAL) has designed a special training programme for banks and PROSPER will 
encourage all participating PFIs to enrol in the training. 
  Affordable financing modalities for RIs/MSMEs to ensure access to finance for smallholders. 
Lack of access to finance at affordable interest rates is a constant issue for smallholders 
wanting to progress. In NRGP’s innovative cashless credit model, financial institutions provided 
USD 4,861,625 worth of credit from their own funds to 21,349 smallholders, but necessarily at 
market interest rates which proved unsustainable for the borrowers. Concessional lines of 
credit have been recognised as an important tool of support to smallholder farmers in Ghana, 
who have difficulty accessing formal market-priced financial services. In July 2021, thirteen key 
lines of credits (launched since 2010) were operational for agricultural value chain and rural 
SMEs financing. However the supply of funds at affordable on-lending rates remains below the 
volume needed to build the capacity of the target group to address concerns. None of the 
above is factoring into consideration adaptation to climate risks. Provision of a line of credit for 
climate mitigation as well as adaptation will be a forward leap in Ghana’s efforts to meet its 
Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement. PROSPER will facilitate the 
development of a blended agricultural refinancing facility to provide FIs with additional 
resources to offer affordable credit to poor and very poor producers. The project will also 
contribute to mitigating the inherent financial risks associated with lending to smallholders 
facing escalating climate change by promoting linkages between (i) PFIs and GIRSAL’s partial 
credit guarantee scheme, and (ii) producers and the smallholder agricultural insurance scheme 
at GAIP. The GCF lines of credit are designed to counter such risks and invest in mitigation and 
adaptation actions. PROSPER will thus support interest rate flexibility to achieve sustainability 
for PFIs while ensuring profitability and positive livelihood changes to its beneficiaries.14 
  One-off Matching Grants. Experience reveals that Matching Grants (MGs) for financing capital 
investments and (mainly) variable costs such as inputs have delivered mixed results in IFAD-
supported projects in Ghana. The GASIP one-off MG support for seasonal inputs produced 
14 The new inclusive rural finance policy (IRF) passed by IFAD’s EB on 14 September 2021 underscores the 
need to “improve use of subsidies to foster long term sustainable outcomes of IRF activities and to attract 
investment capital”. In lieu of market-priced on-lending interest rates, IRF 2021 stipulates, “IFAD will employ 
asset subsidies, matching grants, production and market access TA, value chain development, public and 
private infrastructure development, and other interventions to help develop sustainable climate IRF markets in 
developing member states”. 
9 
encouraging short-term results, particularly for maize and soybean, but revealed the need to 
support beneficiaries over more than a single cropping cycle to ensure mastery of the 
technical capacity and skills acquired, which would undermine IFAD’s policy to use a MG as a 
one-off support. . The current context and GoG practice warrants the use of matching grants 
for both working and investment capital. This approach is delivering excellent results in the 
WCA region, for example; in Nigeria with VCDP. PROSPER will implement a phased financing 
protocol and sequencing, starting with mobilizing savings for securing a beneficiary 
contribution. 
  Climate change adaptation and mitigation measures have high levels of adoption when 
included in production packages linked to markets and financial instruments. PROSPER will 
integrate NRM and climate resilient agricultural practices into all interventions and build 
explicit green criteria into business plans, in particular the larger schemes considered for the 
Finance Facility funding. 
  Vulnerable beneficiary targeting. PROSPER is committed to identifying the poorest people 
living in very poor communities, including specific vulnerable groups: women, youth 
(18-35 years) and PWD. The cumulative experience of projects suggests that the effectiveness 
of direct targeting is increased greatly by authentic participatory consultations. Special 
attention must be paid to the constraints on smallholder farming, particularly women and 
youth access financial institutions. 
Theory of Change 
Developmental challenges. The main development challenges in the project area are high levels of 
rural poverty, youth and women unemployment, food insecurity, malnutrition in all forms, climate 
change and accelerating environmental degradation. Most poor farmers are engaged in low input-low 
output production in the small-scale rainfed field-crop sector, which is neither financially nor 
environmentally sustainable. In the absence of linkages to VCs, marketing tends to be haphazard even 
in good years. There are significant numbers of vulnerable people – women, youth and PWD –
excluded from the rural agricultural economy. 
These challenges are compounded by accelerating NR scarcity and degradation exacerbated by 
climate change and a growing rural population. Traditional farming systems and diminishing access to 
energy in rural areas leads to soil erosion, deforestation and loss of command over water; the 
productive land becomes progressively less fertile and yields decrease. These factors expose rural 
livelihoods to external shocks, limiting the ability of households to meet their basic needs. The lack of 
access to healthy and diversified diets leads to compromised diets, particularly for pregnant/lactating 
women and children under two years. 
On the demand side, VCs are suboptimal with progressively less market offtake in remote areas. 
Farmers sell any surplus produce in local markets or to traders and middlemen straight after harvest 
when prices are low. In these circumstances, there are few opportunities for individual households 
and whole communities to accumulate the human, physical and financial resources needed to 
modernize production and progress from subsistence. Women and youth are most affected due to 
many factors including socio-cultural exclusion. The absence of public investment over many years has 
resulted in a lack of basic infrastructure, such as reliable potable water supplies, which places 
constraints on both livelihoods and living standards. 
Opportunities. PROSPER will tackle these formidable challenges with a market approach. On the supply 
side, the project will invest not only in the technical capabilities of primary producers and processors 
but also in the organisational and business skills required to enter lasting commercial arrangements. 
Climate change has drawn attention to the cumulative depletion of the NR base, with much formerly 
productive land and forest already beyond the point of no return. The aim of the work with farmers 
will be to increase productivity and profitability rather than short-term production, in ways that slow 
and then reverse the rapid deterioration of the productive land, both on- and off-farm. Advice and 
demonstrations of climate-resilient farming practices such Conservation Agriculture will be supported 
10 
by purposeful remediation works in the wider landscape after years of neglect. The key success factor 
in this regard is progress towards proactive NR management arrangements, with acceptance of 
community responsibility for the fragile land. Environmental sustainability is a necessary condition for 
successful “farming as a business”. Even limited additional profit coming into a poor community can 
trigger growth in the local economy, including opportunities for new enterprises to provide support 
services to the farmers. This requires access to rural climate finance to incentivize the sector to adopt 
best adaptation and mitigation practices. 
The project recognises fully that stimulating field and tree crop production alone, however well the 
agronomy is adjusted to the environment, will not benefit the target population without a substantial 
increase in the real demand for the produce, in terms of volume, prices that at least cover production 
costs and access to the multi-step markets. The argument hinges on the efficacy of demand pull rather 
than supply push. PROSPER takes a VC approach for the selected commodities, in which the 
smallholders are linked into the existing private sector VCs. The key link for a primary producer group 
is a contract arrangement with an agribusiness or aggregator. PROSPER is oriented to facilitate such 
private sector arrangements by guiding and coaching the emergent RIs and MSMEs, developing 
business plans as appropriate for groups with differing levels of maturity, engaging with larger-scale 
VC actors (“drivers”) and arranging access to affordable financial services as needed. These 
mainstream business interventions are complemented with measures to include marginalised and 
vulnerable people and to invest in shared public socioeconomic infrastructure to improve the living 
conditions of whole communities. 
Success with the growth in agricultural production in the framework of rapidly expanded value chains 
will drive up the incomes of the whole economy in the target rural communities and stimulate local 
demand for increased and additional support services both in the sector and in the wider population. 
It is this secondary demand that will provide opportunities for youth to escape from the under- and 
unemployment prevalent in the project area. Major constraints regard the lack of opportunities in the 
rural setting and the desire to migrate to urban areas; working in agriculture is not considered 
attractive or remunerative enough. PROSPER is designed to help youth along an authentic pathway 
from poverty by providing general training on running a business, helpingp micro-enterprises of all 
types (related to the six PROSPER value chains) and linking the emergent MSMEs to affordable finance. 
The new enterprises then contribute themselves to the recovery of the local economy.  
PROSPER will promote women’s participation and empowerment by addressing barriers prevalent in 
the geographical context of the project. Major constraints are represented by low level of education 
among poor women, already existing workload, and lack of willingness of spouses and other family 
members to support full participation of women in project activities. PROSPER will mitigate these 
constraints by increased participation in training (e.g. Financial Literacy) and promotion of educational 
and income generation activities; labour - saving and women-friendly technologies to address 
workload; community awareness on gender equality as a vehicle for prosperity and the introduction of 
GALS approach. PROSPER will advocate for different male role models by encouraging men to support 
women’s participation through guarantee of land and other resources required. Gender targeting in 
PROSPER will include the inclusion of young women (youth) and women with disabilities (PWDs). 
Training and meetings with PWDs will be organized in close-by locations in the communities, in 
sensitive teaching and learning environments. To cater to the special needs of the PWDs with visual, 
hearing, physical and speech impairments, PROSPER will train them in braille, sign and audio 
languages. 
In PROSPER nutrition and health will be promoted through several pathways, including selection of 
value chains that are climate and nutrition-sensitive or that will make a high contribution to nutrition; 
food conservation, post-harvest processing and value addition; promotion of vegetable gardens; and 
nutrition education. Specific trainings and a Social Behaviour and Communication Strategy (SBCC) 
strategy will be developed to promote non-discriminatory intra-household food distribution, adequate 
diets for adolescent girls, consumption of diversified diets, food hygiene and safety, and improved 
11 
WASH practices as well as the discrimination of negative socio-cultural habits like teenage marriages 
and early pregnancies resulting in low-birth weight babies as major risk factors for malnutrition. 
12 
Chapter 2: PROSPER 
Project goal and objectives 
The PROSPER Project Development Objective is: Strengthen the integration, climate resilience and 
environmental sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority VCs in the Northern and Middle 
Ecological Belts taking advantage of the increased demand created by the national agro-processing 
strategy. PROSPER aims to provide a framework for the long-term engagement with and financing for 
private sector-led, pro-poor agricultural VC development tailored to the specific needs and potential 
of small-scale producers and operators in targeted regions of Ghana. 
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, PROSPER qualifies as: 
☒ Climate finance: PROSPER will integrate adaptation and mitigation measures in the value chain 
packages, supported by special financial mechanisms promoted by the project. 
☒ Nutrition sensitive: PROSPER will select nutrition sensitive VCs, increase production of highly 
nutritious crops and animal sourced foods, promote food conservation, post-harvest processing and 
value addition, and promote better dietary patterns by providing nutrition education and SBCC(SBCC). 
☒ Youth sensitive: PROSPER will target male and female youth (each group with a minimum of 50% 
eligible youth), adding their access to land as a precondition for community participation in the 
project. PROSPER will support the establishment of youth-led enterprises along the selected VCs and 
will provide targeted financial inclusion, skills development and capacity building. 
Project area and geographical targeting 
Geographical targeting. The geographical targeting strategy of PROSPER considers (i) high rural 
population, (ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food and nutrition insecurity, (iv) strong 
concentration of female and male youth and (v) presence of economic opportunities relevant to the 
project, impact of climate change and, natural resources degradation. 
The geographic area of intervention extends to eight regions in the drier North of the country and the 
middle belt which is characterized to have significant challenges. The five regions in the Northern Belt 
are Upper West, Upper East, North East, Savannah and Northern, all with a high poverty head count 
up to 92% (Wa West District, Upper West). The three regions in the Middle Belt are Bono East, Bono 
and Oti. Although, on average, less poverty stricken than the Northern Belt, the Middle Belt has 
pockets with poverty head counts and peaks up to 78% (Kintampo South District, Bono East), 78% 
(Banda District, Bono) and 67% (Kadjebi District, Oti). 
Phased approach. Selection of all eight proposed PROSPER regions is based on exhaustive analysis of 
available poverty, food insecurity and socioeconomic data in the Northern and Middle Belts. The plan 
is to start with three of the poorest regions to conduct the various project-wide inception activities 
without over-extending Government and management resources and to align with the pattern of 
project financing.  
The project will start implementation in three adjacent regions in the Northern Belt (Calibration 
Phase): Northern, Upper West and either Savannah or North East. The original concept envisaged this 
cautious approach, with all project activities tried from inception and scaled up when modalities are 
shown to be effective. The project structure is flexible and phasing can and should be adjusted in the 
light of experience gained in the first years, particularly with lessons learned from piloting the 
innovative Blended Finance Facility (BFF). 
The project will be scaled up to the remaining five target regions (Replication and Scalability Phase), by 
the middle of the third year of implementation according to four trigger conditions:  
(i) 
(ii) 
filling the financing gap (currently estimated at USD 22,7 million), in part or in full from 
IFAD-12 (IFAD);  
Government meeting its PROSPER cofinancing commitments during the Calibration Phase 
(GoG);  
13 
(iii) 
(iv) 
MoUs with implementing partners established and progressing well (PROSPER 
management); and  
Satisfactory arrangements in place with regard to the operation of the Matching Grants 
and Blended Finance Facility (PROSPER management).  
If one or more of the above conditions are not met, this could lead to restructuring of the project or 
any other possible remedies to address underlying issues through the mechanism of an early mid-term 
review. Examples of measures that could be taken for restructuring include reducing the size of the 
project, reconfiguring implementation arrangements to address performance shortfalls, reducing the 
scope of components facing challenges and increasing the size of those that are performing better, 
and /or partial cancellation.  
It is estimated that PROSPER will be active in any target district for about four years to provide the 
core project support. 
Food security. Food insecurity prevalence as reported by the CFVSA 2020 and based on the Food 
Consumption Score is not necessarily corresponding to the poverty head count. However, the latest 
food security and nutrition monitoring updates of WFP (June 2020) show high level of food insecurity 
(moderately and severe) in the target regions, including the ten worst-off districts nationwide in terms 
of food insecure households: Upper East (5), Northern (3), Upper West (1) and North East (1). Main 
barriers to food security are food availability and accessibility. This affects access to micronutrients, 
especially for women and children. 
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) is an indicator for the adequacy of the diet in a 
household. The Ghana Micronutrient Survey (2017) reports that the proportion of women (15-49 
years) not meeting the MDDW score ranged from 37.9% to 42.4% in the target regions, with a high 
national average of 40.2%. 
There are significant regional disparities concerning nutrition security in Ghana. The Northern region is 
worse off when it comes to rural (extreme) poverty, rural child stunting (chronic undernutrition) and 
the prevalence of anaemia among women and children while the middle belt comes second. The 
national child wasting (acute undernutrition) rate stands at 7%, with the highest prevalence reported 
for Northern Ghana (10.9%). The presence of PWD has also regional differences. The prevalence of 
PWDs by district ranges from 3.0% to 8.3% in the Northern Zone and from 7.3% to 12.4% in the 
Middle Belt. 
Annex 14 provides more information regarding the evaluation of the different considerations in 
selecting the regions. 
Target groups and targeting strategy 
PROSPER will benefit approximately 100,000 beneficiaries, with the targeted participation of 40,000 
women, 60,000 men, 30,000 youth, and 5,000 PWD. PROSPER’s primary target groups will be the 
poorest, the poor and the vulnerable people and those who have little access to assets and 
opportunities due to social exclusion and marginalization. 
The poorest are the ones with not more than 1 ha cultivable land or are landless. These are mainly the 
poorest households and vulnerable groups including women, unemployed female and male youth 
between 18-35 years, and persons with disability.  
The poor households comprise of smallholders with less than 2 ha cultivable land whose livelihood 
comprise smallholders whose livelihoods are more vulnerable to natural resource degradation and 
climate change risks. Also in this group the support is focussed on women, female and male youth and 
people with disability who are economic active. 
Market-oriented farmers with 2 to 10 ha cultivable land are the third target group benefitting from 
the project support. 
14 
Larger market oriented- farming households with more than 10 ha arable land and larger private 
sector entities may only participate in project activities such as capacity-building if they offer 
employment or business opportunities to the targeted smallholder and poorest households.  
Targets for saving mobilization interventions under component 1: ‘Development of Rural Institutions 
and Social Infrastructure’ are 100,000 beneficiaries (40,000 women, 60,000 men, 30,000 youth and 
5.000 PWD). Those beneficiaries will be selected primarily among existing Rural Institutions (RIs) and 
MSMEs whenever they exist and meet the targeting criteria; otherwise, the project will foster their 
formation. The project will reach out to the poorest groups who are non-members of RIs/MSMEs. 
Efforts will be made to integrate them in RIs/MSMEs. It is estimated that 90% of project beneficiaries 
will be members of RIs while 10% will be affiliated to MSMEs. The above number of beneficiaries is 
assumed to correspond to 70,000 HHs. 
It is expected that 50% of total beneficiaries (comprising 20,000 women, 30,000 men, 15,000 youth, 
3,000 PWDs) will successfully complete the organisational and other relevant training, graduate  from 
tier 1 to tier 2 with regard to the financial literacy and saving mobilisation, start utilizing improved 
financial arrangements within their institutions and enterprises and start working towards meeting the 
saving targets. Those will be called to participate in efforts to create market linkages, trained on 
business planning, supported to develop them and called to submit their business plans for funding. 
70% of those business plans will become eligible for the matching grants / BFF loans after successful 
submission of BPs. 
Table 1 -- Total Beneficiaries – Component 1 and 2 
Total Blended Finance Facility 
Total 
23,965 
Women 
11,476 
Men 
12,219 
Total Matching Grant (excl. livelihood grants) 
20,436 
11,718 
8,718 
Youth 
7,362 
PWD 
1,198 
8,482 
2,044 
Total target from MG and BFF (assume 30% from MG scheme graduate to benefit from BFF)  
38,315 
18,37917.485  13,412 
20,000 
2,633 
Total benefiting from business plan training 
51,536 
24,978 
26,558 
18,147 
3,599 
Total benefiting from Component 1 – capacity building and infrastructure 
108,072 
36,295 
49,956 
53,116 
7,199 
Table 2 -- Target groups: Matching Grant and Blended Finance Facility 
Activity 
MG Cluster Rural Inst./Value 
Chain 
Rice 
Maize 
Cashew 
Poultry 
% 
Total #  Women  Men 
Youth  PWD 
1,900 
10,950 
7,950 
7,560  1,890 
50 women 
40 youth 
10 PWD 
15 
Activity 
% 
Total #  Women  Men 
Youth  PWD 
Shea 
100  women 
40 youth 
10 PWD 
MG MSMEs 
Rice 
Maize 
Soy 
Cashew 
Shea 
Poultry 
MG Livelihood options 
Off-season vegetable 
Post-Harvest Mgmt. 
Small ruminants 
Poultry – eggs 
MSMEs 
BFF Cluster of RI/Value Chain 
Rice 
Maize 
Soy 
Cashew 
Poultry 
Shea 
BFF MSME 
Rice 
Maize 
Soy 
Cashew 
Shea 
Poultry 
60 women 
40 youth 
10 PWD 
Rice, Maize, Soy, 
Cashew: 
40 women 
50 youth 
5 PWD 
Poultry: 
40 women 
30 youth 
5 PWD 
Shea: 
232 women / 
cluster 
30 youth / cluster 
5% PWD / cluster 
1,536 
768 
768 
922 
154 
4,500 
2,700 
1,800 
1,700  450 
21,240  10,656 
10,584  6,372  1,062 
2,725 
1,090 
1,635 
1,090  136 
Technical & socioeconomic targeting, gender & social inclusion 
In line with IFAD’s targeting guidelines, PROSPER will reach the target group through a combination of 
geographical targeting, community targeting (i.e. PWDs), self-targeting and direct targeting 
mechanisms. In adherence to IFAD’s mainstreaming objectives, the targeting will include special 
provisions regarding gender, youth, nutrition, climate vulnerability, and for PWD. 
16 
Self-targeting will be ensured through the participatory formulation of cluster level plans and group of 
RIs coming together, and standalone MSMEs Business Plans (BPs) which will serve as the key 
investment tools for directing project support to the communities. Participatory development of these 
planning and investment tools will ensure that the activities which are identified correspond to the 
priorities and capacities of the target group. Amongst other activities, the selection of pro-poor 
activities around the selected value chains which involve agricultural practices that generate high 
levels of rural employment, involve low input costs and contribute to food security and family 
nutrition, will lead to self-targeting. For example, phase 1 implementation will include the shea nuts 
value chain which is characterized by high involvement of women in the collection, trading and 
processing of shea nuts to shea butter, which is a rich source of quality fatty acids and contribute to 
family nutrition. Similarly, the selection of agricultural and village enterprise related 
machinery/equipment will be based on the relevance of such tools in smallholdings and their labor 
reduction and time saving benefits for priority target groups such as women, PWD and female and 
male youth. Self-targeting will be facilitated through the use of gender-sensitive delivery systems (e.g. 
delivering non-residential training at village level respecting the appropriate timing for women). 
Moreover, capacity-building will be tailored to the needs of women, female and male youth and PWD 
based on continuous consultations with the beneficiaries in regularly organized consultative forums. 
Direct targeting: In line with the Ghana COSOP, direct targeting will be one of the key mechanisms for 
reaching the poorest households and vulnerable groups. Direct targeting will aim at achieving the 
outreach targets of 70-80% very poor and poor households, and at least 40% women, at least 30% 
youth (15% young women; 15% young men), at least 5% PWD (within the groups of women and/or 
youth) participating in project activities. A person is deemed to be “poor” in Ghana if their income is 
less than 1,314 GHC per adult per year (which was USD 1.83 per day in 2013 when the relevant survey 
was undertaken, but was only 62 cents in April 2021) while the “extreme poor” live on less than 792 
GHC per adult per year (USD 1.10 per day, in 2013, and 48 cents in April 2018). According to UNDP, 
the poverty line was only 27.1% of the mean consumption level in 2012/13, while the extreme poverty 
line is 44.9%. 
The mechanism for maximizing outreach will prioritize targeting of existing Rural Institutions and 
MSMEs with at least 50% of poor and very poor including vulnerable groups. In case, such groups do 
not or insufficiently exist, the project will foster their formation. The project will also identify very poor 
beneficiaries who are not members of RIs and MSMEs and will promote their integration in such 
institutions / MSMEs, especially the ones that will be eligible for the more concessional project 
support.  For the RIs to be eligible for selected project activities; e.g. Matching Grants (MGs), they 
should have at least a membership of 50% among the very poor (including vulnerable groups), 40% 
women, 30% youth and 15% PWDs. Matching grants will target as well MSME of up to 9 employees. 
The Blended Finance Facility will target all RIs comprising of poor and very poor (50% of the members 
are among the poor category) as well as from the special target group (40% women, 30% youth and 
5% PWDs). MG category geared towards nutrition and livelihood activities will target 60% women, 
40% youth and 10% PWDs.  
Eligibility criteria for direct targeting will be defined with the participation of community members in a 
transparent manner. Thus, direct targeting will start with the development of the cluster plans 
wherein the communities will categorize the households into different socio-economic groups based 
on participatory wealth ranking. The women headed households, households with unemployed female 
and male youth, and PWD in the different socio-economic groups will also be identified during the 
process. Subsequently, the business plans developed at the group level will list the names of all the 
potential beneficiaries/households along with their socio- economic category and priority group 
(women, f/m youth, and PWD). The project will screen these business plans by checking that they 
comply with the direct targeting guidelines for the particular business activity, and by verifying that 
17 
the details of the potential beneficiary households match their socio-economic and priority group 
status identified in the cluster plans. The direct targeting guidelines for the different types of business 
plans and MGs are defined in table 2 above.   
PROSPER will collaborate with the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP), a flagship 
programme of the Ministry of Gender Child and Social Protection implemented as part of the National 
Social Protection Strategy (NSPS). PROSPER will work with LEAP to identify the clusters within the 
geographical region based on poverty and vulnerable groups related data from LEAP and it will assist 
the households in the project areas which qualify for LEAP support to enroll and benefit from LEAP’s 
cash transfers activities in social welfare services. Similarly, PROSPER will engage with the GFD for 
information dissemination about project activities, the identification of PWDs in the project area, as 
well as to fine tune and support implementation of strategies for increasing the project’s impact on 
PWDs. PROSPER will also explore partnerships with the World Bank supported Ghana Jobs and Skills 
Project which is also oriented towards the needs of PWDs.  
Social inclusion will be pushed by measures such as organizing meetings or events, appropriate to 
women’s time and venue constraints; encouraging the submission of business proposals from women-
only groups; and ensuring women hold at least 30- 40% of leadership posts in project supported Rural 
institutions. PROSPER will also promote access to productive land through sensitization across the 
districts and chiefdoms on land tenure and access to land for the intended beneficiaries; engaging 
with Paramount Chiefs to secure land for intending beneficiaries with no access to land; and making 
access to land by women and youth one of the preconditions for a community to participate in the 
project.  
Youth empowerment: Both male and female youth (50% each) will be supported to establish 
enterprises along the selected value chains, and the project will provide skills development and 
capacity building of the youth groups and financial inclusion.  
PROSPER will place a particular focus on potential vulnerabilities affecting specific sections within the 
youth category (e.g. ensure young women have equal opportunities with the young men to participate 
and benefit from the project, inclusion of youth with disabilities, etc). The project will also leverage 
synergies with other on-going programmes to maximize the outcomes and also ensure sustainability 
of the interventions (AFFORD, World Bank’s Jobs and Skill Project, etc).    
Safeguards against elite capture: The primary safeguards against elite capture will be the self-targeting 
plus the participatory identification of the poor and priority households and rigorous screening to 
ensure the inclusion of these households as beneficiaries, in the group level business plans 
implemented with project support. Additionally, PROSPER will create a high level of awareness about 
the project benefits and eligibility criteria amongst all target groups using community level open 
announcements, focus group discussions and consultations with community institutions and 
implementation committees. PROSPER’s rural institutions capacity building inputs will address elite 
capture through measures such as representative governance structures with members from various 
targeted categories and priority groups, fixed tenure of governing members, regular stakeholder 
meetings, and setting up transparent rules, regulations and decision-making processes. Additionally, 
detailed screening of business plan proposals on commercial viability, conflicts of interest and 
corruption will be undertaken. Compliance with pre-approved, objective selection criteria and 
transparent information-sharing and decision-making will be ensured. 
Analysis of District Data, Presence of Rural Institutions and SMEs  
As part of the design process, a situational analysis was conducted for the selected regions to assess 
the status at district level. The analysis included collection of information such as population; poverty 
head count; number of food insecure people; presence of people with disability; presence of key value 
chains and area cultivated; key issues in relation to agriculture, water resources and institutions, 
18 
presence of RIs, etc. The district level information indicates clearly that most of the districts have a 
presence of the above mentioned target groups, as well significance of the selected value chains and 
distinct opportunities for project activities around them. 
Targeting within a selected district will take place over a number of adjacent communities; i.e. a 
cluster. Clusters will be identified following a broad consultation with the communities, taking the 
following criteria into consideration: 
Incidence of poverty, food insecurity and undernutrition and presence of the target group. 
 
  Climate change impacts and vulnerability of the natural resources base. 
  Opportunities for implementation of project activities around the targeted value chains.  
Presence of financial institutions. 
Presence of RIs and SMEs as key drivers for targeting was assessed as part of the design. While 
available data on the presence of RIs (Farmer Based Organizations) in the target area do not provide a 
complete data set, it was still possible to gather important information regarding the presence and 
nature of RIs in the target area.    
Aggregated data regarding presence of SMEs around the target value chains in the selected regions 
indicate significant presence of such enterprises. 
Nutrition and Food Security 
Based on the conceptual framework of (mal) nutrition developed by UNICEF in 1990, food security is 
one the three underlying determinants of the nutrition status; care practices and environmental 
health are the other two determinants. 
Adaptation from the UNICEF conceptual framework of malnutrition showing only the main 
interconnections 
Nutritional Status  
Nutrition Security 
Diet 
Health 
Food Access/Food Security  
Food Security 
Incom
e 
On-farm availability, 
diversity, and safety of 
food 
Food environment in 
markets 
Care Practices 
Women’s 
empowerment 
(time, assets, 
labour, income 
control) 
Nutrition knowledge 
and socio-cultural 
norms 
Environmental 
Health 
Natural Resource 
Management Practices 
Climate 
While diets (food intake) and health (especially infectious diseases) are the only direct causes for the 
nutritional status, food security, care practices and environmental health are underlying causes. One 
19 
can have food security without having nutrition security, but one cannot have nutrition security 
without food security. 
Food security covers availability, accessibility, stability, and utilization of food. There are various 
indicators to measure food security. Very common is the ‘Food Consumption Score (FSC)’. The FCS 
combines dietary diversity, frequency of consumption and the relative nutritional importance of 
different food groups to score a household's food consumption status. Based on predetermined 
thresholds a household is scored as having poor (0-21), borderline (21.5-35) and acceptable (>35) food 
consumption statuses.  
Another common food security indicator is the ‘Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES)’. The FIES is a 
measure of access to food at the level of individuals or households. It measures severity of food 
insecurity based on people’s responses to questions about constraints on their ability to obtain 
adequate food. This approach to food security measurement represents a significant change 
compared to traditional ways of assessing it indirectly through determinants such as food availability, 
or consequences such as poor quality diets, anthropometric failures, and other signs of malnutrition. 
The FIES is not intended to quantify food consumption nor does it provide a quantitative assessment 
of dietary quality. It is not a measure of malnutrition and cannot be used to detect nutritional 
deficiencies or obesity. Consequently, it is not the appropriate tool for monitoring malnutrition or 
assessing nutrition-specific outcomes of food security programs and policies.  
The latest food security and nutrition monitoring updates of WFP for Ghana, dated June 2020, 
reported that, when using the Food Consumption Score as a proxy for food security, out of the total 
number of households surveyed (n=1600), 91.5% were considered food secure, i.e. within the 
acceptable food consumption group while 7.7% and 0.8% were moderately food insecure (borderline) 
and severely food insecure (poor), respectively. According to the survey, moderately and severely food 
insecure households were from the Bono, Bono East, Northern, Oti and Ashanti regions. A quarter 
(24.2%) adopted one or more coping strategies to deal with lack of food or money to buy food during 
the month of June, including relying on less preferred or less expensive foods, borrowing from 
relatives and friends, limiting or reducing the portion or size of meals, restricting food consumption of 
adults in order for small children to eat, and reducing the number of meals eaten in a day. The 
majority of the respondents had physical access to market, however, the lack of money (62.9%), 
COVID-19 pandemic (22.2%) and closure of markets and shops (5.6%) were cited as the main reasons 
for households’ inability to access the market or grocery shops. 
The lack of access to affordable nutritious foods is one of the main causes of poor diets. Seasonality 
particularly affects access to diverse diets for the poorest households who rely on their own food 
production. The cost of diet analysis of WFP calculated the lowest costs of locally available diet that 
meets nutrient requirements - when constrained for locally preferred staples. The regional 
unavailability of this diet ranged from 10% (Greater Accra) to 78% (Northern Region), with correlation 
between unaffordability and stunting prevalence. During lean season, food prices rise, especially in the 
North. The vegetables that are perceived to be local (kontomire, okro, roselle, garden eggs) seem to 
be the most affordable, while the vegetables that are perceived as foreign or exotic (lettuce, cabbage, 
cucumber, cauliflower, beetroot) are more expensive.  
Research conducted in three agroecological zones in Ghana shows that livestock allows savings, 
enables resources-poor households to amass assets, and helps fund planned and unplanned spending 
(e.g., school fees and illness). Due to these various and often critical uses, direct consumption of 
home-reared animal source food is not a major priority, especially for poor households. In addition, 
access to markets is affected by frequent flooding obstructing roads and bridges to markets. 
The Ghana micronutrient survey of 2017 reports that national proportion of (non-pregnant) women 
achieving minimum dietary diversity is 47.2%, with a consumption of, on average 4.4 food groups. 
Other studies in a sample of pregnant women in Northern Ghana showed that 46.1% consume the 
20 
minimum dietary diversity, and among a sample of women attending ante and post-natal care the 
average number of food groups was reported at 4.3 groups. 
The minimum dietary diversity score is expected to be at least 5 food groups. 
The nutrition status is measured with anthropometric indices such as weight and height, combined 
with age. Measuring height and age provides information about chronic undernutrition; weight and 
height provides information about acute undernutrition. While acute undernutrition is usually visible, 
chronic undernutrition cannot be simply assessed by looking at children for example without knowing 
their age.  
Realizing that IFAD supported projects are not nutrition-specific but nutrition-sensitive interventions, 
‘stunting’ (chronic undernutrition) was replaced as Core Indicator by Minimum Dietary Diversity Score 
for Women (MDD-W). The MDD-W is an indicator for the adequacy of a diet of a household or family 
anticipating that a higher score gives a valid information about micro-nutrient content as one of the 
indicators for diet quality. Out of 12 defined food groups15, women of re-productive age should 
consume at least 5 different food groups. 
Beside diet, the nutrition status is also determined by the age, nutrition, and health status of the 
mother; stunted mothers tend to give birth to stunted babies; early marriages are most of the time 
resulting in teenage pregnancies which have a great likelihood of giving birth to low-birth-weight 
babies being a great risk factor for stunting. Foetal growth failure is a main contributor to chronic child 
undernutrition. The first 1000 days which cover pregnancy and the first 23 months are therefore very 
important for mother and child. This does not mean that after this period caring is not important 
anymore, but the first 1000 days are the most sensitive days.  
Studies showed that women’s educational level and her empowerment have very positive impacts on 
the child’s nutritional status. Therefore, nutition interventions should be strongly linked to gender 
responsive activities. 
Living in an unhealthy environment increases the risk of undernutrition. Access to safe drinking water, 
personal and food hygiene, food safety are some of the important determinants with potential impact 
of health and nutrition outcomes. Nutrition interventions should therefore also integrate Water, 
sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) aspects, which of course adds to the complexity of nutrition 
interventions.  
Moreover, increasing income or production is not sufficient to achieve nutrition security SBCC plays a 
very important role and fosters change in knowledge, attitude, and practice.  
Ghana is 'on course' to meet two targets for maternal, infant, and young child nutrition (MIYCN). Some 
progress has been made towards achieving the target of reducing anaemia among women of 
reproductive age, with 46.4% of women aged 15 to 49 years now affected. Meanwhile, some progress 
has been made towards achieving the low-birth-weight target with 14.2% of infants having a low 
weight at birth (< 2500g). No progress has been made towards achieving the exclusive breastfeeding 
target, with 42.9% of infants aged 0 to 5 months exclusively breastfed. Ghana is 'on course' to meet 
the target for stunting (chronic undernutrition), with 17.5% of children under 5 years of age affected, 
which is lower than the average for the Africa region (29.1%) but rises to 33% in the Northern Region 
of Ghana. Some progress has been made towards achieving the target for wasting (acute 
undernutrition) but 6.8% of children under 5 years of age are still affected, which is higher than the 
average for the Africa region (6.4%). The prevalence of overweight children under 5 years of age is 
1.4% and Ghana is 'on course' to prevent the figure from increasing.16 Ghana has shown limited 
progress towards achieving the diet-related non-communicable disease (NCD) targets. The country 
has shown no progress towards achieving the target for obesity, with an estimated 16.6% of adult 
(aged 18 years and over) women and 4.5% of adult men living with obesity. Ghana's obesity 
15 http://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/cb3434en 
16 https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/africa/western-africa/ghana/ 
21 
prevalence is lower than the regional average of 18.4% for women and 7.8% for men. At the same 
time, diabetes is estimated to affect 6.6% of adult women and 6.4% of adult men. 
The high rates for overweight and obesity is a sign for Ghana being at a stage of nutrition transition. 
Modernization, urbanization, economic development, and increased wealth lead to predictable shifts 
in diet, referred to as “nutrition transitions.”  
Researchers divide the nutrition transition into five patterns: 
  Pattern 1 - Hunter Gatherer: Individuals live highly active lifestyles, hunting and foraging for 
food. Diets typically are rich in fibrous plants and high in protein from lean wild animals. 
  Pattern 2 - Early Agriculture: Famine is common, slowing individual’s growth and decreasing 
their body fat. 
  Pattern 3 - End of Famine: Famine recedes as income rises and diet improves. 
  Pattern 4 - Overeating, Obesity-Related Diseases: As income continues to rise, individuals have 
access to an abundance of high-calorie foods, ultra-processed food, and they become less 
active, leading to increases in obesity and obesity-related chronic diseases, such as diabetes 
and heart disease. 
  Pattern 5 - Behaviour Change: In response to increasing rates of obesity and obesity-related 
chronic diseases, individuals change their behaviour and the health system and communities 
promote behaviour changes to prevent these conditions. 
Currently, most low- and middle-income countries are rapidly moving from pattern 3 (end of famine) 
to pattern 4 (consuming more energy-dense diets). This shift from traditional diets to so called 
modern-style diets has been a key contributor to the obesity epidemic in low- and middle-income 
countries. 
Malnutrition in all forms (underweight, micronutrient deficiencies, overweight, and obesity) affects all 
countries with at least one form. In countries in transition often all forms of malnutrition exist at the 
same time, for example you can be overweight but at the same time you suffer from micronutrient 
deficiency. 
For PROSPER, the challenge is to develop a SBCC strategy which addresses the various forms of 
malnutrition as undernutrition and nutrient deficiency are not the only challenge but also overweight 
and obesity. 
In PROSPER nutrition and health will be promoted through several pathways, including the selection of 
value chains that are nutrition-sensitive or that will make a high contribution to nutrition; food 
conservation, post-harvest processing and value addition; promotion of vegetable gardens; and 
nutrition education. SBCC strategy will be developed to promote non-discriminatory intra-household 
food distribution, adequate diets for adolescent girls, consumption of diversified diets, food hygiene 
and safety, and improved WASH practices as well as the discrimination of negative socio-cultural 
habits like teenage marriages and early pregnancies resulting in low-birth weight babies as major risk 
factors for malnutrition. 
Gender 
In Ghana, harmful social norms and behaviours continue to impact opportunities and human 
potential, affecting health; education; and the productivity of men, women, boys, and girls. Critical 
gender gaps and disparities remain in the labour force and employment opportunities; access to 
quality education and levels of educational attainment; access to and use of health services; control 
over and access to long-term assets and resources; promulgation of GEWE-related government 
22 
policies and legislation; and gender-responsive decision-making, leadership, and political 
representation.17 
The 2020 World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap (GGG) report positions Ghana at 107 (out of 
153 countries).17 Ghana’s 2020 global rankings in gender gap indices are 94 for economic 
participation and opportunity, 119 for educational attainment, 121 for health and survival, and 107 for 
political empowerment. Ghana’s 2020 overall ranking on the GGG Index dropped since 2018 because 
other countries achieved larger gains during the same two-year period. In total scoring, Ghana has 
made improvements on the educational attainment and political empowerment indices, maintained 
its progress on child health and survival, but it slid backwards on the economic participation and 
opportunity index. 
Women’s dual reproductive roles and work responsibilities place them and their children at greater 
risk of poor health outcomes. Women in rural areas are obliged to carry out a large number of 
reproductive tasks. 
PROSPER will therefore, promote women’s participation and empowerment by addressing barriers 
prevalent in the geographical context of the project. Overall, 40% women outreach will be targeted. 
Increased participation in training, educational and income generation activities will be promoted by 
spending enough time for mobilization on targeting to reach everybody at community meetings. A mix 
of community-based targeting, direct targeting and self-targeting will be applied depending on the 
type of intervention. 
The project will work with local media as well as local trusted NGOs. Men will be encouraged through 
advocacy to support women’s participation through guarantee of land and other resources required. 
Gender targeting in PROSPER includes the inclusion of young women (youth) and women with 
disabilities (PWDs). 
PROSPER intends to generate several positive results for women, including: 
Improve participation in household decision making (HH methodology) 
Increase in women´s financial literacy including households  economics; business plans 
 
 
  Development / strengthening women´s income generation activities 
 
Improvement of household dietary intake through nutrition-sensitive hh-based livelihood 
interventions 
Household methodologies to enhance gender equality 
Household methodologies (HHMs)18 are innovative approaches to enable more poor households to be 
reached and to improve intra-household gender relations. The purpose of such methodologies is to 
empower members of households to realize their development potential and create stronger, more 
resilient, and sustainable smallholder farming and rural livelihood systems. Although the focus of 
HHMs is to stimulate change at the household level, it is also necessary to engage at the community 
level and beyond.  
The various methodologies share four basic principles:  
 Focus on people. Household strategies are designed by and for household members who define 
whom they want to be and what they want to do. They define and implement their own strategies for 
developing and improving their livelihoods, based on their goals, strengths, opportunities and assets.   
17 https://banyanglobal.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/USAID-Ghana-Gender-Analysis-Report.pdf 
18 https://www.ifad.org/en/web/knowledge/-/publication/household-methodologies-harnessing-the-family-s-
potential-for-change 
23 
 Empowerment. The cornerstone of the HHM empowerment process is strengthening the capacity of 
individuals or groups to make choices and to transform those choices into desired actions and 
outcomes. This can be achieved by building on a mutual understanding of different roles and 
responsibilities.  
 Self-generated solutions. Willingness to change is generated by household members themselves 
(women and men of all ages) by placing them in the driver’s seat of the development process. They 
take responsibility for the changes they want to see and work closely with one another, friends and 
the community to make them happen.  
 Equal opportunities. Women and men, as well as youth, PWD and other vulnerable groups, have an 
equal voice in setting the household vision and equal access to development opportunities, productive 
assets, decision-making and benefits. Some HHMs explicitly address gender relations with a “gender 
justice” lens, making the promotion of gender equality an essential goal of any type of intervention. In 
others, gender inequalities emerge as a factor limiting the achievement of household goals and the 
ability of households to better use the productive resources available to them, and participants 
commit to addressing gender issues as their own choice. 
The four Steps in the household methodology process at the household level are: 
Step 1: Creating a household vision and situational analysis 
Step 2: Preparing an action plan 
Step 3: Implementing the action plan and monitoring progress 
Step 4: Graduating and sustaining the use of HHMs 
As preferred HHM tool for visioning PROSPER will use the Gender Action Learning System (GALS). The 
goal is to address gender and social justice in economic development efforts with an inclusive and 
participatory process. The methodology aims at empowering men and women to achieve a better and 
happier life. It is using simple mapping and diagram tools for visioning and planning in order to 
empower men and women to make changes in their lives. The process embeds a broader change 
philosophy. A GALS process is based on a series of principles, tools and stages, implemented over a 
period of two to three years 
GALS principles: 
Four sets of principles are integrated:  
1.  principles of social inclusion: everyone is a leader (regardless of sex, age, ethnicity, and 
status), human rights are non-negotiable, inclusion and equity, respect difference; 
2.  principles of gender justice: women are intelligent agents of development (not victims), men 
are allies in change, gender is fun, gender transformation, women’s right are non-negotiable 
in regard of the CEDAW rights19; 
3.  principles of empowerment: inspire with visions, every event is focused on action for change, 
from individual to collective action, respect differences, building capacities, removing all forms 
of “power over” some people or groups, in order to gain “power within” (confidence, self-
efficiency), “power to” take action and “power with” to act collectively (as a family, a group or 
community); 
4.  principles of sustainability: start with individual self-interest and ownership, a pyramidal peer 
sharing mechanism that leads to self-upscaling, integration in existing activities at community 
level, movement for gender and social justice at various levels (community, project, country).  
Gender-sensitive Value Chain analysis 
19 Committee On The Elimination Of All Forms Of Discrimination Against Women 
24 
Active participation in Value Chains offers women great opportunities for economic empowerment. 
However, often women are participating at inferior level and support for the development of a 
business orientation is needed. 
Women’s participation in selected VCs and the potential to increase or modify their engagement: 
Value Chain 
Occupation 
Ownership 
Maize 
Planting, harvesting, 
threshing, sometimes pest 
control (spraying) 
Men dominated 
Soybeans 
Planting, harvesting, 
threshing, sometimes pest 
control (spraying) 
Women have a 
share as 
smallholders 
Cashew 
(Note: dedicating 
land from food 
crops to cash 
crops is 
challenging food 
security)  
Overseeing harvesting, 
transporting, sorting, and 
drying.  
Making juice and alcohol 
from cashew apples  
Women represent 
10-15% of the 
cashew 
producers; the 
rest are “helping 
hands” to their 
husbands and 
fathers 
Rice 
Planting, harvesting, 
threshing, sometimes pest 
control (spraying) 
Dominated by 
large companies 
and SMEs 
Shea Nut 
Picking (limited scale for 
most, hence no processing 
capacity); 
Local women processors  
Women are the 
primary 
processors 
Vegetables  
Selling and trading; 
Transporting  
‘market queens’ 
Poultry 
Only at hh level; SMEs in 
layers and broilers 
Large companies 
Potential 
Various side businesses: 
animal feed processing 
(poultry, brewery, trade); 
SME on input provision, 
cultivation, IT services. 
Aggregation, transportation, 
warehousing, (semi-
)processing 
SME on input provision, 
cultivation, IT services. 
Aggregation, transportation, 
warehousing, (semi-
)processing 
Processing, marketing, 
capacity development 
SME on input provision, 
cultivation, IT services. 
Aggregation, transportation, 
warehousing, (semi-
)processing, managing eatery 
places with various diets 
from rice 
Improve production capacity, 
invest in marketing skills; 
improve quality in niche 
production  
Increase economic viability 
through improved 
production and post-harvest 
management 
Egg production; 1-day chicks 
production; quality products 
for domestic market 
Special support for women (incl. women headed-households, young women, and women with 
disabilities) 
Women will participate in the Matching Grant Scheme for different livelihood options: i) off-season 
vegetable production; ii) post-harvest management incl. processing; iii) rearing of small ruminants; iv) 
poultry – egg production; v) MSMEs – small businesses/shops. 
25 
The Matching Grants are eligible for groups and intend to strengthen women’s economic 
empowerment. A mix of self-targeting and direct targeting will be applied.  
Successful groups will have the opportunity to move to the BFF. 
Matching grants are provided one time to only one member of the household. It cannot be provided 
to more than one member of the same household. It is expected, however, than more than one 
member in the same household will benefit from project activities (e.g. MG and nutrition training). 
Targeting Youth 
The country has a youth bulge (between 15-35 years of age20) with 57% of the total population being 
below the age of 25. The rural communities consists of 56% youth, compared to 44% in urban 
contexts. Youth contribute to family labour for agricultural production and engage in other activities 
such as processing, warehousing and transportation but are often unable to pursue farming 
independently due to limited access to land, credit, quality inputs and sustainable profitable output 
markets. Due to limited access to jobs, inadequate training and illiteracy, youth unemployment and 
underemployment in Ghana reached 12% and 50% respectively.21 The lack of employment 
opportunities in rural areas has resulted in g rowing youth migration from rural areas to urban 
centres. 
GoG’s initiatives that aim at providing jobs, building capacities and providing opportunities for youth 
are: the Medium-term National Development Policy Framework (2018-2021); the PFJ in agriculture 
and related sectors, the Initiative for Sustainability, Stability and Security (3S), housed under the IFAD 
managed rural resilience trust fund and focusing on the Northern Belt; the IFAD-supported Rural 
Enterprise Programme (REP); and the Youth Agripreneurship Development Programme, jointly run by 
AGRA and Nestle. Despite these initiatives from GoG and development partners, the outreach to 
youth from semi-subsistence smallholder families remains limited. 
In 2016, it was projected that, because of the country’s growing youth population, 300,000 new jobs 
would have to be created each year to absorb the increasing number of unemployed young people. 
Yet the structure of the Ghanaian economy in terms of employment has not changed much from 
several decades ago. Most jobs are low-skilled, requiring limited cognitive or technology know-how. 
The quality of these jobs is reflected in low earnings and less decent work.  Although Ghana has 
launched a number of initiatives in response to this challenge, the lack of coordination among 
stakeholders in the sector has led to duplication. Key stakeholders on youth employment, including 
those in the private sector, currently have limited interaction. Regular exchanges are important for 
promoting synergies and reducing duplication of programs, and for sharing knowledge. Furthermore, 
Ghana lacks a comprehensive database on the characteristics of various categories of youth 
information—a database that is essential for the design and implementation of effective programs. 
Without transformation of the current Ghanaian economic structure, employment opportunities will 
remain limited. Most existing government-led youth employment programs lack adequate systems for 
monitoring and evaluation and for impact measurement. Few programs include clear indicators that 
measure performance, and most do not carry out tracer studies to assess their effectiveness and what 
happens to beneficiaries once they have exited the programs. Without such systems and data, policy 
makers and other stakeholders find it difficult to make informed decisions on whether to fund or scale 
up a program or make changes for improvement. 
Any options for young people seeking jobs must include consideration of the disparity in 
unemployment and literacy rates between urban and rural areas. The unemployment rate in urban 
areas (13.4 percent) is relatively higher than that in rural areas (10.2 percent), irrespective of gender. 
20 The National Youth Policy in Ghana (2010). 
21 Youth Employment Programs in Ghana: Options for Effective Policy Making and Implementation, 
World Bank, 2020. 
26 
The urban unemployment rate is higher than the rural unemployment rate in 7 of Ghana’s 10 regions, 
different (Ghana Statistical Service 2015). The northern regions have the lowest youth literacy rates 
for both females (31.9 percent) and males (50.6 percent). 
In Ghana, young women are limited in employment and entrepreneurial opportunities because of 
many economic and sociocultural factors, including lack of property rights, lack of access to capital, 
stereotypes, and limitations in the use of digital technology. PWD are also mostly excluded from youth 
employment programs because of employer discrimination, a lack of disability-friendly facilities in the 
workplace, and a general view that they are “alms seekers” rather than productive members of 
society. This group also faces challenges in job search efforts. 
PROSPER will support young women and men in establishing enterprises along the supported value 
chains (rice, maize, soy, poultry, cashew, and shea), focusing on activities that cater for the youth. For 
vulnerable youth, PROSPER provides Matching Grant support to enter into off-season vegetable 
production, post-harvest management, poultry – egg production, small ruminant rearing, or MSMEs. 
The project will provide skill development and capacity building of youth groups and financial 
inclusion. A particular focus will be placed on potential vulnerabilities affecting specific sections in the 
youth category (e.g. ensure young women have equal opportunities as young men to participate and 
benefit from the project interventions; ensure inclusion of young women and men with disabilities). 
The project will also leverage synergies with on-going projects and programmes to maximise the 
outcomes and also ensure sustainability (AFFORD, World Bank Job’s and Skill Project, etc.). 
Targeting PWDs 
Statistically, PWDs make up to 3% of the population in Ghana. Disability in Ghana is considered both a 
human rights concern and a developmental issue due to its strong links to exclusion, discrimination, 
and poverty. In 2006, the Parliament of Ghana passed the Persons with Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715)22. 
The Act protects the rights of PWDs and makes specific provisions to guarantee the right to education, 
healthcare, employment and movement of PWDs. The Act also established the National Council on 
Persons with Disability. The Council is charged with the responsibility of proposing and evolving 
policies and strategies to enable PWDs to integrate and fully participate in national development.  
However, despite efforts being made educating the general public, PWDs are still stigmatized, 
discriminated, and socially excluded.23 There is strong correlation between disability and poverty. Poor 
health, limited schooling and employment opportunities are negatively impacting on the socio-
economic status of affected households.24 Households with disabled members may be vulnerable to 
poverty due to extra costs of living with a disability. 
As part of sensitizing the communities about the nature of the project, PROSPER will create 
community awareness about PWDs and different nature of impairments. The needs assessment of the 
PWDs will follow tailored approaches for capacity building; economic engagement and social 
protection support will be defined depending on the nature of impairment. PROSPER will aim to 
mainstream PWDs through their inclusion in the project supported Rural institutions and participation 
in the different project supported activities. Training and meetings with PWDs will be organized in 
close-by locations in the communities, in PWD sensitive teaching and learning environments. To cater 
to the special needs of the PWDs with visual, hearing, physical and speech impairments, PROSPER will 
train them in braille, sign and audio languages. Accessible training venues, sign language translators 
and interpreters will be organized.
22 https://www.humanrightsinitiative.org/publications/ghana/disability_rights_in_ghana.pdf 
23 file:///C:/Users/User/Downloads/09687599.2018.pdf 
24 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10834-020-09741-5 
27 
Chapter 3: Project components 
Component 1. Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
The expected component outcome is: Improved and sustainable livelihoods in target areas supported 
by strengthened rural institutions and improved socioeconomic infrastructures. These actions are 
concentrated on investing in “public goods” within and for the benefit of the targeted 100,000 
beneficiaries in the project areas. 
Subcomponent 1.1 Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households  
It comprises a range of institution-building and skills development activities to enable target 
communities to take ownership of and accountability for their own development initiatives, to 
promote sustainable community-based NR management, to strengthen their ability to implement 
modern sustainable and climate resilient farming, and to adopt healthier diets. 
Community mobilization, cluster identification and planning.  
Regional and District Consultations 
The project will seek to secure community interest in PROSPER and the approaches it is promoting 
with a series of interactive workshops and consultations at regional and district levels, starting with 
three adjoining Northern sector regions in the first phase. The regions will be consulted in the choice 
of Districts that PROSPER will be working. Following the effectiveness of PROSPER, there will be a 
national launch to which key national stakeholders25 will be invited to participate and pertinent 
project information will be disseminated. The stakeholders will be sensitized and seek the 
cooperation of their decentralized agencies at the national, regional and district levels in the roll out 
of PROSPER. Following the national launch, PROSPER will engage the services of technical assistance 
to support the launches and roll out of the project in the regions and districts. PROSPER will be 
launched in a selected region with a consultation workshop under the auspices of the Regional 
Coordinating Council and attended by regional stakeholders of key institutions supporting agricultural 
value chains and natural resources management. The PROSPER PCU and the TA will have undertaken 
preliminary discussions with the Regional Department of Agriculture (RDA) and other agencies about 
the selection of districts to implement the project and the preliminary ideas on selection of districts 
will be validated at the regional consultations’ forum. The selection of districts will be based on 
criteria comprising the following: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Level of poverty 
Presence of PWDs 
Presence of value chains  
Natural resources degradation 
The regional entry will be completed by the formation of a regional PROSPER team by the RDA 
comprising a senior agricultural officer, a natural resources/climate specialist and gender specialist. 
Representation from Ministry of Gender, Children, and Social Protection; Environmental Protection 
Agency, and any other agency relevant for implementation of SECAP and ESMF under the project will 
be ensured in all of the regional teams.  The focal person will be the Senior Agricultural Officer. For at 
each region a regional consultative committee will be formed to guide the regional implementation 
team. This committee will comprise key relevant governmental agencies at the regional level, key 
value chain actors, private sectors and FIs.  
25 Key national stakeholders of PROSPER include the Ministry of Food and Agriculture; Ministry of Gender, Children and 
Social Protection; Ministry of Trade and Industry; Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development; Department of 
Cooperatives; Environmental Protection Agency; Ghana Commodity Exchange; National Buffer Stock Company. 
28 
The district entry of PROSPER will be marked by a consultation workshop that will gather all key 
players in agricultural value chains in the district comprising the following: 
  Representation from Regional Department of Agriculture 
  District Coordinating Council (Planning Unit, Works Department etc.) 
  District Assembly Members  
  District Department of Agriculture  
  Specialized District Agencies (Department of Feeder Roads, Department of Gender, Children 
and Social Protection etc.) 
  EPA and other relevant agencies for the SECAP and ESMF implementation 
  District Agribusiness (Processors, Aggregators, Warehousing) 
Following the district launch, a PROSPER District Team will be established to coordinate and advance 
the delivery of the project in the district. The PROSPER Team comprise the following persons: 
  District Director of Agriculture 
  District Planning Officer 
  District Works Engineer 
  Management Information Systems Officer 
  Accountant 
  Crops Officer 
  WIAD Officer 
  Agricultural Extension Agents (3No.) 
  EPA and any other agencies that are relevant to the SECAP and ESMF implementation  
The consultations at the region and districts levels are aimed at creating awareness of the project and 
its services and roles and responsibilities of implementing partners.  The AEAs, district and regional 
focal officers of the project will be trained to facilitate the ensuing process at the cluster and 
communities. PROSPER will enter into formal implementation agreements with the RDAs and DDAs to 
finance project related expenses beyond the district own budgets, such as, fuel costs and lunches. 
There will be no salary top-up or DSA. The outline of the implementation agreement is shown in Box 
3.    
Cluster Identification 
In each selected district, the district project team, the PROSPER PCU climate change and vulnerability 
expert, and TA support will identify and form clusters of neighboring communities through a 
screening of NRM and socioeconomic conditions and mobilization meetings at community level.26 The 
Team composition for community meetings to identify clusters comprise the following: 
  Regional Focal Person 
  District Project Team (Planning Officer, Crops Officer etc.) 
  PROSPER Climate Change and Safeguard Expert, Gender and Vulnerability Expert with support 
from the Value Chain Officer 
  TA support 
26 In this document, a “cluster” is a term for several neighbouring settlements sharing natural resources. It has no 
administrative significance but locates the combined population in the specific land area upon which they depend and 
provides the project with a convenient unit for planning and operational purposes. Each cluster will include various common 
economic interest groups, such as Farmer Based Organisations and VSLAs, alongside non-profit community structures. To 
avoid confusion and excessive use of acronyms, the term Rural Institution (RI) is used here for a production-related group 
and Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise (MSME) for any business set up for other purposes. 
29 
The identification of clusters will involve community meetings animated and moderated by PROSPER 
Teams. Eventually, a supra community meeting at the level of the cluster will be organized with the 
aim of forging unity of purpose among the communities within the cluster. Where interest is strong, 
the community leadership decides to commit to PROSPER and opportunities exist around the target 
value chains, a gender balanced Cluster Committee will be established to interact with the project. 
The cluster will be made up of four to eight adjoining communities. Population of a given cluster 
would be in the range of 1,500 to 3,000. There shall be a maximum of four clusters per district. The 
Cluster Committee will oversee the planning and implementation of the project at the cluster level. 
During implementation, specialized sub-committees will be established at the community level to 
ensure the sustenance of socioeconomic investments and services, such as Natural Resources and 
Environmental Management committees for the maintenance of natural resource remediation 
infrastructure and the Water and Sanitation Management Team (WSMT) responsible for the 
sustainable operation and maintenance of water supply and sanitation services. To support the 
mobilization, sensitization and awareness raising efforts at the cluster and community levels, District 
Department of Agriculture Extension Agents (AEA) and other technical staff will be trained by TA 
teams (Training of trainers) to conduct the mobilization, sensitization campaigns and support the 
cluster planning. PROSPER PCU teams will monitor and exercise oversight functions over these 
personnel and their activities.  
Community mobilization and sensitization 
The DDA with RDA and TA support will anchor the community mobilisation activities through young 
professionals and partner community development associations and the master trainers where 
relevant. Capacity building and sensitization activities will, in particular, target the poor, women, 
youth and PWDs with the aim of raising awareness on the potential market and livelihood 
opportunities and the benefits of collective action. The activities will include i) communication 
campaigns in the communities including social media and rural radio programmes; ii) capacity building 
of youth volunteers to organise small group meetings and house visits to raise awareness of target 
households about the benefits of PROSPER activities and how to participate in these; iii) meetings 
with local authorities, agribusinesses and private operators and selected institutions and service 
providers; (iii) special communication events on market days, harvest days, as well as sensitization 
events targeting producers and their organizations (iv) visits to more mature well established RIs 
including Community Development Associations, Cooperatives, FBOs and marketing associations 
(discussed in depth below). These sensitisation sessions will be conducted in tandem with awareness 
raising sessions on livelihood opportunities and specialised coaching on entrepreneurship.  
Mobilisation of Rural Institutions 
PROSPER will initially target rural community institutions at the level of the target command area. 
Examples of RIs are the Atuba-Agumishe Community Livestock and Crop Farmers Association in 
Bawku area and the Namalteng Integrated Development Programme in the Upper East Region of 
Ghana.  These are classified as Community Development Associations (CDAs). Though CDAs have a 
multi-sectoral approach, they are well established RIs, and present in most villages. However, 
capacities, scope and outreach of these institutions vary. Other types of RIs include Farmer Based 
Organisations (FBOs), Village Saving and Loan Groups, Faith Based Organisations, etc. PROSPER will 
strengthen RIs when these have been assessed to be weak or do not meet the targeting criteria.  The 
project will encourage the formation of new RIs in communities within the programme clusters that 
do not have the relevant RIs to serve as programme partners as indicated by the results of the survey 
that would have been carried out at the beginning of the project. The strengthening and formation of 
RIs will emphasise the targeting criteria comprising more than 50% members with access to land of 
1 ha or less and 50% women, 60% youth and 10% people with disability. In the case of MSMEs the 
criteria will be enterprises with fewer than 9 employees. During the selection of beneficiaries, 
vulnerable groups (including landless, marginalised groups, the poorest of the poor, women, youth, 
30 
etc) within the clusters will be identified. Efforts will be made to incorporate them in existing or newly 
formed RIs. The PROSPER teams at the PCU in collaboration with the DDAs and TA support will give 
special attention to mobilisation and strengthening of the RIs in the target clusters.  
Cluster Planning  
For each participating cluster, the Project team at the district level and TA support will facilitate the 
collaborative development of a bespoke community-driven Cluster Plan (CP). Each CP will set out local 
priorities for communal socioeconomic investments and identify potential production and related 
business opportunities that may be realized by RIs and MSMEs under Component 2 and/or with 
community resources. The CP will inform the agenda for PROSPER action in each cluster, focusing on 
investments responding directly to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and supplementing any 
existing development plans of local authorities or other development partners. The CP will underpin 
the local three-year PROSPER-community partnership and remain with the cluster leaders and Local 
Authorities as a live document to guide development planning during and after the three years. The 
scope of Cluster planning is depicted in Box1. 
Box 1: The Scope of Cluster Planning  
Purpose  
Development of bespoke community-driven cluster plans 
Stakeholders 
  Cluster traditional leaders 
  Cluster Influencers 
  Leadership of existing RIs 
Resource Persons 
  Regional PROSPER Team Representative  
  District Project Team (Planning Officer, Crops Officer, EPA and other agencies 
relevant to SECAP and ESMF implementation etc) 
  PROSPER Climate Change Specialist and Safeguards Expert and Gender and 
Vulnerability Expert, Value Chain Officer 
  TA support 
Planning Areas 
  Review existing local development plans 
 
Identify priorities for communal socioeconomic investments responding to climate 
change mitigation and adaptation 
Identify potential production opportunities 
Identify business opportunities 
 
 
Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households 
This action entails bolstering both the governance and management structures and the technical 
capacities of active rural bodies, (including farmer/producer-based organisations and other economic 
interest groups such as Saving and Loan Groups following VSLA model27 and MSMEs), and thereby 
27 Saving and Loan Groups following VSLA model are not necessary a village level association or group. 
However, it follows the same concept of internal mobilisation of funds, and lending to members.  
31 
their capacity to function as effective VC partners. It is envisaged as a purposeful major investment in 
human resource capital to develop a more conducive environment for the economic activities of the 
rural population. Within this drive to grow the rural economies by expanding business activity for 
groups, the poverty focus of PROSPER entails extending the group-based opportunities (and 
membership) to substantial numbers of vulnerable and economically marginalised people. The CP will 
identify and include the capacity training requirements for all RIs operating in the cluster. 
The programme of training, skills development and related demonstrations will be delivered by 
district implementation team with support by other district extension services and  backed up by 
regional team, MoFA technical departments and other line ministries as well as PROSPER technical 
assistance. In preparation for the work, the project will reinforce the technical skills of public service 
frontline field staff, reorient to a modern business approach to farming including the adoption of 
climate-friendly agronomic practices and natural resource remediation. The action will be launched 
with an awareness-raising workshop in each district on opportunities for youth in and around the 
smallholder agriculture sector and the PROSPER value chains. Cluster-level surveys will identify groups 
and MSMEs, both pre-existing and potential, interested in and likely to benefit from capacity building. 
The group identification process will be gender sensitive with a special focus on women, youth and 
PWD. The content of ToT for frontline government agencies responsible for capacity building of RIs is 
depicted in Box 2. 
32 
Box 2: TOR of ToT for District Staff and other government agency staff to Train RIs and 
MSMEs 
Estimated number of institutions to be trained over the life of PROSPER: 4,500 RIs and 800 
MSMEs. 
A.  Organisational Development and Good Agronomic Practices Focus 
a. Purpose: Strengthen the governance and management structures and the technical 
capacities of RIs and REs and their members, through training and coaching to enable them 
to become sustainable, effective and efficient organizations.  
b. Resource Persons 
  Technical Departments of MOFA (DCS, DAES, WIAD), MESTI (EPA) 
  PROSPER Technical Assistance 
c. Curriculum for Organisation Development and Good Agronomic Practices 
  Group organisational skills 
  Registration with Department of Cooperatives, DDA  
  Climate-smart agriculture practices  
  Demonstration on conservation agriculture  
  Good agronomic practices 
  Open and operate bank accounts  
  Undertake Farming as a business  
B. Financial and Entrepreneurial Skills of RI and MSME 
a. Purpose: Strengthen the capacities of RIs and REs to attain effective and efficient 
entrepreneurial and financial management skills to optimise revenue generation while 
instituting sound administration, accounting and financial management systems. 
b. Resource Persons 
  Business Advisory Centres (BACs)/Business Resource Centres (BRCs)  
  PROSPER Rural Financial Specialist 
  PROSPER Technical Assistance 
c. Curriculum for Entrepreneurial and Financial Management Training  
  Financial literacy, including record keeping  
  Entrepreneurship and business management 
  Financial and Bank Literacy 
  Commercial and market operations 
  Assess, negotiate, and implement contracts with service providers  
  Access inputs, services, and finance  
  Develop business plans to access finance  
 
Implementing business plans successfully 
  Open and operate bank accounts 
d. Special training targeting MSMEs (See Section 2.1) 
The DDAs will lead an extension campaign organised around group organisational skills, climate-smart 
  Training of RIs and MSMEs on climate risks and integration into BPs /e 
demonstrations and practical training sessions on topics such as conservation agriculture, agronomic 
  Training of RIs and MSMEs on VC linkages and green bankable BPs 
practices and “farming as a business” tailored to the local agroecological conditions and main VCs in 
  Demonstrations on climate risks and green BPs 
the cluster. Financial literacy, orderly record keeping and the basics of business conduct will be 
  BRCs/BACs support for partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC 
addressed to complement instruction on the technical aspects of sustainable production. Emphasis 
will be placed on the need for a marketing plan for every produce: “production with a purpose”. An 
estimated 4,500 RIs and 800 MSMEs will be trained over the life of PROSPER. Off-farm, the training 
  Demonstrations dedicated for women and youth on climate risks/green BPs 
  Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /g 
actors /f 
33 
will center on the remediation and proper management of the depleted shared NRs which are key to 
the livelihoods of farming communities. Best practices in soil and water conservation, tree planting 
and NRM, (to be supported in many target clusters with remedial works under subcomponent 1.2 
below), will be shown to be beneficial to all the present and future users of the landscape. The 
capacity-building campaign will extend to non-producer economic interest groups who will be given 
training on enterprise development, particularly value addition and support services. Many will be 
Youth-based and start-ups stimulated by the project. 
Household nutrition and healthy diet. 
Alongside the measures to build the capacity of target groups to increase and sustain incomes and to 
sustainably manage their NRs, PROSPER will deliver an inclusive community-wide nutrition and 
healthy diet agenda to benefit all households, in synergy with the promotion of climate and nutrition-
sensitive farming and vegetable cultivation. This initiative enables smallholder famers to derive 
optimum health benefits from the crops they produce for food and for sale, by improving the 
nutritional value of the food consumed.  
This initiative will promote dietary changes on the ground as a counterbalance to the drive to produce 
food for sale, shifting attention to the nutritional value of the food consumed.  It will start with a 
Participatory Needs Assessment in each target community, which entails training on household 
methodologies (HHM) and domestic financial literacy for up to 1,400 selected households throughout 
the project life cycle. The Gender Action Learning System (GALS) as part of HHM will be introduced to 
enhance Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment (GEWE) in PROSPER. GALS will create a sense 
of unity and cooperation within self-selected families to develop a vision and strategy to get 
themselves out of poverty. A Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) study will be conducted to 
deepen understanding of the local issues around nutrition and diet, and to serve as a baseline for 
specific trainings and the development of a Social Behavior Change Communication (SBCC) strategy. 
At the center of nutrition activities will be a household education programme that will be delivered by 
peers through care groups.  One of the vehicles for improved nutrition will be the establishment of 
demonstration nutrition gardens to grow healthy diversified diets for consumption and for sale. The 
nutrition garden will be accompanied by dedicated training on post-harvest management, nutrition 
education and SBCC for the beneficiary communities. The above households will serve as a pathway 
for transferring nutrition related information and best practices to other target households in the 
project areas.  
Strengthening of extension services 
Extension Services at the district level received a boost in the last four years in terms of the numbers 
of Agricultural Extension Agents (AEAs), which increased from 1,586 officers in 2016 to 4,286 in 2020. 
This improved Extension officer to farmer ratio from 1:1,900 to 1:709.  Under the support of the 
Modernising Agriculture of Ghana (MAG) funded by Global Affairs Canada, over 3,367 motorcycles 
were supplied to AEAs to enhance their mobility and delivery of services.  The MAG programme also 
retrained and reoriented AEAs to “on market-oriented agriculture” to broaden their skills beyond 
agronomic and production techniques to include post production agricultural activities.  
Under Prosper, AEAs will be further strengthened during the project implementation to be effective in 
community mobilization, delivery of extension on agronomic practices, value chain promotion, 
natural resource management and gender and vulnerability targeting. Training of trainers will be 
provided to AEAs and district and regional officers of agriculture on enterprise development and 
natural resource management.  
To ensure the effective delivery of extension services, PROSPER will support the DDAs with 
motocycles, laptops and protective gear.  To establish a good database for FBOs for targeting and 
34 
tracking, the project will fund a study to assess FBOs and categorise them into a database to be 
updated regularly.  
The training and orientation of AEAs and agriculture officers will be provided by the TAs. 
Technical Assistance (TA) for sub-component 1-1 
TA in the form of individual consultancies will be provided to support DDA, RDAs and other extension 
staff. The level of TA will be around 6-9 man months per region for four years which is the peak 
implementation period for component 1-1 activities. The TAs are expected to cover the following 
tasks: 
- 
Provide guidance to extension staff on targeting and reaching out to communities and 
mobilization 
Targeting and target groups 
Provide guidance regarding consultation and cluster formulation 
Provide guidance regarding formulation of cluster plans 
- 
- 
- 
-  Nutrition activities 
Detailed ToRs will be included in this PIM.  
35 
Box 3: OUTLINE MOU WITH RDA and DDA AS KEY IMPLEMETING PARTNERS 
1. PROSPER MOU with DDA 
a. Purpose: Formalise the cooperation between PROSPER PCU and the District Department of Agriculture 
for the implementation of PROSPER capacity building and training of RI and RE in the districts.   
b. Obligations of District Department of Agriculture and District Implementation Team with support 
from TA. Following project agreed implementation arrangements: 
  Prepare District AWPB for PCU review and endorsement 
 
Identify all the relevant RIs and REs in the District (existing or potential) for the training. Provide 
list and justification to the PCU for review and approval 
  Organise sensitization and awareness creation on PROSPER and provide agreed training in the 
communities 
  Conduct training in the following thematic areas: 
o  Organisational development of RIs and REs 
o  Climate Smart Agriculture/Conservation Agriculture 
o  Good Agricultural Practices 
o  Harvesting Post-Harvest Management and Marketing 
o 
Food safety, quality, standards, weights and measures 
o  Operational efficiency 
o 
Farming as a business 
o 
Financial literacy, following implementation arrangements under sub-component 2-2. 
c. Obligations of PROSPER 
  Provide TA to District implementation Teams 
  Review and approve the District level draft submissions 
  Provide the financial resources to the various activities agreed upon by both parties. Budget items 
include: 
o  Extension Agents fuel and allowance for lunch for field days (no top-up, honorarium or DSA for 
district teams)  DSA is only allowed for resource persons from central level as needed 
o  Training logistics and material 
o 
o 
o  Demonstration activities 
Fuel for transportation of resource persons to training sites 
Facilitation of registration and certification of RIs and Res 
  Coordinate, supervise and control implementation and delivery of the ToT to DDA resource 
persons 
2. Prosper MOU with RDA 
a. Purpose: Formalise cooperation between PROSPER PCU and Regional Diretorate of Agriculture (RDA) to 
enable the later monitor and supervise the District Directorates of Agriculture in carrying out project 
activities. 
b. Obligations of RDA 
  Monitor and provide guidance to the District Directorates of Agriculture in carrying out PROSPER 
activities 
  Participate in PROSPER activities including field days 
  Reports on field monitoring and supervision visits undertaken to the districts using template 
provided by PROSPER 
c. Obligations of PROSPER PCU 
Provide the funds required to undertake the oversight functions as agreed by both parties.  
36 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
This development activity seeks to realize some of the “public goods” investments prioritized and 
chosen by local communities through the Cluster Planning process. Three complementary types of 
climate-resilient infrastructure are eligible: Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation 
measures; Feeder roads and farm tracks; and Communal social infrastructure. The investments aim to 
improve the sustainability of NR-related livelihoods and to stimulate socioeconomic advancements in 
the participating clusters. 
The NR remediation infrastructures may comprise soil and water conservation structures, such as 
contour bunds, reforestation and shelterbelts, bench terraces, tied ridges, water harvesting and 
storage ponds, as well as climate change mitigation measures in line with local conditions. The District 
Assembly will undertake all procedures as appropriate to acquire/lease any land needed for 
construction. PROSPER envisages expanding and rehabilitating strategic road networks (feeder roads 
and farm tracks, culverts and small bridges), as well as shared domestic water supply structures 
(boreholes with hand or solar pumps), sanitation facilities and waste management systems, and 
alternative/green energy schemes (including resource and energy recovery from waste). 
Each capital investment plan will include appropriate management, operation, maintenance and 
ongoing financing arrangements, with overall responsibility resting with the community. Agreements 
will be reached between the District Assemblies and the cluster leadership for the post-construction 
management of installations by various community gender-balanced committees, building on 
previous local norms and the organisational training delivered under Subcomponent 1.1. The off 
farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation infrastructure and the Feeder Roads/Farm tracks will be 
funded 100% by the project. For water supply, it is normal for communities to make a small 
contribution of up to 5% of the capital cost. For household toilet systems, the project pays for the 
concrete slab or digni-loo, while the beneficiaries excavate the pits and build the superstructure with 
their own resources. 
Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation infrastructure will be community-managed. The 
infrastructure for NR remediation and environmental protection will be managed and maintained by a 
Natural Resources and Environmental Management Committee to be established under the project. 
Feeder roads and farm tracks will be maintained by the Department of Feeder Roads, who will be 
involved in implementation to enable them to take over post-construction maintenance. Water 
harvesting, water supply and waste systems will be managed by a Water and Sanitation Management 
Team (WSMT), a statutorily recognised body operating under the auspices of rthe District Assembly 
Works Department. Water will be sold at the tap and revenue raised will be used to maintain the 
supply systems. Sanitation and waste management systems will be at the household and maintained 
by the households. Environmental sanitation and waste disposal and recovery systems will be 
coordinated by the WSMT and supervised by the District Assembly Works Department. 
The Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) process is a framework for identifying and evaluating 
potential environmental and social impacts of infrastructure interventions, as well as providing for 
mitigation and management safeguards during implementation. Essentially the environment and 
people should not be worse off as a result of the project. The ESS presented in this design document 
has assessed PROSPER to be Category B and recommends the preparation of site-specific 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) for all physical interventions, which will be done. 
However, the impacts associated with the proposed categories of socioeconomic infrastructure are 
minimal, site-specific and can be managed without resulting in any irreversible damage to the 
environment. The waste management interventions improve the environment. 
Three complementary types of climate-resilient infrastructure are eligible: Off-farm/watershed works 
and hazard mitigation measures; Feeder roads and farm tracks; and Communal social infrastructure. 
37 
The identification of common ownership infrastructure under PROSPER will be initiated during the 
preparation of NRLIPs and subsequently ranked through further investigations to establish the 
pipeline of priority communal projects. The selection and prioritization of public infrastructure will be 
based on agreed criteria, which will be made available to the stakeholders by the project. The 
infrastructure identified for implementation shall form part of the District Medium-Term 
Development Plan (MTDP). The District Assembly undertakes all processes to acquire the land area via 
Lease or Free Hold (involving survey and production of cadastral plans and issuance of formal title 
from the Lands Commission). The implementation of socioeconomic infrastructure activities will 
commence with the procurement of consultancy services for engineering design and supervision of 
works. Following acceptance of the designs and bid documents, a contractor is competitively selected 
to undertake the installation and construction of the relevant infrastructure works that have been 
designed. Where necessary, an environmental and social management plan is developed by the 
project in collaboration with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and/or the Environmental 
Division of the Ghana Health Service (GHS). 
1.2.1  Objective Ranking System for Infrastructure 
Criteria for selection of socioeconomic infrastructure needs involve addressing the following: 
Is the infrastructure critical for the value chains selected for the cluster?  
i. 
ii.  Will the infrastructure benefit the smallholder farmer? 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi.  Will the MMDAs provide the oversight and monitoring outputs to sustain the infrastructure?  
Are there viable post construction management arrangements?  
Availability of litigation free land for the infrastructure identified 
The infrastructure will be captured under the District Assembly Annual Maintenance plan  
1.2.2  Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation measures 
Natural resources remediation aims to preserve productivity and ecosystem integrity regarding the 
water, soil, plants, and animals within a watershed, thereby protecting and restoring natural resource 
integrity for environmental, social, and economic benefit. 
Strategies and practices that protect the resource base comprise agroforestry, expanded tree cover 
on fragile slopes, constructing soil and water conservation structures for the control of soil erosion, 
preservation of water resources and biodiversity in the environment.   
The identification of infrastructure for environmental remediation will be part of the NRLIP process. 
The process for selecting natural resource remediation interventions in communities comprise three 
steps as follows: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Site selection that is premised on level/risk of degradation of the natural resource  
Rapid micro-watershed assessment that combines a quick science-based assessment by 
experts along with participatory assessment by local stakeholders  
Identify priorities for specific micro-watershed interventions, based on stakeholder 
review and consensus 
Natural resource  and environmental remediation infrastructure includes all mechanical or structural 
measures that control the velocity of surface runoff and thus minimize soil erosion and retain water 
where it is needed. The physical interventions to control runoff include but not limited to, contour 
bunding, bench terraces, tied ridges, contour fallows, windbreaks, stream buffers, grassed waterways, 
earthen embankment, gully control structures, trenching, diversions, ditches, stone terraces and 
water retention pits. The choice of soil and water control infrastructure will depend on the natural 
resource challenges facing the community. Some of the most common off-farm/watershed works and 
hazard mitigation measures are described below.   
38 
Contour Bunding 
a 
Contour bunds are narrow-based earthen embankments constructed at intervals across the slope of 
the land on a contour dividing the length of the slope into pieces to: reduce the velocity of runoff 
water, impound water for increased soil moisture and prevent or minimise soil erosion and land 
degradation. Applying a simple bunding design formular28 on an area with moderate rainfall (800mm 
per year) with moderate loamy soil and 3% land slope yields bunds with bottom width=2.4m; Height 
0.75m, Top width=0.45m, Side slope=1:2. The horizontal spacing between bunds is 30 m and the 
length of each bund per ha is 333 m. 
The average cost of constructing the contour bunds is about US$ 3,000 per ha. The cost of 
engineering design and construction supervision is 10% of the construction cost. 
b 
Planting of protective grass (Vetiver)  
Vetiver is a grass with deep root system that provides structural strength to soils to minimise soil 
erosion, gully formation, soil nutrients loss, roadside & riverbank erosion, river and lake pollution, and 
groundwater depletion. The idea is to plant continuous hedges of Vetiver on the contour lines or 
along rivers and roads so that the leaves of vetiver filter the runoff while the deep roots retain the soil 
and help water infiltration. The cost of purchase and planting vetiver grass is about US$ 500 per ha.  
c 
Gabions 
Gabion structures are made with boulders packed closely in wire mesh cages. They are constructed in 
gullies for retention of debris and soil accumulation without ponding. The cages are constructed from 
mild steel wire for general engineering purposes complying with BS 1052. Stone filling for gabions 
consist of hard durable rock free from weathered or decomposed parts - 120 to 80mm in size. Cost is 
estimated at about $150.00 to $450.00/m3 of protection (Average is US$ 300/ m3). This includes the 
baskets, assembly and filling the baskets, stone fill (may vary depending on location and availability). 
1.2.3 
Feeder roads and farm access tracks 
This socioeconomic infrastructure includes the construction or rehabilitation of rural roads and farm 
tracks (90 km) to facilitate the movement of goods for farmers involved in agribusiness agreements to 
markets and for aggregators to access produce in the farms. This intervention includes the 
construction of culverts, small bridges and other appurtenances required for the conveyance of storm 
water from the roadway. PROSPER will support the identification, design and supervision, preparation 
of bidding documents, construction and/or rehabilitation of the selected road infrastructure. The 
project will provide 100% financing, however the District Assembly/Department of Feeder Roads, the 
public agency responsible for rural roads, must demonstrate that it will provide necessary 
maintenance, by including the roads in their maintenance plans. 
The project provides criteria for selection of feeder roads and farm access tracks to the Cluster 
animators and planning teams, which shall include the Department of Feeder Roads. The teams apply 
these criteria in the selection of roads and farm access tracks to be constructed or rehabilitated under 
the project. The selection proposed and validated by the project teams shall be included in the 
District Assembly Consolidated Plan and Budget. Selection criteria for feeder roads and farm access 
tracks must include but not limited to the following: 
i. 
Roads opening up to major farming sites and irrigation sites;  
28 Vertical Intervals VI = (S/a + b)0.3 where S is land slope (%), ‘a’ is constant = 2 for low rainfall or 3 for heavy 
rainfall, ‘b’ constant = 2; Horizontal Intervals HI = VI/S*100; Length of Bund per ha LB = 100S/VI. 
39 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Roads opening up to block farmlands for grains and cereals under rainfed conditions 
(acreages = 500 acres or more);  
Roads that require bridges to make them usable will receive less priority; this condition is due 
to the current limited funds;  
Economic viability-benefits to community, employment generation, in particular the 
livelihood of women and children;  
Environmental impacts can be mitigated at an affordable cost;  
Selection criteria for farm access tracks must include but not limited to the following:  
o  Link up to a feeder road;  
o  Link up to water management schemes, to large block farms, aggregation sites and 
other project intervention sites 
1.2.4  Communal Social Infrastructure  
a. 
Domestic Water Supply and Sanitation 
 Communities with poor access to water for domestic use or trek long distances to fetch water may be 
supported by the project to improve access to water supply.  The identification of the need for water 
supply will take place during the preparation of NRLIPs. Community members convened to discuss 
and identify their developmental needs may include the provision of domestic water supply and 
sanitation/waste management facilities.  The staff of the District Works Departments (DWD) from the 
District Assembly shall participate in the discussions to educate the community on the water supply 
and sanitation opportunities available, technology choice and level of service. Approval of the specific 
request for water supply provision, is contingent on meeting the requirements of a selection criteria. 
Community pre-selection checklist criteria include the following: 
Level of poverty;  
 
  Existing water and sanitation facilities, their condition and distances/proximity 
  Water and sanitation coverage 
  Water related diseases prevalence 
  Performance of existing community-based organisations  
  Number of self-help projects completed in the last five years; 
  Evidence of bank statement showing an initial deposit, as required. 
Following a community pre-selection for a water supply facility, technical assistance support is 
provided for the community to prepare a water supply system proposal, which shall be appraised for 
implementation under the project.  The eligibility criteria in the Appraisal Checklist include:  
  Documentary evidence that proposed facility and the sites belongs to the community 
  Technical and environmental feasibility of proposed civil works and goods 
  Evidence that the community reached consensus over technological choice and service level 
desired  
  One year O&M financing deposited in the community bank account  
  Procedures for O&M and tariff collection prepared and adopted 
  Plans for improved hygiene, environmental protection of the water supply facility 
  Gender-balanced representation in the Water and Sanitation Management Team (WSMT), 
whose members are trained and formally recognised by the MMDA 
  Proposed facilities meet national technical and environmental standards 
Water and Sanitation Management Team (WSMT)  
b. 
Communities benefitting from water supply and sanitation facilities shall elect a gender balanced 
Water and Sanitation Management Team, (WSMT), which shall be involved in planning, 
40 
implementation of the water and sanitation sub-project.  They shall sign off on completed works and 
community development activities on water, sanitation and hygiene. 
The Water and Sanitation Management Team (WSMT) comprises of a gender balanced team that is 
democratically elected from a beneficiary community. The WSMT’s persona is derived from the 
statutory powers of the District Assembly Works Department. The WSMT is responsible for the proper 
operations and maintenance of boreholes fitted with handpump or limited reticulated piped scheme 
(comprising borehole fitted with solar powered submersible pump connected to a high-level tank and 
a battery of taps). The WSMT: 
i. 
Retains staff and service providers that operate the water system and collect revenue from 
consumers of water;  
ii.  Monitors the services provided by its employed staff or a private operator (in the case of 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
reticulated pipe schemes; 
Keeps proper financial records on revenue and expenditure, and reports to the community as 
required; 
Submits regular reports to the District Assembly Works Services Department; 
Undertakes hygiene education and sanitation promotion; and  
Proposes tariffs or user fees in accordance with Community Water and Sanitation Agency 
(CWSA) guidelines to guarantee sustainable delivery of services. 
Sanitation and Waste Systems 
c. 
The focus on sanitation is to create awareness for sustained behavioural change to ensure the 
following:  
i.Safe confinement and disposal of excreta and other wastes  
ii.Safe handling and use of water  
iii.Personal, domestic, and environmental hygiene  
iv.Regular hand washing with soap, particularly at critical times  
The project will generate demand for improved sanitation products and services through sensitisation 
sessions at the community level. With regards to household sanitation facilities, the project will 
provide support to poor households which are unable to afford the costs of constructing a toilet. This 
support will be limited to core elements of a basic household latrine, such as the slab, or digni-loo unit 
with the rest of the costs to be financed by the household itself. 
Technologies for Domestic Water Supply and Sanitation Systems 
d. 
The choice of domestic water supply and sanitation systems comprise the following technologies: 
A. Limited mechanised borehole: Average cost per system – US$ 20,000-35,000 
In accordance with the guidelines provided by the Community Water and Sanitation Agency (CWSA) 
the limited mechanised system shall be constructed for rural communities with populations larger 
than 1,200 people.  The works for this technology comprise: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Borehole drilling and lining (up to 60m) 
Construction of well head assembly with flow meter 
Laying of pipeline from wellhead to High-Level Tank 
Install solar submersible pump in borehole 
Install High-Level Tank capacity of 10,000 litres. 
Install 2 to 4 standpipes close to the High-level Tank 
B. 
Borehole fitted with handpump: US$ 8,000 
41 
The CWSA guidelines propose the construction of a borehole fitted with a handpump for communities 
with population from 300 to 1,200. One borehole serves about 300 persons. The works for this 
technology comprise: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Borehole drilling and lining (up to 40 m) 
Construction of concrete apron around borehole with drainage ditch or a soak away pit 
Install handpump 
Sanitation systems 
Ventilated Improved Pit Latrine (US$ 100) 
C. 
The VIP latrine is suitable for household of up to 15 persons. The VIP latrine consist of stabilised pit, 
improved concrete slab, improved superstructure, vent pipe. Flexible choice of material for the 
superstructure: Sandcrete blocks, bamboo/palm fronds, wooden boards, sand, cement, PVC pipe. 
Digni-Loo Latrine (US$ 85) 
D. 
Digni-Loo toilet is the latest addition to the household sanitation technologies, which is visually 
appealing and easy to install and maintain. It comprises a plastic slab and substructure that combines 
functionality, safety, affordability, and reusable. Flexible choice of material for the superstructure: 
Sandcrete blocks, bamboo/palm fronds, wooden boards, sand, cement, PVC pipe. 
II. Development of value chains 
Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators around 
selected agricultural value chains. The expected outcome is: Smallholders and small businesses draw 
greater benefits from the increasing market outlets for agricultural produce through comprehensive 
financial, capacity and marketing support.  
Whereas the first component will invest in the human, physical and natural resources of the target 
communities, the second component is concentrated on investing in the “private goods” of the 
population to bring about a sustained uplift in the earning capacity of agricultural producer groups 
and related enterprises. The aim is to expand business activity both within the target communities 
and in lasting agreements with other actors in the selected VCs. 
Agricultural value chain describes the full range of activities required to bring a product or service 
from conception, through the different phases of production, delivery to final consumers and final 
disposal after use. Under the PROSPER programme, products which will be focused on are rice, maize, 
soya, cashew, shea, and poultry. These products will be upgraded to offer more value to the 
stakeholders. Upgrading a value chain means acquiring the technological, institutional and market 
capabilities that allow resource-poor rural communities to improve their competitiveness and move 
into higher-value activities. Upgrading is the process of trading up, trading in higher value markets or 
items. Small businesses will be empowered to take advantage of the increasing market demand for 
agricultural produce. 
Component 2. Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators around 
selected agricultural value chains 
Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development.  
This practical and intensive developmental activity is aimed at generating enduring partnerships 
between producers engaged in climate-resilient farming and larger-scale agribusinesses within locally 
appropriate forms of robust and equitable contract relationships in the private sector. PROSPER itself 
will not enter business relations with the parties at any stage. The project will concentrate on those 
42 
eligible RIs and MSMEs that demonstrated interest and potential in the Component 1 capacity 
building interventions. Group eligibility for different windows of PROSPER support centres on meeting 
membership criteria regarding the minimum proportion of specified disadvantaged groups: women, 
female and male youth, PWDs and landless or near-landless households. These criteria allow for and, 
for practical reasons, encourage a minority of non-eligible members with productive land holdings of 
up to 10 ha in each group.29 
This sub-component will identify the existing markets for the chosen products under the value chains, 
strengthen and increase their outreach to the target households. The purpose of agricultural 
marketing is to distribute agricultural commodities from producers to users and consumers. Market 
participants may engage in moving, storing, grading and processing the commodity in the expectation 
that this will enhance its value to consumers. Although these marketing services incur costs, 
producers, consumers and the overall economy gain where the benefits of specialized production and 
exchange exceed the costs of marketing and allow greater volumes and prices for producers and 
greater volumes and lower prices for consumers. 
PROSPER will support about 100,000 participants in total. Around 50 percent of them will benefit 
from sub-component 1-2. The strengthened will serve as platform to reach out to all the members 
along the value chain to benefit from agribusiness partnership and improved marketing 
infrastructure. 
Preparatory studies and assessments:  
As an essential prerequisite to the investment, PROSPER will build on the value chain analysis 
conducted during project design and assess further the potential for increasing the real demand for 
the produce from areas remote from the main markets. It will examine in depth the status and 
characteristics of selected national value chains (soya, rice maize, cashew, shea and poultry) and map 
the VC actors located close to the target communities, particularly the first stage market linkages 
between producers and others in the chains. The general presumption is that most smallholder 
farmers and their groups have no established marketing arrangements and interact opportunistically 
with buyers and middlemen only as and when they harvest a surplus. The number and location of 
private sector operators in the project area, including larger agribusinesses working with contracted 
outgrowers, is not well documented. PROSPER will commission a detailed structural examination of 
each VC, including an estimation of the value added at each link, to provide a sound platform for 
project interventions 
PROSPER will recruit TA to carry out a detailed value chain analysis and associated information 
gathering. The analysis will be conducted at the Regional level and will touch base strongly on the 
district level and the selected clusters. It will determine key players and actors and will collect detailed 
information. . The TA will work closely with DDAs, BRCs/BACs and other key entities in the areas.  
Promotion of linkages between producers and value chain actors. 
Business Advisory Services (BAS):  
PROSPER will support developing formal marketing partnerships between agribusinesses (export-
oriented and local) and target beneficiaries. Through these partnerships, agricbusinesses will 
incentivise target RIs and MSMEs to increase their income by improving the quality and quantity of 
produce.  
PROSPER will also recruit TA to support Business Advisory Services to be provided by the BRCs/BACs. 
PROSPER will enter into MoU agreement with the BRCs as a BAS.  
29 However, for reasons of equity and to avoid any elite capture of benefits, strict rules will limit any material 
provision of inputs to RI members to a standard package sufficient to cultivate 1 ha. 
43 
Indicative criteria for the TA include presence in the selected region including districts where the 
selected clusters are located and past experience in preparing bankable BPs 
With the support of the Business Advisory Centres (BACs)/Business Resource Centres (BRCs) and 
DDAs, the project will engage with VC actors in each participating district with an information-
gathering and analysis exercise. An initial assessment will be conducted of the organisational status 
and maturity of the targeted groups (RIs and MSME), building on the cluster profiling at project 
inception, (Component 1.1), in terms of their organisational proficiency, level of capitalization, 
acquired skills in financial management and potential to establish business agreements with VC actors 
such as traders and processors. 
Entry level 
(all groups passed this level to 
benefit from sub-component 
2-1) (tier 1) 
New / inexperienced group 
No internal capital 
No skill 
Less-mature RIs/MSMEs (tier 
2) 
More-mature RIs/MSMEs 
(tier 3) 
Loose organisation, some 
evidence of joint activity. 
Experienced and 
structured group. 
Less than 500 cedis per 
member on average. 
500-1,500 cedis per 
member in average. 
Regular saving practices. 
Groups with internal small 
loan system, little/no 
experience with formal 
financial system 
Group with a bank 
account, some 
experience in credit 
management. 
No experience 
Some experience with 
difficulty to develop 
partnership 
Regular and successful 
partnerships. 
Maturity 
indicators 
Organisatio
nal skills 
Level of 
capitalizati
on 
Skills in 
financial 
manageme
nt 
Potential to 
establish 
business 
agreement
s. 
The groups will be categorized broadly into two streams going forward with project support: those 
needing more time and coaching to consolidate their organisational and financial capacity to engage 
in business; and those deemed ready to advance to formal business arrangements with larger VC 
actors and external financial services. This objective evaluation will be instrumental in proper 
targeting and sequencing to access further project support and appropriate financial services. 
It is expected that 50% of the total number of beneficiaries targeted under Component 1 (50,000 
people) by PROSPER will qualify for assistance under this Subcomponent. Among those, the 
marginalised, poorer and most vulnerable RIs (composed of more than 50% members with access to 
land of 1 ha or less and 50% women, 60% youth and 10% people with disability) and smaller MSMEs 
(fewer than 9 employees) progressing from Component 1 and meeting organisational proficiency 
requirements, minimum level of internal savings and acquired skills in financial management will be 
offered training sessions backed up by demonstrations and events at the cluster level on climate risk 
mitigation, resilience and integration into value. Particular attention will be paid to potential MSMEs 
dedicated to women, youth and PWDs. Meetings will raise awareness, share information, bring 
together potential partners, and seek to conclude RI and MSME agreements with VC actors. These 
beneficiaries will be assisted later in the preparation of a basic climate-friendly Business Plan (BP) to 
aid the consolidation of their income-generating activities and consideration for financing, (see 
below). 
44 
The relatively better-off RIs that: (i) have a larger proportion of well-off beneficiaries (less than 50% of 
the members have access to an area of 1 ha of land and no more than 10% have access to 5-10 ha of 
land) and a lesser proportion of vulnerable people (40% women, 30% youth and 5% PWDs); and 
(ii) meet the organisational and financial literacy requirements, (including a bank account with an 
adequate level of savings), will be offered a more advanced version of the trainings and 
demonstrations leading towards the establishment of business partnerships in each target district. 
MSMEs (with up to 29 employees) will be engaged in the same developmental processes if their 
business can be shown to contribute to increasing the offtake from the primary target group and 
extending the reach of the VCs in remote locations. These beneficiaries will be assisted later in the 
preparation of a more advanced version of an orthodox Business Plan to support an application for 
external commercial credit. Those less-mature RIs and MSMEs that perform well in the entry level 
scheme are able and encouraged to progress to this advanced level activity. 
The outcome of this activity is the establishment of formal market linkages between group of 
capitated RIs and standalone MSMEs and offtakers, value adders, aggregators, etc.  
Training modules development.  
The BAS will train the target RIs and MSMEs and guide them to develop business plans (BPs), form 
marketing linkages with buyers (exporters, processors, wholesalers) and develop business plans and 
start affordable credit linkages with Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) to implement the BPs. It 
will also help the RIs and MSMEs with the right targeting profile to benefit from the PROSPER MG 
facility.  
The TA will support PROSPER in developing a set of training modules based on the project design and 
other VC assessments. These modules will focus on a range of topics, such as: 
Training of RIs and MSMEs on climate risks and integration into BPs /e 
Training of RIs and MSMEs on VC linkages and green bankable BPs 
- 
- 
-  Demonstrations on climate risks and green BPs 
-  BRCs/BACs support for Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /f 
-  Demonstrations dedicated for women and youth on climate risks/green BPs 
- 
Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /g 
PROSPER will organise a series of Training of Trainer (ToT) workshops for preparing a group of 
“master trainers” from BRCs, DDAs and regional Departments who can further roll out these training 
and capacity building inputs to the target households in the future.  
PROSPER will identify groups of RIs in the clusters of communities identified under sub-component 1-
1.  
Contract agreement and partnerships:  
PROSPER aims to support smallholder farmers to enter into inclusive commercial partnerships with 
other value-chain actors. This can either be done through public-private producers’ partnerships, and 
or direct contractual agreements. The aim of these partnerships is to secure volumes of sales and 
agreed pricing mechanisms (either fixed or spot), to facilitate finance and access embedded services 
from agribusiness on improved productivity and quality, as well as promote value-addition processing.   
Some of the other areas PROSPER will invest to support market development linkages between 
producers and buyers are provided below. PROSPER will facilitate certification of producers to 
appropriate professional certification agencies such as the Foods and Drugs Authority to ensure 
standards are met. PROSPER may support in meeting cost for certification against (i) clear assessment 
45 
in the business plan that certification will be an advantage for production and marketing and (ii) 
presence of clear marketing agreements (formal and informal) for certified produce. 
Business plan (BP) development: 
The centrepiece of the third activity is the generation of a sound, achievable and fully costed plan 
appropriate to the resources and realistic prospects of each concerned entity. For the less-mature RIs 
and MSMEs , which meets the poverty criteria referred to above, a simple but achievable BP will be 
prepared with the support of BRCs, BACs, DDAs and PFIs as available. The Cluster Committees from 
Component 1.1 will be strengthened and upgraded to include PFIs and other VC actors to participate 
in BP development and realisation. BPs will be developed by multiple RIs and standalone MSMEs with 
the prerequisites of potential formal market linkages (supported by the project or pre-existing), 
proper organisational skills and an adequate level of internal capital. Each basic BP should include 
inputs, simple tools and equipment, and whatever other cost items are required, set against a realistic 
estimate of returns. For individual MSMEs, the BP will centre on income-generating services and 
activities related to primary production, such as land preparation, simple value addition or crop 
aggregation, and may include limited working capital. All simple BPs should be green in design and 
address effectively climate and NR degradation risks and impacts. The simple BPs will be evaluated by 
an independent agent/service provider (to avoid elite capture or any risk of political interference) 
and, if acceptable, used to support a request for support through a Matching Grant window, (detailed 
under Subcomponent 2.2). Access to this MG window will be limited to the very poor groups and 
MSMEs with less than nine employees and meeting the targeting criteria (with regard to percentage 
of women, youth and PWDs described below: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
The marginalised, poorer and most vulnerable RIs composed of more than 50% members 
with access to land of 1 ha or less  
50% women (some selected value chains such as shea will target 100% women) 
40% youth for RIs and 60%  youth for MSMEs  
10% people with disability 
As mentioned above smaller MSMEs (with nine employees and less) will be targeted. These MSMEs 
should have similar percentages of women, youth and PWDs referred to above. 
Both above mentioned RIs and MSMEs should have progressed from Component 1 and meeting 
organisational proficiency requirements, minimum level of internal savings and acquired skills in 
financial management. They should be at least at tier 2 level (referred to in the table above).  
For stronger RIs and MSMEs meeting at least the overall targeting criteria by the project, the project 
will provide the opportunity for professional support by technical assistance and the BACs/BRCs in 
close collaboration with the PFIs in preparing a fully-fledged BP and facilitating access to affordable 
finance, (see Subcomponent 2.2 below).30 The strengthened Cluster Committees will support the 
process. The PFIs themselves will be receiving capacity building and mentoring support from PROSPER 
to extend their outreach and are expected to engage fully with their potential customers early in the 
Business Planning stage. The first category of advanced BPs will include groups of RIs partnering with 
an agribusiness/value chain actor. It may include inputs and simple tools for the participating RIs as 
well as working capital and elements such as mills, machinery, vehicles, equipment and minor 
infrastructure for the agribusiness. Another category of full-fledged BPs will include individual MSMEs 
with up to 29 employees. The full-fledged BP for MSMEs will be larger and more sophisticated than 
those under the basic ones and would similarly cover working capital requirements. Each BP should 
30 The concept of supporting “flexibility to achieve sustainability” in financing rural poor people is central to 
IFAD’s new Inclusive Rural Finance Policy, with less emphasis on commercial (market-priced) finance at the 
entry level. 
46 
be green in design and address effectively the climate change adaptation and mitigation challenges 
and NR degradation risks. The successful advanced BPs will be eligible for support by the Blended 
Finance Facility, (detailed under Subcomponent 2.2). 
The above groups will meet at least the following minimum criteria: 
The smallholders RIs composed of more than 50% members with access to land of 2 ha or less  
40% women 
30% youth  
5% people with disability 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
As mentioned above MSMEs (with twenty nine employees and less) will be targeted. These MSMEs 
should have similar percentages of women, youth and PWDs referred to above. 
Both above mentioned RIs and MSMEs should have progressed from Component 1 and meeting 
organisational proficiency requirements, minimum level of internal savings and acquired skills in 
financial management. They need to be meet the requirements for tier 3 level (referred to in the 
table above).  
For PROSPER, the imperative is to promote and expand businesses operating an aggregator-primary 
producer model that is prepared to engage with the IFAD target RIs and related enterprises to 
become their interface with the market. This VC chain development is key to moving the sector on 
from the failing unsustainable smallholder farming systems. 
The PCU will make an open call for business plans (BPs) from groups of RIs in the programme area. 
There will be two types of business plans; one for MG financing (simple Business Plan and one for BFF 
financing (full-fledged Business Plan. The project will also cater for green investments and so business 
plans will be required for them. Business Development Services (BDS) will support the above different 
target groups and assist them in preparation of bankable business plans 
The BDS will support the beneficiaries’ groups coming together with an Agribusiness partner and 
standalone MSMEs to prepare a BP.  
Contents of the BPs:  
The pre-requisite of the BPs is that it will be simple enough so that the RIs will have technical 
command to manage and that the planned activities will translate in livelihood increase. The content 
of the BP  will include i) institutional details about the leadership, member composition and activities 
of the RI or MSME as relevant ; ii) the description of the business concept/business model along with 
the background and rationale for selecting it; iii) details of target beneficiaries, particularly women 
youth and PWDs, along with socio economic category and projected increase in outreach of benefits 
over 3-5 years; iv) operational details outlining how the business will be operated and managed; v) 
marketing and market development plans for establishing the necessary contractual arrangements; 
(vi) market-oriented production plans and measures for improved production efficiencies, addressing 
the effects of climate change and sustainable use of natural resources (further elaborated and 
implemented under Component 2.2); vii) projected revenue and profitability over 3 to 5 years and 
revenue retention and reinvestment plans; viii) financing needs and sources of finance for meeting all 
organizational and technical capacity building requirements; production needs; market development 
and marketing plans and working capital requirements; and ix) impact on the income level, and 
nutrition and resilience of the target households. The BP will be green and prepared in accordance 
with the Operational Manual for the IGREENFIN with regard to green investments. This Operational 
Manual of the IGREENFIN is considered part of PROSPER PIM. This will be a requirement for all BPs 
including the simple (for the MG window) and full-fledged ones (BFF window). 
47 
The project will make sure an offtaker will be part of the full-fledged BP arrangement.    
BP development process:  
Groups of RIs or standalone MSMEs interested in the business plan will submit a concept note 
prepared with the assistance of extension officers in the community. . For full-fledged BP, an offtaker 
could be part of the process. The concept note will be 1-3 pages long and will present a summary of 
the business idea, expected number of beneficiaries and their economic category, expected level of 
financing required, sources of finance, key risks and plans for mitigating these. TA will be provided for 
the preparation of the two types of BPs. 
The strengthened Cluster Committees including PFIs will participate in the development of the BP  
Business Plan Review: 
PROSPER will recruit an independent agent to conduct review of simple BP for the MG window. The 
independent agent should have capacity whether the simple BPs are green and meet criteria for 
climate adaptation and mitigation. 
For the BFF process, the PFIs will make the decision regarding whether the full-fledged BP for the BFFs 
are successful or not. The evaluation process will include the climate officer in the PCU and the 
project unit in APEX BANK to ensure that the successful full-fledged BP meets the GCF and PROSPER 
requirements regarding being green and meet the adaptation and mitigation requirements.  
All BPs (simple and fully fledged) should demonstrate that the proposed activities and investments 
comply with the following eligibility criteria: bankable; social inclusiveness (generation of benefits to 
women, youth, very poor and poor households, PWDs); market prospects; show job creation 
prospective; no duplication of previous similar support to the same group; increasing livelihood, 
climate  mitigation and adaptation measures integrated as per project and GCF requirements, 
resilience and nutrition security for target households; and financial and organisational feasibility; and 
it should be green.  
The business plans will be assessed based on the following criteria: i) Readiness and capacity: previous 
business history and financial performance; existing activity, capacities and group cohesiveness; ii) 
business plan quality: identification of market needs, prospective clients, realistic targets and pricing, 
etc.; iii) projected profitability/cash flow: the business plan should include a multi-annual cash flow 
analysis, including profitability indicators and demonstrated savings capacity for Operation and 
Maintenance and asset replacement; funding sources: clear specification of public and private funding 
sources; demonstrated contractual and 5-Ps of marketing arrangements linkages: number and 
coverage of pre-agreed contracts, volume of sales, embedded services. One of the very important 
factors is presence of mitigation and adaptation factors and that the BP can be classified as green 
Additionally, the RIs/MSMEs should show proof that they have the required financial literacy, saving 
and required organisational skills.. 
Financing business plan implementation:  
PROSPER MG facility will support the simple BPs which is prepared by groups of RIs that classify as 
poorest groups descried in the targeting section of the PIM. The MG facility will support the simple 
BPs from standalone MSMEs (up to 9 employees. No direct support to VC actors will be provided from 
the MG facility. 
The full-fledged, described above from groups of RIs that are classified as poor and standalone 
MSMEs (up to 29 employees) will be financed from the BFF and channelled through PFIs. Groups of 
RIs should submit the BP in partnership with an agribusiness, aggregator, nucleus farmer, etc. 
48 
PROSPER will support APEX BANK through establishing a BFF that will be financed in part from IFAD 
and GCF. The PFIs will access credit at preferential interest rates and flexible collateral terms in order 
to implement the approved BPs of selected firms. PROSPER will collaborate with the Bank of Ghana 
and ARB – APEX Bank to deal with universal banks and Savings and Loans Companies and community 
banks. Funds will be lodged at the ARB Apex Bank (after a MoU is developed) for participating 
institutions to access after they had entered into agreement to be part of the programme. 
Subcomponent 2.2 – Access to rural financial services  
The project objective under this sub-component is to support realization of the Business Plans for 
number of groups coming together and to facilitate lasting access to suitable financial resources for 
the beneficiaries as they engage in agro-business. The financial instruments PROSPER are designed 
primarily to target the most vulnerable producers and VC actors, youth and women in particular as 
well as PWDs, and also to promote climate change adaptation and mitigation and sustainable natural 
resources management. 
PROSPER financial services are structured around three instruments appropriate to the various 
situations prevailing in rural areas as regard capacities and professionalization. The three instruments 
are: 1) Saving and Loan Groups (VSLA model), for sparking saving habit within communities, 2) a 
matching grant (MG) fund for capitalizing RIs that engage in commercial agriculture, and 3) a blending 
finance facility (BFF) operated as a refinancing fund for PFIs, for ensuring a sustainable access to 
financial services. These instruments form a global graduation process by which beneficiaries will be 
able to increase their access financial resources over time as they progressively build their financial 
and management capacities and develop their business relationships with other VC actors. It is 
expected that the most vulnerable people will be able to climb the graduation ladder over the course 
of the project starting with building saving capacities (VSLA model), then benefiting from a grant as to 
improve group capitalization, up to having access to affordable credit through the BFF for their 
sustainable development. At the same time, more mature and advanced groups of beneficiaries 
already involved in agro business agreement with offtakers and aggregators, will be able to have 
direct access to MG and/or BFF without going through the whole process from the start. 
An initial assessment of the maturity of the targeted groups will be conducted alongside the group 
profiling to be commissioned at project inception (Component 1.1). Groups will be evaluated against 
their organizational skills, level of capitalization, their skills in financial management and their ability 
to establish business agreement with VC actors such as traders, processors. They will finally be 
categorized into three tiers depending on their maturity level (from tier 1 for the weakest to tier 3 for 
the most advanced). This will be instrumental in a proper targeting. 
PROSPER shall work with selected rural banks in the project area under the auspices of the ARB Apex 
Bank. The Banking services shall include savings and granting of loans. For savings, the participating 
financial institutions will be encouraged to open accounts for RIs in the project area and do cash pick-
up under compulsory savings scheme.  
The core endeavor of the financing the subcomponent is to provide credit that will allow beneficiaries 
to accomplish their investment plans for production improvement and marketing development. The 
BFF will finance successful full-fledged BPs. The PFIs will obtain approval from the Project unit at the 
APEX-Bank and the PCU for the pipeline to be financed.  
Expected outcomes: 100,000 farmers and rural beneficiaries (through RIs and local MSMEs) are 
integrated in the formal financial system and have lasting access to adapted and affordable financial 
services to develop their agri-businesses, including green investments. Out of these, the majority will 
be members of RIs (approximately 90,000). The above number will include as well non RI members 
49 
who will also be identified either in areas where existing RIs are few or don’t meet the targeting 
criteria31. The project will then integrate non RI members into RIs to expand outreach and ensure 
project benefits achieve the intended target group. Around 10,000 will come from entrepreneurs and 
employees of MSMEs active in the project area around the selected value chains. 
Achievement of this outcome will be measured by the following key indicators: 
  100,000 men and women farmers, entrepreneurs and employees of MSMEs (100 %  of total 
direct beneficiaries) have developed culture saving and have deposited savings on a collective 
bank account. 
  20,500 men and women farmers and entrepreneurs (including MSMEs employees) of the MG 
facility 
  23,965 men and women farmers and entrepreneurs access formal financial services (credit 
from the BFF) mainly through RCBs to invest in their agri-business and for improved climate 
resilience. This target will include up to 30% of those benefited from the MG facility. 
  Promotion of savings: the Saving and Loan Groups (VSLA model). 
The Ghana financial sector review shows that a large majority of small farmers are still excluded from 
the formal financial sector and having access to proper financing solutions is deemed to be one of the 
major constraints that prevent them from developing their production and increasing livelihoods. 
Fundamentally, lending to small farmers is considered risky by the financial institutions as they 
demonstrate weak capacities in terms of farm management and financial management, compounded 
by the inherent risks associated with agricultural businesses in a climate change context that may 
undermine their ability to repay their loans. 
For the bottom tier of the targeted beneficiaries, PROSPER will support the creation of Savings and 
Credit Groups, based on the VSLA model. The objective are to promote the saving habit and culture as 
a way to increase self-financing capacities for farmers and other VC actors, thus reducing dependency 
to external resources; and to build internal capital in order to reduce the need for and cost of credit in 
the longer term. 
Village Saving and Loan Groups are informal autonomous groups of 20 members in average that 
decide to come together to save little cash on a regular basis in a safe box to face future cash needs 
and access small loans to realize income generating activities. These groups base their activities on 
trust, accountability, and transparency in all transactions. 
Through PROSPER, members of tier 1 groups (farmers from RIs and entrepreneurs/employees from 
MSMEs) will be encouraged to save around 30 to 100 cedis per month per member32. After one year, 
groups will be linked to PFIs and assisted to open an interest-bearing bank account to deposit their 
savings and develop their credit worthiness. As they form the group and start transactions, members 
will be trained in financial literacy and banking activity management along the way. Village Saving and 
Loan Groups (Village Saving and Loan Groups) are considered a first step towards inclusion in the 
formal financial system. Savings deposited will constitute an initial capital that will be leveraged in 
subsequent investment in equipment on credit, particularly with the support of the project (see 
below). PFIs will be trained in product development to incentive groups to keep saving. 
31 Extra poor beneficiaries of less than 1 ha and vulnerable groups (women, youth, PWDs) will also be the focus 
of selection from outside the existing RIs pool. 
32 With an ideal objective to save about 1,000 cedis over the year, which is in line with the average cost of an 
input package for the targeted VCs (such as inputs for one hectare or other typical models). Such amounts have 
been  tested  and  validated  by  a  number  of  projects  in  Ghana.  Assessment  of  BPs  will  be  based  on  whether 
activities are suitable for levels of saving per member beneficiary. 
50 
Considering the intensive support that is needed to help form and develop the groups (three training 
sessions spread over one year + mentoring on a regular basis), a system of volunteers will be used to 
rapidly roll out the model on a large scale. As a first solution, PROSPER will replicate groups existing in 
the neighbourhood that were supported by GASIP and other projects in the same target districts. 
Volunteers from those groups will be identified to become trainers and mentors. In other districts, 
volunteers will be identified within the community33, with a focus on women leadership. Training of 
trainers for those volunteers will be organized for building capacities in the communities. At mid-
term, PROSPER will train RCBs’ staff to become trainers, with the view to transferring to banks the 
responsibility of the Village Saving and Loan Groups coordination and support, as part of their strategy 
to attract savings and leverage that source of liquidity. Groups will be primarily identified through the 
initial group profiling to be conducted under component 1.1. PROSPER will favor groups formed with 
members carrying out same activities to become VSLA (production, trading, processing etc.). The 
programme will focus on woman and youth groups as a matter of priority. 
Going forward, best performing groups will be supported towards developing business planning 
capacities. Over the project duration years, PROSPER will target to create / strengthen 5,300 Village 
Saving and Loan Groups (100,000 members) building on the target RIs and MSMEs in the 8 targeted 
regions. After the period of one year, groups will be assessed partly on their level of savings on their 
bank account, participation of members and their commitment to develop their business activities as 
well as their organisational skills. Additional criteria to move to business planning support from the 
project is that the groups should have achieved milestones with regard to improving their internal 
structure and organisational skills. The best rated groups will graduate to preparing a simple Business 
Plan under PROSPER subcomponent 2.1 and benefiting from the matching grant fund. It is expected 
that 50% of the groups will qualify at this stage (2,650 groups stemming from RIs and MSMEs).  
Matching grant fund 
As a second stage, PROSPER will operate a matching grant fund34 with the goal to capitalize RIs, which 
achieved tier level 2 toward raising their production and value addition capacities as part of a business 
agreement with VC actors (nucleus farmers, offtakers, processors, traders, aggregators, agroindustry, 
etc.). It is expected that, with enhanced capacities, groups will become more reliable in the eyes of 
potential partners in the VC, and this will favour their inclusion. At the same time, PROSPER will 
promote adoption of innovative, climate smart and resilient technologies and practices to achieve 
financial and environmental sustainability in the context of climate change and natural resource 
depletion. 
Under the MG window, the group has to consist of 50% at least very poor beneficiaries (please see 
the targeting section). Such group (RI/ Village Saving and Loan Groups) should consist of at least 50% 
very poor beneficiaries who have one ha or less and should meet additional minimum vulnerable 
group membership criteria i.e., women, youth, and PWDs. This additional criterion will depend on the 
category of the matching grant and value chain under consideration. 
Besides, the MG will also target MSMEs of up to 9 employees. Grants provided to such enterprises 
will be targeting BPs from ones with large concentration of vulnerable target group, especially the 
youth. Youth target will be 60%, women 50% and PWDs 10%. 
From a process perspective, the matching grant will be allocated to a group of about 5 RIs with 15-25 
members each. Beneficiary RIs (qualified Village Saving and Loan Groups and other existing RIs from 
the tier 2) will be selected on the basis of the common simple BP that has been developed with the 
support of the programme under component 2.1 among the partnering RIs that have been involved in 
the BP preparation within the identified geographical clusters identified at project start-up. 
33 Interesting experience from the RUFIN project by IFAD in Nigeria could be leveraged in that regard.  
34 The MG account will be directly managed by PROSPER management unit. 
51 
The MG fund will help partnering groups and individual MSMEs finance their investments described in 
their simple BP as a one-off support. Items that could be considered under the MG scheme include: 
inputs, working capital, small equipment (for example conservation agriculture tools, processing 
machinery, solar pumps, etc.) and TA on agronomic practices such as pruning/mulching for cashew 
trees. However, heavy equipment will be excluded (no tractors or infrastructure) to avoid any risk of 
elite capture. Such machinery will be supported through different windows. Quality inputs will be 
made mandatory to provide a robust solution for input financing (especially selected seeds with 
climate resilience). However, groups of RIs will be free to decide on simple equipment that best fits 
with their needs. Crop insurance from GAIP and agricultural risk guarantees from GIRSAL would also 
be promoted to be part of the investment plan. 
Three MG categories are proposed, covering the 6 focus VCs. The level of grant/contribution required 
varies as follows: 
Beneficiary Contribution 
Whole Group 
Cash +In-kind 
000 US$ 
10-50 
50 -100  
1.5-4 
Per Farmer 
Cash (US$) 
20 - 100 
200 (over 4 
years) 
30 -50 
Table 3: The matching grant scheme35 
MG category 
Target 
Value chain 
Range of MG 
000 US$ 
Group of Rural 
Institutions 
(50-100 
beneficiaries) 
for poultry, 
number of 
beneficiaries is 
25-50). 
Rice, Maize, 
Soy 
10-50 
Cashew 
50- 100  
Shea, 
Poultry 
10 – 30 
RIs with 50% 
or more very 
poor farmers 
with less 
than one 
hectare of 
land. The RIs 
should also 
meet specific 
criteria for 
women, 
youth and 
PWDs that 
depend on 
the target 
VC. 
40% women, 
30% youth, 
15% PWDs 
for rice, 
maize, soy, 
cashew and 
poultry. For 
35 The matching grants ranges for groups of RIs are based on specific assumptions with regard to total number 
of beneficiaries, no of Rural Institutions participating in the Business Plan, area to be cultivated. During 
implementation, the above table should be used as guidance regarding the maximum amount per single 
beneficiary to guide the process and not as guidance regarding the limit of matching grant regardless of 
number of beneficiaries per Business Plan. Additionally, it is strongly recommended to limit the upper limit 
amount of MG per beneficiary (for group of RIs receiving MG for production) to equivalent of MG share of one 
hectare or upper limit the beneficiary have access to but no higher than one hectare of support (one hectare is 
not an entitlement for every beneficiary in the RI). The limits for MSME (9 employees and less) are based on 
examples and should be used as guidance for the process.  
52 
shea 100% 
women, 40% 
youth and 
10% PWDs. 
Eligible 
standalone 
MSMEs less 
than 9 
employees 
The MSMEs 
should also 
meet specific 
criteria for 
women, 
youth and 
PWDs that 
depend on 
the target 
VC. 
50% women, 
60% youth, 
10% PWDs 
for rice, 
maize, soy, 
cashew and 
poultry. For 
shea 100% 
women, 40% 
youth and 
10% PWDs. 
Most 
vulnerable 
people, 
women, 
youth, PWD 
60% women, 
40% youth, 
10% PWDs 
MSME 
(standalone) 
(average 8 
employees) 
Nutrition  
(Group of 20 
farmers) 
All VCs 
15 – 20 
3.5 – 5 
N/A 
Small 
ruminants, 
Vegetable 
Gardens, 
etc. 
5 -12 
0.5 – 1.2 
25 - 70 
Selection criteria for clusters’ BBP will include: 
  Most vulnerable farmers are targeted, for RIs they should have at least 50% of their members 
access to 1 ha of land or below in addition to the above percentages of women, youth, PWDs, 
  Confirm acceptable organisational capacity, at least tier two from financial literacy / saving 
mobilization point of view,  
  The BP should demonstrate how investment will translate into higher livelihoods (with a focus 
on women and youth), 
  RIs should apply within marketing linkages arrangements that include other RIs and a value 
chain actor (offtake agreement between the RIs and a VC actor); partner offtakers and 
aggregators are expected to be involved in inputs distribution, 
53 
  Simple BPs should include green inputs, technologies, and practices. This evaluation process 
will ensure applying the guidelines in the IGREENFIN Operational Manual (attached to the 
PROSPER PIM) regarding green matching grants.  
  RIs should demonstrate minimal technical knowledge as to manage equipment, 
  RIs should demonstrate business management capacities and commitment for developing 
commercial agriculture, 
  Each RI should have a bank account. 
For standalone micro or very small enterprises, the BP does not need to include producers but linkage 
with farmers and other VC actors will be encouraged and assessed on a case by case basis. These 
simple BPs will not include heavy machinery but rather simple activities such as simple machinery for 
land preparation, animal feed from crop residues, aggregation, inputs provision, etc. Working capital 
could be of the simple BP and the MG support. Focus of the simple BPs for MSMEs will remain the six 
target value chains. 
Finally, for women, youth and PWD groups targeted under the “Nutrition Window”, no  simple BP will 
be required for small income-generating schemes focused on promoting diversification towards 
nutrition and food security (for example, kitchen gardens). 
The following tables shows objectives per category. 
Table 4: Objectives of the matching grant fund per category 
RI 
Group of RIs  # of RIs per group  RI Total  Farmers/FBO  Beneficiaries total 
36 
Rice 
36 
Maize 
44 
Soy 
Poultry  46 
Cashew  20 
30 
Shea 
212 
Total 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
180 
180 
220 
230 
100 
150 
1,060 
20 
20 
20 
10 
20 
20 
3,600 
3,600 
4,400 
2,300 
2,000 
3,000 
18,900 
MSMEs  Nb  Employees/MSME  Beneficiaries total 
32 
Rice 
32 
Maize 
Soy 
32 
Poultry  32 
Cashew  32 
32 
Shea 
190 
Total 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
256 
256 
256 
256 
256 
256 
1,536 
Nutrition 
Groups  Farmers/Group 
Beneficiaries 
total 
Off-season vegetable production 
Post-harvest management 
(preservation/conservation) 
Small ruminants (goats) 
Poultry - egg production 
Small processing 
Total 
90 
30 
35 
35 
35 
225 
20 
20 
20 
20 
20 
54 
1,800 
600 
700 
700 
700 
4,500 
Going forward, groups of RIs will be assessed against the realization of their simple BPs and capacity 
to expand business with their offtaker partner. The best rated clusters will qualify to graduate with 
the project towards preparing a full fledged BPunder component 2.1 and having access to an 
affordable loan from PFIs through the BFF. It is expected that 50% of the beneficiaries of the MG 
window would graduate to prepare ABP and 30% would actually benefit from the credit line. 
The Matching Grant  will provide green grants in accordance with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual. 
This manual is considered a part of this ROSPER PIM (this document) and it will apply to both GCF and 
IFAD financing for the BFF. 
The PCU will have a dedicated climate/safeguards officer and social inclusion officer who will support 
the process of ensuring the grants from the MG facility are in accordance the operational manual of 
the IGREENFIN (attached to this PIM). The climate/safeguards officer will be specialised in  specialized 
in climate finance and will run the day-to-day activities of the MG facility in coordination with 
PROSPER and utmost attention will be placed on these aspects during supervision. The MG facility  
will be supported by the project’s M&E core team, which will report on the number and amounts of 
loans that are verified as “green” against the GCF criteria. This will be verified dueing supervision 
missions. 
The Blended Finance Facility (BFF) 
The BFF will be proposed as a third step for tier 3 most advanced and mature groups (groups of RIs 
and MSMEs) that have the potential to develop further commercial agriculture36. Groups that are 
classified as tier three with proper structure and structurally strong will qualify for the BFF window 
since the project start37. The BFF will provide an affordable financing solution to the target groups to 
invest on a larger scale (heavy equipment, working capital, inputs, TA) and grasp other business 
opportunities. A number of tier 2 groups that doesn’t qualify for the MG window because of the 
poverty criteria may be considered as well for direct access to BFF credit financing. 
Under the condition of being linked with offtakers, they would have access to credit at a concessional 
rate for financing a more sophisticated BP with a strong focus on adaptation and mitigation in face of 
the climate change impacts on small agriculture. 
The BFF can support the following groups: 
 
 
Less poor and mature groups of RIs in the geographical clusters along the target VCs will have 
to come together (for example 10 RIs with 200 farmers) to develop and finance a full-fledged 
BP. The group of RIs will be closely linked to a VC actor / offtaker that will be part of the full-
fledged BP.  
Larger standalone SMEs of up to 29 employees, whether they benefited from the MG window 
or not38, provided that they are appropriately structured and that they qualify as tier three. 
They would also be eligible to present a standalone full-fledged BP. 
  For a group of RIs partnering with value chain actor / offtaker (private party), the detailed full-
fledged BP will be prepared in coordination with the private party. It would typically include 
inputs, mills, warehouses, expansion of plants, cooling facility, crop insurance, agricultural risk 
guarantee etc., as well as measures for addressing climate adaptation and mitigation in 
accordance with GCF and PROSPER requirements and ensuring the BP is green. Clusters will 
be free to include any investment in line with the full-fledged BP purpose and goal. A cash 
contribution of minimum 25% of the cost of the infrastructure (to be borne by the private 
36 Only for the 6 main VCs: rice, maize, soya, poultry, cashew, and shea. 
37 A number of tier 2 groups that doesn’t qualify for the MG window because of the poverty criteria may be 
considered as well for direct access to BFF credit financing but they have to graduate to tier 3 first. 
38 At the time of benefiting of the MG, they should have complied with the targeting criteria. 
55 
party) and 50% contribution from the farmers. It is expected that the PFIs will factor in the 
profile of the Value Chain Actor / offtaker in their decision making process to finance the full-
fledged BP or not. The Actor will be the main guarantor through credit history, collateral in 
addition to the savings mobilized by the RIs participating in the respective ABP. 
  For a standalone SME full-fledged BP, a minimum own contribution of 30% will be required. 
Table 5: The BFF credit scheme39 
No 
BFF loan 
category 
Value chain 
1 
2 
Group of Rural 
Institutions 
(100-200 
beneficiaries) 
SME 
(standalone) 
(below ABP 30 
employees) 
Range of 
Loan 
000 US$ 
Private Party / 
Value Chain 
Actor 
Beneficiary Contribution 
Whole Group 
Cash +In-kind 
000 US$ 
Per Farmer 
Cash (US$) 
100-300 
20-40 
25-150 
40 - 150 
50- 100  
10-50 
20-40 
30-200 
Rice, 
Maize, Soy 
Shea, 
Poultry 
cashew 
750-1200 
200-300 
All VCs 
30 – 130 
300 
N/A 
Table 6: Objectives of the BFF 
RI 
Group of RIs  # of farmers per group  Farmers Total 
17 
Rice 
17 
Maize 
Soy 
18 
Poultry  18 
Cashew  8 
Shea 
Total 
18 
96 
200 
200 
200 
100 
500 
280 
3,400 
3,400 
3,600 
1,800 
4,000 
5,040 
21,240 
MSMEs  Standalone MSMEs  # of people per MSMEs  Farmers Total 
14 
Rice 
14 
Maize 
Soy 
15 
Poultry  14 
25 
25 
25 
25 
350 
350 
375 
350 
39 The BFF loans ranges for groups of RIs are based on specific assumptions with regard to total number of 
beneficiaries, no of Rural Institutions participating in the Business Plan, area to be cultivated. During 
implementation, the above table should be used as guidance regarding the maximum amount per single 
beneficiary to guide the process and not as guidance regarding the limit of BFF loan regardless of number of 
beneficiaries per Business Plan. Additionally, it is strongly recommended to limit the upper limit amount of the 
loan per beneficiary (for group of RIs receiving BFF loan for production) to equivalent of BFF loan to two 
hectares or to the land they have access to but not higher than two hectares (two hectares is not an 
entitlement). The limits for MSME (29 employees and less) are based on examples and should be used as 
guidance for the process. 
56 
Cashew  26 
26 
Shea 
109 
Total 
25 
25 
650 
650 
2,725 
The BFF will provide green loans in accordance with the IGREENFIN Opertional Manual. This manual is 
considered a part of this ROSPER PIM (this document) and it will apply to both GCF and IFAD financing 
for the BFF. 
The BFF will operate as a refinancing facility that will continue beyond PROSPER closure to provide 
sustainable access to affordable finance for groups to maintain and develop activities in the future. It 
will be established at and managed by the ARB Apex Bank that will provide wholesale liquidity on 
concessional terms to partner financial institutions (PFI) to on-lend for smallholder agricultural 
production and MSMEs development. This arrangement will leverage existing derisking tools (GIRSAL 
guarantee, GCX warehouse receipts and other market enhancing instruments). The BFF will address 
key bottlenecks, including the risk averse nature of FIs in Ghana, lack of affordable liquidity in the 
banks and high interest rates for producers. 
Partner PFIs that will be selected to channel BFF financing to beneficiaries will have to commit to 
offering a concessional interest rate, to be agreed to with the project to ensure a reasonable return to 
RCBs but making sure it is maintained below the 10% targeted beneficiaries can afford. Details on the 
structuration and functioning of the BFF are provided below. 
When a beneficiary group presents a profitable business plan40 (including green and climate 
technologies) vetted by the PFIs and applies for a loan, the bank/FI will approve the loan based on its 
own due diligence selection criteria and credit committee decision, since the bank will have to bear 
the associated credit risk41. In doing so, the PROSPER team in the APEX Bank (including climate and 
safeguards & social inclusion specialists) will be involved in applying the IGREENFIN Operational 
Manual Guidelines (which is part of this PIM) regarding Green financing/ loans. The Banks will ensure 
they abide by the provisions of that manual.   
However, partner RCBs will have to apply GCF criteria (in the IGREENFIN Operational Manual) 
regarding the green investment purpose. Training will be proposed by PROSPER to PFIs for them to 
integrate these criteria into their due diligence process. More generally, IGREENFIN technical 
assistance to RCBs staff will be deployed by PROSPER towards climate change capacity building and 
financial product development. 
The Project, APEX Bank and partner financial institutions will report on the IGREENFIN indicators 
regrading how much of the BFF loans (GCF and IFAD loans) are considered green in accordance with 
the criteria in the IGREANFIN Operational Manual. 
At mid-term, along with a sound study of the market for green financing instruments, a review will be 
undertaken of the strategic management of the BFF to make recommendations on how the 
refinancing fund might be promoted and developed to ensure that the liquidity continues to revolve. 
In preparation of the project closure, the objective is to institutionalize the BFF and arrange for 
periodic replenishment in anticipation of loss and inflation. The review would recommend a 
mechanism for accessing additional international private funds and assess the current capability of 
the Apex Bank to do so. 
40 With technical assistance under component 2.1. 
41 As a first assumption, the partner offtaker will be the loan obligor and credit manager on behalf of RIs. To be 
confirmed. Flexibility will exist in the scheme for most advanced and capitalized clusters/MSMEs to borrow directly 
from the RCB without guarantee from anchor offtaker.  
57 
The table below summarizes the graduation process with highlighting of the key features of the 
financial instruments used at each stage. 
Table 7: The graduation process 
Financing 
instruments 
Target 
Financial support from 
PROSPER 
Non-financial assistance 
SCG (Village 
Saving and Loan 
Groups) 
4,500 groups / 90,000 
members; 800 MSMEs 
/ 10,000 
None 
Matching grant 
212 groups of 1,060 
RIs (18,900 
beneficiaries) + 192 
MSMEs (1,536 
beneficiaries) + 225 
vulnerable groups 
(4,500 beneficiaries) 
Grant against 
beneficiary 
contribution 
BFF 
96 groups of RIs 
(21,240 beneficiaries) 
and 109 MSMEs (2,725 
beneficiaries) 
(up to 30% from the 
MG recipients could 
benefit as well from 
the BFF loans) 
Credit at a 
concessional interest 
rate from partner RCBs 
leveraging 
concessional line of 
credit provided by the 
project. 
Training of trainers + capacity 
building in financial literacy and 
banking activities management. 
Support to market linkage, 
business development and 
green investments will be 
provided under SC 2.1. 
Coaching and mentoring to 
realize BBPs and expand 
business. 
Technical assistance (agronomy) 
will be provided as part of the 
business plan developed by 
clusters. 
Training on market linkage, 
business development and 
green investments will be 
provided under SC 2.1. 
Coaching and mentoring to 
realize BPs and expand business. 
Technical assistance (agronomy) 
will be provided as part of the 
business plan developed by 
clusters. 
Structuring of the Blending Finance Facility (BFF) 
The technical guidance on the process and the details of the loan blending are intended to guide the 
initial PROSPER project design. This includes the relations with the financial institutions and the key 
features of their strategies and priorities in the context of the project, the selection criteria for the 
financial institution that will take part in the on-lending of the blended facility, the main steps to 
disburse the funds to the financial institutions, the composition and the cost calculation of the 
blended facility, and the blending option chosen to channel the concessionnality to the 
beneficiaries42. The basis of the guidance below is in line with IFAD’s experiences, and it is tailored to 
the local context of Ghana. It is expected that the inception phase as well as the project team will 
further tailor this guidance in view of the latest demand and supply assessment.  
Relation with Financial Institutions:  
  Products: The financial institutions will be able to finance the beneficiaries targeted under the 
PROSPER program through their existing products offer (being agricultural loans, loans for 
SMEs, individual loans, group loans, etc.). The financial institutions will be supported to 
bundle their financing into loans allocated to clusters, MSMEs, or offtakers. This type of 
42 The cost calculation includes an Excel file so that further adjustment can be done and automatically 
calculated. 
58 
bundling for allocation to aggregated borrowers, will reduce operational and transaction 
costs and risks by leveraging on local knowledge for self-selection of individuals with reliable 
character and business plans. This may however require some support to the financial 
institution in adapting their disbursement and repayment procedures, and legal 
responsibilities of each party for repayment and in case of default.  
 
  Selection of the final beneficiaries/clients: Some minimal requirements will exist, to finance 
the targeted geographical locations and the targeted value chains. An exclusion list will also 
be put in place so that activities that are not suitable are excluded43.  
Interest rate for the final beneficiary/clients: it is expected that the pricing of funding provided 
to the final beneficiary will be lower than the market rate, as the interest rate of the fund lent 
to the financial institution is significantly lower than the market rate – more details are 
provided in the table x.x below. It is to be noted however that this will be negotiated by the 
project with partner FI. As per the table X.X below regarding the selection criteria of the FIs, a 
concessional IR to beneficiaries will be a key selection criterion. 
  Guarantee: It will also be possible for the financial institution to keep the rate lower than the 
market rate taking into consideration the guaranty that will be provided by GIRSAL with 
support from  PROSPER (see details below) – thus decreasing potential risk costs for the 
financial institution (mainly provisioning and write-off costs).  
Table 8 below describes some key features of the targeted financial institutions (rural and community 
banks), and some key implications for the project. It is to be noted that the financial institutions will 
require significant support for market development, institutional diagnosis, and technical assistance – 
since their capacity and interest in agricultural and green financing seem to be limited (the status of 
green financing including the capacity and interest of financial institutions in agricultural and green 
financing will be verified during the market assessment phase of the project). The Rural Community 
Banks (RCBs) and the Savings and Loans (S&L) targeted under this program have different profiles and 
should therefore be approached in a different manner under this project.  
Table 8: Situation Analysis of the partner FIs, strategies and priorities 
Key features 
Implications for the project 
Invest significant portion of their portfolio in 
government bonds, partly as a result of 
regulatory requirement.44 
Little knowledge and interest in green products. 
Negative experience with agriculture, most 
notably with high PAR.  
Most of the financial institutions primarily 
targeted under this program have a limited size 
(being mainly Rural Community Banks - RCBs), 
and are owned and managed by their members. 
Support to assess and implement new 
technologies and capacity building to decrease 
operational costs (and profitability) while 
providing small loans in rural areas.  
Training and coaching through pilot studies to 
coordinate market development and/or 
assessment, and institutional assessment. 
Capacity building on green investments to adapt  
products and  develop loan appraisal techniques 
to take into consideration cashflow needs.  
The RCBs will be more flexible in the products 
and processes to apply to the beneficiary under 
this project. The S&L are expected to be less 
43 Refer to the selection criteria for potential investments in Annex 25 of the IGREENFIN 1 Funding Proposal 
44 See for example the financial statement of the Rural Community Bank FIASAMANBANK available here: 
https://fiasemanbank.com.gh/?page_id=138   
59 
The Savings and Loans (S&L) organizations are on 
average larger in size and operate on more 
commercial basis.  
flexible in applying the requirements set by this 
project.   
The table below shows some selection criteria that could be used while shortlisting the most 
attractive financial institutions (Rural Community Banks) for the PROSPER project. It includes some 
specific weighting/importance. The criteria with the highest weighting include the rural focus of the 
financial institution, the share of its agricultural portfolio, and the types of products and services that 
it offers (which should be as suitable as possible to the targeted beneficiaries by PROSPER). It is to be 
noted that the information currently available about the RCBs shows that some of them may rate high 
on the rural focus, but their experience with agriculture will generally be limited and therefore their 
product offer may not be suitable for agriculture/green financing. In this context, the APEX has 
communicated to IFAD that they would be willing under the PROSPER project to deploy their due 
diligence to identify a few RCBs that have higher exposure in agriculture.  
Table 9: Selection criteria for the institutions 
Category 
1. Outreach 
capacity 
2. Ability to 
commit 
liquidity with 
the view to 
increasing 
the multiplier 
factor 
3. Rating and 
quality of 
management, 
Criteria 
Weighting 
% 
1.       Rural focus. The financial institution (FI) operates within or close to 
the locations of the targeted regions of focus (North and Middle belts). 
The FI has a significant footprint in the targeted areas, which guarantees 
outreach capacities. The FI operates close to the value chains of focus 
(Rice, Soy, Maize, Poultry, Cashew, Shea). 
2.       The financial institution staff (e.g., credit officers and risk analysts) 
has an exposure to agriculture, especially in the value chain of focus, 
with a strong base of smallholder clients.    The financial institution has a 
sizeable loan portfolio (at least more than 5M USD, and ideally more 
than 10M USD) so that it can effectively on-lend between 800k and 2.1M 
USD per year for green loans. 
3.       The financial institution is willing to provide loan products and 
lending rates that are favorable to the proposed lending scheme and 
ability to invest its own liabilities in the lending scheme. . 
4.       The financial institution operates as a going concern i.e., it 
functions without the threat of liquidation for the foreseeable future.  
5.       The financial institution has effective risk control policies and 
procedures.  
6.       The financial institution has strong environmental and social 
safeguard, and governance policies. 
30% 
20% 
20% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
The table below describes the main steps to launch the Blended Finance Facility (BFF), including the 
central role that the APEX Bank will play. The Apex Bank will perform the dual role of Fund Manager 
and Wholesaler. The steps include details about the financial institutions that will be targeted. BFF will 
be accessible to both Apex Bank RCB network members and other qualified FIs with a good rural 
outreach network. The blended facility will be available for the financial institutions that have an 
existing relationship with the APEX. It is expected that those will in most cases be their members and 
60 
shareholders (the Rural Community Banks RCBs)45, but it is not excluded  that some other types of 
financial institutions that engage with APEX (especially savings and loans) will also want to have access 
to the facility provided by IFAD.  
The targeted financial institutions will be approached with a “summary teaser” (two-pagers) about 
the PROSPER project. This teaser should include the growth opportunity (high level market growth 
potential), the funding available, guarantee provided, and grant funding available for technical 
assistance. An introductory meeting with the top management will be organized, ideally in-person 
and including senior experts from the PROSPER team. Following this, the financial institutions will be 
encouraged to share a letter of intent for the APEX (with cc to PROSPER/IFAD), in which they should 
explain/justify why APEX should select them for this program. APEX will then choose five to ten 
financial institutions for the actual pilot, depending on the individual outreach capacity of each FI. A 
set of selection criteria of the financial institution has been defined (section x.x). The APEX will be 
required to perform due diligence on the financial institutions (mainly RCBs, but also including other 
qualified FIs for market growth, expansion, and diversification) prior to funding them. The due 
diligence will also include an assessment of the technical capacities of the financial institutions, to 
support them in identifying their technical assistance needs. It is expected that the program will first 
support the financial institutions with a market assessment, to identify its most attractive 
development opportunities for the targeted financial institutions. Thereafter the financial institutions 
will be assessed in view of the market opportunities identified, so that specific technical assistance 
needs are narrowed down, and capacity building plans are designed. This initial phase of market 
development is expected to take at least six months per financial institution, and it may take up to 24 
months for all the selected financial institutions.  
The BFF will have a dedicated unit in the ARB Apex Bank specialized in climate finance safeguards to 
run the day-to-day activities of the BFF in coordination with PROSPER and utmost attention will be 
placed on these aspects during supervision. The BFF will be supported by the project’s M&E core 
team, which will report on the number and amounts of loans that are verified as “green” against the 
GCF criteria in the GCF Logframe on a yearly basis. 
Table 10: Main steps to disburse the fund to the institutions 
Steps  
1-  Sensitization of the APEX and partner financial institutions.  
2-  Supply: Market Assessment, with focus on the demand side.  
3-  Demand: Long list (15 to 25) of the partners based on the outreach capacity of 
each. Shortlist the partner FIs46, and assessment against the selection criteria.  
4-  Demand:  Institutional assessment of the shortlisted FIs, to identify gaps that 
requires strengthening in their operations in order to grow sustainably their 
green portfolio. 
5-  Match supply and demand: Produce reports (merging market assessment with 
institutional assessment, and presenting some growth figures), present and 
discuss them with the FIs. Agree on targets, and list of actions to support those, 
including some capacity building.  
6-  Execute capacity building actions  
Duration (in 
months) 
1-3  
1-3 
1-3 
1-3 
1-3 
4-8 
46 The number of FIs that could potentially qualify under the criteria defined is to be assessed and validated 
jointly with the Apex at the beginning of the project.  
61 
7-  Monitor usage of funds 
8-  Organize workshop to share lessons learned between the institutions. 
9-18 
1-3 
The composition and the cost calculation of the blended facility 
The cost, margin and interest rates presented in the two tables below have been thoroughly 
discussed and iterated in several discussion with the APEX and different IFAD departments and 
experts. Those discussions led to use in parallel three different methodologies47 to estimate an 
acceptable level of cost and margin for the different stakeholders. At the end of the process those 
methodologies converged to similar results – most importantly a cost to the final beneficiary of 
approximately 9.5%, taking into consideration acceptable margins for the APEX and the RCBs.  
- 
- 
Legal and Fiscal: APEX acts as the investment manager of the fund (Fund Manager). APEX is 
therefore legally responsible for its legal and fiscal aspects. 
Economic:  
o  The funds are disbursed in various trenches, upon completion of milestones 
(performance-based disbursements). 
o  As show in the table X below, the funds on lent to the selected financial institutions 
are expected to have an interest rate that will be the average between the funds 
provided by PROSPER (GCF IGREENFIN 1 resources at approx. 0% to 1% and IFAD 
resources at 2%) and the average cost of other funds for APEX (approx. 12%) – thus 
taking the average cost of the fund to approximately to 2%.  
Table 11: the composition of the fund 
Fund lines 
1)  GCF highly concessional loc for 
climate mitigation (aka, Functional 
line of credit for climate mitigation)  
2)  GCF highly concessional loc for 
climate adaptation (aka, Functional 
line of credit  for energy for 
agriculture)  
3)  Contribution from the APEX own 
resources. the PFIs (RCBs plus other 
qualified FIs)   
12%49 
Interest 
rate 
Amount 
Cost of 
fund Total 
Average cost 
of fund48 
0% 
$6.9 m 
0m 
1% 
$13.9 m 
0.139m 
2% 
$1.25 m from 
Apex 
$1.25 m from 
other PFIs 
0.3m 
4)  Other investors (private capital)/ 
other co-financiers (development 
partners), as possible50 
4% 
$1m 
0.04m 
47 The tables X and X present a first simple methodology for project design high level estimates. The annex X 
presents a second methodology used in the private sector to provide funding facilities in the context of public / 
private partnership. A third methodology has been used by APEX, in their standard planning internal 
templates.  
48 for the blended fund managed by the APEX 
49 The rate of 12% has been defined based on the rate that the APEX and the RCBs get when buying 
government bonds of Ghana.  
50 In the initial phases of the project other investment partners will be approached to see if they could also 
invest in the project. Given the low interest rate that is required under this project by the final beneficiaries 
(below 10%), it will be important to approach development funds that have access to highly subsidized private 
62 
5)  IFAD concessional loc to 
complement (fill the demand-supply 
gap) 
Total 
2% 
NA 
 $14m 
38.3m 
0.28m 
0.759m 
The table below shows how the interest rate would evolve based on the average cost of fund and the 
margin of the APEX and the RCBs, and the costs of a guarantee instrument. 
It is assumed in this case that APEX would have a margin of approximately 2% on its loan. Thereafter 
the margin of the retail FIs (RCBs plus other qualified FIs) could be approximately 4.5% and would 
therefore need to be added to the interest rate applied to the retailers. In addition, it is expected that 
the APEX will subscribe to a guarantee instrument from GIRSAL, where the IFAD will also contribute 
up to 0.5%. In addition, it is possible that customers will include in their business plan to subscribe to 
a crop insurance (provided for example by the risk management instrument of the Ghana Agricultural 
Insurance Pool - GAIP) – this may be subsidized separately as part of the PROSPER project. This will 
take the interest rate charged to the customer to approximately 9.5% - which is significantly cheaper 
than the market rate offered by RCBs and other FIs to their agricultural customers.  
Table 12: Estimates of the cost of the final beneficiaries 
Elements  Average 
Weighte
d 
Annualiz
ed Cost 
of Funds 
Cost 
of 
fund 
APEX 
Average 
Weighted 
Annualized 
Cost of Funds 
(including 
cost of fund 
APEX) 
GIRSAL / 
APEX 
Credit 
Guarantee 
Premium51 
IFAD 
Contributio
n on  
Insurance52 
Cost 
2.0% 
2.0% 
4.0% 
0.5% 
0.5% 
Referenc
e 
 a  
b 
1=a+b 
2 
3 
Interest 
Rate for 
On-
Lending 
to RCBs 
and 
S&Ls 
Mar
gin 
of 
the 
RCB
s 
5.0% 
4.5
% 
4=1+2+3  5 
Interest 
rate 
applied 
to the 
clients 
(farmers
) 
9.5% 
6=4+5 
The project structure and fund flows 
It is envisioned that IFAD / PROSPER will receive a GCF loan and grant from through IFAD. IFAD / 
PROSPER will channel the funds to the Ghana APEX. The APEX will on-lend to partner retail financial 
institutions that will in turn on-lend to the target groups. The partner financial institutions will receive 
highly concessional loans from the APEX institution. A due diligence and selection process will be 
done in accordance with the criteria defined above. A TA Facility (TAF) managed by an IGREENFIN 1 
Project Management Unit hosted at Apex will provide TA /capacity-building support to all project 
stakeholders, including to ensure that products will be designed in accordance with market needs, 
and in view of the institutional assessment. Details of the TAF-supported activities will be in line with 
the wider IFAD and GCF programs implemented in the region. Specifically, TAF will assist the financial 
institutions to design products that have interest rates that are sustainable for the targeted recipients 
funds, and/or ensure that the volume of fund they on lend remains marginal in the blend (1m for example) – 
to avoid increasing the price to the final beneficiary. The project will consider approaching in this context the 
Ghana’s Securities and Exchange Commission, which is developing a Green Bonds Market and its risk 
management instruments.  
51 Cost for partial credit risk guarantee instrument - GIRSAL 
52 Cost for crop insurance instrument - GAIP 
63 
(while also ensuring sustainable financial return for PFIs, as per the table X above). TAF will carry out 
monitoring to ensure that funds are disbursed. 
Blending option chosen to channel the concessionnality to the beneficiaries  
It is expected that the Comparative Financial Advantaged (CFA) will be transferred by the FI to the 
client in the form of an investment grant and in the form of a concessional loan i) Concessional Loan 
from PFI – interest rate will be subsidized with project funds, ii) investment grant funded by the 
project. In addition, it is also expected that the smallholders will contribute to the project through the 
loan disbursement requirements managed by the partner financial institutions. For example, as per 
the procedure of the financial institution, this should include a contribution in the investment in the 
business investment of approximately 10% to 20% of the loan provided, in addition of the fund mix 
displayed above in table X. 
The model / blending structure is proposed based on the demand and supply analysis in Ghana, taking 
into consideration  the level of concessionnality needed for smallholders to invest in the equipment/ 
technology, sustainability of identified PFIs, ease of implementation an investment grant mechanism 
vs subsidizing the interest rate, risk of market distortion considering products already available on the 
market, ease of monitoring the use of the funds, sustainability of the scheme after the project ends, 
marketing consideration, capacity/resources of the type of partners, maturity of the FIs in providing 
agricultural and green loans. – see the table 13 below. In the case of Ghana, it is expected that the 
level of concessionnality will require investment grants in addition of concessional loans, because of 
the low level of interest of the farmers in green technology / low level of maturity of the demand for 
the green products and the limited capacity/resources of the type of partners (RCBs & S&L) selected, 
and their low maturity in providing agricultural and green loans53.  
Table 13: Evaluation of the local market  
Elements 
Level of interest of the smallholders to invest in the green equipment/ technology / 
maturity of the demand for the green products 
Sustainability of the identified financial institutions  
Ease of implementation an investment grant mechanism vs subsidizing the interest 
rate 
Risk of market distortion considering products already available on the market 
Ease of monitoring the use of the funds 
Sustainability of the scheme after the project ends  
Capacity/resources of the type of partners  
Maturity of the FIs in providing agricultural and green loans 
Evaluation 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
Potential for synergy with AAFORD 
The Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development (AAFORD) project is a recent 
project developed by IFAD in Ghana. AAFORD will establish another Blended Finance Facility (BFF) 
with different modalities and features through the Bank of Ghana and ARB Apex Bank to make 
concessional credit and results-based grants available for loans and supporting risk mitigation 
instruments (such as guarantees and insurance) for AAFORD-targeted beneficiaries. The expected 
outcome is expanded availability of affordable finance and market-enhancing instruments directed to 
smallholder production and key intermediaries. 
53 To ensure that green loans are validated and to avoid greenwashing risks, the eligibility criteria of the green 
loans are clearly defined in the GCF’s project Operational Manual, which is the equivalent of the PIM. 
64 
Considering the similarity of the AAFORD approach with that of PROSPER (the use of BFF through ARB 
Apex Bank, and the support to risk-mitigating instruments), there is an evident need for collaboration 
and coordination, with concern for complementarity and synergies. As for the rural finance activities, 
both projects concur to build a stronger and more conducive financial sector that provides affordable 
and sustainable financing resources to support smallholder farmers across value chains and districts 
in Ghana. 
The areas of potential synergies between AAFORD and PROSPER would include: 
 
 
Initial financial sector landscape assessment: the current landscape for agricultural lending 
should be mapped in detail and PROSPER would be able to build on AAFORD implementation 
arrangements and the role of the ARB Apex Bank, as part of establishing the BFF, 
Leveraging and complementing AAFORD demand survey and assessment of existing financial 
institutions in common areas of intervention, 
  Bundling of TA and capacity building sessions for the Apex Bank staff involved in the 
management of the two BFFs, 
  Reducing management cost through economy of scale, 
  Development of a credit product for agriculture including derisking instruments as part of 
PROSPER exit strategy. 
Digital Finance 
As the financial needs of every farmer are different, PROSPER’s activities may help financial agencies 
leverage technology to create and get the data metrics which would add value to their services while 
at the same time advise them on curating new schemes and plans to engage with farmers in a better 
way.  
The implementation steps for Digital Finance  
• The PROSPER digital finance strategy provides beneficiaries with the savings and insurance 
products. A comprehensive farmers data available with PROSPER Platform will be synergized with the 
financial data (credit requirements, profiles, insurance and savings etc).  
• For this, a tender will be called for inviting financial institutions who may be interested in offering 
savings product for the poor farmers, digitally. And probably insurance will be introduced for both 
crops and animal husbandry based on the need  
• The winner gets the opportunity to partner with the PROSPER project.  
• PROSPER project will provide the capacity to the farmers and to the institutions as how to backstop 
the farmers. And the institutions will be responsible for providing a platform and the product. 
65 
Component 3. Project management and policy engagement 
Subcomponent 3.1 Project management PROSPER will be facilitated by an implementation support 
structure embedded in the host GoG agency providing liaison, physical and financial project 
management, reporting and accounting, proactive knowledge management and learning activities, 
and monitoring and evaluation functions.  
Subcomponent 3.2 Policy engagement The GoG policy environment for rural economic development 
(which is broader than agricultural sector development) advances incrementally, but still contains 
operational contradictions such as the simultaneous provision of both commercial agricultural credit 
and highly subsidised inputs. Evidence-based policy dialogue and evolution is by nature a long-term 
process and even the eight-year time frame of PROSPER may be regarded as too short to make much 
progress. However, the project is being launched in the context of a global climate emergency and 
environmental catastrophe; “business as usual” is not an option. PROSPER is de facto a full-scale trial 
of green/climate finance and it is expected that much will be learned about this novel instrument. It is 
highly likely that the knowledge gained will influence policy development during and long after 
implementation. 
IFAD brings considerable knowledge to the development partnership from a long-term constructive 
presence in the country and region. The Fund is an active participant in the Agricultural Sector 
Working Group (ASWG) established between the GoG, development partners and other key 
stakeholders such as businesses, financial institutions, NGOs and farmers. The ASWG is chaired by 
MoFA, to exchange knowledge and identify issues requiring policy refinement and decision-making to 
improve programme implementation and sectoral development. It has proven an effective instrument 
for cooperation with previous developmental initiatives. The GoG organizes an annual Joint Sector 
Review under the auspices of the ASWG.  PROSPER through this subcomponent will continue to 
support the GoG to drive agriculture and rural development.   
PROSPER will promote an enabling policy environment that will help achieve the project’s goals and 
objectives through the provision of technical assistance, high-level round-table discussions, policy 
dialogue fora, conferences and advocacy as appropriate, underpinned by analytical work and 
knowledge management products from the experience of IFAD and other development partners. The 
project will commission ad hoc studies on policy issues related to the IFAD Ghana COSOP and the 
scope of PROSPER. South-South Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) instruments will be used as a tool for 
advancing the policy agenda and for the dissemination of the results. 
The intention is to provide GoG with a high-quality policy support facility on salient issues, starting 
with the policy ramifications of PROSPER’s large-scale trial of the new financial sector product 
“climate/green finance” as a potentially important development instrument in Ghana in coping with 
climate change. Creating incentives  for FIs and private sector to invest in green and climate resilient 
agricultural value chains, without which the private sector is unlikely to borrow at scale to remediate 
NRs at landscape level that have long been neglected, under-invested, over-exploited and regarded as 
“free goods” by traditional agriculturalists and pastoralists.  
Other topics of policy engagement would include: (i) barriers to private investment in the value 
chains, such as domestic value addition of cashew nuts, and regulation of domestic and international 
trade in agricultural commodities; (ii) support ongoing efforts for public expenditure review in the 
rural economy and effectiveness of subsidy schemes; (iii) access to productive land for women and 
youth; and (iv) availability of financial services for smallholders and MSMEs. 
66 
Chapter 4: Project implementation structure and responsibilities 
Project management and coordination 
Implementation structure & staffing 
MoFA is designated as the Lead Project Agency. The MoFA has overall responsibility of agricultural 
development in Ghana. It has is head office in the capital, Accra. The Ministry has the Minister as the 
political head and the Chief Director as the head of technical services. The Ministry through the 
Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services (DAES) will directly supervise and have oversight of the 
project implementation.  In addition to the DAES, the Agribusiness and the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Divisions of the Policy Planning Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate (PPMED); the Animal 
Production Directorate (APD), the Veterinary Services Directorate (VSD) and the Crops Services 
Directorate of MoFA will be involved in the implementation of the project.  The specific role of each 
Directorate is outlined below.  
MoFA is designated as the Lead Project Agency. The ministry will have the overall responsibility for the 
implementation of PROSPER and will ensure linkages to other relevant Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies, such as the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and 
Innovation (MESTI), the MoTI, the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLDRD), 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Agricultural Extension Services Directorate of MoFA 
and the Departments of Agriculture at the Regional and District levels. These Ministries and agencies 
will provide overall strategic direction and oversight to the project implementation. PROSPER 
implementation will involve private sector and community level technical level service providers and 
will leverage on on-going projects implemented by public sector and NGOs. 
MoFA will establish a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to provide overall oversight and policy 
direction to the project implementation. It will be chaired by the Chief Director of MoFA and will 
include representatives of all relevant ministries and agencies (MoF, MoFA, MoTI, MLGRD), Bank of 
Ghana, ARB-Apex Bank and representatives from the project area. Members shall include 
representatives from the financial sector, private sector non-state actors’ representatives (such as 
NGOs) and representatives of youth and women who operate along the relevant agricultural VCs as 
practitioners or advocates. The PSC will meet at least twice a year, and as necessary. The main 
responsibilities of the steering committee will include: (i) providing strategic and policy guidance to 
the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) for implementation and coordination of activities; (ii) ensuring 
overall conformity with government policies and strategies; (iii) reviewing project progress and 
performance; (iv) approving the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB); (v) resolving implementation 
problems or conflicts; and (iv) assisting the PCU in obtaining government assistance to the project 
when needed. A PSC Technical Committee (PTC) will be constituted at the central level comprising 
members drawn from the PSC. The PTC will serve as a standing committee empowered to meet 
whenever needed to resolve implementation bottlenecks that cannot be settled at the zonal level and 
requires immediate attention. 
PROSPER’s Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be responsible for the project implementation, based 
in the project area rather than Accra to ensure effective implementation and coordination. The PCU 
will operate within the supervision of the Agricultural Extension Services Directorate (DAES), which 
will provide oversight and strategic direction. A Project Coordinator will head the PCU’s day to day 
operations, assisted by central technical and operations support teams and as defined in the PIM. The 
responsibilities of the PCU will include the overall coordination of the activities implemented under 
the project and the implementation of Component 3: Project management and policy engagement. 
The PCU will have overall fiduciary, environmental and social safeguards and climate change, 
including gender and vulnerability (GBV/EASH/VAC), responsibility for project implementation, 
67 
including consolidation of project accounts, preparation of annual financial statements, 
disbursements, consolidation of Annual Work Programme and Budgets (AWPB) and procurement 
plans; quarterly financial and comprehensive safeguards and climate change reports; consolidation of 
progress reports; organization of annual audits in line with IFAD’s guidelines; assistance for 
supervision, implementation support and other missions, including inter-cycle; promotion of 
transversal themes such as gender, youth and vulnerability; and preparation and updating of Project 
Implementation Manual and other required manuals. 
Key implementation partners will include MoFA departments, MoTI, NBSSI including BRC and BACs, 
MESTI, GCX, GIRSAL, GAIP. The PCU will arrange for developing MoUs with all these entities as well as 
DDAs, RDAs and other technical departments in partnering line ministeries. 
From a safeguards and climate change standpoint, the PCU will embed a dedicated team of 
Safeguards and Climate Change Specialist (SCCS) and a Social Inclusion, Gender and Vulnerability 
Specialist. To ensure consistency with national regulations, the PCU Safeguards, Climate and Gender 
and Vulnerability (SCGV) team will work in tandem with the Ministry of Environment EPA Division to 
ensure consistency and compliance of the project implementation. The SCGV team will be supported 
by the Lead International IFAD Safeguards and Climate Change Consultant to quality review their work 
and ensure consistency and compliance with triggered/relevant safeguards standards, and to 
strengthen their capacity skills to fulfil their respective roles and responsibilities. 
IGREENFIN: the grant proceeds will be anchored within PROSPER’s PCU, which will budget for two 
additional headcounts to manage IGREENFIN. PCU staff working on IGREENFIN will undergo an annual 
performance evaluation in line with the PCU’s performance assessment policy and procedures. 
ARB Apex Bank:  
ARB Apex Bank will provide oversight and supervision to the Rural and Community Banks (RCBs) 
participating in the Project. The BFF will be disbursed through the RCBs to the deserving beneficiaries 
and the former will ensure recovery and reporting. 
In coordination with the BoG, PROSPER will partner with the ARB Apex Bank in the management of 
the BFF. ARB APEX Bank has signed a commitment to contribute $2,5 million of its own resources in 
providing funds to beneficiaries of the programme. PROSPER will also leverage on partnerships 
already developed by other IFAD projects such the REP, GASIP and AFFORD with the Rural Banks to 
implement this activity. 
A Unit will be established at the ARB Apex Bank, headed by an investment analysts and supported by 
two Field Officers.  In addition, to support the Unit in ensuring that loan proposals are climate and 
environmental safeguards compliant, two experts comprising a Climate and Adaptation Officer and 
Environment and Social Safeguards Specialist will work in the unit and will be funded from the 
IGREENFIN-I Grant. The Unit will report the PROSPER PCU. 
Project Staffing: 
The staff of the PCU shall comprise a National Project Coordinator, a Senior Policy and M&E Manager 
and Assistant, a Financial Manager supported by two Project Accountants – one each for IFAD and 
GCF accounts -, a Procurement and Contract Manager, a Senior Climate Change Adaptation and 
Mitigation Specialist, two Manager, an Infrastructure Manager, One Senior Value Chain/Agri-Business 
Expert with two others, a Rural Financial Services specialist, a gender/vulnerability/social inclusion 
specialist, a Geographic Information System specialist, other professional and support staff as needed 
for the implementation of the Programme. The responsibilities of each position are detailed below.  
The PCU staff shall be hired by the Lead Project Agency competitively and in accordance with criteria 
68 
and procedures to be developed in agreement with the Fund. The appointment of such personnel 
shall have IFAD’s prior no objection. The ToRs for project staff are provided in Annex 1. 
Key project staff namely the Project Coordinator, Financial Controller, KM/M&E Manager and Officer, 
will be following on progress of meeting the triggers for the replication phase, including filling of the 
financing gap, Government and beneficiary contributions are met and recorded timely, key MoUs 
with implementing partners established and progressing well, and satisfactory arrangements in place 
with regard to the operation of the Matching Grants and Blended Finance Facility. These tasks will be 
reflected in the ToR of the above mentioned key staff 
The M&E/KM Manager and officer will support the Coordinator in following the progress towards 
meeting the triggers for the expansion phase. They will also in coordination with the 
Climate/Safeguard and Social Inclusion officers in the PCU and PROSPER team in APEX Bank follow up 
on meeting the green investment criteria for the grants and loans from the Matching Grant Facility 
and BFF. 
69 
Roles and responsibilities (Organogram) 
70 
Supervision missions, Mid-Term Review and Completion 
PROSPER supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD. One Supervision Mission and one 
follow-up mission will be undertaken each year. Implementation Support will focus on 
planning, gender, vulnerability and targeting, procurement, financial management, 
safeguards and climate change risks management, M&E, partnerships and the integration of 
activities within the governance framework. Such support will be a continuous process with 
frequent communication and engagement with MoFA, the PCU and other relevant 
stakeholders. The first Implementation Support mission will occur soon after start-up. The 
frequency, composition of Supervision and Implementation Support Missions will be based on 
implementation requirements and MoFA requests. During the initial two years of 
implementation, one full supervision mission and one partial supervision mission will be 
carried out to ensure close follow-up on meeting the triggers for the replication phase. The 
supervision report will contain a dedicated section on progress for meeting the triggers; such 
as meeting in-kind financing and timely reporting and satisfactory progress of 
implementation. Portfolio stocktakes will be used to address cross cutting issues that are 
affecting satisfying conditions for starting the replication phase. 
The Supervision and Implementation Support Missions and MTR will follow closely the 
compliance of the investments by the BFF and MG facility with IGREENFIN Operational 
Manual (attached to this PIM) guidelines about green investments (loans and grants).  
Mid-term Review. The MoFA, as the lead project agency, IFAD and implementing partners will 
jointly prepare and carry out the Mid-term Review (MTR) at the end of Project Year 4. The 
MTR will be based on, inter alia, the PDR, SECAP, Procurement Plans, Reports of Supervision 
and Follow Up Missions, AWPBs, Progress Reports, Financing Agreements, evolving 
government policies and strategies, and additional data from various commissioned studies. 
The MTR findings will be communicated promptly to the implementing agencies and, in 
consultation with the GoG and partners, and the project design and financing agreements 
adjusted as needed to remove constraints and achieve the PROSPER objectives. The GoG will 
ensure that the MTR recommendations are implemented within the specified time and to the 
satisfaction of IFAD. 
Project Completion Review. The MoFA, as the Lead Project Agency, will be responsible for 
organizing the preparation of a Project Completion Review (PCR) to be submitted to the Fund 
after the Project Completion Date but in any event no later than the Financing Closing Date. A 
completion evaluation would be conducted, as an input into the PCR through a formal survey 
undertaken by a neutral agency with no previous involvement in project implementation. The 
PCR will focus on PROSPER costs and benefits, the achievement of development objectives, 
risks, impact on beneficiaries and communities, partner performance and lessons learned. 
Planning, budgeting & reporting 
Preparation for implementation and start-up 
The IFAD country office (ICO) will take the following steps to ensure PROSPER readiness for 
implementation: i) Preliminary mapping and identification of the clusters of communities will 
be carried out with the support of GASIP and REP; ii) Off-takers, financial institutions, RIs and 
BACs/BRCs (operating in the PROSPER project area) with good track record of partnership 
with GASIP and REP will be identified and oriented and prepared to partner with; iii) REP, 
through existing partnership with the BoG and ARB Apex Bank will support the swift initiation 
of the BFF; v) MOFA has experience of partnering with other donor projects including IFAD; vi) 
sensitize the donor community and prepare them for PROSPER partnership in relevant areas; 
vii) continuously work with authorities to fulfil conditions prior to board approval; and viii) 
71 
ensure that the budget for year one and procurement plan is available by the effectiveness 
date and set up the team prior to the start-up. 
Annual Work Programmes & Budgets 
Planning will follow current practices for the IFAD-funded projects in Ghana. The main tool for 
PROSPER will be the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), prepared annually using a 
participatory bottom-up approach after consultation with the implementing partners of the 
various activities and based on the investment forecasts agreed and validated during the 
preparation processes. 
The AWPB will include, among other things, a detailed description of the planned activities 
and required budget, specifying implementation responsibilities, required inputs, expected 
outputs, performance indicators and corresponding targets. It will also entail a procurement 
plan and a narrative explaining the implementation of project activities against predefined 
targets (refer to the PIM for specific content of the AWPB). The AWPB will be in line with the 
Logical Framework (LF). 
The PCU will ensure overall coordination and efficiency of the planning process. Once the 
priorities have been set at the regional level and activities defined, the AWPB will be compiled 
and submitted to the PSC for review and approval. The PSC will ensure the inclusion of 
PROSPER under the national budget. It will be sent to IFAD for review and no-objection 60 
days prior to the start of each implementation year. 
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
The M&E and Knowledge Management (KM) Unit will be responsible for all M&E and KM 
activities, including the development of the M&E system, for generating comprehensive and 
reliable information to support planning and decision-making. The M&E system will provide 
information on implementation progress and constant feedback to facilitate the identification 
of problem areas, the implementation of risk mitigations planned, evaluating the 
performance of implementing agencies and assessing achievements on outputs, outcomes 
and impact. 
Staffing for M&E  
The M&E and KM at the PCU will comprise of one KM/M&E manager and one KM/M&E 
officer and one KM/MIS officer, with responsibility for i) liaising with extension services to 
collect and analyse data, ii) preparing monthly reports on progress and results achieved and 
iii) identifying implementation issues arising from monitoring activities. Indeed, staff from the 
extension services, as well as technical consultants will have a key role in collecting the data 
from the field and reporting to the KM/M&E officer. Data verification and consolidation will 
be done by the KM/M&E officer and sent to the KM/M&E Manager at the PCU.  
The M&E/KM Manager and officer will support the Coordinator in following the progress 
towards meeting the triggers for the expansion phase. They will also in coordination with the 
Climate/Safeguard and Social Inclusion officers in the PCU and PROSPER team in APEX Bank 
follow up on meeting the green investment criteria for the grants and loans from the 
Matching Grant Facility and BFF. 
Local talent will be trained in M&E activities yearly to ensure that the project remains on track 
and achieves its strategic objectives. MOFA participated to the Advancing Knowledge for 
Agricultural Impact (AVANTI) initiative to analyse Ghana’s agricultural and rural development 
sectors' capacities for Results -Based Management (RBM) and to measure the sectors' 
achievements against the SDGs. Moreover, the M&E staff in MOFA participated to the 
Program in Rural Monitoring and Evaluation (PRiME) training, organised by IFAD and the 
72 
Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR). Lastly, IFAD has supported the 
establishment of a Programme Delivery Unit at MoFA to build capacity for M&E, improve 
learning and sharing, coordination and reporting among all sector programmes in the 
Ministry, strengthen the oversight responsibility of its on-going development Programmes for 
impacts, including PFJ. Capacities built by the AVANTI and PRIME initiatives, as well as through 
the Delivery Unit, will benefit PROSPER and the overall quality of M&E. 
An early task of the M&E and KM Unit will be to establish an M&E Plan including a matrix to 
identify indicators, data sources and periodicity of reporting for the agreed indicators.  
The reports will be directed at the Project Coordinator, but may be shared with the Project 
Steering Committee. Provisions have been made under the Project Management Component 
for office equipment and supplies that may be required. 
Implementation support and training for M&E/KM will be provided by IFAD regularly.  
Quantitative and qualitative information will be collected at beneficiary level by the extension 
service staff and consultants, using M&E indicators that have been developed by the M&E 
unit based on the M&E plan and M&E matrix. 
Results Based Approach and Managing for Impact.  
The results-based approach will account for progress against AWPB targets and beneficiary 
impact. Service providers, contractors, and beneficiary groups will be the prime sources of 
data emanating from grass roots activities.  
A Project M&E matrix, including the whole range of indicators PROSPER will report on, will be 
prepared in a participatory manner as part of the start-up activities and in line with the 
Logical framework (Log frame). 
Managing for impact means responding to changing circumstances by adapting the Project to 
achieve its intended objective. It is only possible if there is reliable information about the 
progress of activities and their outcomes, the context in which activities are taking place and 
the reasons for success and failure. Table 14 below illustrates how to manage for impact.  
Elements 
A focus on poverty 
A learning environment 
Effective operations 
Table 14. Managing for Impact 
Projects that manage for 
impact 
The implementing partners, 
including primary stakeholders, 
collect data on impact and 
meet regularly to verify 
whether the Project is reaching 
the expected objective. 
The PCU, their partners and 
primary stakeholders regularly 
and openly discuss progress 
and problems. People feel safe 
enough to share their ideas 
and observations with higher 
authorities and peers. 
The M&E Unit has set up a 
clear system for tracking staff 
performance, equipment use, 
73 
Projects that do not manage for 
impact 
The Project leaves impact 
assessment to outside 
organizations and only focuses 
on monitoring the 
implementation of activities. 
The PCU focuses only on 
implementing activities, 
without asking if they are 
relevant to local poverty needs. 
The PCU and their partners feel 
their ideas and observations 
are not valued and do not 
speak up when they see things 
going wrong. Primary 
stakeholders are rarely asked 
their opinions. 
It is unclear what PCU staff 
should be doing, when and 
where. Vehicles and other 
A supportive M&E system 
etc. People know about their 
responsibilities and deadlines, 
and have access to the 
resources needed to perform. 
The managers allocate 
sufficient budget and are 
building capacity where 
needed. 
The Project manager has quick 
and easy access to information 
about outcomes and impact. 
Information is shared regularly 
with all stakeholders; up-to-
date information, graphs, 
pictures about Project progress 
is available at the PCU office. 
Studies are undertaken to 
explain any emerging 
problems. Project reports 
make interesting reading and 
inform about the good and bad 
achievements, and how 
improvements will be made. 
resources are poorly 
coordinated and often not 
available on time. No efforts 
are made to fill capacity gaps. 
Few people know what the 
Project has achieved to date. 
There is little evidence about 
whether all activities are 
leading anywhere. M&E is seen 
largely as an external reporting 
function. Project reports are 
uninteresting, not analytical 
and exaggerate success while 
not mentioning problems. 
Little information is shared 
with Project stakeholders. 
In order to best mobilize resources and build partnerships, implementers have to redirect the 
implementation strategy when problems arise. Guiding the strategy is largely about asking 
the right questions-and getting answers-at the right moment (Table 15).  
Table 15. Five strategic M&E questions to manage for impact 
Relevance 
Effectiveness 
Efficiency 
Impact 
Sustainability 
Are activities improving the beneficiaries’ 
situation? Are they in line with the target 
group’s priorities? Why or why not? 
Have Projects outcomes, outputs and 
activities been achieved? Is the intervention 
logic correct? Why or why not? Are we 
doing what’s needed to maximize impact? 
Are resources used in the best possible 
way? Why or why not? What could we do 
differently to maximise impact at an 
acceptable and sustainable cost?  
To what extent has the Project contributed 
towards poverty reduction (or other long-
term goals)? Why or why not? What 
unanticipated positive or negative 
consequences did the Project have? Why 
did they arise? 
Will there be continued positive impacts 
after the Project funds run out in 4-5 years? 
Why or why not? 
74 
Setting up the M&E system. Setting up an M&E system involves six steps: 
1.  Establishing the purpose and scope - Why do we need M&E and how comprehensive 
2. 
should our M&E system be?  
Identifying performance questions, information needs and indicators - What do we 
need to know to monitor and evaluate the Project in order to manage it well?  
3.  Planning information gathering and organizing - How will the required information be 
gathered and organized?  
4.  Planning critical reflection on processes and events - How will we make sense of the 
information gathered and use it to improve results?  
5.  Planning for quality communication and reporting - What, how and to whom do we 
want to communicate in terms of our Project activities and processes?  
6.  Planning for the necessary conditions and capacities - What is needed to ensure that 
the M&E system actually works?  
These steps can be used when initiating a new Project or when revising and expanding the 
M&E system of an existing Project.  
While developing the M&E system, the M&E and KM Unit has to keep in mind IFAD 
requirements provided in the Project Design Report and other sections of this Project 
Implementation Manual. 
An effective M&E system will create an historical overview of efforts made, problems faced, 
results delivered and lessons learned at outputs, outcomes and impact level. It will be used to 
deepen and share knowledge about factors that influence Project results and thereby help to 
improve implementation approaches. 
The M&E system will be developed within the first year of implementation by the M&E and 
KM Unit, with the assistance of IFAD.  During the initial years, the M&E system will inform on 
how Project activities are being implemented and what adjustments are required; later on it 
will serve as a tool to assess achievement of outcomes and impacts.  
The role of M&E in IFAD Projects 
The following table summarizes the expected M&E tasks to be performed during the different 
stages of IFAD’s Projects life cycle.  
Phase 
Early design phase (formulation and 
appraisal) 
Start-up prior to loan effectiveness  
Tasks 
 Establish the scope and purpose of the 
M&E system.  
 Indicate key performance questions and 
indicators, plus associated monitoring 
mechanisms.  
 Identify organizational arrangements for 
M&E. 
 Develop terms of reference for M&E staff. 
 Indicate the process for how M&E is to be 
established during start-up.  
 Establish an indicative M&E budget.  
 Document the above in the M&E matrix. 
 Revise performance questions, indicators 
and monitoring mechanisms after reviewing 
the Project strategy.  
 Organize training with staff and partners 
likely to be involved in M&E. 
  Initiate baseline studies, as appropriate.  
75 
Start-up after loan effectiveness 
Main implementation 
Mid-term review (MTR) 
Phasing-out and completion 
 Prepare a Project implementation manual 
with key staff. 
 Review Project design in relation to M&E 
with key stakeholders.  
 Develop a detailed M&E plan, taking into 
consideration existing mechanisms with 
partners.  
 Put in place necessary conditions and 
capacities for M&E to be implemented. 
 Ensure information needs for 
management are met.  
 Coordinate information gathering and 
management.  
 Facilitate informal information gathering 
and communication.  
 Support regular review meetings and 
processes with all implementers.  
 Prepare for supervision missions.  
 Prepare for and facilitate the annual 
Project review.  
 Conduct focused studies on emerging 
questions.  
 Communicate results to stakeholders.  
 Prepare annual progress reports. 
 Collate information for the mid-term 
review.  
 Facilitate the internal review process to 
prepare for the external review process.  
 Help respond to MTR feedback. 
 Adjust the M&E system, as necessary. 
 Assess what the implementers can do to 
sustain impact and sustain M&E after 
closing down - and implement these ideas.  
 Hold workshops and do field studies with 
key stakeholders to assess impacts.  
 Identify lessons learned for the next phase 
and/or other Projects. 
Operational Results Management System (ORMS) 
ORMS is a full-fledged IFAD online system which stores data on all IFAD Projects. It builds on 
interconnected templates for the online presentation, analysis, reporting and approval of 
Project design, supervision and completion documents, as well as Log frames and related 
targets and indicators. Data entering will be done at IFAD level, yet the Project will provide 
information on Project achievement on an annual basis, through the update of the Project 
Log frame. At the beginning of each year the M&E and KM unit will compile the progress of all 
Log frames indicators and send it to IFAD upon request. Of particular importance are the Log 
frame Core Indicators (CIs), which consist of a set of new and improved output and outcome 
indicators to measure the more recurrent results achieved through IFAD operations. The CIs 
and related measurement approaches have been developed to be consistent with and 
complementary to IFAD’s impact assessment programme, thus ensuring that the 
76 
performance of IFAD operations is measured across the results chain, i.e. at the output, 
outcome and impact levels.  
Development of Electronic Management Information System (MIS) 
The M&E will be developed in the form of a Management Information System (MIS), i.e. a 
web-based platform for data storage, retrieval and reporting. The MIS would necessarily be 
aligned to the information needs identified in the M&E plan developed by the M&E and KM 
Unit, as well as those identified in future. The electronic MIS will serve as a centralized 
repository of data for all operational, performance and impact indicators for Project 
interventions. It will serve as a one-stop system on which personnel at various levels within 
the organizational structure can rely for real time data as well as timely, accurate, and 
consistent reports on the status of implementation of interventions. The MIS will provide 
additional benefits by focusing the activities of the various teams, providing visibility on these 
activities and improving reporting capabilities. 
Beneficiary Database 
A database of programme beneficiaries will be established by the PCU for use at regional and 
central level. It will be integrated into the MIS system and will include detailed information 
about each beneficiary (socio-economic indicators such as age, gender, targeting category, 
HH level assets and land size and farming activities). The database will be consolidated by the 
M&E unit at the PCU and will be utilized for different purposes, including sampling for the 
different surveys, tracking the beneficiaries outreach as well as selection of beneficiaries to 
visit during the supervision missions. 
Geo-referencing 
PROSPER will adopt the geo-reference methodology, embedded in the M&E plan of the 
program and the MIS. The integration of GIS information in the MIS will improve analysis 
capabilities and help implementing partners gather and use data and generate the necessary 
indicators required to measure progress or otherwise. The extension services staff will be 
responsible for ensuring that the different Project sites and interventions are georeferenced. 
To a minimum, construction works will be geo-referenced, along with FBOs, demonstration 
plots and other relevant interventions in each cluster.  
Progress Reporting 
Progress reports are to be prepared semi-annually and annually and should address:  
  quantitative and qualitative progress made in implementing the Project and achieving 
its objectives; 
  amount of money spent on implemented activities; 
  problems encountered during the reporting period; 
 
  proposed activities and progress expected during the following reporting period. 
steps taken or proposed to be taken to remedy these problems, and  
The main functions of the progress reports are:  
 
review current progress compared to planned activities, and expenditure compared 
to budget;  
  provide overall status information on the Project since the start, in terms of physical 
progress and total expenditure;  
identify problems during the reporting period and required corrective actions;  
 
  analyse strengths and weaknesses, opportunities and threats;  
  discuss quantitative and qualitative progress made in achieving overall objectives; 
and  
77 
  provide strategic direction for the next planning cycle.  
Preparation of Progress Reports.  
The PCU will submit a progress report to the Project Steering Committee and IFAD. The final 
reports will be submitted, no later than 31 July and 31 January respectively, in line with the 
format and content described below: 
Section A – Introduction: this section will include a brief summary of the Project objectives 
and the design features, as described in the Project Design Report. The same section can be 
used for all future Progress Reports, with minor changes as necessary.  
Section B - Executive Summary: this section will include a brief summary of the report, 
highlighting the Project performance to date, trends, reasons for discrepancies with initially 
set targets and objectives (if any), problems encountered (if any) and proposed action. 
Section C - Detailed Report: This section will include the following:  
Current progress - a summary of the most important aspects of Project implementation to 
date, including any issues surfaced and suggestions for resolution. It will concisely describe 
and highlight: progress on all components including physical works, actual costs incurred vs. 
estimates, financing received from IFAD and GOG, large procurements carried out, 
disbursement performance, critical studies undertaken, technical assistance and training 
received (numbers of participants -male and female - and information about the socio-
economic status of individual participants). It will assess performance in reaching and 
benefiting the intended target groups, in particular the poorer, as well as gender equity in 
participation.  
Sources and uses of funds - a table on the opening cash and bank balances, listing of sources 
and amounts of funds received, expenditures by Project component in line with the IFAD 
loan/ grant withdrawal schedule in the respective agreements and the cash and bank 
balances.   
Statement of use of funds by expenditure type - tables listing expenditures by component, 
expenditure type and disbursement categories. An important feature of these tables will be 
the comparative listing of the actual expenditure figures with the estimates from the latest 
Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB), showing any variation and providing appropriate 
explanation. The tables will include the total estimated base costs of Project components and 
expenditure categories, as per the appraisal report. 
Output monitoring report - physical progress and related expenditures on output indicators. If 
there is any variation between current targets and targets set at design, appropriate 
explanation will be provided.  
Procurement report (updated Procurement Plan) -  updated Procurement Plan at grant 
effectiveness and all key procurements made on behalf of the Project, as well their status as 
at the end of the reporting period. The procurement report will also include all key 
procurement of works, vehicles, equipment, goods and consulting and other services 
undertaken by the Project since start up. 
Other Relevant Aspects:  
Organization and Staffing: the progress report will include the latest Project organization 
chart, including names, titles and sex of all staff. Any change in the senior management 
structure and Project compensation details will be reported here.  
Accounts and Audit: this part will describe the status of the PCU’s books of accounts, 
preparation of quarterly accounts, accounts readiness for annual audit and progress or 
completion of the audit (during the appropriate quarter). Where audits have been completed, 
key findings, observations, qualifications and recommendations of the auditors will be 
provided here. 
78 
Compliance with conditionality/legal covenants: compliance with all stipulated conditions 
included as covenants in the loan agreement. Problems relating to non-compliance of any 
legal covenant will also be highlighted with suggested resolution.  
Monthly progress reports 
The PCU shall produce a monthly progress report covering the key issue related to 
implementation in each region. The following sections will be included in the monthly 
progress reports: 
 
Introduction and summary of achievement against planned activities in the AWPB. 
  Physical progress: the list of indicators under the M&E matrix including the actuals for 
each month and the cumulative against the AWPB and Project targets. 
  Financial progress: financial table showing the actual expenditures by activity, in 
comparison with the AWPB targets and the appraisal targets. 
  Key Issues for the month and recommendations: any issues related to delays in 
implementation or any obstacles that require management attention. 
Surveys  
Three surveys will be done at the beginning of the project, halfway through implementation 
and at the end of the project life, namely the Baseline, Mid-term and Completion Survey. The 
methodology to be used is the IFAD’s Core Outcome Indicators (COI) Measurement 
Methodology, which provides a specific guide and tools to measure project’s outcome CIs.   
Baseline Study 
 Baseline data on Project beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries will be collected within three 
months after PROSPER has entered into force. The objective of the baseline assessment will 
be to provide the necessary benchmarks on indicators prior to the Project intervention to 
aide easy and proper impact assessment. It will provide quantitative and qualitative data for 
effective tracking of outcome level indicators. The evaluation of the effectiveness and impact 
of the Project will draw on the database created at baseline and during the monitoring 
process, supplementing it as necessary with data on Project impact, and reviewing the 
combined information over an extended period to assess achievements. 
The Baseline Study will provide baseline data for all Project indicators, including those in the 
M&E Matrix and the Log frame. The survey will cover both beneficiary villages as well as 
control villages with a representative sample size. The goal of the baseline study is to 
understand the level of poverty, agricultural activities, community development and gender 
inequality in the Project area, with special focus on women and youth.  
The survey should: (i) focus on key indicators measuring the outcomes and impact of the 
planned activities, as described in the Project’s Log frame; (ii) not duplicate existing available 
data; (iii) not require an excessive amount of interviewees time; (iv) generate accurate and 
reliable results based on sound statistical best practice, and; (v) allow disaggregation by 
gender, age, and targeting categories. Baseline data will be used by the Project management 
and M&E unit to compare effectiveness of interventions on a regular basis. They will set the 
basis for proper measurement of mid-term performance and impact at completion, as well as 
for possible ad-hoc studies.  
The Baseline Study will be conducted by a specialized firm, with the following tasks: 
Review Project design documents, particularly Log frame indicators within the relevant 
context of their use and value;  
Develop a detailed sampling and design methodology. The sample should be a mixture of 
future possible beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries and representative of Project areas. 
79 
Decisions on the final sampling strategy should be made in consultation with IFAD. Power 
calculations for optimal sample size will have to be performed based on poverty measures.  
The household questionnaires shall use MS Excel or another software which will be 
incorporated in the final report in English. 
The questionnaire will be tailored to Project objectives (using Log frame indicators as well as 
socio-economic, livelihoods and nutrition indicators).  
Data analysis and report writing will be in English.  
Data to be captured should include but not limited to the following categories and modules:  
Household 
Demographics 
Nutrition and Food security 
Poverty levels 
Income, expenditure and consumption  
Household enterprises 
Shocks and coping strategies  
Asset ownership  
Community  
Basic information  
Community needs, actions & achievements  
Access to basic services  
Communal resource management  
Economic activities 
Agriculture activities 
Communal organization 
Organizations and institutions in the communities 
Stakeholders’ and activities 
Farm and off-farm activities  
Farming and Production 
Average plot size  
Land ownership 
Land usage  
Land allocation 
Plot details 
Labour details  
Market details 
Farm inputs  
Details on other farm inputs 
Agricultural activities 
Agricultural production Stats 
Sales and storage  
Livestock and crops  
Machinery  
Details on farmer groups and associations 
Insurance and other services available  
Access to extension services  
Control group: In order to better understand the attribution of the Project interventions on 
beneficiaries, a control group (counterfactual) will also be used. This group will be identified 
80 
based on similar characteristics of the beneficiaries (nearby locations with similar 
demographics). However, care would be taken to ensure that this group does not include 
future indirect Project beneficiaries. 
The firm will be responsible for collection/analysing data from secondary sources that would 
allow for the benchmarking of the key indicators in the Project targeted area which will be the 
basis for the comparison during the impact assessment/completion survey.  
Thematic surveys. Thematic surveys will be undertaken periodically by Project staff and will 
cover a small sample of beneficiaries of a specific project activity (e.g. recipients of matching 
grants) to measure the impact generated. Overall, the exercise is expected to take no more 
than 1 month and can be implemented by Project staff and extension officers, with or without 
external support. The main objectives of the survey are to:  
  measure changes happening at the household level in terms of livelihoods during the 
Project life;  
  assess targeting efficiency;  
  provide evidence of Project success or failure; and  
  provide timely performance information necessary to undertake corrective actions. 
  Thematic surveys will be conducted after mid-term and will provide information on 
“why” and “how” some outcomes were or were not achieved.  
Mid-term Study 
The PCU will carry out a mid-term review of the Project implementation at the end of Project 
year three (Mid-term Review), to evaluate the overall progress of Project implementation in 
achieving its goals and objectives and make recommendations for the remaining Project 
period.  
In particular, the Mid-term Study will:  
 
review the achievements of each Project component and sub-component visa-vis 
Project Design Report estimates, including their financial and physical progress;  
  assess the validity and relevance of Project goals, objectives, and strategies, taking 
into account the implications of evolving public policies and the country’s socio-
economic circumstances;  
review the effectiveness of participatory approaches and targeting, focusing on 
constraints for reaching the poorest and the adequacy and effectiveness of support 
to women beneficiaries;  
 
  assess the post Project sustainability of the assets and other development outcomes 
 
created through Project support;  
identify the critical factors and constraints that have inhibited timely Project 
implementation, both in global terms and by component and sub-component, 
including the institutional and socio-economic policy issues, in addition to any other 
external factors unforeseen at design;  
  examine the arrangements for Project implementation, co-ordination and 
 
management, including the roles and responsibilities of all key players at the national, 
regional and local levels, in particular assess the adequacy, the overall effectiveness 
and the institutional; 
review the adequacy of existing policies and procedures governing the Project’s 
financial management, external audit, liquidity and the use of the special account 
facility, and staff training needs and make practical recommendations to improve the 
effectiveness and efficiency of Project co-ordination and management;  
  examine the efficiency and overall adequacy of the arrangements for annual 
planning, budgeting, and the flow of funds;  
81 
  assess the efficiency of procurement and disbursement procedures, and make 
recommendations to redress any constraints encountered with a view to ensure the 
timely delivery of goods and services required for the Project;  
  examine the effectiveness of the M&E system, in particular its capacity to collect and 
analyse data and information, and report on the performance of the Project in line 
with the key performance indicators highlighted in the Project’s results framework;  
  examine the need, nature and scope for adjustments or reorientation of Project 
 
design and implementation strategy, and propose practical recommendations for 
corrective remedial measures by component and sub-component to be carried out 
during the remaining or extended period of implementation with a view to achieve 
the Project goals and objectives;  
critically examine Project costs and financing plan by component, subcomponent and 
categories, bearing in mind any revisions to the physical and financial targets;  
  assess the effectiveness of supervision process in terms of implementation support, 
its timeliness and ability to identify and deal with problem issues, the adequacy of its 
expertise mix, and effectiveness in following up on its recommendations; and  
  evaluate the important lessons learnt in the course of Project implementation and 
highlight their implications on future Project activities  
The Mid-term Study will largely be based on, inter-alia, the Project Design Report; 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Reports, Procurement Plans, the Reports of 
Supervision and Follow Up Missions; the Project’s Annual Work Plans and Budgets; Progress 
Reports; Financing Agreements; evolving government policies and strategies; and additional 
data and information collected through commissioned studies.  
The Mid-term Study will include extensive field visits and consultations with key 
implementation agencies at the national, regional and local levels, in addition to interacting 
and conducting interviews with beneficiary households in the Project area. The findings of the 
study will be communicated promptly to the implementing agencies and discussed jointly 
between the GOG and IFAD.  
On the basis of the study’s conclusions and recommendations, necessary adjustments will be 
made in the Project Design and the Financing Agreements to remove constraints and put the 
Project on track to achieve its objectives. The GOG will ensure that the recommendations 
resulting from the Mid-term Study are implemented within the specified time and to the 
satisfaction of IFAD.  
Completion Study 
The Completion Study will use the same questionnaires used for the Baseline Study, to allow 
for comparison against baseline results. The parameters used in the analysis will be 
beneficiary status, gender of the household’s head and geographical location. 
The Completion Study will assess the Project impact using the same indicators as the Baseline 
Study. The key elements of the Study will include the socio-economic characteristics of the 
Project primary target group and the status of social and economic infrastructure.  
The Study will be aimed to measure the changes brought about by the Project in the 
socioeconomic development of its beneficiaries. It is anticipated that the Study will combine a 
formal household sample survey with a more qualitative and in-depth study. The Study will 
also compare the socio-economic situation of beneficiaries and the control group, in order to 
better attribute the impact to the Project. A detailed analysis will be undertaken of the 
changes observed between the Baseline Study and the Completion Study. Where possible, a 
panel data structure will be used, i.e. some of the beneficiaries interviewed during the 
Baseline Study will also be included in the sample of the Completion Study.  
82 
Knowledge management, learning and communication 
Knowledge Management, learning and communication is the integrated approach of 
identifying, capturing, evaluating, retrieving and sharing information. It involves the use of 
knowledge taking into account 5 interconnected functions:  
 
 
 
 
 
Learning and Adaptation: seeking regular feedback, learning lessons to improve 
performance, regular reviews for collective decision making, documentation of 
decisions that lead to change, flexibility for the use of knowledge and innovation.  
Learning oriented M&E: setting benchmarks, indicators and learning question; 
collective qualitative and quantitative data, analyzing data, monitoring process, 
continuous follow up of progress and performance. 
Internal and External Communication: internal communication to support learning, 
foster teamwork and joint responsibility, culture of feedback and appreciation, 
creating visibility and advocacy, sharing lessons across Projects and organization. 
Innovation and Experimentation: sourcing new ideas and innovations, seeking and 
embracing new opportunities, enriching new ideas through Communities of Practice, 
groups of people who focus on particular aspects, and trying out new ideas.  
Information management: electronic archives with reports and lessons, capturing and 
documenting information, systematizing and organizing information, packaging 
information to suit the targeted audience into websites and blogs as well as keeping 
data banks.  
83 
Figure 1. Integrated Knowledge Management and Learning System 
In addition to refining and carrying out the KM strategy, the project managers will ensure: 
(i) PROSPER’s visibility; (ii) the inclusion of KM indicators in the M&E system; (iii) inclusion of 
KM-related activities in the AWPB; (iv) integrated information management systems set-up, 
for example, electronic archives; (v) clarity of KM-related roles and responsibilities in the PCU 
and related GoG structures; (vi) facilitation of internal project learning; and (vii) exchanges 
with other projects and agencies operating in Ghana, organizing workshops, producing a 
website, publications, videos and other activities to disseminate results, attract interest of 
other partners, and replicate/scale up tested and documented innovations. 
In order to enhance the learning process and the dissemination of results, a knowledge 
management and communication strategy (KMC strategy) will be developed and integrated 
84 
into the management of the PROSPER, with the aim of capturing and disseminating lessons 
obtained from implementation progress for the purposes of programme maturity, 
sustainability and creating awareness on project activities and services.  
Targeted audiences will include potential beneficiaries among selected districts (in 
accordance with each of PROSPER stages along the gradual and differentiated approach), 
collaborating institutions, as well as the wider donor community in Ghana (DPs and PSWG 
groups) and political dialogue platforms such as the ASWG. Also, the staff involved in day-to-
day project implementation (PCU and MoFA personnel) will be a target audience of 
knowledge sharing events and products. 
Areas of knowledge defined as priority for this project include good practices on climate 
adaptation and mitigation, farming as a business, green sustainable infrastructure 
interventions and natural resource remediation, practical/achievable green business plans, 
green/climate finance, access of producers and MSMEs to rural financial services, and 
effective M&E tools for project staff.  The strategy will be reviewed and revised annually by 
conducting a knowledge audit to identify key needs and opportunities as well as specification 
of activities to be included in the work plan and budget. On those basis target audience, 
priority topics and knowledge products will be confirmed or adapted to address the needs 
identified through project-specific data 
PROSPER’s KMC strategy will be guided by two strategic pillars: 
Pillar 1: Knowledge Harvesting, Storage and Processing. In order to ensure that knowledge 
generated is used and applied, the strategy will promote information harvesting, storage and 
processing to adapt to its users. Resources will be made available to harvest, store, process 
and disseminate information to stakeholders that need it, and to ensure best use of 
knowledge generated by other initiatives in Ghana and the region. Electronic databases, will 
be made accessible through the programme website. PROSPER will finance additional 
hardware and software, so as to better maintain and disseminate data, and library services 
for document acquisition and storage at various work stations.  
Pillar 2: Knowledge Sharing and Learning Partnerships. After information is captured, there 
will be value addition through interpretation and analysis, drawing on information from other 
sources, and adapting it for use by a range of partners. The knowledge sharing and learning 
instruments to be deployed are as follows: (i) studies and publications on lessons learned; (ii) 
case studies documenting successes and failures; (iii) publicity material including newsletters, 
radio and television programmes; (iv) formation of national and regional learning networks; 
(v) periodic meetings and workshops to share knowledge and lessons learned; (vi) /extension 
liaison/feedback meetings; (v) study tours; (vi) preparation and distribution of technical 
literature on improved agricultural practices, including crop and farm budgets; and (vii) the 
routine supervision missions, mid-term review and Project completion report. Special efforts 
will be made to incorporate stakeholders at district and community level in the learning 
partnerships to ensure that they contribute to and benefit from the sharing of knowledge. 
These two pillars fall under IFAD’s Knowledge Management & Learning (KM&L) framework 
pillars of information management, learning oriented monitoring and evaluation and internal 
and external communication principles. PROSPER’s KMC pillar number 1 is aligned to 
information management, and learning oriented monitoring and evaluation while pillar 
number 2 is aligned to internal and external communication pillar under the IFAD’s KM&L 
framework.  
85 
In order to optimise PROSPER’s benefits, stakeholders at the district, regional and national 
levels need to know about the achievements of the Project and the value it creates. There are 
multiple benefits to be derived from communicating effectively about how the Project is 
addressing the needs of the target population.  
The knowledge management strategy will capture and disseminate knowledge at various 
levels and will focus on issues that will be deemed to be critical during Project 
implementation.  
To begin with, the priority will include the following: i) generating linkages among partners 
through transparency; ii) managing and sharing information, knowledge and experiences; and 
iii) conducting analysis that can provide the evidence base for policy interventions. 
Knowledge products from earlier stages of implementation will be an important tool to 
accompany the transition to later stages of PROSPER and for the process of incorporating a 
larger number of districts as implementation progresses. These products will include, for 
example, brochures, reports, seminars, and other knowledge sharing events. Mechanisms 
include: the use of surveys and green/climate reporting defined as part of the M&E system 
with information collected from the field; and the identification and selection of project 
“champions”/most successful cases to share their experience "in first person" with others. 
After the MTR/towards project completion, PROSPER will promote beneficiary knowledge and 
experience sharing events with other groups in similar value chains and focus on identifying 
potential activities for scaling-up. 
The output of the MIS will be will be used to inform knowledge management initiatives and 
will be disseminated within and beyond the intervention zone through existing information 
sharing networks and forums. After MTR and towards project completion, PROSPER will 
encourage the organization by beneficiary rural institutions of knowledge and experience 
sharing events with other groups working on similar value chains in former project areas. Also 
after MTR and towards project completion, PROSPER’s KMC strategy will focus on identifying 
potential areas for scaling-up and collaborating with the development of the programme’s 
Exit Strategy 
SSTC and IGREENFIN 
PROSPER will participate in, contribute to and benefit from SSTC activities under IGREENFIN 
regional activities concentrated on the generation and dissemination of practical and 
technical knowledge in the context of the escalating climate emergency. Ghana (with Burkina 
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali and Senegal) is part of the first phase of the IGREENFIN programme, 
to be extended subsequently to six more countries in West and Eastern Africa, all under the 
GCF Great Green Wall Umbrella Programme. The ambitious IGREENFIN agenda mirrors most 
of the key KM purposes of PROSPER – climate-related know-how/knowledge creation and 
dissemination in the region, with a strong focus on responding to climate change in semi-arid 
areas and the promotion of synergies between countries tackling similar developmental 
challenges independently.  
PROSPER will engage in IGREENFIN regional SSTC activities through, inter alia, experience-
sharing and fact-finding visits and support for and entries in the annual Sahel and Great Green 
Wall Award event rewarding the best green business plans produced by women and youth 
entrepreneurs. PROSPER will collaborate with these interrelated structured and participatory 
learning programmes in the region which will provide opportunities for knowledge exchanges, 
the sharing of experiences and awareness raising about successful practices and pilots that 
can be scaled up, for instances, in agricultural adaptation, value chain development, and the 
86 
needs of private sector investors and access to productive land. PROSPER will also play a part 
in the IGREENFIN establishment and maintenance of an integrated regional M&E systems. 
Other possible areas for SSTC cooperation will include policy agendas that are best tackled 
through regional collaboration such as developing a common conducive commercial 
environment for cashew production, processing and trade, and regulation of domestic and 
international trade in agricultural commodities. 
87 
Chapter 5: Project cost and financing  
Project costs 
The total project costs, for eight-years, are estimated at USD 147.3 million or GHS 1.2billion. 
The base cost amount to USD 133.1 million or GHS 827.6 million, equivalent to 90.3% of total 
costs. Physical and price contingencies at USD 14.2 million account for about 11% of base 
costs or 9.7% of total costs. Investment costs of USD 135.1 million represent 91.7% of total 
project costs and Operating costs only 8.3%%. (Project costs by component/subcomponent 
are presented in Annexes 3 and 4.) 
PROSPER Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
totals USD 30.9 million or 23.2% of base costs and comprises two subcomponents: (i) Capacity 
building of rural institutions, enterprises and households; and (ii) Development of socio-
economic infrastructure. Component 2: Strengthening the benefits for smallholders and small 
operators around agricultural value chains totals USD 90.8 million or 68.2% of base costs and 
comprises two subcomponents: (i) Sustainable marketing linkages and business development; 
and (ii) Access to rural financial services (including the green finance through IGREENFIN I). 
The third support component is related to Project Management and Policy engagement at 
USD 11.2 million (8.6% of total base cost) and comprises two subcomponents: (i) Project 
Management; and (ii) Policy engagement. The total project cost is divided into 
USD 46.4 million in foreign currency, USD 84.7 million in local currency (excluding taxes) and 
USD 16.2 million of taxes. 
Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan 
The financiers/co-financiers of PROSPER are Government, IFAD (IFAD 11 and IFAD 12), Green 
Climate Fund (GCF) (Grant, Adaptation and Mitigation), participating financial institutions 
(PFIs), private sector and beneficiaries (RIs, MSMEs and local communities). The financing 
plan by component is summarized in Table 1 below. PROSPER will be financed from IFAD 11 
(USD 52.5 million, 35.6% of project total cost) and IFAD 12 (USD 22.7 million or 15.4% of the 
total. The IFAD share of project costs will relate to: works; equipment and materials, goods, 
services and inputs; consultancies; training and workshops; grants and subsidies, salaries and 
allowances. 
Government of Ghana’s contribution is estimated at USD 22.5 million (15.3% of total costs) 
mainly in the form of tax exemptions and GoG staff costs. Beneficiaries’ in-kind and cash 
contribution is estimated at USD 19.3 million (13.14% of total costs), mainly through Business 
Plans. PFIs and the private sector represent USD 4.8 million or 3.3% of total costs. GCF will 
contribute to the BFF facility. 
Table 1: PROSPER project costs by component and financier 54 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
54 To be shown by subcomponent in final version. 
88 
Expenditure categories. The most important investment expenditure categories are Credit, 
Guarantee Funds (USD 62.1 million, 42.2% of total costs) and Civil Works (USD 23.4 million, 
15.9% of total costs). Grants and subsidies stand at USD 19.3 million, (13.1% of total costs), 
Equipment and goods, including vehicles USD 2.8 million (1.9%), Consultancies 
USD 12.4 million (8.4%) and Training and workshops at USD 14.2 million (9.6% of the total). In 
terms of recurring costs, Salaries and allowances constitute USD 10.1 million, (6.8% of total 
costs and 82.1% of recurrent costs), with a significant portion as an in-kind contribution from 
the GoG. Table 2 summarizes the project expenditure accounts. 
Table 2: PROSPER expenditure accounts by financiers 
(Millions United States dollars) 
The projected component expenditures by year are shown in the following table. 
89 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERComponents by Financiers(US$ Million)A. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic Infrastructure1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households4.842.62.522.0----0.54.8------3.530.611.37.72. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure17.471.93.213.1------------3.615.024.316.5Subtotal22.362.65.715.9----0.51.5------7.119.935.624.1B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development1.511.06.548.8----1.410.3------4.029.913.39.02. Access to Rural Financial Services25.729.94.35.013.816.16.98.11.11.32.32.719.322.52.53.09.811.485.858.2Subtotal27.227.410.810.913.813.96.97.02.52.52.32.419.319.52.52.613.813.999.167.2C. Project Management and Policy Engagement1. Project Management3.024.56.149.3----1.613.3------1.612.812.48.42. Policy Engagement0.014.70.250.7----0.119.5------0.115.00.30.2Subtotal3.124.26.349.4----1.713.5------1.612.912.78.6Total PROJECT COSTS52.535.622.715.413.89.36.94.74.73.22.31.619.313.12.51.722.515.3147.3100.0Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %Bene-ficiariesPrivate SectorThe Gov'tTotalAmount  %Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %IFAD 11IFAD 12GCF AdaptationGCF MitigationGCF GrantPFIsRepublic of GhanaPROSPERDisbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ Million)The Gov't1. Civil works16.972.23.012.8------------3.515.023.415.92. Equipments,Goods and Vehicles1.027.91.541.9------------1.130.23.62.53. Consultancies3.125.15.543.9----2.016.10.00.3----1.814.612.48.44. Training and Workshops5.639.65.840.9----2.014.4------0.75.014.29.65. Grants and Subsidies11.660.01.05.0--------6.735.0--0.0-19.313.16. Credit,Gurantee Funds12.219.72.54.013.822.26.911.1--2.33.712.620.22.54.19.315.062.142.27. Salaries and allowances0.77.12.928.9----0.77.0------5.757.010.16.88. Operating costs1.360.30.524.7------------0.315.02.21.5Total PROJECT COSTS52.535.622.715.413.89.36.94.74.73.22.31.619.313.12.51.722.515.3147.3100.0Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %Bene-ficiariesPrivate SectorTotalAmount  %Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %Amount  %IFAD 11IFAD 12GCF AdaptationGCF MitigationGCF GrantPFIs 
Table 3: PROSPER project costs by component and year  
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Disbursement 
The proceeds of the financing will be used for eligible expenditures as defined in the Financing 
Agreement and in line with the disbursement allocations specified in the relevant section of 
the Financing Agreement. IFAD will make an initial deposit to the Designated Account 
(Authorized Allocation). The ceiling for the Authorised Allocation will be specified in the Letter 
to the Borrower (LTB) issued for PROSPER. The funds will be disbursed into a US Dollars 
Account at the Central Bank of Ghana and will be operated by the PCU. 
The proceeds from the Designated Account shall be used exclusively to finance the Project’s 
eligible expenditures as will be stipulated in Schedule 2 of the Project Loan Agreement. The 
ceiling for the Authorised Allocation will be specified in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB) issued 
for PROSPER. The funds will be disbursed into US Dollars Account at the Central Bank of 
Ghana and will be operated by the PCU. Funds shall be periodically transferred from the 
Designated Account to the Programme Operational Account (GHS) for the purpose of 
financing the Programme’s eligible expenditures financed by IFAD. 
Funds shall be periodically transferred from the Designated Account to the Programme 
Operational Account (GHS) for the purpose of financing the Programme’s eligible 
expenditures financed by IFAD. The regular signatories to the Designated and Programme 
Accounts will be the Project Coordinator and the Finance Manager as Cat A and B signatories 
respectively. However, Chief Director of MoFA and the Director of Finance (MoFA) will be the 
alternate Cat A and B signatories respectively in the absence of the regular signatories. The 
same arrangements will be applicable to funds allocated by co-financiers. Government 
approved fund-flow processing would be used to accelerate cash-flow. 
Report based disbursement method will apply for the project. Other methods of 
disbursement will include advances, direct payments and reimbursements. Payments made 
90 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including Contingencies20222023202420252026202720282029TotalA. Development of Rural Institutions and Socioeconomic Infrastructure1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households786.31,211.11,615.52,769.02,162.41,172.9958.4622.011,297.62. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure26.52,321.34,561.14,942.05,040.83,634.73,707.430.724,264.5Subtotal812.83,532.46,176.67,710.97,203.24,807.64,665.9652.735,562.1B. Strengthening the Economic Benefits for Smallholders and Small Operators Around Selected Agricultural value Chains1. Sustainable Marketing Linkages and Business Development924.61,548.92,082.72,613.72,544.81,889.21,043.4663.913,311.12. Access to Rural Financial Services465.911,483.913,402.815,149.016,792.215,285.412,229.6954.185,762.8Subtotal1,390.513,032.815,485.417,762.619,337.017,174.613,273.01,617.999,073.9C. Project Management and Policy Engagement1. Project Management1,814.31,074.61,779.41,625.51,759.41,523.41,392.01,402.812,371.32. Policy Engagement23.672.735.936.677.538.126.927.4338.7Subtotal1,837.91,147.31,815.21,662.11,836.91,561.51,418.91,430.212,710.0Total PROJECT COSTS4,041.217,712.523,477.227,135.728,377.123,543.719,357.73,700.8147,346.0 
against advances would be secured against bank guarantees by a commercial bank and or 
bonds acceptable to IFAD. Training will be provided to accounts staff on IFAD procedures and 
all processes documented as part of the PIM and outlined in MOUs with districts. 
Summary of benefits and economic analysis 
The PROSPER target beneficiaries are producers, investors, MSMEs and households located in 
the project area. Farmers were expected to benefit directly from the project, including women 
and youth. In addition, MSMEs and RIs will take advantage of positive externalities brought by 
the project. Indirect beneficiaries will include local institutions and the families of workers 
employed directly by the project. Finally, the targeted areas will benefit from a general uplift 
in the local economy driven by the growth in activities. It is important to note that the 
PROSPER targeted population lives in precarious and relatively disadvantaged conditions in 
areas with high levels of transaction costs and limited market access. They are highly exposed 
to the negative impacts of climate change. 
The main benefit stream analysed is the income and profits derived from business activity in 
the three principal commodity value chains: soya, rice and maize. Other significant non-
financial benefits include improved access with feeder roads and farm tracks, enhanced 
productive potential from on- and off-farm and watershed works and natural resource 
remediation, secure drinking water supplies and other communal assets, increased tax 
revenues and enhanced nutrition security. These benefits, which are not included in the 
calculation of the ERR, consolidate the economic profitability of the PROSPER and contribute 
to the justification of the investments made. 
Economic analysis based on ten models elaborated for the principal production modes funded 
by PROSPER, under very moderate assumptions, yields an economic rate of return (ERR) of 
21.4%, (see Annex 4). Sensitivity analysis shows this ERR to be robust under different adverse 
scenarios. A simultaneous increase in costs of between 10% and 60% combined with a 
decrease in benefits of 10% yields an ERR greater than or equal to the Opportunity Cost of 
Capital (assumed to be 12.25%). This is an acceptable level given the analysis does not 
consider other direct and indirect benefits including such significant environmental benefits as 
improved soil fertility, reduced erosion, tree cover and better long-term management of the 
NR base. 
91 
Chapter 6: Financial management  
A.  Financial Management Assessment 
Methodology.  A Financial Management (FM) Assessment was conducted in in August 
1. 
2021 for the “Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience 
(PROSPER) in accordance with the IFAD’s Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design (2021). 
The objective of FMA was to provide assurances that the Project will be implemented in an 
environment with sufficiently strong financial management systems and controls in place 
such that programme funds are used efficiently, effectively and economically to achieve value 
for money, programme assets are safeguarded, are well as the provision of accurate, reliable 
and timely reports to the financiers and other stakeholders. The FMA involves assessing: (i) 
the inherent risk at country level; and (ii) the project specific risk.  
The Government has shown commitment to reducing corruption and corruption 
In the 2020 survey, the Transparency International (TI) Corruption Perception Index 
Country Risks 
2. 
(CPI), Ghana scored 43% (2019: 41%) and ranked 75 (2019:80) out of 180 countries; thus, 
falling into the countries with medium level perception.  Therefore, the inherent risk is 
considered Medium.  
3. 
perception with the enactment of laws and regulations, and the active involvement of 
Ghana’s Parliament in carrying out its oversight responsibility in the approval of budgets and 
review of the Auditor-General’s Annual Reports.  
The legal framework (laws, legislative instruments, policies, guidelines and 
4. 
operational procedures) required to support implementation of PROSPER  from financial 
management perspective include the Public Financial Management Regulations 2019 (L.I. 
2378), Public Financial Management Act 2016 (Act 921), the Public Procurement 
(Amendment) Act 2016 (Act 914), Public Procurement (Amendment) Act 2016 (Act 914), and 
Public Procurement Act 2003 (663), Public Financial Management (Public Investment 
Management) Regulations, 2020 (L.I. 2411),  and Public Private Partnership Act, 2020 (Act 
1039), These are  in line with IFAD policies and will be applicable to implementing and 
managing PROSPER, in addition to other IFAD-specific anti-corruption policies. 
5. 
agency (the Ministry of Food and Agriculture). Government’s adoption of austerity measures 
has led to lower spending and irregular contribution of budgetary support form of 
counterpart funding to existing projects, thus, not meeting some elements of counterpart 
commitments. In order to mitigate this risk with PROSPER, budgetary support form of 
counterpart funding has been eliminated with Government contribution limited to tax 
exemptions, Government staff pro-rata time on PROSPER activities, provision of office space, 
and auditing services as the main sources of Government counterpart funding to PROSPER. 
That notwithstanding, during project implementation, the government will be requested to 
make budgetary contribution to cater for any expenditure that IFAD would consider ineligible.  
6. 
Note to identify, acknowledge and quantify GoG in-kind contributions that shall include the 
provision of office space, the provision of audit services, and the staff time of MOFA 
Directorates that shall implement PROSPER activities in the fields. Beneficiary in-kind 
contribution shall also be identified, acknowledged and quantified with guidance from the 
IFAD Technical Note. The referenced IFAD document is available at: 
https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/125/docs/EB-2018-125-R-7-Rev-1-Add-6.pdf 
Organization and Staffing. Project staff are either seconded from the lead 
7. 
implementing agency who retain their status as public servants with benefits such as social 
The finance team will be guided by the IFAD In-kind Domestic Financing Technical 
It is recommended that IFAD would work very closely with the lead implementing 
92 
Budgeting. MMDAs use GIFMIS (the Government’s electronic platform and enterprise 
security contributions, health insurance for their families, and end-of-service benefits, or 
recruited as consultants and paid gross consultancy fees to enable meet their own financial 
obligations, including tax obligations, social security contributions, health insurance for 
themselves and their families.  
PROSPER shall follow the pattern of IFAD-financed REP and GASIP, and recently 
8. 
closed projects RTIMP and RAFIP, by recruiting the project’s professional staff through a 
competitive process and in accordance with criteria and procedures developed in agreement 
with IFAD. This is to ensure transparency of the recruitment process as well as reducing the 
risk of divided attention and lack of focus by project staff where staff are seconded from the 
lead implementing agency.   
9. 
resource programme) for capturing financial data. The national budgets which are prepared 
with GIFMIS are submitted by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to the Parliament of Ghana 
before the end of November of each year. With the use of GIFMIS by the project, PROSPER’s 
budgets shall form part of the national budgets.  
Traditionally, IFAD requires at least 60 days to the end of fiscal year as the period of 
10. 
submission of AWPB for approval. If this threshold is maintained, the project shall be able to 
meet IFAD’s requirement but may miss the national submission date. To mitigate this risk, the 
Financing Agreement shall require that the project’s AWPB shall be submitted to IFAD at least 
90 days (instead of 60 days) to the end of fiscal year to shall ensure that both IFAD and MoF’s 
review and approval are met.  
11. 
control, measurement, analysis and classification of the financial flows of GoG is the 
Controller and Accountant-General’s Department (CAGD). CAGD is also responsible for the 
development and implementation of sound financial management systems for budget 
implementation, accounting and reporting on public funds including the facilitation of the 
usage of the Ghana Integrated Financial Management Information System (GIFMIS) by 
covered entities. With the support of CAGD, PROSPER will integrate its financial management 
systems to the national system through the usage of GIFMIS.   
12. 
Act, 2003 (Act 658) is the national institution that carries out internal audits to ensure ensures 
that the financial activities of MDAs and MMDAs are in compliance with laws, policies, plans, 
standards and procedures. Staff of the Agency are posted to MDAs and MMDAs, are regularly 
rotated or transferred. Staff of the agency has regularly audited IFAD-financed projects 
satisfactorily, albeit, submissions to IFAD are delayed due to reporting channels within the 
MDAs and MMDAs.  
13. 
the Ghana Audit Service (GAS) who are mandated by law to carry out the audits. In a few 
exceptions, annual audits of projects are outsourced to private audit firms recruited with the 
approval of the GAS. The GAS has successfully conducted IFAD-financed projects in Ghana 
since 2014.  
External Audit. Annual audits of MDAs, MMDAs and GoG projects are conducted by 
Internal Audit. The Internal Audit Agency, established by the Internal Audit Agency 
Accounting and Financial Reporting. The government’s agency that ensures the 
The introduction of disbursement cap to project annual spending may result in funds 
Project Level Risks and Mitigations.  
14. 
not being available when needed to implement activities which poses a risk to project 
achieving its objectives within the timeframe envisioned at design. This risk is further 
exacerbated as disbursement cap Information may not be readily available at the time of 
AWPB preparation. To mitigate these risks, the Project Coordinator must liaise with FMD and 
PMD through the Country Director to obtain disbursement cap information before 
completion and submission of AWPB for approvals (Project Steering Committee, IFAD and 
Parliament).  
93 
Expected delays in justifying prior advances, particularly, MoFA Directorates of 
15. 
District Agriculture due to the use of the revolving fund mechanism is seen as a risk. This is 
mitigated by a constant reminder by Programme Accountants and Technical Specialists to 
implementing partners to justify advances at least once a month. Furthermore, a restriction 
rule of minimum 80% of advances justified before the release of any new advance shall be 
applied.  
The implementing entity has three chartered Accountants and one finalist. All have 
16. 
experience in managing IFAD projects. PROSPER does not need that number of qualified and 
experienced financial management staff. The excess number of qualified and experienced 
financial management staff poses a risk of increasing cost significantly for the project. This risk 
will be mitigated by the engagement of two junior accounting staff to replace two senior 
accountants on completion of GASIP. Moreover, IFAG will make complete and appropriate 
staffing a condition precedent to disbursement and throughout the project cycle of PROSPER. 
Lack of experience in using the national accounting platform – GIFMIS - resulting in 
17. 
late submission and poor quality of the financial reports, as well as challenges to meeting all 
the reporting requirements of project financiers is another risk identified for the successful 
implementation of PROSPER. To mitigate this risk, sensitization and migration is planned for 
the staff of GASIP to use GIFMIS in the current programme before PROSPER start-up to 
enhance experience before implementation of the new project. Very detailed accounting 
dimensions will form part of the chart of accounts to enable the system’s report generator to 
pull out carefully defined reporting requirements per financier at project start-up phase, as 
part of mitigation measures to overcome the identified risk. The GASIP team will use GIFMIS 
and their current computerized accounting system, iSCALA, concurrently for three months in 
early 2022 while the customization of GIFMIS reports is underway, and then when all is 
satisfactorily done, the project will discontinue the use of iSCALA and rely on GIFMIS for 
financial data capturing, processing and reporting. 
Inherent 
Rating 
Moderate 
Summary of Project Risks 
Risks 
Organization and Staffing. 
The implementing entity 
has excess number of 
qualified and experienced 
financial management staff 
thereby increasing cost 
significantly. 
Residual 
Rating 
Low 
Mitigation Measures 
Entity has three chartered 
Accountants and one finalist.  All 
have experience in managing 
IFAD project. Two junior 
Accounts Assistants will be 
engaged to replace two senior 
accountants on completion of 
GASIP. PROSPER will make 
complete and appropriate 
staffing a condition precedent to 
disbursement and throughout 
project cycle 
Budgeting. IFAD 
disbursement cap may 
result in funds not being 
available when needed. 
Disbursement cap 
Information may not be 
readily available at the time 
of AWPB preparation 
Substantial  Project must obtain 
Moderate 
disbursement cap before 
completion and approval of 
AWPB. Project must liaise with 
FMD and PMD through the 
Country Director to obtain 
disbursement cap information 
during the preparation of the 
AWPB 
94 
Mitigation Measures 
Inherent 
Rating 
Substantial  Programme Accountants and 
Residual 
Rating 
Moderate 
Risks 
Funds flow and 
Disbursement 
Arrangements. Delays in 
justifying prior advances, 
particularly, MoFA 
Directorates of District 
Agriculture  
Internal Controls. 
Contractual arrangements 
between the project and 
implementing partners, 
particularly, the MoFA 
Directorates of District 
Agriculture, thereby 
interrupting fund flow and 
reporting 
Accounting and Financial 
Reporting. Inexperience of 
FM team in using the 
national accounting 
platform (GIFMIS). 
Moderate 
Moderate 
External Audit. Delays in 
performing and submitting 
Audited PFS 
Low 
Technical Specialists shall 
constantly remind implementing 
partners to justify advances at 
least once a month. Restriction 
rule of minimum 80% of 
advances justified before the 
release of any new advance shall 
be applied. 
Contractual arrangements and 
reporting templates and 
guidelines for project finances 
shall be spelt out in MOUs/MOAs 
with implementing partners and 
service providers. Quarterly 
reports shall be required of 
implementing partners to feed 
into the Project IFRs. 
Sensitization and migration 
planned for the staff to use in 
the current programme to 
enhance experience before 
implementation of the new 
project as well as configuring 
reports to meet IFAD’s 
requirements. 
Joint collaboration with the SAI 
on auditor’s ToRs, and 
prioritization of performing 
project audit. 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Credit & Guarantee Funds, 
and Grants and Subsidies. 
Delays in funds reaching out 
to beneficiaries after 
approval of their proposals 
Substantial  The performance of ARB Apex 
Moderate 
Bank and the PFIs will be 
monitored against a number of 
KPIs shall be established in their 
MOUs with PROSPER. These will 
include the lead time that the 
APEX Bank credits PFIs accounts 
and the lead time that PFIs credit 
beneficiaries’ accounts, that  
95 
Table 2: Analyses of Use of Country Systems 
FM Control Area 
Narrative 
Use of 
country 
systems 
1.  Organization 
and staffing 
N 
  Project staff are either seconded 
from the lead implementing 
agency who retain their status 
as public servants with benefits 
such as social security 
contributions, health insurance 
for their families, and end-of-
service benefits, or recruited as 
consultants and paid gross 
consultancy fees to enable meet 
their own financial obligations, 
including tax obligations, social 
security contributions, health 
insurance for themselves and 
their families.  
  PROSPER shall follow the 
pattern of IFAD-financed REP 
and GASIP, and recently closed 
projects RTIMP and RAFIP, by 
recruiting the project’s 
professional staff through a 
competitive process and in 
accordance with criteria and 
Residual 
Rating 
Low 
Mitigation 
measures 
against 
identified risks 
Recruit staff 
competitively 
from the open 
source and 
considering 
public service 
as an added 
advantage.   
Institution / 
Systems used 
Risks with using /not 
using country systems 
Inherent 
Rating 
  None 
Moderate 
Divided attention and 
lack of focus by project 
staff where staff are 
seconded from the lead 
implementing agency.   
Capacity built during 
the course of project 
implementation are not 
retained in the PFM 
system when staff are 
recruited from the 
private sector. 
Additional costs are 
incurred to pay market 
rates of remuneration 
to private sector 
employees 
xcvi 
FM Control Area 
Narrative 
Use of 
country 
systems 
Institution / 
Systems used 
Risks with using /not 
using country systems 
Inherent 
Rating 
Residual 
Rating 
Mitigation 
measures 
against 
identified risks 
2.  Budgeting 
Y 
procedures developed in 
agreement with IFAD. This is to 
ensure transparency of the 
recruitment process as well as 
reducing the risk of divided 
attention and lack of focus by 
project staff where staff are 
seconded from the lead 
implementing agency.   
  MMDAs use GIFMIS (the 
Government’s electronic 
platform and enterprise 
resource programme) for 
capturing financial data. The 
national budgets which are 
prepared with GIFMIS are 
submitted by the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) to the Parliament 
of Ghana before the end of 
November of each year. With 
the use of GIFMIS by the 
project, PROSPER’s budgets shall 
form part of the national 
budgets.  
  GIFMIS 
  National 
Budget 
Moderate 
Substantial 
IFAD requires at least 
60 days to the end of 
fiscal year as the period 
of submission of AWPB 
for approval. If this 
threshold is maintained, 
the project shall be able 
to meet IFAD’s 
requirement but may 
miss the national 
submission date. 
Low 
Moderate 
The Financing 
Agreement 
shall require 
that the 
project’s AWPB 
shall be 
submitted to 
IFAD at least 90 
days (instead 
of 60 days) to 
the end of 
fiscal year to 
shall ensure 
that both IFAD 
and MoF’s 
review and 
xcvii 
FM Control Area 
Narrative 
Use of 
country 
systems 
Institution / 
Systems used 
Risks with using /not 
using country systems 
Inherent 
Rating 
3.  Funds Flow / 
Disbursement 
Arrangements 
Y 
4.  Accounting 
Y 
and Financial 
Reporting 
  The project maintains 2 bank 
accounts each (dollars and cedi) 
with the Bank of Ghana for IFAD 
and GCF funds. The accounts are 
for flow of funds from IFAD and 
operational purpose. Additional 
Counterpart Account shall be 
opened for GoG funds. 
  The default payment accounts 
shall be the programme 
accounts in line with Bank of 
Ghana directives that the Ghana 
Cedi is the only legal tender in 
Ghana (Foreign Exchange Act, 
Act 723, 2006). 
  The government’s agency that 
ensures the control, 
measurement, analysis and 
classification of the financial 
flows of GoG is the Controller 
and Accountant-General’s 
Department (CAGD). CAGD is 
also responsible for the 
  Bank of 
Ghana 
  GIFMIS 
Low 
Substantial 
Inaccessibility of online 
bank statements thus 
causing delays in 
tracking activities on 
the bank account.  
Limited printout of 
Bank Statements (once 
a month, only).  Lack of 
Mobile Money Transfer 
facility. 
Residual 
Rating 
Low 
Moderate 
Mitigation 
measures 
against 
identified risks 
approval are 
met. 
Request 
Monthly Bank 
Statement. 
Transfer funds 
to a 
commercial 
bank to effect 
mobile money 
transaction 
with 
beneficiaries  
  CAGD 
  GIFMIS 
Secretariat 
Un-customized reports 
such as automated 
withdrawal 
applications. 
Moderate  With the 
Low 
support of 
Secretariat, 
GIFMIS will be 
customised in 
order to allow 
the accounting 
software to 
xcviii 
FM Control Area 
Narrative 
Use of 
country 
systems 
Institution / 
Systems used 
Risks with using /not 
using country systems 
Inherent 
Rating 
development and 
implementation of sound 
financial management systems 
for budget implementation, 
accounting and reporting on 
public funds including the 
facilitation of the usage of the 
Ghana Integrated Financial 
Management Information 
System (GIFMIS) by covered 
entities. With the support of 
CAGD, PROSPER will integrate its 
financial management systems 
to the national system through 
the usage of GIFMIS.   
  The Internal Audit Agency, 
established by the Internal Audit 
Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658) is 
the national institution that 
carries out internal audits to 
ensure ensures that the financial 
activities of MDAs and MMDAs 
are in compliance with laws, 
policies, plans, standards and 
procedures. Staff of the Agency 
are posted to MDAs and 
5. 
Internal 
Controls 
Y 
Moderate 
Irregular audit reviews 
to projects and delays 
in obtaining final 
internal audit reports. 
 
Internal 
Audit 
Agency 
within the 
Internal 
Audit 
Agency 
Act. 2003 
(Act 658) 
xcix 
Residual 
Rating 
Mitigation 
measures 
against 
identified risks 
automatically 
generate 
financial 
reporting in 
line with IFAD 
requirements 
and forms  
Low 
Internal audit 
reviews will be 
explicitly 
included in 
both the MoFA 
Internal Audit 
Directorate’s 
annual work 
plan, and the 
budget of 
PROSPER.  
Residual 
Rating 
Mitigation 
measures 
against 
identified risks 
ICO will liaise 
with the MoFA 
Chief Director 
and Head of 
Internal Audit 
Agency to 
obtain audit 
reports. 
N/A 
FM Control Area 
Narrative 
Use of 
country 
systems 
Institution / 
Systems used 
Risks with using /not 
using country systems 
Inherent 
Rating 
6.  External Audit  Y 
MMDAs, are regularly rotated or 
transferred. Staff of the agency 
has regularly audited IFAD-
financed projects satisfactorily, 
albeit, submissions to IFAD are 
delayed due to reporting 
channels within the MDAs and 
MMDAs. 
  Annual audits of MDAs, MMDAs 
and GoG projects are conducted 
by the Ghana Audit Service 
(GAS) who are mandated by law 
to carry out the audits. In a few 
exceptions, annual audits of 
projects are outsourced to 
private audit firms recruited 
with the approval of the GAS. 
The GAS has successfully 
conducted IFAD-financed 
projects in Ghana since 2014. 
N/A 
  Ghana 
Audit 
Service 
c 
Annex b - Financial Management Assessment Questionnaire at Design  
Country: Ghana 
Performed by: Daniel Ekow Pasos 
Implementing Entity: Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
Project Name: 
Mission Ref.: Detailed Design Mission  
Date of review: 
About the FMAQ: The FMAQ provides an indicative list of issues and questions to be considered in the FM assessment 
of a project during the design phase. The FMAQ should be tailored during each assessment to better address specific 
project circumstances by adapting the questions (adding, deleting, or modifying, as deemed appropriate). 
The FMAQ has been designed to primarily assess the Lead Project Agency (LPA), which may be a Government 
Department and/or a Project Implementing Unit (PIU). Before commencing it is essential to have a clear view of the 
probable project implementation arrangements, for instance, where the project FM arrangements are administered 
through a PIU, which primarily uses stand-alone financial systems, the PIU is effectively the Implementing Entity and so 
focus of the FMA should be on the PIU’s FM arrangements. If there is more than one Implementing Entity, an FMAQ 
should be completed for each entity that will receive and disburse project funds. 
Various sets of supporting documentation / reference material may be required to perform the FMAQ effectively, 
including but not limited to:  
 
  Evidence of consideration of the work of the Internal Auditor (if applicable).  
  Chart of Accounts. 
  Project or entity Financial Management Manual (Index page). 
  External Audit terms of reference. 
 
  Copy of most recent audit report (if applicable). 
Completing the FMAQ: The FMAQ consists of two main parts, both of which must be completed in full:   
Terms of reference and curriculum vitae for key financial and accounting personnel. 
Financial regulations, standards or pronouncements used by the project/entity. 
1)  Summary: The findings included in the Summary section may be saved directly online in the Financial 
Management Dashboard (FMDB), or shared with the Finance by email. 
2)  Detailed findings: The detailed findings must be recorded in the word template as provided below, and either 
uploaded in FMDB in the respective mission page, or shared with the Finance Officer by email.   
Where the FMAQ is performed by an FM Consultant, the Finance Officer and Consultant should ensure that submission 
requirements are clear. 
101 
Summary 
Country Risks 
  1. TI Index (0-30 High; 31-40 Substantial; 41-50 Moderate; 
51-100 Low) 
Country Level  
Entity Level 
Brief description of issues 
Inherent (current) 
Risk H/S/M/L 
Proposed Mitigation 
Measures 
(Future) Residual Risk 
H/S/M/L 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Poor linkages between 
strategic planning and long-
term budgeting at sector 
levels; 
Expenditure commitments are 
made outside the approved 
budget and GIFMIS system 
which are not supported by 
cash thus resulting in 
payments arrears;  
Unreliability of flow of 
counterpart funding to LPA to 
support project 
The ability of MoFA and the 
PCU to effectively coordinate 
implementation. 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
All staff, suppliers, and 
beneficiaries will be 
informed of IFAD’s 
Policy on Corruption 
Strengthened FM 
capacity of MDAs and 
MMDAs through 
ongoing PFM reform & 
capacity building, 
supported by funding 
from multilateral and 
bilateral donors. 
Reduced dependency 
of budgetary support 
form of counterpart 
funding. Reliance on 
tax exemptions 
Adequate staffing 
arrangements at PCU 
Level to collaborate 
with MoFA and its 
District Offices 
MOUs or subsidiary 
agreements between 
PROSPER and MoFA 
102 
  2. RSP Score (0-30 High; 31-40 Substantial; 41-50 Moderate; 
51-100 Low) 
Control Risks55 
1.  Organization and Staffing 
Low 
Moderate 
Risk that the implementing entity does not have the necessary 
number of adequately qualified and experienced financial 
management staff in the national and regional centers, 
resulting in limited ability to meet the functional needs of the 
project 
The risk that the implementing 
entity has excess number of 
qualified and experienced 
financial management staff 
thereby increasing cost 
significantly.  
DADUs to strengthen 
accountability; Needs-
based support from 
PCU with budget 
preparation and 
reporting 
Low 
Low 
Entity has three 
chartered Accountants 
and one finalist.  All 
have experience in 
managing IFAD project. 
Two junior Accounts 
Assistants will be 
engaged to replace two 
senior accountants on 
completion of GASIP. 
PROSPER will make 
complete and 
55 While performing the risk assessment, the FM Specialist must keep in mind the fraud risk exposure, i.e.: a) the vulnerability to potential or actual fraud schemes; b) the 
likelihood of control override, c) the potential existence and impact of incentives and pressures on individuals to commit fraud; and d) assume that there will be an attempt 
to conceal the fraud.  According to IFAD’s Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations, fraud is defined as “any act or omission, including a 
misrepresentation, that knowingly or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party in order to obtain a financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation”.  Financial 
fraud is any action undertaken to gain financial advantage through deliberate deception and falls into three general categories of asset misappropriation, corruption and 
manipulation of financial statements. 
103 
2.  Budgeting 
Risk that budgeted expenditures are not realistic, not 
prepared or revised on a timely basis, and not executed in an 
orderly and predictable manner, resulting in funds not being 
available when needed, ineligible costs and reallocation of 
project funds and slow implementation progress 
IFAD disbursement cap may 
result in funds not being 
available when needed  
Substantial 
Disbursement cap Information 
may not be readily available at 
the time of AWPB preparation 
Substantial 
appropriate staffing a 
condition precedent to 
disbursement and 
throughout project 
cycle  
Project must obtain 
disbursement cap 
before completion and 
approval of AWPB. 
Moderate 
Project must liaise with 
FMD and PMD through 
the Country Director 
Moderate 
104 
3.  Funds flow and Disbursement Arrangements 
Risk that funds from multiple financiers disburse with delay 
due to cumbersome treasury arrangements or inability of 
project cost centres and service providers to justify prior 
advances, resulting in delayed implementation 
Delays in justifying prior 
advances, particularly, MoFA 
Directorates of District 
Agriculture 
Substantial 
Moderate 
Programme 
Accountants and 
Technical Specialists 
shall constantly remind 
implementing partners 
to justify advances at 
least once a month. 
Restriction rule of 
minimum 80% of 
advances justified 
before the release of 
any new advance shall 
be applied. 
4. 
Internal Controls 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Risk that appropriate controls over Project funds are not in 
place, leading to the inefficient or inappropriate use of project 
resources. 
Contractual arrangements 
between the project and 
implementing partners, 
particularly, the MoFA 
Directorates of District 
Agriculture, thereby 
interrupting fund flow and 
reporting  
Contractual 
arrangements and 
reporting templates 
and guidelines for 
project finances shall 
be spelt out in 
MOUs/MOAs with 
implementing partners 
and service providers. 
Quarterly reports shall 
be required of 
implementing partners 
105 
5.  Accounting and Financial Reporting 
Risk that accounting systems – including polices and 
standards – are not integrated and reliable, leading to 
inaccuracies in financial records and that reasonable records 
are not prepared, issued and stored, leading to lack of 
informed decision-making. 
6.  External Audit 
Risk that independent and competent oversight of the Project 
financial statements is not in place or performed timely 
leading to possible misrepresentation of the financial results 
and/or suspension or other remedies due to compliance 
breaches.   
Overall Rating 
Substantial 
Experience in using the 
national accounting platform - 
GIFMIS 
Delays in performing and 
submitting Audited PFS 
Moderate 
to feed into the Project 
IFRs. 
Sensitization and 
migration planned for 
the staff to use in the 
current programme to 
enhance experience 
before implementation 
of the new project  
Joint collaboration with 
the SAI on auditor 
ToRs, and prioritization 
of performing project 
audit 
Low 
Low 
Substantial 
Moderate 
106 
ANNEX C – DETAILED FMAQ 
Topic 
1. 
Organization and Staffing 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
Note: In the case of a Government Department, the FM Specialist (FMS) should initially focus on the status of the country’s Public FM (PFM) systems in order 
to gauge the level of FM risks to which the proposed project may be exposed.  Once an understanding of the PFM environment has been ascertained, the 
FMS should then focus on the project level, paying close attention to the department(s) or unit(s) that will financially administer the project. 
1.1. 
Lead Programme Agency (LPA)  
What entity is the LPA? What is the entity’s legal status? 
1.2.  b. 
Will FM of the project be the responsibility of the LPA or be 
undertaken within the-PIU?  
Has the entity implemented a donor-financed project in the past - if 
so, provide details. 
1.3.  c. 
Project Coordinator must develop strong 
ties with the Project Directorate and the 
Legal Department of MOFA to rely on 
them to resolve legal and project 
management issues. 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) is 
the LPA. 
The LPA is a Government Ministry.  
How will the project deal with legal issues 
when they arise such as contract not well or 
timely executed? 
Financial management will be undertaken 
within the PCU  
Yes: The most recent projects include:  
IFAD Financed: 
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and 
Food Systems Exposed to COVID-19 (ESRF), 
GASIP Ghana Agriculture Investment 
Programme (GASIP), Northern Rural Growth 
Programme (NRGP) Jointly financed with 
AfDB. Root & Tuber Improvement & 
Marketing Programme (RTIMP) 
AfDB Financed: 
Savannah Investment Programme (SIP), 
Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity 
Improvement Project (SAPIP),  
107 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
Staffing 
What is the (proposed) organizational structure of the accounting 
department? Attach an organization chart. 
1.4.  d. 
Identify the (proposed) accounts staff, including job title, 
responsibilities, educational background and professional experience. 
Attach job descriptions and CVs of key accounting staff.  
1.5.  e. 
World Bank Financed: 
Ghana Commercial Agriculture Project 
(GCAP);  
West Africa Agricultural Productivity 
Programme (WAAPP). 
Finance Manager (as the head of Finance) to 
be assisted by two Project Accountants, and 
two Assistant Accountants.  
See attached marked “Proposed 
Organizational Structure of the Accounting 
Department PROSPER” 
  Hussein Salia, PhD, Chartered 
Accountant (Finance Manager) 13yrs 
of IFI experience; 8yrs Non-IFI 
experience. 
  Naana Enyema Bawuah, MBA, 
Chartered Accountant (Project 
Accountant) 3yrs IFAD experience, 
17yrs Non-IFI experience. 
  Mohammed Bashar ALIU, MBA, 
Chartered Accountant (Project 
Accountant) 3yrs IFAD experience, 
9yrs Non-IFI experience. 
Finance Manager and two Project 
Accountants (one each for IFAD and GCF) 
would be transferred to Field Office 
when the office is set up.  
Two Assistant Accountants will be 
recruited (one each for IFAD and GCF) to 
support the FM team. 
  Samuel Adu-Boahen, MSc, MBA, 
(Project Accountant) 11yrs IFI 
experience in 4 IFAD-funded/managed 
projects. 
  See attached marked 
108 
Topic 
1.6. 
1.7. 
1.8. 
1.9. 
Are written position descriptions that clearly define duties, 
responsibilities, lines of supervision, and limits of authority for all of 
the officers, managers, and staff? 
Are the project accounts and finance staff trained in IFAD 
procedures? 
Are any Finance Staff appointed on contract? What is the duration of 
the contracts?  
Indicate key positions not contracted yet, and the estimated date of 
appointment. 
Is the finance and accounts staff adequately qualified and 
experienced? What is training policy for the finance and accounting 
staff? 
1.10.  
Is fraud awareness training foreseen at project start-up? The 
objective of such training should be to ensure that finance staff can 
demonstrate an understanding of the appropriate fraud policies and 
key risks faced by the project, as well as an awareness of the 
reporting channels and whistle-blower protection.  
How frequently is such a training foreseen? (Recommended 
semi/annual) 
Brief description of issues 
CVs of key accounting staff 
Mitigation Measures 
What’s the availability of the FM skill-set 
required for the project? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes, the finance and accounts staff are 
adequately qualified. 
There exists no specific training policy. 
However, Finance/Accounting staff are 
constantly trained/updated on Finance and 
Accounting issues by IFAD FMD / ICO 
Although the finance staff are adequately 
informed about the IFAD Policy on 
Corruption and Sexual Exploitation, as a 
refresher, there would be fraud awareness 
training for all staff including the finance 
staff.  
AWPB will include training opportunities 
for the FM staff 
Fraud awareness training shall be 
conducted for all staff including the 
finance staff. 
109 
Topic 
1.11.  
1.12.  
Is there evidence that finance staff are regularly transferred to other 
Government departments? At what frequency are personnel 
transferred? 
Is the project finance and accounting function staffed adequately? 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
No 
The FM staff will be transferred to the 
Filed Office when its set up. 
Yes. 
Does staff composition appropriately 
correspond to proposed FM organisational 
structure?  
Staff composition will be tweaked to 
respond adequately to proposed FM 
structure. 
2. 
Budgeting 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
 Identify who will be involved in the AWPB preparation/approval 
2.1. 
process 
The FM/M&E Managers would lead the 
preparation of the AWPB in consultation 
with other project staff and stakeholders. 
The AWPB will be subject to NPSC first 
approval; and subsequent approval by 
IFAD before inclusion of national budget 
and implementation 
3. 
Are Implementing Entity project budgets prepared for all significant 
2.2.  b
project activities in sufficient detail to provide a meaningful tool with 
. 
which to monitor subsequent performance? 
Are procedures in place to plan project activities, collect information 
2.3.  c
from the units in charge of the different components, and prepare the 
. 
budgets? 
Funds flow and Disbursements Arrangements 
Yes 
Yes 
Does the Implementing Entity have previous experience of using 
imprest fund and donor funding Statement of Expenditure (SOE) 
procedures? 
3.1. 
Were there any problems or issues encountered by project staff in 
the operation of the imprest fund or SoE procedures in the past? 
Does the Implementing Entity have experience in the management of 
disbursements from IFAD or other donors? 
3.2. 
Have there been the major problems in the past in receipt of funds by 
the entity? 
Yes. 
No 
Yes 
No 
110 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
Does the entity have/need to develop capacity to manage foreign 
3.3. 
exchange risks? 
Are the beneficiaries required to contribute to project costs? 
How are payments made for the counterpart funds?  
If counterpart funds are to be contributed in kind (in the form of 
3.4. 
labour), are proper guidelines formulated to record and value the 
labour contribution?  
Is part of the project implemented by communities or NGOs? 
Does the PIU have the necessary reporting and monitoring features 
built into its systems to track the use of project proceeds by such 
3.5. 
agencies? 
Describe (proposed) project funds flow arrangements; (attach flow 
chart and explanation of the flow of funds from IFAD, government 
and other financiers). 
3.6. 
No 
Yes 
IFAD guidelines on in-kind contribution shall 
be followed for computing non-cash 
contributions 
IFAD Guidelines on in-kind contribution 
shall considered an integral part of the 
PIM 
No 
Any potential implementing partner will 
be required to furnished PIU with reports 
on usage of such funds in a prescribed 
financial reporting template developed 
during the signing of MOU/MOA 
between the PIU and the Community 
As soon as entry into force, IFAD will open a 
loan and a grant account which will be 
credited with the total loan/Grant agreed 
amounts. These funds will be transferred to 
the project in accordance with the financing 
agreement and the IFAD‟s disbursement 
procedures.  
The project will open two designated 
accounts in USD, one for the IFAD loan and 
another for the IFAD grant in the Central 
Bank of Ghana and two project accounts in 
local currency; one for the IFAD loan and 
another for the IFAD grant in the Central 
Bank of Ghana. The Project will also open 
two project accounts designated to receive 
111 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
counterpart funding from the government 
and from the beneficiaries.  
See attached marked “Proposed Flow Chart 
Prosper” 
The Central Bank 
Yes, Satisfactory 
Microfinance schemes not applicable. 
However there are blended finance scheme.  
In which bank will the Imprest Account be opened? 
3.7.  b
. 
Are the (proposed) arrangements to transfer the proceeds of the 
3.8.  c
financing (from the government / Finance Ministry) to the 
. 
Implementing Entity satisfactory? 
If microfinance schemes are foreseen, analyse the control system 
planned (staff capacity, financial reporting, targeting etc.) to 
3.9. 
determine whether they will address the inherent financial fraud risk 
exposure. Outline any control gaps identified.   
If cash distribution schemes are foreseen:  
-  Determine the level of security of the disbursement system to 
be adopted (cards, mobile phones, blockchain technology 
etc.) 
Cash transfers to beneficiaries will be paid to 
their mobile phone accounts. 
Beneficiaries list will be given to MTN (as 
partner) to effect transfers, and provide 
report to PROSPER Management.  
3.10.  
-  Analyse the controls over beneficiary lists for receipt of 
matching grants; how will the lists be maintained and 
communicated for receipt of resources? What controls are in 
place to secure the list of intended recipients? How will the 
names be verified? 
Beneficiary lists will be generated by 
VCD/FBOs and shared with the project.  
4. 
Internal Controls 
Policies, Procedures, and Manuals. 
Are there policies or procedures that outline the decision processes? 
4.1. 
Are they clear? Is there a separate Financial Manual (or equivalent)? 
Yes 
Yes 
112 
The staff of MOFA, specifically, the 
extension officers would have to confirm 
smallholder farmers presence in the 
district to PROSPER Management before 
disbursement. 
FM and Rural Finance Officer will then 
call beneficiaries to confirm receipt of 
cash 
Project to submit updated Financial 
Manuals to IFAD for No Objection 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
How often are policies, procedures, and manuals reviewed/updated? 
What is the process of approval when modifications are required? 
When an issue arises or new policies or new 
procedures are communicated by IFAD or 
the GoG. 
Segregation of duties. 
Are the following functional responsibilities performed by different 
units or persons? 
i) 
4.2.  b
ii) 
. 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
Preparation of a transaction; 
Review of a transaction; 
Authorization of a transaction; 
Custody of assets; and 
Reconciliation of accounts 
Are the functions of ordering, receiving, accounting for, and paying 
4.3. 
for goods and services appropriately segregated?  
4.4.  c
Are bank reconciliations prepared by someone other than those who 
make or approve payments? 
. 
Are internal controls for all high risk areas (most commonly cash 
transfers, fuel management (purchase rights / reasonable usage), 
vehicle logbooks, suspense accounts, manual payments) appropriate 
and adequately documented? 
4.5. 
Assess how per diem usage will be monitored.   
4.6. 
Assess procedures foreseen for management and eventual recovery 
of advances.  
4.7. 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Electronic Fuel cards used to purchase and 
analyse usage of fuel by vehicles; vehicle 
logbooks are in use; cash transfers are done 
via MTN which summits reports to PCU for 
reconciliation of recipients. 
Manual payments are hardly used; 
payments are well documented. 
Per Diem will indicated in the AWPB and 
calculated according to existing policy. Ahe 
approved amount in the AWPB will be the 
limit for the year.  
Recipients of advances (particularly to 
DADUs) are retired on monthly basis until 
Electronic fuel cards will be used. Cash 
transfers to beneficiaries will be done 
with MTN for availability of reports and 
audit trail 
The project will seek No Objection to 
every travel if they achieve 100% of the 
allocation approved in the AWPB.  
Technical officers who work directly with 
the DADUs are to help in the planning of 
activities to be undertaken by the DADUs 
113 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
the final activity is executed and accounted 
for. 
Internal Audit (if applicable) 
Is there an internal audit department in the LPA? If, not, is internal 
4.8. 
audit deemed necessary given the size and design characteristics of 
the project? Describe internal audit requirements.  
What are the qualifications and experience of internal audit 
department staff?  
4.9. 
To whom does the internal auditor report? 
4.10.  
Yes 
If internal audit is not deemed relevant for 
this project (as per 4.5), these sections can 
be left blank 
Chairman of MOFA Audit Report 
Implementation Committee 
Will the internal audit department include the project in its work 
4.11.  
program? 
Are actions taken on the internal audit findings? 
4.12.  
Yes 
Yes 
5. 
Accounting and Financial Reporting 
Basis of accounting applied by the Implementing Entity (cash, 
accrual), and whether the accounting standards are in line with IFAD’s 
5.1. 
requirements (e.g. IFRS/IPSAS/IPSAS cash). 
Cash 
IPSAS 
114 
Mitigation Measures 
to reduce the time between the release 
of advances and the implementation of 
activities. 
Programme Accountants are to send 
reminders regularly to the DADUs to 
retire advances. 
MoFA Internal Audit will conduct at least 
twice audit per year 
Internal Audit Report will be shared with 
IFAD at the same time as the report is 
being submitted to the Chairman. This 
will be inserted in the Letter to the 
Borrower. 
Audit Tracker will be part of 
documentation for Withdrawal 
Applications 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
Yes 
Project will not use the entity accounting 
system 
The project will use the IFMIS module of 
the of the GIFMIS 
Adequacy and reliability of accounting system. 
Does the entity have an integrated accounting system that allows for 
the proper recording of project financial transactions, including the 
5.2.  b
allocation of expenditures in accordance with the respective 
. 
components, disbursement categories, and sources of funds? Will the 
project use the entity accounting system? 
Are controls in place concerning the preparation and approval of 
transactions, ensuring that all transactions are correctly made and 
5.3. 
adequately explained? 
Is the chart of accounts adequate to properly account for and report 
5.4. 
on project activities and disbursement categories? 
Can cost allocations to the various funding sources be made 
5.5. 
accurately? 
Are the General Ledger and subsidiary ledgers reconciled and in 
5.6. 
balance? 
Are all accounting and supporting documents retained on a 
permanent basis in a defined system that allows authorized users 
5.7. 
easy access?  
 What is the basis of accounting (e.g., cash, accrual)? 
5.8. 
 What accounting standards are followed? 
5.9. 
Does the project have an adequate policies and procedures manual to 
5.10.  
guide activities and ensure staff accountability? 
Do procedures exist to ensure that only authorized persons can alter 
or establish a new accounting principle, policy or procedure to be 
5.11.  
used by the entity? 
Is there a written policies and procedures manual covering all routine 
5.12.  
project financial management activities? 
Are manuals distributed to appropriate personnel? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Cash 
IPSAS 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
115 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
Payments 
5.13.  
Are all invoices stamped PAID, dated, reviewed and approved, and 
clearly marked for account code assignment? 
Cash and Bank 
5.14.  
Does the organization maintain an adequate, up-to-date cashbook, 
recording receipts and payments? 
5.15.  
Are bank and cash reconciled on a monthly basis? 
Assess the adequacy of the authorized signatory hierarchy and the 
appropriateness of the roles given the authorization (reporting lines, 
capacity, thresholds for 2nd signatures, etc.). Names and positions of 
5.16.  
authorized signatories of project bank accounts may be recorded if 
necessary. 
Paid invoices not stamped as PAID. Will be 
introduced. Account codes clearly stated on 
PVs. 
Yes 
Yes. Automated Bank Reconciliation is use. 
? Cat A signatories are the Project 
Coordinator alternated by the MoFA Chief 
Director 
Cat B signatories are the Finance Manager 
alternated by MoFA Director of Finance. 
 Will the alternate signatories be available in 
the absence of regular signatories 
Safeguards over assets 
Is there a Fixed Asset accounting system, with a Fixed Asset Register, 
5.17.  
fully implemented - as part of an integrated accounting system? 
Is the system maintained up to date? 
5.18.  
Are there periodic physical reconciliation of fixed assets and stocks?  Yes, annually. 
Are there appropriate physical safeguards (security practices) for high 
value and/or high risk assets (e.g. petty cash, vehicles and logbooks, 
5.19.  
office equipment etc.) in place?  
Other  
Are fraud reporting and handling procedures described in the Project 
5.20.  
Implementation Manual?  
Yes 
No  
Yes 
Yes 
Bank signatories must share their 
vacation calendar and informed each 
other when they are taking a break. 
Will be used under GIFMIS 
Has the project advised employees, beneficiaries and other recipients 
to whom to report if they suspect fraud, waste or misuse of project 
5.21.  
resources or property? 
Yes, but not all. 
Beneficiaries are usually represented by 
their leaders (FBO leaders). During 
missions, the project will relay this 
information to the beneficiaries. 
116 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
Do policies and procedures clearly define conflict of interest and 
5.22.   
related party transactions (real and apparent) and provide safeguards 
to protect the organization from them? 
Do controls exist for the preparation of the project payroll and are 
5.23.   
changes to the payroll properly authorized 
Reporting and Monitoring 
Does the reporting system need to be adapted to report on the 
project components? 
5.24.   
Does the project have established financial management reporting 
5.25.   
responsibilities that specify what reports are to be prepared, what 
they are to contain, and the frequency of production? 
What is the frequency of preparation of financial statements? Are the 
5.26.   
reports prepared in a timely fashion so as to useful to management 
for decision making? 
Do the financial reports compare actual expenditures with budgeted 
5.27.   
and programmed allocations? 
Are financial reports prepared directly by the automated accounting 
5.28.   
system or are they prepared by spreadsheets or some other means? 
(In case of need of consolidated financial statements) Is the 
5.29.   
accounting system sufficiently equipped to ensure proper 
consolidation of entities’ financial data? 
Information systems 
5.30.   
Is the financial management system computerized? 
Does the system enforce the segregation of duties through restricted 
access and controls over edit and approver rights by staff role?  
5.31.   
Yes 
Yes 
Yes, for the new project since the 
components are different from the existing 
project components 
As part of implementation preparedness, 
the report generator of accounting 
system will be amended to take care of 
the components of the new project. 
Yes 
Quarterly 
Yes 
Reports prepared directly from the 
automated accounting system 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
When new staff is employed. 
When new responsibilities are assigned.  
117 
Topic 
Brief description of issues 
Mitigation Measures 
How frequently will user access lists be reviewed for consistency and 
correctness? How will new rights and/or new users added and old 
users removed?  Is an independent review of system access rights and 
users foreseen? 
Can the system produce the necessary project financial reports? 
5.32.   
No 
Yes 
6. 
Is the staff adequately trained to maintain the system? 
5.33.   
5.34.   
Are adequate systems in place to “back up” financial records 
External Audit 
 Who is the external auditor of the entity?  
6.1. 
Are there any delays in audit of the entity? When are the audit 
6.2. 
reports issued? 
Is the audit of the entity conducted according to the International 
6.3. 
Standards on Auditing? 
Were there any major accountability issues brought out in the audit 
report of the past three years? 
Were there any issues noted in prior audit reports related to the 
6.4. 
operation of project imprest accounts or use of SOE procedures? Did 
any past audits flag potentially fraudulent activities? 
Will the entity auditor audit the project accounts or will another 
6.5. 
auditor be appointed to audit the project financial statements? 
Has the project prepared acceptable terms of reference for an annual 
6.6. 
project audit? 
Yes, to the current system. But there is a 
planned migration to the national platform, 
GIFMIS, of which the staff are untrained. 
Yes 
The Ghana Audit Service 
No. Before the 30 June deadline 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Project financial reports will be 
customized when the GIFMIS migration 
is completed. 
Staff will be sensitized and trained in the 
GIFMIS as part of planned migration 
Same entity auditor will audit the project 
accounts 
Yes 
The Ghana Audit Service will audit the 
PFS of the project 
118 
GOVERNMENT OF GHANA 
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE 
(PROSPER) 
Financial Manual 
OCT 2021
1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS .......................................................................................................... 2 
1 
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
PURPOSE AND APPLICATION OF THE MANUAL ............. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
CONTENT AND STRUCTURE OF THE MANUAL ............... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
DISTRIBUTION & MONITORING RESPONSIBILITIES ........ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
REVISIONS TO THE MANUAL .......................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
2 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION, ORGANIZATION AND STAFFING ........ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
PROJECT GOAL AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE ........... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION ............. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
PROGRAM COORDINATION UNIT (PCU) ......................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS ............................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT ..................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT AND DISCIPLINE .......... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
OFFICIAL TRAVEL EXPENSES ........................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
CODE OF CONDUCT ....................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
3 
PLANNING, BUDGETING PROCESS AND BUDGET CONTROL ... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
3.1 
3.2 
Planning Principles ......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Development of the AWPB ............................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Stages in AWPB Preparation, Review and Planning Calendar ...... Error! Bookmark not 
3.3 
defined. 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
Review and Planning Calendar ....................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
AWPB Preparation Schedule .......................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Review of the AWPB ...................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
AWPB and related documents approval process ........... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
BUDGETARY CONTROL ................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Budget Monitoring ......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
FUNDS FLOW: INCOMING FUNDS FLOW AND DISBURSEMENT MANAGEMENT .......... Error! 
4 
Bookmark not defined. 
4.1 
Disbursement Arrangements ......................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.2  Withdrawal of Funds ...................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.3 
4.4 
Disbursement Procedures .............................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Use of Designated Account ............................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
2 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
4.9 
Period of Withdrawal Application .................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Direct Payment .............................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Reimbursement ............................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Evidence of Authority to Sign Withdrawal Applications . Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Submission of WAs using IFAD client portal ................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.10 
Terms and Conditions for Access to IFAD Client Portal .. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.11 
Supporting Documentation............................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.12 
Supporting Documentation............................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Schedule 2 of Financing Agreement: global budget per category Error! Bookmark not 
4.13 
defined. 
4.14 
Eligible expenditures ...................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.15 
Exemption from taxes .................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
5.8 
5.9 
General instructions ....................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Invoice Related Payments .............................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Travel related payments ................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Accountable Imprest/Office Travel ................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Daily Subsistence Allowance (DSA) ................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Resource Persons’ Allowance ........................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
NPSC Sitting Allowance .................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Processing of payments for Civil Works and Goods ....... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Processing of payments for Consultants' Services ......... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5.10  Processing of Payments for Office Supplies and Other Operating Costs ............ Error! 
Bookmark not defined. 
5.11 
Financing of Matching Grants ........................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5.12  PAYROLL EXPENDITURE.................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5.13  Petty Cash Account ........................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5.14  Bank reconciliation......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5.15  ADVANCES TO IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS .................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6 
ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS .......... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
Accounting system ......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
FM Staff Responsibility for the Accounting System ....... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
The Accounting Policies ................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Basis of Accounting ........................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Fixed Assets and Depreciation ....................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
3 
6.6 
Foreign Currency ............................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Tracking and Recording of In-kind Contributions and tax exemption  Error! Bookmark 
6.7 
not defined. 
6.8 
6.9 
Income from project activities ....................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Year-end accounting activities. ...................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.10  Key accounting control objectives and respective controls ......... Error! Bookmark not 
defined. 
6.11  Key reporting control objectives and respective controls ............ Error! Bookmark not 
defined. 
6.12  Method of Accounting: .................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.13  Project Accounting & Standard Books of accounts to be maintained:Error! Bookmark 
not defined. 
6.14  Accounting Entries for the Project: ................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.15  Accounting Entries Only for PCU: ................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.16  Accounting Entries Only for PSIU: .................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.17  Chart of Accounts .......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.18  Designing the project accounting system. ..................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.19 
The Selection of an Accounting Software ...................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.20 
Legal basis: ..................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.21  Used accounting standards: ........................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.22  Chart of Accounts .......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.23  Budgeting and budgetary control .................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.24  Multi-component accounting ........................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.25  Recording and processing of transactions ..................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.26  Petty cash management. ............................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.27  Bank account reconciliations ......................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.28  Withdrawal of funds ...................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.29 
Financial reporting ......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.30  Multi-currency accounting ............................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.31  Reporting requirements ................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.32 
Fixed Asset Register ....................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.33  Period for which records are to be kept ........................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.34  Access Levels .................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.35  Revision of accounting manual ...................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.36  Project financial reports & statements .......................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4 
6.37  Content of the Interim Financial Reports (IFR) .............. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.38  Records Management .................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
6.39 
Fixed Asset Management ............................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
7 
INTERNAL CONTROL .............................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
7.7 
Overview ........................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Responsibilities for Internal Control............................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Critical Elements of Internal Control .............................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Financial Delegations and Authorities ............................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
General Financial Internal Controls ................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Transaction Processing Controls .................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Computerized Accounting Systems Controls ................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
8 
9 
SUPERVISION MISSIONS ........................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Internal Audit Process............................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
10  EXTERNAL AUDIT ................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
10.1 The Audit Cycle and Appointing the Auditor ...................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
10.2 Anticorruption policy ......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
10.3  Compensation of costs and logistics. ............................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
10.4 
The Audit Report ............................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
11  PROJECT COMPLETION AND CLOSURE ................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
ANNEX A: POTENTIAL RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
CREDIT & GUARANTEE FUNDS AND GRANTS & SUBSIDIES. ............. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5 
ACRONYMS  
Abbreviations and acronyms 
1D1F 
AAFORD 
ACB 
ASWG 
AU 
BAC 
BoG 
BP 
BRC 
CAADP 
CHRAJ 
DA 
DAES 
DDA 
DSF 
EASH 
ESRF 
ESS 
FARA 
FI 
FMA 
FNS 
FSRP 
GADP 
GAIP 
GASIP 
GBV 
GCF 
GCX 
GEA 
GEWE 
GFD 
GGWUP 
GHG 
GIRSAL 
GJSP 
GoG 
GRM 
GSIVS 
HH 
HHM 
ICO 
ICP 
IFAD 
IFR 
IGREENFIN 
IPRM 
KAP 
LCU 
LEAP 
LF 
LULUCF 
One District One Factory 
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development Project 
Agricultural Sector Working Group 
African Union 
Business Advisory Centre 
Bank of Ghana 
Business Plan 
Business Resource Centre 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 
(Ghana) Commission on Human Rights and Justice 
District Assembly 
Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services 
District Department of Agriculture 
District Stakeholder Forum 
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems Exposed to COVID 19 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
Agribusiness Learning Alliance 
Financing Institution 
Financial Management Assessment 
Food and Nutrition Security 
West Africa Food Systems Resilience Programme 
Ghana Agricultural Development Plan 
Ghana Agricultural Investment Programme 
Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme 
Gender Based Violence 
Green Climate Fund 
Ghana Commodities Exchange 
Ghana Enterprises Agency 
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment 
Ghana Federation of the Disabled 
GCF Great Green Wall Umbrella Programme (GGWUP). 
greenhouse gas 
Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing Agricultural Lending 
Ghana Jobs and Skills Project 
Government of Ghana 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Gender, Social Inclusion and Vulnerability Specialist 
household 
household methodologies 
IFAD Country Office 
IFAD Client Portal 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Interim Financial Report 
Inclusive Green Financing Initiative 
Integrated Project Risk Matrix 
Knowledge Attitude Practice 
Local Currency Unit 
Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty 
Logical Framework Matrix 
Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry 
vi 
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women 
Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation 
maternal, infant, and young child nutrition 
Ministry of Local Government, Decentralisation and Rural Development 
Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework 
Memorandum of Agreement 
MDDW 
MESTI 
MIYCN 
MLGDRD 
MNDPF 
MOA 
MOAP-NW  Market Oriented Agriculture Project 
Ministry of Finance 
MoF 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
MoFA 
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection 
MoGCSP 
Ministry of Trade and Industry 
MoTI 
Memorandum of Understanding 
MOU 
Multidimensional Poverty Index 
MPI 
Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise 
MSME 
multi-stakeholder platform 
MSP 
non-communicable disease 
NCD 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
NDC 
National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy 
NFIDS 
National Nutrition Policy 
NNP 
No Objection Tracking and Utilities System 
NOTUS 
Northern Rural Growth Programme 
NRGP 
Natural Resource Management 
NRM 
project affected person 
PAP 
Planting for Export and Rural Development 
PERD 
Participating Financial Institutions 
PFI 
Planting for Foods and Jobs 
PFJ 
Productive Investments Project 
PIP 
Public Procurement Authority 
PPA 
Procurement Risk Matrix 
PRM 
Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience 
PROSPER 
Person with Disability 
PWD 
Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme 
RAFIP 
Rural Commercial Bank 
RCB 
Resilience Against Climate Change 
REACH 
Rural Enterprises Programme 
REP 
Rural Financial Services Project 
RFSP 
Rural Institution 
RI 
Roots and Tubers Improvement & Marketing Programme 
RTIMP 
Social Behaviour Change Communication 
SBCC 
Safeguards, Climate, Gender and Vulnerability 
SCGV 
Smallholder Farmer E-Commerce Access 
SFEA 
UN Sustainable Development Partnership 
UNSDP 
Violence Against Children 
VAC 
World Economic Forum 
WEF 
Water and Sanitation Management Team 
WSMT 
vii 
SECTION ONE 
INTRODUCTION 
0 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1  PURPOSE AND APPLICATION OF THE MANUAL 
This manual is applicable to all the employees who are directly or indirectly engaged in the financial 
and administrative operations of the PROSPER project. Specifically those administering the IFAD and 
GCF funds. 
It describes PROSPER’s accounting, internal control policies and operational procedures in relation to 
financial and administrative management. 
The main objectives of this manual are: 
  To clearly document systems, procedures and controls - defining who does what, where, 
how, in what sequence and why it is done.  This enables standards of performance and 
efficiency to be clearly understood; 
  To provide a quick reference and easy to follow guide to staff in their day to day activities, as 
well as a reference for management, external auditors and other stakeholders; 
  To train new staff in their duties and responsibilities. It is also used to train staff replacing 
colleagues absent on leave or for any other reason; and 
  To ensure consistency in recording and classifying financial transactions. 
1.2  CONTENT AND STRUCTURE OF THE MANUAL 
The FM is presented in eight chapters presented as follows:  
Introduction 
1. 
2.  Organization and Staffing 
3.  Planning & Budgeting , Budget Control 
4.  Funds Flows : Incoming Fund Flows and Disbursement Management 
5.  Accounting policies and financial statements & reports 
6.  Asset management 
7. 
Internal Control  
8.  External Audit 
9.  Project Completion and Closure. 
1.3  DISTRIBUTION & MONITORING RESPONSIBILITIES 
It is the Financial Manager’s responsibility to maintain and distribute the manual to all staff and to 
provide training and assistance in the correct application of the required procedures. The Internal 
Auditor will ensure that all staff have obtained a copy of the manual and apply the required 
procedures consistently.  
1.4  REVISIONS TO THE MANUAL 
The Financial Manager is responsible for reviewing all proposed revisions to PROSPER’s Financial 
Procedures Manual. The Financial Manager will then submit a recommendation for manual revision to 
the National Project Coordinator. The National Project Coordinator will require the validation from 
the IFAD Finance Officer for Ghana and decide whether or not to approve the proposed change.  
If the amendment is approved by the National Project Coordinator, authorized revisions to the 
procedure manual will be accomplished with a “Notice of changes to Procedures Manual”. The notice 
1 
of changes should be sent to IFAD Country Director for no objection.  After no objection by IFAD, the 
revised procedure will be sent by the Financial Manager to users of the Procedures Manual.  
Each recipient of a “Notice of changes to Procedures Manual” is responsible for inserting the new 
pages into the Manual and keeping it current until a complete revised version is provided.  
2 
SECTION TWO: 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION,  
ORGANIZATION AND STAFFING  
3 
2  PROJECT DESCRIPTION, ORGANIZATION AND STAFFING 
2.1  PROJECT GOAL AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 
Project Goal. The overall goal of PROSPER is to support the structural transformation of the Ghana 
economy by tapping into the full potential of its agricultural sector.   
Development Objective: Strengthen the integration, climate resilience and environmental 
sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority VCs in the Northern and Middle Ecological 
Belts taking advantage of the increased demand created by the national agro-processing strategy. 
PROSPER aims to provide a framework for the long-term engagement with and financing for 
private sector-led, pro-poor agricultural VC development tailored to the specific needs and 
potential of small-scale producers and operators in targeted regions of Ghana. 
Project Components and Expected Outcomes 
PROSPER comprises two mutually supportive components concentrated on increasing the real 
demand for sustainably grown produce by significant numbers of people living in poor rural 
communities while enhancing their capacity to meet this demand through more efficient climate-
resilient agricultural practices and natural resource management to mitigate the negative impact of 
climate change. The intended outcomes are increased incomes, greater food and nutrition security, 
and improved health status.  
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure. The expected 
component outcome is: Improved and sustainable livelihoods in target areas supported by 
strengthened rural institutions and improved socioeconomic infrastructures. These actions are 
concentrated on investing in “public goods” within and for the benefit of the targeted 100,000 
beneficiaries in the project areas. 
Subcomponent 1.1 Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households comprises a range 
of institution-building and skills development activities to enable target communities to take 
ownership of and accountability for their own development initiatives, to promote sustainable 
community-based NR management, to strengthen their ability to implement modern sustainable and 
climate resilient farming, and to adopt healthier diets. 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. This development activity seeks to 
realize some of the “public goods” investments prioritized and chosen by local communities through 
the Cluster Planning process. Three complementary types of climate-resilient infrastructure will be 
eligible: Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation measures; Feeder roads and farm tracks; 
and Communal social infrastructure. These investments aim to improve the sustainability of NR-
related livelihoods and to stimulate socioeconomic advancements in the participating clusters. 
Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators around 
selected agricultural value chains. The expected outcome is: Smallholders and small businesses draw 
greater benefits from the increasing market outlets for agricultural produce through comprehensive 
financial, capacity and marketing support.56 
Whereas the first component will invest in the human, physical and natural resources of the target 
communities, the second component is concentrated on investing in the “private goods” of the 
population to bring about a sustained uplift in the earning capacity of agricultural producer groups 
and related enterprises. The aim is to expand business activity both within the target communities 
56 Small businesses comprise enterprises and organised groups engaged in income generating activities other 
than primary production. The members are drawn from the same population. 
4 
and in lasting agreements with other actors in the selected VCs. The project is realistic in recognising 
the differing prospects of the targeted beneficiary groups and the extent to which access to finance is 
the main constraint they face. In this context, the PROSPER emphasis on climate-friendly business 
development must be balanced with social and welfare considerations for the most-disadvantaged 
households. 
Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development. This subcomponent 
comprises three activities. In the first, Value chain analysis, PROSPER will build on the preliminary 
value chain analysis conducted during project design. It will examine in depth the status and 
characteristics of each selected national value chain– soya, rice maize, cashew, shea and poultry – 
and map the VC actors located close to the target communities, particularly the first stage market 
linkages between producers and others in the chains. The general presumption is that most 
smallholder farmers and their groups in remote areas have no established marketing arrangements 
and interact opportunistically with buyers and middlemen only as and when they harvest a surplus. 
The number and location of private sector operators, including larger agribusinesses working with 
contracted outgrowers, is not well documented. PROSPER will commission a detailed structural 
examination of each VC, including an estimation of the value added at each link, to provide a sound 
platform for project interventions 
The practical and intensive developmental activity Promotion of linkages between producers and 
value chain actors is aimed at generating enduring partnerships between producers engaged in 
climate-resilient farming and larger-scale agribusinesses within locally appropriate forms of robust 
and equitable contract relationships in the private sector. PROSPER itself will not enter business 
relations with the parties at any stage. This second activity will concentrate on those eligible RIs and 
MSMEs that demonstrated interest and potential in the Component 1 capacity building interventions. 
Group eligibility for PROSPER support centres on meeting membership criteria regarding the 
minimum proportion of specified disadvantaged groups: women, female and male youth, PWDs and 
landless or near-landless households. These criteria allow for and, for practical reasons, encourage a 
minority of non-eligible members with productive land holdings of up to 10 ha. 
Subcomponent 2.2 Access to rural financial services. The objective is to promote a savings culture 
among PROSPER’s beneficiaries, facilitate realization of the cluster-level Business Plans and improve 
enduring access to suitable financial resources for the beneficiaries to engage in profitable 
agribusiness. Expected outcomes: farmers through RIs and related local MSMEs are integrated step-
by-step into the formal financial system and have lasting access to adapted and affordable financial 
services to develop their agribusinesses, including green investments. Such access is a necessary 
though not sufficient condition for rapid sectoral development. 
PROSPER financial services are structured around three instruments appropriate to the various 
situations prevailing in rural areas as regard capacities and professionalization: (1) Saving and Loan 
Groups (VSLA model) for sparking the saving habit within communities; (2) a Matching Grants fund for 
capitalizing emergent RIs to engage in commercial agriculture and smaller MSMEs around the 
selected VCs and supporting food and nutrition security promotion schemes for the most vulnerable 
groups; and (3) a Blended Finance Facility operated as a refinancing facility (RF) by PFIs to ensure 
sustainable access to financial services for growing FIs and MSMEs, (see details in respective sections 
below). These instruments form a global graduation process by which beneficiaries will be able to 
increase their access to financing solutions over time as they build their financial and management 
capacities and develop their business relationships with other VC actors. 
Component 3. Project management and Policy engagement. The expected outcome of the support 
component: Efficient and timely delivery of PROSPER development results and support to evidence-
based sectoral policy formulation. 
Subcomponent 3.1 Project management. PROSPER will be facilitated by an implementation support 
structure embedded in the host GoG agency providing liaison, physical and financial project 
5 
management, reporting and accounting, proactive knowledge management and learning activities, 
and monitoring and evaluation functions. 
Subcomponent 3.2 Policy engagement. PROSPER will support developing an enabling policy 
environment that will help achieve the project’s goals and objectives through the provision of 
technical assistance, organising high-level round table discussions, establishing policy dialogue, 
holding conferences and advocacy as appropriate. This will be underpinned by analytical work and KM 
products from PROSPER, IFAD and other development partners. 
2.2  PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION 
MoFA is designated as the Lead Project Agency. The ministry will have the overall responsibility for the 
implementation of PROSPER and will ensure linkages to other relevant Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies, such as MoF, MESTI, MoTI, MLGDRD, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Local 
Government Service. PROSPER implementation will involve private sector and community level 
technical service providers and will leverage on-going projects implemented by public sector and 
NGOs. 
MoFA will establish a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to provide overall oversight project 
implementation. It will be chaired by the Chief Director of MoFA and include representatives of all 
relevant ministries and agencies, Bank of Ghana, ARB Apex Bank and regional coordinating councils 
from the project area. Members shall include private sector non-state actors (such as NGOs) and 
youth and women who operate along the relevant agricultural VCs as practitioners or advocates. The 
PSC will meet at least twice a year, and as necessary. The main responsibilities of the PSC will include: 
(i) providing strategic and policy guidance to the Project Coordination Unit (PCU); (ii) ensuring overall 
conformity with government policies and strategies; (iii) reviewing project progress and performance; 
(iv) approving the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB); (v) resolving implementation problems or 
conflicts; and (vi) assisting the PCU in obtaining government assistance for the project when needed. 
A Project Technical Committee (PTC) will be constituted comprising members drawn from the PSC. 
The PTC will serve as a standing committee empowered to meet whenever needed to resolve 
implementation bottlenecks that require immediate attention. 
2.3  PROGRAM COORDINATION UNIT (PCU)  
PROSPER’s Project Coordination Unit will be responsible for implementation and will be based in the 
project area to ensure effective management and coordination. The PCU will operate within the 
supervision of the Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services DAES, which will provide direct 
oversight. A Project Coordinator will head the PCU’s day to day operations, assisted by central 
technical and operations support teams as defined in the PIM. The responsibilities of the PCU will 
include the overall coordination of Project activities and direct implementation of specific actions, and 
overall responsibility for fiduciary, climate change and environmental and social safeguards, including 
gender and vulnerability. Key activities will include consolidation of project accounts, preparation of 
annual financial statements, disbursements, consolidation of Annual Work Programme and Budgets 
(AWPB) and procurement plans; quarterly financial and comprehensive safeguards and climate 
change reports; consolidation of progress reports; organization of annual audits in line with IFAD’s 
guidelines; assistance for supervision and other missions, including mid-term review; promotion of 
cross-cutting themes such as gender, youth and vulnerability; and preparation and updating of the 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and other required manuals. 
6 
2.4 
IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS 
Key implementation partners will include selected MoFA departments, DDAs, Regional Departments 
of Agriculture (RDAs), ARB-APEX Bank, MoTI, GEA including BRCs and BACs, MESTI, GCX, GIRSAL and 
GAIP. PROSPER will enter MoUs with the above entities that will outline implementation modalities 
and the role of each of these partners. From a safeguards and climate change standpoint, the PCU will 
embed a Gender, Social Inclusion and Vulnerability Specialist (GSIVS) to work with EPA to ensure 
consistency and compliance of project implementation with national regulations and the SECAP 
guidelines. 
A dedicated team will be anchored in APEX Bank to manage the BFF. The BFF team will report to the 
PROSPER PCU. This team will comprise a Coordinator and two field officers supported by the GSIVS 
funded from the IGREENFIN-I Grant. 
2.5  CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 
PROSPER human resource (HR) policies, rules, procedures and guidelines apply to all PROSPER staff, 
unless otherwise specified in their contract. The PCU and PSIU are responsible for providing PROSPER 
staff with HR services and for ensuring the proper implementation of PROSPER rules, policies and 
procedures on human resource matters.  
PROSPER recognizes a robust and professional approach to recruitment and selection of staff to 
attract and appoint individuals with the necessary skills, knowledge and attributes to effectively 
support the achievement of Project objectives. 
All appointments are made on the Principle of Merit and need in line with relevant government 
policies and related processes. The PROSPER is an equal opportunity employer where emphasis is 
placed on applicant’s ability to do the job, not on factors that are unrelated to job performance (such 
as ethnicity, gender, religion, age, disability, HIV status or marital status). All vacant staff positions will 
be advertised, and recruitment will be conducted on a competitive basis, to ensure the best 
employees are hired.  
Recruitment Process  
Based strictly on clearly defined needs, the following shall be the process for staff recruitment: 
-  Declare vacant positions in consultation with component heads. 
-  Advertise for the vacant position. 
-  Accept curriculum vitae. 
-  Constitute the PROSPER interviewing panel (if not contracted to an external agency) 
-  Collate applications. 
-  Shortlist candidates. 
-  Set up interview date with the interviewing panel. 
-  Call to inform candidates of date. 
-  Send candidates for final interview. 
-  Ensure proper documentation of finalists. 
-  Furnish the HR Department with details as to names, cadre of entry, department 
deployed to, and salary per annum of each new intake. 
MOFA will co-ordinate the recruiting process. The NPC in consultation with IFAD Country Office will 
give final approval for all full-time hires. 
Publication of job position.  
Depending on the nature of the job, the HR Department can advertise a job opening using internal 
PROSPER’s information network, electronic and print media or through reputable employment 
7 
agencies/relevant stakeholders. When posting a vacancy, the HR Department should create a simple 
position description for the job covering key activities, tasks, skills required, expectations, deliverables 
and safety considerations. When advertising, discriminatory language/insinuations should be avoided. 
The requirements of the job should be the target.  
Job Description  
The Administration and Logistics Officer is responsible for: (i) developing detailed job description for 
all PROSPER staff, and (ii) ensuring that job description records are properly managed and regularly 
updated for all positions. A job description is indicative of the characteristics/requirements of the job 
in terms of duties and responsibilities, order of reporting, seniority, and functional relationship with 
other jobs. The objectives of a job description in PROSPER are to:  
Identify the requirements of each position,  
a.  Aid in orienting employees to their jobs,  
b. 
c.  Establish hiring criteria,  
d.  Set standards for employee performance evaluations,  
e. 
f.  Provide the information needed to put a job in the proper classification in order to assign an 
appropriate salary range and to comply with applicable employment and personnel laws and 
regulations, 
Identify role boundaries and avoid role conflicts among staff,  
g.  Guide the process of interviewing candidates to fill a job opening,  
h.  Guide newly hired employees to immediately understand the job duties, and  
i.  Assist in the conduct of employee performance appraisals.  
Job descriptions may be rewritten periodically to reflect any changes in the position’s duties and 
responsibilities. All employees will be expected to help ensure that their job descriptions are accurate 
and current, reflecting the work being done. Employees should remember that a job description does 
not necessarily cover every task or duty that might be assigned, and that additional responsibilities 
may be assigned as necessary. Contact the HR Department if you have any questions or concerns 
about your job description. 
Orientation Training 
All new employees should be made to feel welcome and ready to start work safely and competently 
through the use of a proper, formal induction process. The induction exercise should cover among 
others the following areas.  
 
Introductions 
  Workplace tour 
  HR policies and procedures  
  Project overview - structure and implementation arrangements 
  A working safely plan 
  Training policies and procedures 
 
  Policy and procedural requirements 
Information technology (IT) system orientation 
Probation Period and Confirmation of Appointment 
Probation period. For all staff, the first 90 days of employment are considered a probation period. 
This time gives a staff member the opportunity to learn and adjust to his/her new job and work 
associates. It also gives a supervisor the opportunity to work with the employee and to evaluate work 
performance and progress, punctuality and attendance, and any other considerations that will 
contribute to a satisfactory employment relationship.  At the end of the period, all new employees 
will be formally evaluated and recommended for confirmation or otherwise. 
8 
Confirmation of appointment. On successful completion of probation, the employee’s appointment 
will be confirmed. This will qualify him/her to enjoy: 
  Staff training and development 
  Annual increment in salary subject to fulfilment of other requirements 
  Maternity leave 
  Terminal benefit. 
Special Appointments 
The PROSPER may appoint consultants and other temporary staff. Consultants (independent 
contractors) are individuals with whom the Project has signed an agreement for a specified period of 
time and for a specified task. Consultants are not employees and receive no benefits. Fees will be 
agreed upon by the appropriate Project representative and the consultant prior to assignment, and 
will be based on the type of work involved and approved procurement guideline. Such appointments 
are based on contracts. All contracts are renewable depending on: 
(a) Satisfactory job performance 
(b) Continuity of the project  
(c) Availability of sufficient funds 
(d) Approval of the NPC   
(e) In some cases, approval of IFAD. 
The NPC shall identify terms and conditions of the contract. Contracts are not guarantees of 
continued employment. 
Project staff are either seconded from the lead implementing agency who retain their 
status as public servants with benefits such as social security contributions, health insurance for their 
families, and end-of-service benefits. 
As per Ministry of Finance Notice dated 10 April 2017, “consultants who are recruited 
as project implementation specialists to manage Donor-Funded Projects / Programmes are not Public 
Servants. It is therefore not Government’s responsibility to pay their Social Security contributions, 
health insurance for their families, and end of service benefits”. Consequently, projects staff that shall 
be recruited as consultants shall be paid gross consultancy fees to enable meet their own financial 
obligations, including tax obligations, social security contributions, health insurance for themselves 
and their families. Consultants shall be limited to the renumeration that shall be spelt out in their 
contracts and shall NOT be entitled to public servants’ benefits.   
The benefits stated in this manual are for meant for staff that shall be seconded or recruited as public 
servants to the project. 
Salary Structure 
It is PROSPER's policy to compensate its employees in a fair and equitable manner on the basis of 
responsibilities, qualifications, and work performance. Staff salaries and allowances are determined 
based on what is paid by government and other similar organizations. As an incentive, salaries and 
allowances are subject to periodic reviews in response to situations regarding the current job market 
of its operating locations as determined by periodic surveys and availability of funds. When a staff 
member is hired, his/her position in the salary range for the job is determined by the NPC in 
consultation with relevant PCU members based on the employee's qualifications and experience.    
Salary Payment 
Salary is payable in equal monthly instalments directly into the employee’s assigned bank account. All 
salaries and benefits shall be subject to taxation and other deductions according to applicable laws 
and legislation. Employees will receive monthly an itemized statement of wages (pay slip) from the 
9 
Accounts Unit, as an extract from the Account System in use. The pay slip shall indicate as a minimum 
the basic salary, the distribution of the allowances, and deductions.  
Salary Review 
Salaries may be reviewed at the end of a contract period based on availability of fund and other 
considerations in the interest of moving the Project forward. Promotional increases or other salary 
adjustments (called administrative changes) may be considered based upon changes in the level of 
responsibility and the recommendation of a supervisor. Such adjustments must be fully justified by 
the supervisor and approved by the NPC.  
The PROSPER does not guarantee regular salary adjustments. All increases will NOT be above the 
range of annual increments in the approved COST TABLES and dependent upon the financial position 
of the Project, both generally and with respect to the funds available for particular projects or 
activities.  
Confidentiality 
A staff member's salary is a confidential matter between the employee and the PROSPER, and it is not 
a topic for discussion with anyone other than the employee's immediate supervisor and other 
PROSPER personnel on a 'need-to-know' basis. 
General Medical Benefits 
The PROSPER believes that the employees are in the best position to be responsible for their own 
health. The Project includes in the payroll of the employee, X% of the basic monthly salary as a 
contribution to the employee’s health expenses.  
Personal Life Insurance  
PROSPER shall provide towards the premium (in consonance with existing Government approved 
rates or amounts for public servants) for a personal life insurance of the employee, subject to 
evidence of the employee actually taking up a life insurance policy and renewing such policy annually. 
Maternity Leave 
Female full-time staff who have worked for PROSPER for at least 12 months are eligible for 4-months 
paid maternity leave, starting anytime in the last month of pregnancy. The benefit of maternity leave 
is provided to the primary caregiver and only to those staff members who fully intend to return to 
work at PROSPER following their leave. A written agreement to this effect will be drawn up and signed 
by the employee. Vacation, all bonuses and other benefits are not accrued or paid during maternity 
leave. Annual and Sick leave do not accrue during periods of maternity leave. Pregnant women are 
exempted from query or suspension from duty.  
Personal Leave  
Full-time staff of PROSPER shall be entitled to specific leave with full pay to cover vacation or sickness. 
Other staff are not entitled to personal leave. Leave shall be taken under conditions that are 
convenient to the organization. The following categories and conditions shall apply: 
(a)  Annual leave is earned at the following rate starting on the date of appointment: 
i)  All full-time senior staff, other than casual laborers, earn 30 working days per annum. 
ii)  All full time senior/support staff earn 21 working days 
iii)  All full time junior staff including drivers are entitled to 14 working days. 
(b)  The employee must have earned at least half of their leave, i.e., worked for the organization 
for six months to be eligible to take leave. If leave is required before that time, the employee 
may apply subject to the approval of IPC.   
(c)   Leave days may be taken one at a time (for personal days), a few days at a time, or altogether. 
10 
(d)  Staff are encouraged to take their annual leave. If leave is not taken in the year it is due for no 
(e) 
serious and approved reasons, the officer forfeits the leave for that year.  
In an emergency situation, management may recall a staff member from leave. In such 
instances, the balance of his leave is deferred.  
(f)  A staff member who fails to return to duty on due date at the expiration of his/her leave, is 
deemed to be absent from duty without permission. Absenteeism without permission or 
without just cause, as determined by the PC, will result in subtraction of future leave days, 
equal to the days absent, probation or dismissal.  
(g)  Leave time cannot be taken by employees during the probation period. If a staff member is 
terminated before the probation period has been completed, he/she will not be reimbursed 
for any accrued but unearned vacation.  
(h)  Leave is not accrued on overtime hours or during periods of medical disability leave or other 
unpaid leaves of absences. 
Procedure. The following steps are followed in benefiting from Personal Leave: 
(a)  The HR Department develops a tentative calendar for annual leave for all staff to guide staff 
leave management. 
(b) The employee’s leave request, authorized in writing by the supervisor, with a copy to the PC, is 
required no less than one month in advance. This ensures that there is no conflict with future 
work assignments or other leave periods. In the event that there is a conflict, employee 
seniority will be the deciding factor. 
(c) Before departing for leave, the employee is expected to make sure that his immediate 
supervisor is aware of the status of projects or special assignments and where all materials 
can be located. The departing employee is also responsible for leaving all assignments at a 
reasonable point where they can be completed by other staff if necessary. He must leave his 
full contact address while on leave in case there is a need to contact him or her.  
(d)  Leave allowance is paid according to the terms of employee’s contract. 
Leave of Absence 
Leave of absence is unpaid unless otherwise specified, and only full-time employees are eligible to 
apply for leave of absence.  
Policies regarding leave of absence are as follows:    
(a) Before taking a leave of absence, the employee shall notify the immediate supervisor of the 
status of projects or special assignments and where all materials can be located. The departing 
employee is also responsible for leaving all assignments at a reasonable point where they can 
be completed by other staff if necessary. 
(b) In order to ensure efficient office management, the employee shall inform the supervisor of 
his/her whereabouts at all times and this information shall be noted in the office calendar. 
(c)  Personal leave shall not accrue to the employee during periods of leave of absence. 
(d) Unless otherwise specified, the employee’s job will be held open during periods of leave. 
Return to employment from leave of absence. An employee who has been officially granted leave 
shall be assured the same or a comparable position as previously held upon return from the leave and 
will be reasonably accommodated, unless: 
(a) The same or comparable position is no longer available due to an operational necessity 
associated with reorganization, financial retrenchment or similar cause, in which case the 
employee shall be given 30 days’ notice that the same or comparable position will not be 
available on their return; or 
(b) The right to such reinstatement has been waived in the terms of the leave, signed by both the 
employee and the NPC.  
11 
Unplanned absence. When absent from work because of personal or dependent illness the immediate 
supervisor should be notified no later than 9:00 a.m. of the first day of the period of absence and 
every day during the illness.  
Planned absence. When planning a doctor or dental appointment during official hours, the supervisor 
should be informed at least one week in advance (with the exception of appointments in the case of 
emergencies). 
Leave without Pay 
A staff member who does not have any accrued vacation may take time off for personal reasons to a 
maximum of two weeks in the form of a leave without pay. The request must be made in writing to 
the employee’s immediate supervisor and approved by the PC at least one month in advance. The 
purpose of the leave, length of service with PROSPER, and general performance record will be taken 
into consideration when granting a staff member’s request for a leave of absence without pay. 
Personal leave of absence/sabbaticals. In cases where it is deemed in the best interest of PROSPER, a 
staff member may take up to a one month leave of absence without pay to participate in education, 
training, or other related activities. It will be at the discretion of the PC to determine if the assignment 
is in the interest of the Project. Personal leave of absence must be requested in writing to the 
employees’ immediate supervisor and approved by the PC at least one month in advance. 
Note: PROSPER does not accept staff of other organisations/institutions on sabbatical leave 
engagement.  
Compassionate Leave 
Full-time staff with approval of the PC and his/her immediate supervisor are eligible for 
compassionate leave of up to five (5) paid days to be away from work as a result of death or critical 
illness or injury of an immediate member of the family (spouse, child, brother, sister or parent) and 
one (1) paid day from work as a result of death of a relative. 
Compassionate leave will normally be granted unless there are unusual official needs or staffing 
requirements. Employees may, with their supervisors’ approval, use any available paid leave for 
additional time off as necessary. 
Critical illness or injury is defined as an instance in which death is imminent or likely to occur as based 
on competent medical opinion or one in which the absence of the staff member would result in great 
personal hardship. 
Public Holidays 
PROSPER will grant paid public holidays for those days required by Ghana legislation. If an observed 
holiday falls within an employee’s vacation period, vacation is not deducted on these days.  
Holidays are NOT exchangeable for other days. Employees wishing to observe holidays other than the 
ones noted above are free to do so as a leave day or an unpaid leave of absence, subject to 
management approval.    
Employees traveling and/or working on official assignment during a paid holiday may take one 
compensating day either during the trip or upon return. 
Absence from Office 
The PC, and Component Heads should always inform the office of their absence from duty in writing 
stating the period of absence, purpose of the trip and location. He/She should designate an 
appropriate officer to act for him/her. Appropriate files for information on absence should be opened 
for information purposes.  
12 
Death of an Employee 
Realizing that the death of an employee brings hardship to the employee’s family, PROSPER’s policy is 
to provide assistance to the employee’s family in receiving all appropriate benefits due to them. The 
Project Accountant will prepare the following: a final payroll cheque based on wages earned through 
the date of death, calculate the cash equivalent of earned and accrued vacation and reconcile any 
outstanding accounts. 
The foregoing payments should be made to the next of kin. Items of indebtedness to the Project are 
to be deducted from any money due to the employee’s next of kin.  In addition, the Project will 
provide the family of the deceased with some funds to offset cost of obituary announcement, coffin 
and transporting the corpse home where necessary. If the amount of the employee’s indebtedness 
exceeds the money due, the Project Accountant should make an arrangement for repayment of the 
balance. 
The PC will assist the family with benefits coordination. A final letter of settlement, accompanied by a 
letter of condolence, will be sent to the next of kin. The letter will contain the following: 
  Status of unpaid wages and other amounts and benefits due to the employee 
  Withholding tax statement 
  Status of debts owed to the organization 
2.6  PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT AND DISCIPLINE 
PROSPER is concerned about continuous improvement of staff performance and has put in place a 
number of incentives to create the necessary enabling environment for staff to put in their best. 
However, PROSPER requires a minimum standard of conduct and performance, which will be made 
clear to employees in management appraisals. If an employee does not meet this standard, the 
Project will take appropriate corrective action, in line with the provisions of the Civil Services rules.  
Training and Staff Development 
It is the PROSPER’s policy to hire only individuals who are already fully qualified for the job for which 
they were selected. However, growth and life-long learning are essential for the improvement of staff 
performance. As a first step, PROSPER will seek to encourage and facilitate the learning process with 
on-the-job coaching by supervisors and fellow employees.  
PROSPER’s staff training and capacity building policy provides staff the opportunity to further improve 
on their knowledge, skills and performances. Regular skills gap analysis (Skills Audit) is conducted to 
determine staff training and development needs. The result is used to: (i) determine the types of 
training interventions, (ii) identify non-training and capacity building interventions, and (iii) identify 
organizational performance problems and remedial measures. 
PROSPER provides opportunity for employees to benefit from the following types of training: 
a)  Orientation training:  
b)  In – house training  
c)  Workshops/Seminars 
Local training  
International Training 
 
 
d)  Study tours, local and international  
e)  Part–time studies 
f)  Professional associations trainings/meetings 
Disciplinary Action 
13 
The PROSPER expects its employees to perform their duties in a professional manner and according to 
specified standards. The Project’s objective in addressing poor performance is to correct the situation, 
prevent the reoccurrence of past problems as well as to deter other problems from arising. When a 
staff member's performance or behaviour fails to meet established standards, it is the responsibility 
of the supervisor to counsel the employee and to assist in resolving the problem. Should these efforts 
fail, the supervisor may, under the guidance of the NPC, initiate a program of constructive disciplinary 
action to be administered in a fair and consistent manner. If there is not sufficient improvement, the 
employee is subject to dismissal. PROSPER will give an employee the opportunity to defend himself or 
herself before management takes further action.  
Corrective action for performance improvement may include: 
1.  Verbal or written warning  
2.  Loss of Pay 
3.  Suspension 
4.  De-secondment 
5.  Termination of Appointment 
6.  Dismissal (from service for gross misconduct 
General procedure for corrective action. The following steps will be followed: 
The employee’s supervisor will advise the employee of any shortfall in their performance, and give 
them an opportunity to respond indicating how to improve on their performance. The advice will 
clearly state, using specific examples, what the supervisor sees as the performance problem or the 
unacceptable conduct, and refer to the correct policy or procedure. 
Following their response, the supervisor will decide if performance improvement action should be 
taken. PROSPER will provide support such as training where appropriate. 
If the employee is given a verbal warning, the supervisor should make a note of it, date it and sign it. 
The supervisor will allow the employee to respond before making a decision. The employee may have 
a support person present at such meeting. 
If a written warning is to follow, the supervisor is to: (i) document it and give the employee a copy, (ii) 
give the employee (and their support person) the opportunity to sign the warning, and (iii) keep a 
copy on file. 
The warning must clearly define: (i) the deficiency, (ii) a clear explanation of the expected standard, 
(iii) by when the employee needs to achieve it, (iv) how the Project will help the employee achieve the 
improvement required, and (v) consequences of failing to improve. 
The supervisor concerned will keep a record of all meetings, training and/or coaching given and a 
summary of discussions, and put a copy in the employee’s personnel file. This should include date, 
location and time of discussion. 
The supervisor will continue to support the employee and note the support given, for example, 
training or counselling. 
If the employee’s performance or conduct doesn’t improve, the supervisor will give the employee a 
final written warning and follow steps 4–7 above. This document needs to warn the employee in clear 
terms that PROSPER will terminate their employment if there is not enough improvement, and a 
sustained improvement, in their performance. 
Note: some circumstances may justify going straight to a second or final warning.  
Progressive discipline. Progressive discipline means that, with respect to most disciplinary problems, 
four steps will normally be followed: a first offence may call for a verbal warning; a next offence may 
be followed by a written warning; another offense may lead to a suspension, and, still another offense 
may then lead to termination of employment. PROSPER may use progressive discipline at its 
discretion. Depending on the severity of the problem and the number of occurrences, one or more 
14 
steps are bypassed. By using progressive discipline, the Project hopes that most employee problems 
can be corrected at an early stage, benefitting both the employee and the Project. 
Procedure. Should the supervisor choose to initiate a programme of progressive discipline, any 
written documentation in this regard must be reviewed by the PC before signing and the original copy 
must be placed in the employee’s confidential file. A corrective interview should be conducted and 
documented on a corrective interview form. Both supervisor and employee should sign off on the 
written form. Signatures reinforce the fact that both parties have read and fully understand the 
situation and the content of the interview, as well as demonstrate a good faith effort by the 
organization to review and help correct an undesirable situation.  Employees should be advised that 
signing the corrective interview form does not necessarily mean that the employee is in agreement 
and that the employee has the right to respond in writing to the interview. If an employee refuses to 
sign the form a notation should be made on the form indicating that the employee has refused 
signature and for what reasons. All corrective interviews will specify, if appropriate, any disciplinary 
action to be taken. The type of disciplinary action is determined by the appropriate staff member in 
conjunction with the PC on a case by-case basis as required. Employees may request copies of any 
document in their files that they have signed. Any decision regarding continued employment will be 
made by the PC in collaboration with the recommendation of the immediate supervisor. A staff 
member may appeal his/her dismissal to the NPC in writing within two weeks of the date of dismissal. 
The decision of the PC will be final. 
Termination of Employment. Below are examples of some of the most common circumstances under 
which employment is terminated: 
  Resignation - voluntary employment termination initiated by an employee.  
  Discharge - involuntary employment termination initiated by the organization.  
 
Layoff - involuntary employment termination initiated by the organization for non-disciplinary 
reasons.  
  Retirement - voluntary employment termination initiated by the employee meeting age, 
length of service, and any other criteria for retirement from the organization. 
Dismissal. Unsatisfactory performance that is grounds for dismissal includes, but is not limited to, 
habitual absenteeism or tardiness, inadequate work performance, fighting in the office, antagonism 
or refusal to accept reasonable work assignment, and failure to comply with the PROSPER’s code of 
ethical standards. Management should seek legal advice before dismissing an employee.  
Procedure. The following steps should be taken regarding the dismissal of an employee:  
1.  The supervisor is to investigate the alleged offence thoroughly, including talking to witnesses, 
if any. 
2.  The supervisor should ask the employee for their response to the allegation (taking notes of 
this discussion) and allow them to have representation. The supervisor should also have a 
witness present. The supervisor shall give genuine consideration to the employee’s response 
and circumstances. 
If still appropriate, following a thorough investigation, the supervisor can recommend 
termination/dismissal of the employee to the PC. 
3. 
4.  The supervisor should keep a file of all evidence collected and action taken in these 
circumstances. 
5.  PROSPER will send the employee a letter of termination noting brief details. 
Position Elimination. A position may be eliminated in PROSPER through no fault of the staff member. 
Reasons for position elimination might include lack of funding, work that is no longer required by the 
Project or work that has been absorbed by other positions. 
Resignation is a voluntary act initiated by the employee to terminate employment with PROSPER. A 
one month written notice from the employee or the corresponding salary in lieu of notice, is required. 
PROSPER will give the required notice stipulated above or pay in lieu of notice if the termination of 
15 
appointment is at its instance. Prior to an employee’s departure, an exit interview may be scheduled 
to discuss the reasons for resignation/ termination and its effect on benefits. 
Obligations of the employee and employer on termination of an appointment. 
Employees’ obligations. An employee leaving PROSPER after their contract has come to an end must: 
-  Carry out an inventory of their working equipment; 
-  Return all PROSPER property, materials, or written information issued to them or in their 
possession or control;  
-  Return the corporate badge and any identification tools that they may still have (for example, 
stickers with the corporate logo on them) and the working tools; 
-  Reimburse the loans subscribed or advances on salary, if any. 
-  Make sure that the job can be continued. 
Employer's Obligations. PROSPER shall take the following steps when an employee is leaving:  
Provide the employee with a work certificate/attestation; 
Inform all key stakeholders involved of the termination of the contract; 
Pay out all amounts due to the employee; 
- 
- 
- 
-  Request the employee to return all PROSPER property immediately. Where permitted by 
applicable laws, PROSPER may withhold from the employee's check or final pay check the cost 
of any items that are not returned when required, and take all action deemed appropriate to 
recover or protect its property. 
Problem Resolution 
PROSPER is committed to providing the best possible working conditions for its employees for 
optimum performance. Part of this commitment is encouraging an open and frank atmosphere in 
which any problem, complaint, suggestion, or question receives a timely response from PROSPER’s 
supervisors and management. PROSPER supports the right of every employee to lodge a grievance 
with their supervisor if they believe a decision, behaviour or action affecting their employment is 
unfair. An employee may raise a grievance about any performance improvement action taken against 
them.  
It is aimed to resolve problems and grievances promptly and as close to the source as possible. When 
necessary, PROSPER will escalate a grievance to the next higher level of authority for more discussion 
and resolution, and continue escalating it to the level above until it is resolved. Supervisors will do 
their utmost to action grievances objectively, discreetly and promptly. Grievances that are 
misconceived, vexatious, and lacking substance may result in disciplinary action being taken against 
the employee lodging the grievance. 
Procedure. The following steps shall be followed in relation to problem resolution: 
1.  The employee should try to resolve the grievance as close to the source as possible. Every 
possible effort should be made to settle a grievance before the formal grievance process 
starts. If the matter still can’t be resolved, the process continues and becomes formal. 
2.  To start the formal grievance, the complainants must fully describe their grievance in writing, 
with dates and locations wherever possible and how they have already tried to settle the 
grievance. 
3.  The person(s) against whom the grievance/complaint is made should be given the full details 
of the allegation(s) against them. They should have the opportunity and a reasonable time to 
respond before the process continues. 
If the grievance still cannot be resolved, the employee should refer the matter, in writing, to 
the most senior officer for consideration and a final decision.   
4. 
16 
Work Schedules 
The normal work schedule for all employees is 8 hours a day, Monday to Friday.  Supervisors will 
advise employees of the times their schedules will normally begin and end. Staffing needs and 
operational demands may necessitate variations in starting and ending times, as well as variations in 
the total hours that may be scheduled each day and week. PROSPER operates an attendance register 
that all staff must sign every morning on reporting for duty and at closing.  
Flexible scheduling, or flextime, is available in some cases to allow employees to vary their starting 
and ending times each day within established limits. Flextime may be possible if a mutually workable 
schedule can be negotiated with the supervisor involved. However, such issues as staffing needs, the 
employee's performance, and the nature of the job will be considered before approval of flextime.  
Place of Work 
Although the PROSPER recognizes that the creative and conceptual work in which employees are 
engaged will sometimes necessitate work to be done at some outside locations, regular office 
presence is necessary to maintain interface among staff. The normal place of work for all office staff is 
their assigned desk or operations area at their various regional or state offices. All employees are 
expected to work at the office unless their duties require them to be on the field. Any exceptions to 
this policy must be approved by the immediate supervisor on a case-by-case basis.  
Staff must be accountable for time spent away from the office or from the assigned area of 
operations. Inability to properly account for time spent away from the office will be the basis for 
appropriate disciplinary action to be instituted by the staff’s supervisor. State level staff should be 
encouraged, guided and supported to manage field activities.  
Punctuality 
To maintain a productive work environment, PROSPER expects employees to be punctual in reporting 
for scheduled work. Tardiness places a burden on other employees and on the Project. In the rare 
instances when employees cannot avoid being late to work or are unable to work as scheduled, they 
should notify their supervisor as soon as possible in advance of the anticipated tardiness. Excessive 
tardiness may lead to disciplinary action.  
Excessive Absence 
Excessive absence decreases team morale and productivity and the Project will take disciplinary 
action to curb such absence. Excessive absence is when there are five periods of absence, regardless 
of reason, in any four-month time span. The four-month time span is the most recent four months, 
even if several of those months had been figured in a previous disciplinary action. A period of absence 
is defined as all consecutive days of absence from work regardless of reason. For example, an absence 
on Thursday, Friday and Monday, is considered one period of absence. However, an absence on 
Monday and then again on Thursday of the same week, is two periods of absence.  
Personal official should be arranged during lunchtime or before or after work whenever possible. If an 
employee must be away during official hours for personal official, the supervisor’s approval is 
required and the absence should be recorded on time sheets appropriately. In the event of an 
unexpected absence or lateness, the employee should notify the supervisor and/or the NPC within a 
reasonable period of time (preferably before 9:00 a.m.) on the morning of the absence. If the 
employee's supervisor or the NPC is unavailable, the employee should leave a message with the 
secretary. 
Overtime 
All employees are expected to work the hours required to get the job done. When operating 
requirements or other needs cannot be met during regular working hours, employees will be 
encouraged to undertake overtime work assignments. Appropriate incentives will be extended to 
concerned officers and staff for overtime work. 
17 
Emergency Closing 
At times, emergencies such as fires, floods or political disturbances, can disrupt project operations, or 
in extreme cases, cause danger to staff and project property. Management should order emergency 
closure of work until such situations are under control. 
Short and Long Term Disability 
No Short or Long Term Disability Coverage is offered by the PROSPER. Vacation and sick days do not 
accrue during periods of disability. 
Use of Official Phone, Computer, E-Mail and Internet 
Telephone. Personal use of the telephone for long-distance and toll calls is not permitted. Employees 
should practice discretion when making local personal calls and may be required to reimburse 
PROSPER for any charges resulting from their personal use of the telephone.  
Computer and E-Mail. Computers, computer files, the e-mail system, and software furnished to 
employees are PROSPER property intended for official use. Employees should not use a password, 
access a file, or retrieve any stored communication without authorization. To ensure compliance with 
this policy, computer and e-mail usage may be monitored. The e-mail may not be used to solicit 
others for commercial ventures, religious or political causes, outside organizations, or other non-
official matters. 
To maintain a workplace free of harassment and sensitive to the diversity of its employees, PROSPER 
prohibits the use of computers and the e-mail system in ways that are disruptive, offensive to others, 
or harmful to morale. Examples include, the display or transmission of sexually explicit images, 
messages, and cartoons; ethnic slurs, racial comments, off-color  
Internet. Internet access to global electronic information resources on the World Wide Web is 
provided by PROSPER to assist employees in obtaining work-related data and technology. The 
following guidelines have been established to help ensure responsible and productive Internet usage:  
(i) While Internet usage is intended for job-related activities, incidental and occasional brief personal 
use is permitted within reasonable limits. 
(ii) All Internet data that is composed, transmitted, or received via PROSPER computer 
communications systems is considered to be part of the official records of PROSPER and, as such, is 
subject to disclosure to law enforcement or other third parties. Consequently, employees should 
always ensure that the official information contained in Internet e-mail messages and other 
transmissions is accurate, appropriate and lawful.  
(iii)  The equipment, services, and technology provided to access the Internet remain at all times the 
property of PROSPER. As such, PROSPER reserves the right to monitor Internet traffic, and retrieve 
and read any data composed, sent, or received through its online connections and stored in its 
computer systems. 
(iv) Data that is composed, transmitted, accessed, or received via the Internet must not contain 
content that could be considered discriminatory, offensive, obscene, threatening, harassing, 
intimidating, or disruptive to any employee or other person. Examples of unacceptable content may 
include, but are not limited to, sexual comments or images, racial slurs, gender-specific comments, or 
any other comments or images that could reasonably offend someone on the basis of race, age, sex, 
religious or political beliefs, national origin, disability, sexual orientation, or any other characteristic 
protected by law. 
(v) The unauthorized use, installation, copying, or distribution of copyrighted, trademarked, or 
patented material on the Internet is expressly prohibited. As a rule, if an employee did not create the 
material, does not own the rights to it, or has not gotten authorization for its use, it should not be put 
on the Internet. Employees are also responsible for ensuring that the person sending any material 
over the Internet has the appropriate distribution rights. 
18 
(vi) Internet users should take the necessary anti-virus precautions before downloading or copying 
any file from the Internet. All downloaded files are to be checked for viruses; all compressed files are 
to be checked before and after decompression. 
(vii) Abuse of the Internet access provided by PROSPER in violation of law or PROSPER policies will 
result in disciplinary action. Employees may also be held personally liable for any violations of this 
policy. 
(viii) The following behaviors are examples of previously stated or additional actions and activities that 
are prohibited and can result in disciplinary action: 
  Sending or posting discriminatory, harassing, or threatening messages or images  
  Using the organization's time and resources for personal gain  
  Stealing, using, or disclosing someone else's code or password without authorization  
  Copying, pirating, or downloading software and electronic files without permission  
  Sending or posting confidential material, trade secrets, or proprietary information 
outside of the organization  
  Violating copyright law 
  Failing to observe licensing agreements  
  Engaging in unauthorized transactions that may incur a cost to the organization or 
initiate unwanted Internet services and transmissions 
  Sending or posting messages or material that could damage the organization's image 
or reputation 
  Participating in the viewing or exchange of pornography or obscene materials 
  Sending or posting messages that defame or slander other individuals 
  Attempting to break into the computer system of another organization or person  
  Refusing to cooperate with a security investigation 
  Sending or posting chain letters, solicitations, or advertisements not related to official 
purposes or activities 
  Using the Internet for political causes or activities, religious activities, or any sort of 
gambling 
  Jeopardizing the security of the organization's electronic communications systems 
  Sending or posting messages that disparage another organization's products or 
services  
  Passing off personal views as representing those of the organization  
  Sending anonymous e-mail messages 
  Engaging in any other illegal activities 
Use of Equipment 
When using property, employees are expected to exercise care, perform required maintenance, and 
follow all operating instructions, safety standards, and guidelines. An employee should notify the 
supervisor if any equipment, machine, or tool appears to be damaged, defective, or in need of repair. 
Prompt reporting of damages, defects, and the need for repairs could prevent deterioration of 
equipment and possible injury to employees or others. The supervisor can answer any questions 
about an employee's responsibility for maintenance and care of equipment. The improper, careless, 
negligent, destructive, or unsafe use or operation of equipment can lead to disciplinary action. 
Smoking, Use of Alcohol and Drugs   
Smoking. In keeping with PROSPER’s intent to provide a safe and healthy work environment, smoking 
is prohibited throughout the workplace. This policy applies equally to all employees,  
19 
Use of alcohol and drugs. PROSPER recognises that alcohol or other drug abuse can impair short-term 
or long-term work performance and is an occupational health and safety risk. Accordingly, PROSPER 
has a zero tolerance policy in regards to the use of alcohol and illicit drugs on their premises or 
attending other official related premises (e.g. clients) while under the influence of alcohol or illicit 
drugs. Contravening either of these points may lead to performance improvement action or dismissal.  
Visitors in the Workplace 
To provide for the safety and security of employees and the facilities at PROSPER, only authorized 
visitors are allowed in the workplace. Restricting unauthorized visitors helps maintain safety 
standards, protects against theft, ensures security of equipment, protects confidential information, 
safeguards employee welfare, and avoids potential distractions and disturbances.  
All visitors should go through the body and car scanners, if available, at the entrance gate of PROSPER 
Offices and should enter the offices via the reception area only. Authorized visitors will receive 
directions or be escorted to their destination by the receptionist. Employees are responsible for the 
conduct and safety of their visitors. If an unauthorized individual is observed on PROSPER premises, 
the security guard should be notified for immediate necessary action.  
Security 
Employees responsibility. Entry to the PROSPER premises during and/or outside of normal official 
hours must be through the security guards at the entrance gate. It is the responsibility of every 
employee to submit himself or herself for routine security check when entering or leaving the office 
premises.  
Employees must ensure that all confidential/sensitive documents are locked away at night. Personal 
belongings and valuables should also be locked away and secured. Personal property is not covered 
by Company insurance. Employees must ensure that all inner lights and connections to electronic 
gadgets are put off/disconnected at close of work. Only security lights should be left on overnight.  
Security Disposal/Shredders. Paperwork with any sensitive or confidential PROSPER information needs 
to be disposed of by either being shredded or placed into the locked security disposal bin. Such 
documents include but not limited to: 
  Procurement related documents 
  Financial related documents 
  PROSPER official correspondence 
  Personnel information 
  Classified documents 
  Any other sensitive materials/documents 
Security Inspections. PROSPER wishes to maintain a work environment that is free of illegal drugs, 
alcohol, firearms, explosives, or other improper materials. To this end, PROSPER prohibits the 
possession, transfer, sale, or use of such materials on its premises. The cooperation of all employees 
in administering this policy is required. Desks, lockers, and other storage devices provided for the 
convenience of employees remain the sole property of PROSPER. Accordingly, they, as well as any 
articles found within them, can be inspected by any agent or representative of PROSPER at any time, 
either with or without prior notice. 
20 
Intellectual Property. All intellectual property developed by employees during their employment with 
PROSPER, including discoveries or inventions made in the performance of their duties, will remain the 
property of PROSPER. Employees who are given access to confidential information, data, official 
property, keys to premises or any other official related property/information in the performance of 
their duties must protect such property and use it only in the interests of PROSPER. Employees must 
not: 
  disclose or use any part of any confidential information outside of the performance of their 
duties and in the interests of PROSPER; or 
 
  authorize or be involved in the improper use or disclosure of confidential information during 
or after their employment without the Employer's written consent, other than as required by 
law. 
‘Confidential information’ includes any information in any form relating to PROSPER and 
related bodies, clients or activities, which is not in the public domain. Employees must act in 
good faith towards PROSPER and must prevent (or if impractical, report) the unauthorized 
disclosure of any confidential information. Failure to comply with this policy may result in 
performance improvement proceedings, and PROSPER may also pursue monetary damages 
or other remedies. 
Workplace Monitoring. Workplace monitoring may be conducted by PROSPER to ensure quality 
control, employee safety and security. Employees, who regularly communicate with contractors, 
consultants, farmers, etc, may have their telephone conversations monitored or recorded. Such 
telephone monitoring is used to identify and correct performance problems through targeted 
training. Computers usage and files may be monitored or accessed. 
Because PROSPER is sensitive to the legitimate privacy rights of employees, every effort will be made 
to guarantee that workplace monitoring is done in an ethical and respectful manner. Employees can 
also request access to information gathered through workplace monitoring that  
Workplace Violence Prevention. PROSPER is committed to preventing workplace violence and to 
maintaining a safe work environment. Given the increasing violence in society in general, the 
following guidelines have been adopted to deal with intimidation, harassment, or other threats of (or 
actual) violence that may occur during official hours or on its premises: 
  All employees, both senior and support staff, should be treated with courtesy and respect at 
all times. Employees are expected to refrain from fighting, or other conduct that may be 
dangerous to others, including gossiping, peddling rumors and pressure groupings. 
  Conduct that threatens, intimidates, or coerces another employee, a customer, or a member 
of the public at any time, including off-duty periods, will not be tolerated. This prohibition 
includes all acts of harassment, including harassment that is based on an individual's sex, 
race, age, position or any characteristic protected by federal, state, or local law. 
  All threats of (or actual) violence, both direct and indirect, should be reported as soon as 
possible to the immediate supervisor or any other member of management. This includes 
threats by employees, as well as threats by contractors, consultants, or other members of the 
public. When reporting a threat of violence, you should be as specific and detailed as 
possible. 
  All suspicious individuals or activities should be immediately reported to the appropriate 
authority.  
21 
  Employees should not place themselves in peril by trying to observe or intercede in a 
commotion or disturbance near the office premises.  
PROSPER will promptly and thoroughly investigate all reports of threats of (or actual) violence and of 
suspicious individuals or activities. The identity of the individual making a report will be protected as 
much as is practical. In order to maintain workplace safety and the integrity of its investigation, 
PROSPER may suspend employees, either with or without pay, pending investigation. 
Anyone determined to be responsible for threats of (or actual) violence or other conduct that is in 
violation of these guidelines will be subject to prompt disciplinary action up to and including 
termination of employment. 
Employees are encouraged to bring their disputes or differences with other employees to the 
attention of their supervisors or the Administration and Logistics Officer before the situation escalates 
into potential violence. PROSPER is eager to assist in the resolution of employee disputes, and will not 
discipline employees for raising such concerns. 
Miscellaneous Employee Workplace Conduct and Disciplinary Action 
Employee Conduct and Work Rules. It is not possible to list all the forms of behavior that are 
considered unacceptable in the workplace. The following are examples of infractions of rules of 
conduct that may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment: 
  Theft or inappropriate removal or possession of PROSPER property  
  Falsification of timekeeping records  
  Working under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs  
  Possession, distribution, sale, transfer, or use of alcohol or illegal drugs in the workplace, 
while on duty, or while operating employer-owned vehicles or equipment  
  Fighting or threatening violence in the workplace  
  Boisterous or disruptive activity in the workplace  
  Negligence or improper conduct leading to damage of employer-owned property  
 
  Violation of safety or health rules  
  Sexual or other unlawful or unwelcome harassment  
  Possession of dangerous or unauthorized materials, such as explosives or firearms, in the 
Insubordination or other disrespectful conduct  
workplace  
  Excessive absenteeism or any absence without notice  
  Unauthorized use of telephones, mail system, or other employer-owned equipment  
  Unauthorized disclosure of official "secrets" or confidential information  
  Violation of personnel policies  
  Unsatisfactory on the job performance or conduct 
  Operating pressure groups. 
Sexual and Other Unlawful Harassment. PROSPER will not tolerate actions, words, jokes, or comments 
based on an individual's sex, race, color, national origin, age, religion, disability, or any other legally 
protected characteristic. Sexual harassment is defined as unwanted sexual advances, or visual, verbal, 
or physical conduct of a sexual nature. This definition includes many forms of offensive behavior and 
22 
includes gender-based harassment of a person of the same sex as the harasser. The following is a 
partial list of sexual harassment examples: 
  Unwanted sexual advances. 
  Offering employment benefits in exchange for sexual favors. 
  Making or threatening reprisals after a negative response to sexual advances. 
  Visual conduct that includes leering, making sexual gestures, or displaying of sexually 
suggestive objects or pictures, cartoons or posters. 
  Verbal conduct that includes making or using derogatory comments, epithets, slurs, or jokes. 
  Verbal sexual advances or propositions. 
  Verbal abuse of a sexual nature, graphic verbal commentaries about an individual's body, 
sexually degrading words, or suggestive or obscene letters or invitations. 
  Physical conduct that includes touching, assaulting, or impeding or blocking movements. 
  Unwelcome sexual advances constitute sexual harassment when: 
  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of 
employment; 
  Submission or rejection of the conduct is used as a basis for making employment decisions; 
or, 
  The conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with work performance or creating an 
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment. 
The following guidelines will be used in the treatment of cases of sexual harassment: 
  The employee reports immediately to the supervisor if she/he experiences or witnesses 
sexual or other unlawful harassment in the workplace. If the supervisor is unavailable or is 
believed to be inappropriate to contact, the employee should immediately contact the 
NPC/SPC or any other member of Management. The employee should raise concerns and 
make reports without fear of reprisal or retaliation. 
  All allegations of sexual harassment will be quickly and discreetly investigated. To the extent 
possible, the confidentiality of the employee and that of any witnesses and the alleged 
harasser will be protected against unnecessary disclosure.  
  When the investigation is completed, the employee will be informed of the outcome of the 
investigation. 
  Anyone engaging in sexual or other unlawful harassment will be subject to disciplinary action, 
up to and including termination of employment. 
The IFAD policy to preventing and responding to sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse is 
available on IFAD website at https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/ifad-policy-to-preventing-and-
responding-to-sexual-harassment-sexual-exploitation-and-abuse. 
Personal Appearance. Dress, grooming, and personal cleanliness standards contribute to the morale 
of all employees and affect the corporate image PROSPER presents to supervising agencies, 
stakeholders and visitors. Accordingly, during official hours or when representing PROSPER, staff are 
expected to present a clean, neat, and tasteful appearance. Staff are to dress and groom themselves 
according to the requirements of their positions and accepted social standards.  
Without unduly restricting individual tastes, the following personal appearance attires and items are 
considered not professionally appropriate during official hours:  
Jeans, bermudas, t-shirts, and shorts  
 
  Unnaturally colored hair and extreme hairstyles   
  Offensive body odor and poor personal hygiene   
  Facial jewelry, such as eyebrow rings, nose rings, lip rings, and tongue studs   
23 
  Multiple ear piercings (more than one ring in each ear)  
  Visible excessive tattoos and similar body art  
Workplace Etiquette. PROSPER strives to maintain a positive work environment where employees 
treat each other with respect and courtesy. PROSPER encourages all employees to keep an open mind 
and graciously accept constructive feedback or a request to change behavior that may be affecting 
another employee's ability to concentrate and be productive. The following workplace etiquette 
guidelines are not necessarily intended to be hard and fast work rules with disciplinary consequences. 
They are suggestions for appropriate workplace behavior to help everyone be more conscientious and 
considerate of co-workers and the work environment. The NPC or SPC should be contacted for further 
clarifications or suggestion regarding these workplace etiquette guidelines. 
  Avoid public accusations or criticisms of other employees. Address such issues privately with 
those involved or your supervisor.  
  Try to minimize unscheduled interruptions of other employees while they are working.  
  Communicate by e-mail or phone whenever possible, instead of walking unexpectedly into 
someone's office or workspace.  
  Be conscious of how your voice travels, and try to lower the volume of your voice when 
talking on the phone or to others in open areas.  
  Keep socializing to a minimum, and try to conduct conversations in areas where the noise will 
not be distracting to others.  
  Minimize talking between workspaces or over cubicle walls. Instead, conduct conversations 
with others in their workspace.  
  Try not to block walkways while carrying on conversations.  
  Refrain from using inappropriate language (swearing) that others may overhear.  
  Monitor the volume when listening to music, voice mail, or a speakerphone that others can 
hear.  
  Clean up after yourself and do not leave behind waste or discarded papers in your office. 
Anti-Corruption Policy 
The management of the project funds shall be sufficiently rigorous to safeguard against Fraud and 
Corruption. Fraud and corruption include, but are not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
corrupt practice - offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, anything of value 
to influence improperly the actions of another party 
fraudulent practice - any act or omission, including a misrepresentation, that knowingly or 
recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain a financial or other benefit or to 
avoid an obligation 
collusive practice - an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve an 
improper purpose, including influencing improperly the actions of another party 
coercive practice - impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or indirectly, 
any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a party 
IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in 
projects financed through its loans and grants. ‘Zero tolerance’ means that IFAD will pursue all 
allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied to 
parties or entities involved where the allegations are substantiated. IFAD takes all possible actions to 
protect individuals who submit allegations of fraudulent or corrupt practices in its activities from 
reprisal. The primary responsibility for enforcing the Anticorruption Policy lies with the 
Borrower/Recipient, and the first defence for controls shall be exercised by Project staff, 
Implementing Partners and Counterparts. Pursuant to this, the Borrower/Recipient shall have the 
24 
responsibility to incorporate pertinent provisions of the Anticorruption Policy in its contracts with 
project staff, cooperating/implementing partners, and suppliers/consultants. The IFAD anticorruption 
policy is available on IFAD website at www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm). The IFAD 
website also provides instructions on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and 
Oversight (http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). 
Under the IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, by notice to the 
Borrower/Recipient, the Fund may require that all bidding documents and contracts for procurement 
of goods, works and services financed by the Financing include provisions requiring bidders, suppliers, 
contractors, sub-contractors and consultants to: (i)  allow full inspection by the Fund of all bid 
documentation and related records; (ii)  maintain all documents and records related to the bid or 
contract for three years after completion of the bid or contract; and (iii)  cooperate with agents or 
representatives of the Fund carrying out an audit or investigation. 
It is the Project Coordinator's and the Project Financial Manager’s responsibility to make sure that all 
NPCU   staff, including the financial department, are aware of IFAD's and the National’s anticorruption 
policies and whistle blowing procedures. 
2.7  OFFICIAL TRAVEL EXPENSES 
PROSPER will reimburse employees for approved official travel expenses incurred while on 
assignments away from the normal work location. All official travels must be approved in advance by 
the NPC or SPC, as appropriate. Employees whose travel plans have been approved should consult the 
relevant department to make all travel arrangements.   
Expenses that generally will be reimbursed include the following: 
  Airfare fare, train fare or boat fare for travel in coach or economy class or the lowest available 
fare.  
  Car rental fees, only for compact or mid-sized cars.  
  Fares for shuttle or airport bus service, where available; costs of public transportation for 
other ground travel.  
  Taxi fares, only when there is no less expensive alternative.  
  Mileage costs for use of personal cars, only when less expensive transportation or official 
vehicles are not available.  
  Cost of standard accommodation in low to mid-priced hotels, motels, or similar lodgings.  
  Telephone calls fax, and similar services required for official purposes.  
Employees are encouraged to use their cellular telephone or calling cards when traveling, as hotel 
charges are excessive. 
Employees who are involved in an accident while traveling on official duties must promptly report the 
incident to their immediate supervisor. Vehicles owned, leased, or rented by PROSPER may not be 
used for personal use without prior approval.  
Cash advances to cover reasonable anticipated expenses may be made to employees, after travel has 
been approved. Employees should submit a written request through their supervisor to the NPC or 
SPC when travel advances are needed.   
When travel is completed, employees should submit travel expense reports within 10 days. Reports 
should be accompanied by receipts for all individual expenses.  
Employees should contact their supervisor and finance officers for guidance and assistance on 
procedures related to travel arrangements, travel advances, expense reports, reimbursement for 
specific expenses, or any other official travel issues. 
25 
Abuse of the official travel expenses policy, including falsifying expense reports to reflect costs not 
incurred by the employee, can be grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including termination of 
employment. 
PROSPER strongly upholds and enforces the “No Retirement, No New Advance Policy” as non-
retirement of advances affects the phase of preparation of withdrawal applications and fund 
replenishment to support Project activities.  
Vehicles’ Operation and Maintenance 
Official vehicles are major assets of PROSPER. Drivers are responsible for the operation and 
maintenance (O&M) of the vehicles allotted to them. They are required to check their vehicles daily 
(water, oil, etc.) and sign in the log register daily. Drivers will be trained on the completion of the log 
register as well as safe defensive driving. They would wash the vehicles daily and keep them clean. All 
problems arising from the use of the vehicles should be reported to the Administration and Logistics 
Officer. Fueling should be done at designated gas stations and signed for or receipt obtained.  
Drivers are responsible for the safety of their passengers. They should ensure that they and the 
passengers put on their seat belts (or life jackets in the case of marine craft), that they practice 
defensive driving, and drive within acceptable speed limits.  
In the event of an accident, the driver and the employee(s) should report immediately to the 
supervisor or other senior official. 
Careless driving and tardiness to work could be ground for disciplinary actions up to, and including 
dismissal. 
Insurance 
Project vehicles and equipment are major assets and should be properly secured and managed. 
Insurance of PROSPER vehicles and capital equipment is mandatory. As much as possible, such assets 
should be insured with government insurance companies.  
2.8  CODE OF CONDUCT 
Policy and Principles for the Code of Conduct 
PROSPER believes in responsible social and ethical behaviour by all employees. Furthermore, 
PROSPER employees have an obligation to the Project, stakeholders and to themselves to observe 
high standards of integrity and fair dealing. Unlawful and unethical practices undermine the much-
needed trust and confidence in the Project.  
The Code of Conduct Policy applies to all employees and provides the framework of principles for 
conducting official business, and dealing with other employees, stakeholders, consultants, project 
beneficiaries and contractors. The Code of Conduct does not replace national legislation and if any 
part of it is in conflict, then the legislation takes precedence. All employees should: 
  Act and maintain a high standard of integrity and professionalism 
  Be responsible and scrupulous in the proper use of Programme information, funds, 
equipment and facilities 
  Be considerate and respectful of the environment and others 
  Exercise fairness, equality, courtesy, consideration and sensitivity in dealing with other 
employees, contractors, consultants and farmers.  
  Avoid apparent conflict of interests.  
  Promote the interests of PROSPER at all times.  
  Perform duties with skill, professionalism, honesty, care and diligence 
  Abide by policies, procedures and lawful directions that relate to the employment with 
PROSPER and/or stakeholders. 
26 
  Avoid the perception that any official transaction may be influenced by offering or accepting 
gifts 
  Under no circumstances offer or accept money. 
Any employee, who in good faith, raises a complaint or discloses an alleged breach of the Code, whilst 
following correct reporting procedures, will not be disadvantaged or prejudiced. All reports will be 
dealt with in a timely and confidential manner. 
PROSPER expects co-operation from all employees in conducting themselves in a professional, ethical 
and socially acceptable manner of the highest standards. Should an employee have doubts about any 
aspect of the Code of Conduct, they must seek clarification from their supervisor. Any employee in 
breach of this policy may be subjected to disciplinary action, up to, and including termination. 
Policy and Procedures for Dealing with Conflict of Interest  
Policy. Conflict of interest arises whenever the personal, professional or official interests of an 
employee are potentially at odds with the best interests of PROSPER. Employees need to be aware of 
the potential for a conflict of interest to arise, and should avoid being put in a situation where there 
may be a conflict between the interests of PROSPER and their own personal or professional interests, 
or those of relatives or friends. Where such a conflict occurs (or is perceived to occur), the interests of 
PROSPER will be balanced against the interests of the employee and, unless exceptional 
circumstances exist, resolved in favour of PROSPER. 
Procedures. Employees must: 
  declare to management any potential, actual or perceived conflicts of interest that exist as 
soon as soon as they are employed by PROSPER in any capacity.  
  avoid being placed in a situation where there is potential, actual or perceived conflict of 
interest if at all possible. 
  not set up or engage in private official or undertake other employment in direct or indirect 
competition with PROSPER, using knowledge and/or materials gained during the course of 
employment with PROSPER. Engaging in other official interests during work hours will result 
in strong performance improvement/disciplinary action. 
If an employee declares such an interest, PROSPER will review the potential areas of conflict with the 
employee and mutually agree on practical arrangements to resolve the situation. Failure to declare a 
potential, actual or perceived conflict of interest or to take remedial action agreed with PROSPER, in a 
timely manner, may result in performance improvement proceedings including dismissal. 
Employee Declaration 
I have read and understand the contents of the PROSPER Administrative Manual and I agree to the 
terms and conditions as stated in the Manual. 
Employee Name: ______________________ 
Employee Signature: ___________________ 
Date:  ____________________ 
27 
SECTION 3:  
PLANNING, BUDGETING AND BUDGET CONTROL 
28 
3  PLANNING, BUDGETING PROCESS AND BUDGET CONTROL 
3.1  Planning Principles 
The PCU has major components and a range of implementing activities under each component and by 
various implementing agencies and participating states that should reinforce each other and jointly 
lead to achieving the objectives of the project. Clear AWPB is essential in order to integrate all 
activities and to coordinate the efforts of the different implementing states and entities.  
Three Levels of Planning    
Planning is not just preparation of an AWPB. Throughout the life of the project, planning should take 
place at three levels: (a) strategic, (b) annual work planning, (c) short-term planning 
a.  Strategic Planning. A good strategic or logical model is a critical element for a project to succeed. 
Initially this strategy is defined in the project design document but the PCU will increasingly use 
their own analysis of what has happened, the external assessments, the participatory planning 
and actual implementation experience to compliment the project design. To facilitate this 
process, a strategic review should take place at least once a year, before planning and budgeting 
for the next year. Review of the Logical Framework is also important.  
b.  Annual Planning. IFAD-funded projects are implemented based on an approved AWPB, and 
annual planning therefore is the most important planning activity. Annual planning is expected to 
do four things: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Take local needs and priorities on board 
Review and where needed adjust the project strategy 
Set realistic targets for the year in line with implementation capacity 
Produce an AWPB based on inputs from the states that can direct implementation by 
different implementers, service providers and facilitate monitoring.  
c.  Short-Term Planning. An AWPB only defines project activities in general terms but cannot 
contain operational details of these planned activities. For example, an AWPB can indicate the 
construction of an office but not when, how, and how many bags of cement will be procured 
for the construction of this office. Each implementer therefore should use the AWPB as a 
starting point, together with the procurement plan, but needs to set its individual work. 
3.2  Development of the AWPB  
The Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and Procurement Plan will be prepared each year using the 
bottom-up approach. A joint (GoG, IFAD and MoFA) AWPB will be developed by the PCU and FSIUs. 
These budgets will be approved by the steering committees and granted NO by the co-financiers. This 
exercise will commence in July each year by when, the PCU would have prepared their plans based on 
the market potential and expressed demands of the FOs though the Value Chain Action Plans (VCAPs) 
and the clusters. The cluster level plans will be prepared with assistance from the PSIU and full 
participation of the beneficiaries and required inputs and information from service providers. The 
consolidated plan (state level) will be placed before the respective SVCSC by 15 September each year. 
After approval from the SVCSC, these Plans ratified at state level are later forwarded by the PSIU to 
the PCU. The PCU places the draft Plan before the VCSC for information and approval.  
The PCU shall prepare a consolidated final AWPB for each Programme year to be submitted to the 
Fund for no-objection no later than sixty (60) days before the beginning of the relevant Programme 
Year – 1 November. The AWPBs would include inter alia a Procurement Plan, a detailed description of 
planned Programme activities during the coming Programme year, and the sources and uses of the 
proceeds of the IFAD Financing. The AWPBs shall also provide the basis for identifying the amount of 
counterpart funds to be provided each year upfront by the Federal, State and Local Governments.  
29 
AWPB for each financial year will be the responsibility of PCU. 
3.3 
Stages in AWPB Preparation, Review and Planning Calendar 
The AWPB of the first year of the project is usually based on the project design document and is 
prepared by a small team of experienced staff. From year 2 onwards, the decentralized and 
participatory approach should take over. Three important sources of information should be used by 
the PCU and participating states 
a.  The project design document and the Log Frame 
b.  The findings of needs assessment and participatory planning exercises in the states and local 
government levels 
c.  The findings of annual strategic review and performance evaluation (review workshops, 
supervision missions, special reports from consultants etc.) 
(Chart 1: Stages in AWPB Preparation, Review and Planning) 
30 
3.4  Review and Planning Calendar 
Once the states planning process is over and the AWPBs are consolidated, the PCU submits the draft 
AWPB to the National Project Steering Committee for approval not later than 20th October. The final 
objective is to send the final AWPB, consolidated and possibly amended, to IFAD not later than 30th 
September. If IFAD does not comment on the draft AWPB within 30 days of receipt, the AWPB is 
deemed to be approved. The PCU shall adopt the AWPB substantially in the form approved by IFAD 
and the PCU shall provide copies thereof to IFAD, prior to the commencement of the relevant project 
year. The AWPB thus becomes the sole authority for expenditure during the programme year. 
Review and Planning Activity 
Timing/Deadline 
Continuous review and self-appraisal 
CPCU – Head of components supervision 
CPCU – Finances, MIS, Procurement 
MIS Feedback 
Continuous 
Daily 
Monthly 
Quarterly 
Local and State Governments reporting 
Quarterly, Annually 
IFAD supervision missions 
FOs’ planning process at beneficiary level 
Participatory evaluation/planning workshops 
All DADUs AWPB ready for PCU 
CPCU consolidation of AWPB 
Review and approval by the NPSC 
Final draft of AWPB sent to IFAD/MoF/MoFA 
Biannually 
1 to 15th t July 
16th to 31st  July 
1st August 
31st sth August 
20th September 
1st Octoberber 
(Chart 2: Review and planning calendar. This timing is to suit MoF and MoFA budgeting 
processes) 
3.5  AWPB Preparation Schedule 
When preparing the AWPB the following aspects should be taken into consideration: 
  Consistency with other financial reports: It is practical to prepare the budget and financing plan 
in the same format as the periodic (financial) progress reports and the project financial 
statements of the project. 
  Contingency provisions (physical and price) and allocation of funds from the unallocated 
expenditure category. 
  Post implementation activities e.g. arrangements for after life of project. 
  Availability for funds and arrangements for all audits.  
In accordance with the FA, a draft AWPB has to be submitted to IFAD no later than 90 days before the 
beginning of the relevant fiscal year of the project. If required the PCU/MoFA could propose 
adjustments in the AWPB during the relevant project year, which would become effective after IFAD’s 
approval. 
31 
The AWPB must be accompanied by a procurement plan prepared by the Procurement Officer in 
accordance with the procurement manual of the project. In short, the procurement plan outlines 
what will be procured, at what cost, under what procurement method and when. The first 
Procurement plan should cover the first 18 months of the project lifecycle while the subsequent 
procurement plans should cover 12 months of the project lifecycle. Due to the fact the majority of the 
funds go through procurement it is vital that the Financial Manager and the procurement officer 
communicate regularly to ensure sufficient availability of funds. While efficiently managing the 
intersection between financial management and procurement does not alone ensure the 
achievement of the development goals, neglecting it virtually guarantees the project will fail.  
3.6  Review of the AWPB 
A sub-committee on budget should be inaugurated by the National Programme Coordinator. 
Members shall include all component heads and the Financial Manager / M&E Officer as heads of the 
committee. At least once every quarter, the budget sub-committee shall meet to review the budget 
implementation status during the quarter comparing budget with actual figures. In case of differences 
between the planned and actual costs presented in the AWPB, the sub-committee should identify the 
reasons for those differences, highlight them and advise on ways to handle such differences and 
guide against future occurrences.  
Every quarter, the Financial Manager (FM) in conjunction with Programme Accountants (PAs) shall 
review the costs incurred during this time period. In case of differences between the planned and 
actual costs presented in the Annual Budget, the FM should identify the reasons for those differences 
and detail them in the periodic Financial Reports presented to IFAD. In case of internal problems 
identified during the costs review, the FM shall take the necessary steps to eliminate them. 
Otherwise, the budget for the next quarters should be readjusted to reflect the difference between 
actual and planned figures. These should also be done in conjunction with the M&E Officer. 
3.7  AWPB and related documents approval process 
After preparing the draft AWPB, the M&E Officer, the procurement officer and the Financial Manager 
(in coordination with all staff members: Head of Components) will send it to the Project Coordinator 
and Steering Committee for review and clearance/approval before sending it to IFAD for no objection.  
In accordance with the Financing Agreement, a draft AWPB has to be submitted to IFAD no later than 
90 days before the beginning of the relevant fiscal year of the project. If required the MoFAPCU could 
propose adjustments in the AWPB during the relevant project year, which would become effective 
after the steering committee’ s approval and IFAD’ s no objection. 
The checks listed below are designed to improve the quality of the AWPB during the final preparation 
stage.  
 
Is the AWPB complete and clearly presented? Does it disclose sufficient information? Does it 
contain the necessary financing and budget tables?  
  Are the expenditures structured by component, expenditure category and financier?  
 
Is the AWPB in line with the project description and rational (schedule 1) as per the financing 
agreement and the project log-frame? Are all the activities relevant to the project? 
  Are the cost categories of the AWPB in line with the Schedule 2 of the IFAD financing 
agreements and are expenditures within the agreed allocations? 
  Does the implementation schedule seem realistic and does it show appropriate targets and 
milestones? 
  Do the total (and subtotal) costs add up? Are the inputs (unit cost) and outputs (physical 
targets) adequately quantified? Is there coherence between the inputs and outputs? And 
32 
does these represent value for money (i.e. what is the unit cots for per output, e.g. cost per 
trained farmer)? 
  Are the unit cost are realistic and do they reflect market prices? 
 
 Is the AWPB accompanied by a procurement plan? Is the AWPB consistent with the 
procurement Plan? For multi-year contracts or activities, does the AWPB take into account 
the year’s achievable portion only? 
For an expenditure to be eligible for IFAD financing, it has to be included in the AWPB, GIFMIS, 
approved by the relevant authorities, i.e., the steering committee IFAD and Parliament. 
3.8  BUDGETARY CONTROL 
Computerized budget monitoring system  
Usually, the AWPB is developed and modified using excel. However, once the AWPB has been 
developed and approved, it should be inserted in the budget module of the PCU’s accounting system 
(GIFMIS) to ensure that expenditures not part of the AWPB are blocked reducing the risk of incurring 
ineligible expenditures. 
The computerized accounting system incorporates a feature to allow for comparison of actual 
expenditure against budget at any time. The Financial Manager shall generate monthly budgetary 
performance reports comparing actual against budgeted expenditure by financier, category, 
component and sub-component. The reasons for all variances must be investigated.  
A variance is calculated as the difference between the approved and the actual expenditure. 
Favorable variances occur when actual expenditure on a budget or activity line is less than the 
approved amount. Adverse variances occur when actual expenditure on a budget or activity line 
exceeds the approved amount. The Financial Manager should investigate and report on significant 
variances in actual costs from approved budgeted amounts. 
An accepted level of variance will be agreed but any excessive variance (positive or negative) should 
be investigated.  Identifying the cause can allow the PROSPER to take timely and appropriate action. 
Variance analysis and reports  
In preparing the variance report, The Financial Manager and all Officers should consider the following 
issues: 
  What is the size of the variance?  
  Why has it happened? 
 
  Does it appear to be indicating a trend, or merely a one-time expense? 
  Can actions be taken to reduce or eliminate the variance (is it a controllable variance)? 
Is this the first time or has it happened before? 
The budget vs. actuals reports along with variance reports must be discussed monthly with all PCU 
staff. The same meetings must be enlarged to implementing partners on a quarterly basis.  
Assessment of AWPB Financial execution rates:  
The FM should always indicate in the project’s quarterly, bi-annual and annual reports the following 
two rates: 
  AWBP financial achievement rate 
  AWBP disbursement rate 
33 
Financial achievements against AWPB are comprised of the costs of the year’s achieved works and 
activities, received goods, supplies and services. These should be recorded under Payable at year –
end, whether they are billed and paid or not yet paid. (cut-off rule).  
Disbursements against AWPB are comprised of all payments made by the project during the year:  
Payment for achieved works and activities, received goods, supplies and services AND ADVANCES.  
The Budget Vs. Actuals statements are produced automatically by the Project Accountant from the 
GIFMIS financial software and give both rates:   
  Disbursement rate from the Disbursement Module  
  Financial achievement rate from the Budget Monitoring Module.  
The Financial Manager should review these statements and send them to the PD with brief comments 
on figures.  
The financial achievement rate should be closed to the physical execution rate given by M&E as it 
represents the costs of all physical achievements.  
The financial software gives also the following figures and rates:  
  Disbursement rate including Commitments 
  Achievement rate including Commitments 
Commitments represent: signed commitments (contracts, MoUs, purchase orders) that are not yet 
executed /performed. It may be part of the commitment or the entire commitment. 
Coherence between physical and financial execution of the AWPB  
An analysis of the coherence between physical and financial execution of the AWPB should be 
performed by the projects and included in their quarterly / semi-annual and annual reports.  The 
following tasks must be performed in that respect:   
  Assess the coherence between the physical and the financial execution rates for each activity 
(main activities) and the possible facts that may have led to the incoherence if any; 
  Make corrections / updated in the accounting entries or at M&E level to correct the 
incoherence 
  Comment of the financial issues relating to each activity (main activities). 
  Make their appreciation on the AWPB global execution at the time of the report.  
The M&E Officer and FM should ensure coherence of budget lines with the expected results of the 
activity concerned. This will ease the correct interpretation of execution rates against the expected 
result, for each activity.  
Example: Purchase of seeds to be distributed to farmers.  
1. 
If the AWPB has 2 budget lines:  
  one budget line for the purchase of the seeds  
  one budget line for the distribution costs of the seeds 
The project may rate 100% execution on the first line, which could be interpreted as a good result. 
But if it rates 0% on the second, the performance is bad as the goods are stored somewhere and may 
deteriorate: the end result of delivery to the final beneficiaries is not achieved.  
34 
2. 
If the AWPB has one budget line: Purchase and distribution of the seeds, one can better assess 
the performance because the rate of 100% (physical and financial if there are no over costs) will 
be reached only when the distribution is done. 
The detailed tasks and costs should be presented in the Budget Notes.   
3.9  Budget Monitoring 
Assessment of AWPB Financial execution rates: 
The FM should always indicate in PROSPER quarterly, bi-annual and annual reports the following two 
rates: 
1.  AWBP financial achievement rate 
2.  AWBP disbursement rate 
Financial achievements against AWPB are comprised of the costs of the year’s achieved works and 
activities, received goods, supplies and services. These should be recorded under Payable at year–
end, whether they are billed and paid or not yet paid. (cut-off rule).  
Disbursements against AWPB are comprised of all payments made by the project during the year:  
Payment for achieved works and activities, received goods, supplies and services AND ADVANCES.  
The Budget Vs. Actuals statements are produced automatically by the Accountant from the financial 
software and give both rates:   
  Disbursement rate  
  Financial achievement rate  
The FM should review these statements and send them to the PC with brief comments on figures.  
The financial achievement rate should be much closed to the physical execution rate given by M&E as 
it represents the costs of all physical achievements.  
The financial software gives also the following:  
  Disbursement rate including Commitments 
  Achievement rate including Commitments 
Commitments represent: signed commitments (contracts, MoUs, purchase orders) that are not yet 
executed /performed. It may be part of the commitment or the entire commitment. 
Coherence between physical and financial execution of the AWPB  
The analysis should be made by the projects and included in their quarterly / semi-annual and annual 
reports.  
They have to:  
  Analyze the coherence between the physical and the financial execution rates for each 
activity (main activities) and the possible facts that may have led to the incoherence if any; 
  Make corrections / updated in the accounting entries or at M&E level to correct the 
incoherence 
  Comment of the financial issues relating to each activity (main activities). 
  Make their appreciation on the AWPB global execution at the time of the report.  
35 
SECTION 4: FUNDS FLOW:  
Incoming Funds Flow and Disbursement Management 
36 
4 
FUNDS FLOW: INCOMING FUNDS FLOW AND DISBURSEMENT MANAGEMENT 
4.1  Disbursement Arrangements 
Disbursement arrangements for the Project are grounded in the Project Financing Agreement, the 
Project Design Report, the Letter to the Borrower and IFAD guidelines on supervision and 
implementation support of projects and programmes funded from IFAD loans and grants.  
IFAD funds will be disbursed into an account denominated in United States dollars with the Central 
Bank of Ghana, and will be operated by the PCU using country system. An operational bank account in 
local currency will also be used. 
The proceeds from the designated account will be used exclusively to finance eligible project 
expenditures, as stipulated in schedule 2 of the financing agreement. Funds will be periodically 
transferred from the designated account to the operational account for expenditures eligible for 
financing by IFAD. Additional designated and operational accounts will be opened for GCF financing. 
Funds flow arrangements shall be organized in line with Public Financial Management procedures 
adopted by GoG. Report-based disbursement method will apply for the project, with disbursement 
based on the interim financial reports of the project which will be specified in the Letter to the 
Borrower. Other methods of disbursement will include advances, direct payments, and 
reimbursements.  
Prior to disbursement, relevant Project Accounts should have been opened by the Lead Project 
Agency through the MoF and the CAGD. These accounts are: 
Designated Accounts. The Borrower will be required to open and maintain one bank account (the 
Designated Account - DA) denominated in USD with a bank acceptable by the Fund, designated to 
receive IFAD loans proceeds. GCF loan and grant designated accounts will be opened as soon as the 
specific agreement concerning GCF funds will enter into force. All Designated Accounts will be 
administered based on the revolving fund mechanism.  
Programme Accounts. One Program Account denominated in Ghana cedis shall be opened and 
maintained in a bank, acceptable to the Fund, to receive funds from the IFAD Designated Account for 
eligible expenditures and will be managed by the designated staff within the project implementation 
unit. Two program accounts will also be opened to receive funds from the GCF Loan and grant 
designated accounts as specified in the IGREENFIN Appraisal Report. An additional Programme 
Operational Account in Ghanaian cedi shall be opened to provide counterpart funds from the GoG for 
Project implementation. The default payment accounts shall be the programme accounts in line with 
Bank of Ghana directives that the Ghana Cedi is the only legal tender in Ghana (Foreign Exchange Act, 
Act 723, 2006). 
The regular signatories to the bank accounts will be the Project Coordinator and the Financial 
Manager as Category A and Category B signatories respectively, unless clearly specified otherwise in 
the IFAD or GCF Financing agreements. However, the Chief Director (MoFA) and Director of Finance 
(MoFA) will be the alternate Category A and B signatories respectively. The same arrangements will be 
applicable to funds allocated by co-financiers.  All signatories must have access to the GIFMIS platform 
to enhance payments through the use of the electronic funds transfer feature of GIFMIS. 
Payments made against advances to implementing partners will be secured against bank guarantees 
and training will be provided to partners’ financial staff on IFAD procedures. All processes will be 
documented and outlined in MOUs. 
37 
Before withdrawal can commence (after the loan is declared effective) IFAD must receive from the 
MoF (the designated official representative of the Borrower as stated in the Financing Agreement) a 
letter designating the person or persons authorized to sign WAs, together with their authenticated 
specimen signatures. 
4.2  Withdrawal of Funds 
The Project Financing Agreement refers to the withdrawal of funds to meet project expenditure. 
Report-based disbursement method will apply for the project, with disbursement based on the 
interim financial reports of the project as specified in the Letter to the Borrower. Other methods of 
disbursement will include advances, direct payments, and reimbursements. Withdrawal of Loan or 
Grant Funds must be carried out in accordance with the disbursement procedures of IFAD as the case 
may be. The MoF and PCU must always refer to the Letter to Borrower from IFAD or the IFAD 
Disbursement Handbook, and ensure that project staffs are trained in these procedures. The PCU is 
responsible for submitting WAs to IFAD via the IFAD Client Portal. 
GoG and IFAD will explore the use of harmonized disbursement forms to make them easy to be 
automatically generated from the project’s accounting system.
38 
The PROSPER Funds Flow Diagram is presented below: 
GoG 
GOG counterpart  
Fund account 
IFAD : 
i. HC Loan and Blended Loan Accounts   
      ii. GCF Loan Account 
     iii. GCF Grant Account  
Advances /    Replenishments 
3  Designated Accounts in USD  : 
i. HC & Blended Loans DA  
ii. GCF Loan DA  
iii. GCF Grant DA   
3 Project Accounts in GHS 
PCU 
Direct Payments 
       PFIs 
Matching  
grants 
Transfers to  
Implementing  
partner 
PCU staff  
salaries ,  
consultants ,  
operating  
expenditures 
Contractors ,  
Suppliers ,  
Service  
providers 
Project Beneficiaries  
39 
4.3  Disbursement Procedures 
There are three standard procedures that may be used for disbursing loan funds.  
  Procedure I: Designated Account 
This should be used for the documentation of the initial deposit and replenishment to the 
Designated Account of the Project. 
  Procedure II: Direct Payment 
This procedure should be used for eligible Project expenditures to be paid directly by IFAD to 
suppliers, contractors, consultants, or other third parties as authorized by the Borrower. 
  Procedure III: Reimbursement 
This procedure should be used when eligible Project expenditures reimbursable under the loan or 
grant have been pre-financed by the Borrower. 
4.4  Use of Designated Account 
Application for deposit of the Initial Withdrawal:  
The project PCU will receive initial deposit amounts from IFAD and GCF in the designated accounts 
equivalent to the first six (6) months of operation as approved in their first AWPB. All withdrawal 
applications shall be processed through the IFAD Client Portal. 
The request for the Initial Deposit into the Designated Account shall be made using Form 100. 
Documentation required in support of the WA for Initial Deposit are: 
  A copy of the agreement between the Borrower and BANK OF GHANA holding the Designated 
and Programme Accounts, confirming the establishment of the designated bank accounts, 
providing the account numbers and the agreed procedures for the operation of the accounts;  
  The Approved AWPB and Procurement Plans; and 
  A list of the persons (names and functions) authorized to operate the Designated and 
Programme Accounts   
After loan effectiveness is declared, the following details will be provided to the MoF for submission 
to IFAD.   
(a) Specimen signatures for all the nominated signatories to bank accounts and withdrawal 
documents. 
(b) Details of project bank accounts for all of the Project and USD accounts including:  
Name and address of bank  
Title of account and account number  
Names and ranks, and signatures of authorized signatories 
Form 100 shall be signed by the authorized signatories, i.e. PC and FM. Copies of the duly signed Form 
100 together with the relevant attachments shall be prepared and uploaded onto the IFAD Client 
Portal. 
Replenishment of the Designated Account:  
Further advances to the Designated Accounts will be made for the next reporting period provided that 
at least 70% of the immediately preceding advance and 100% of all prior advances have been justified. 
All withdrawal applications shall be processed through the IFAD Client Portal. 
40 
WAs for the replenishment of the Designated Account which shall be denominated in US dollar shall 
be prepared using Form 100. Summary Sheet Form 101 is used when additional space is required, 
that is, for more than one contractor, or if expenditures relate to multiple suppliers on a 
reimbursement basis. Summary Sheet Form 102 is used when expenditures are claimed under 
Statement of Expenditure (SOEs). If the expenditures are not claimed under a Statement of 
Expenditure (SOE), the supporting documents (bills, receipts, evidence of payments and evidence of 
shipment) are submitted. 
In order to recover the actual US dollars withdrawn from the Designated Account, the local currency 
expenditures that were funded from the designated bank accounts should be converted at the 
prevailing exchange rate at the time of the transfer of US dollars to the Project Account in Ghana 
Cedis and not at the prevailing exchange rates at the time of payment or time of the withdrawal 
application. 
At the time of transferring funds from the Designated Account, the schedule of payment which shall 
show the calculations of eligible project expenditures by categories and at the agreed funding 
percentages shall constitute the Statement of Expenditure for that WA. No payment shall be 
authorized from the Designated Account except for eligible expenditures based on approved work 
plan and budget. Expenditures which have not been properly documented and advances which have 
not properly retired shall not qualify for replenishment under the Project. Note also that part 
payment will only be reimbursed when bank guarantee is attached. 
Recovery of Initial Deposit to Designated Account:  
Any balance of the Designated Account Initial Withdrawals that remains unjustified at the Closing 
Date of the Loan must be promptly refunded to IFAD in the currency used by IFAD for the purpose of 
withdrawal from the Loan Account. 
Providing supporting documentation for Disbursement: In the preparation of WAs for the 
replenishment of Designated Accounts, the following documents shall be required. 
–  Withdrawal Application Forms. 
–  Application Summary Sheets. 
– 
Interim Financial Statements 
–  Register of Contracts. 
–  Designated Account Reconciliation Statement. 
Withdrawal Application Forms: 
Withdrawal Application Form 100: This is the official application for the withdrawal of funds from 
IFAD. It has 14 sections which shall be duly completed by the FM. The Letter to the Borrower has the 
instructions on how to complete Form 100. The following notes are however to be applied in 
completing Form 100. 
  Applications should be submitted in duplicate and together with all supporting 
documentation sent to IFAD, through the ICP. 
  Separate applications must be prepared for each currency of payment and for each payee. 
  All numbered lines of paragraph 1 through 14 must be completed 
  When completed, this application should be checked to ensure that the references, amounts, 
and other details are correct before passing to the Authorized Representative for signature. 
Mistakes and omissions lead to delay in payment. 
If a Summary Sheet is used, items 4 through 6 should be left blank. 
 
  The WAs shall be prepared in English and shall be numbered consecutively irrespective of the 
withdrawal procedure used. 
41 
Application Summary Sheets 
Form 101: Application Summary Sheet Form 101 is used for replenishment of the Designated 
Account, direct payment and reimbursement of expenditures that are not eligible under the SOE. 
Effort should be made to ensure that all relevant sections of the Form are completely and accurately 
filled.  
Form 102: This is the form prescribed for expenditures eligible under the SOE i.e. where supporting 
documentations are not required to be attached to the WA. Care should be taken to ensure that the 
relevant sections for replenishment into the Designated Account or reimbursement of expenditure 
pre-financed by the Borrower are appropriately marked. Bank Statement duly cross reference to SOE 
should be attached.  
Supporting documentation 
For expenditures eligible under SOE:  
  The completed and signed SOE Form 102 appropriately marked for replenishment or for 
reimbursement of eligible project expenditure  
  Every form should be signed by the authorized representatives 
  The Interim Financial Reports, at a minimum comprising: 
(i) sources and uses of funds by expense category,  
(ii) sources and uses of funds by component and subcomponent  
(iii) a variance analysis, comparing actual expenditures against budget, with explanations for 
significant variances for both the quarter and cumulative period  
(iv) The DA activity statement (and related bank statements)  
(v) The summary SOEs extracted from the DA by expense category, for contracts subject to 
IFAD prior review  
(vi) Semi-Annual Cashflow Statement by Financier (forecast expenditures for the fooling two 
reporting periods) 
For direct payment to a contractor, supplier or consultant: 
  The completed and duly signed Form 101  
 
Invoice (or Demand Letter, Statement), certified for payment 
  Contract (for the first progress payment or one-time payment) 
  Purchase order 
  Bank guarantee, for advance payment 
  Delivery receipts for goods 
  Certification for works by certified professional completed on civil works 
  Consultant’s report, if required, for final payment to be made 
Register of Contracts: It is required of the Project to keep a register of all contracts entered into 
whether prior or post review threshold contracts. The register will disclose necessary detailed 
information about the contract for works, supplies and consultancy executed by the Project for the 
period covered by the WA. A schedule of contract register is attached in Annex 2. 
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement – Form 104: Each WA submitted for replenishment to 
the Designated Account must be supported with a Designated Account Reconciliation Statement 
(Form 104), together with the bank statements issued by BANK OF GHANA. The Designated Account 
Reconciliation Statement enables the Project to ascertain the liquidity and facilitates in overall 
resource management. 
42 
The completed and signed Designated Account Reconciliation Statement together with the bank 
statements of BANK OF GHANA and the bank statements of the Project Accounts (if applicable) are 
mandatory supporting documentation WAs for replenishment to the Designated Accounts. 
To complete the Designated Account Reconciliation Statement, each application for replenishment to 
the Designated Account should be supported by a statement issued by BANK OF GHANA for the 
Designated Account at the relevant month-ending (Reporting Period), showing all transactions under 
the account during the reporting Period, including: 
  Opening balance 
  Each transaction during the Reporting Period, by currency and amount paid 
  Date of payment 
  Rate of exchange used 
  Deposit(s) by IFAD into the Designated Bank Accounts during the Reporting Period; and 
  Closing balance at the end of the Reporting period 
The statement of account by BANK OF GHANA for the Designated Account must be provided in USD, 
with each transaction shown in the currency and amount of withdrawal made. 
4.5  Period of Withdrawal Application 
The period of WA starts with the date of transfer of funds from the Designated Account to 
Programme Account to meet eligible project expenditures to the date that that transfer or any other 
within the application period has been fully exhausted in the Programme Account. An earlier date 
could be taken where the FM feels that enough amounts for replenishment could be prepared from 
the withdrawals that have been made in the Programme Account. 
The cut-off date for item 4 should be consistent with item 5 in Form 104, i.e. the same date of closing 
balance should be used and this date must so reflect on the bank statement. Designated and clear 
instructions should be given to the bank in requesting for bank statement so that the closing date of 
bank statements should be consistent with items 4 and 5 in Form 104 and also the end of reporting 
period of Forms 101 and 102 as the case may be. 
4.6  Direct Payment 
This procedure is used for asking IFAD to make a direct payment to a third party (usually to a supplier, 
contractor or consultant on the basis of the Borrower’s instructions) for amounts due. The 
appropriate forms to use for this Application for Withdrawal are: 
  Form 100- Application for Withdrawal 
  Summary Sheet – Form 101 with the section for direct payment on top right corner of the 
form appropriately marked, and if required, to summarize several invoices. 
  The Withdrawal Application Form and Summary Sheet to be used under this procedure is the 
same as the reimbursement procedure. The only difference is in the payment instruction. 
Under the direct payment procedure, IFAD pays directly to the supplier, contractor or 
consultant. 
  Attachments to Form 101 are as described above section 6.4.4b. 
It should be noted that direct payment to a contractor, supplier or a consultant should be for an 
amount exceeding USD100, 000. If lower, payment should be made from the Designated Account. 
4.7  Reimbursement 
All eligible expenditures pre-financed by the borrower are claimed for reimbursement under this 
procedure using Application for Withdrawal – Form 100 and Summary Sheet Forms – 101 or 102 as 
required.  
43 
 
If Summary Sheet Form 101 is used, the supporting documents to be attached are the same 
as discussed under replenishment of Designated Account above 
  Separate summary sheets should be used for each disbursement category 
 
If expenditures are claimed under the SOE, supporting documents do not need to be 
submitted with the Application for Withdrawal 
  A summary sheet Form 102 should be prepared, signed and attached to the WA 
  Normally, reimbursement applications should be submitted within 30 days from the date that 
payment was made and, in any case, no later than three months of such date 
  Reimbursement should be made in the currency of the Borrower and payment should be 
domiciled into the Government Counterpart Funds Account where the payment for the 
expenditures being claimed was made 
  Request for reimbursable will not be eligible where the Designated Account is well funded 
during the period of making claim. 
4.8  Evidence of Authority to Sign Withdrawal Applications 
The IFAD requires the borrower’s representative, as designated in the financing agreement, to furnish 
satisfactory evidence of the authority and authenticated specimen signatures of the individuals who 
will sign WAs on behalf of the borrower. This evidence must reach the IFAD before the first WA is 
presented by the borrower and should be the original (photocopies, facsimiles or other means of 
transmission are not acceptable). 
Each WA should be signed by such duly authorized individuals, and the IFAD must be notified of any 
change in the signatories authorized to withdraw IFADs from the loan account.  
The IFAD must also be notified of the designated signatories for operating any designated and/or 
programme or other accounts, including changes thereto, whether or not these authorized 
signatories are included in the financing agreement. Such changes, as effected during the life of the 
project, must be communicated promptly to the IFAD. The borrower, guided by the sample in annex 1 
of the disbursement handbook, should provide the names and specimen signatures of the newly 
appointed signatories and include the date when such change is to take effect. The original of such 
changed documentary evidence is to be provided to the IFAD.  
The PCU will compile and consolidate, on a timely basis, eligible project expenditures for activities. 
From these expenditures the PCU will prepare withdrawal applications (WAs) for eligible project 
expenditures under each financing source and submit these to IFAD. All WAs will be signed by the 
authorized signatories under the IFAD Client Portal (ICP).  The Withdrawal of Funds will follow IFAD 
disbursement procedures and the transfers will reflect the requirements of the Project 
implementation.  
4.9  Submission of WAs using IFAD client portal  
The IFAD client portal (ICP) allows the project to submit Withdrawal applications electronically to IFAD 
while the hardcopies are maintained by the project for audit purposes. 
ICP also allows the project and ministry staff to access real time financial reports on the project 
performance or debt servicing reports of ongoing and closed projects. 
If you face any technical problems, or you want to raise issues or queries you can contact the 
‘ICP dedicated help-desk by filling up a basic form in the ICP portal itself.  This can be done in 
two places: 
  On the ICP login page, below the area where you enter your username and password, there 
is a link ‘Request Support’: 
44 
  Alternatively, if you have already logged into the ICP, you can find another ‘support’ button 
on the top right-hand side of the page (picture below). Clicking either of these will take you 
to a basic form where you can enter your enquiry. 
It is important to note to use the ICP support function for any ICP related issues or queries as it 
is the quickest and most direct way to have issues reviewed and escalated by the IFAD support 
team. On the other hand, if you should require guidance on how to fill in a Withdrawal 
application or run a report, you can find detailed quick cards by clicking on the "Help" button 
just next to the support button (picture below). 
4.10  Terms and Conditions for Access to IFAD Client Portal 
These are the terms and conditions of use that apply to the IFAD Client Portal (ICP). 
Only authorized users are allowed to access the system. Unauthorized access is not permitted and 
IFAD reserves the right to fully pursue any and all remedies available to it related to any 
unauthorized access, use or connection. 
Access to the web-site requires the user to be authenticated using a Two Factor Authentication 
(2FA) mechanism. The first factor is a username and password combination. 
IFAD will determine which type of second factor is most appropriate Based on the evolution of the 
associated technology. Currently, the default second factor adopted by IFAD is to issue Borrower/ 
users with a soft token accessed through a smart phone. 
A. Identification of Users. 
The Borrower/ must identify users authorized to use the ICP and is responsible for the actions 
The Borrower/ must immediately notify IFAD if a User is no longer authorized to act as a User. 
Each User will be required to provide various mandatory data for creation of a user profile 
1. 
performed in the ICP by these users. 
2. 
3. 
before access to the ICP is granted.  
4. 
Once user registration is completed the User will be issued with the second authentication 
factor. This registration step requires the User to establish a PIN code which is associated with the 
second factor.  
45 
The Borrower/ must ensure that all Users authorized by them to access the ICP have read, 
5. 
understood and agreed to be bound by these Terms and Conditions of Use before accessing the ICP. 
6. 
ICP. 
IFAD will maintain in its records a user account (Account) for each User to manage access to 
B. Use of 2FA  
I.Security 
It is the responsibility of the ICP User to: 
always logout from the application when not using the system.  
immediately notify IFAD through the ICP Support form available on the ICP log-in page, if the 
not reveal his/her PIN code to anyone or store or record the PIN in written or other form. 
not allow anyone else to utilize his/her credentials to access information in the ICP or initiate 
I.1. 
I.1. 
or submit online requests in the ICP. 
I.2. 
I.3. 
User believes a third party has learned any part of his/her credentials. 
I.4. 
immediately notify IFAD through the ICP Support form available on the log-in page of any lost, 
stolen or compromised 2FA devices, and take other reasonable steps to ensure such 2FA devices are 
disabled immediately. 
II.Reservation of Right to Disable Access  
IFAD reserves the right to revoke the authorization of a User to access the ICP at any 
II.1. 
time. 
III.Care of 2FA  
IFAD will deliver soft token activation codes or hard tokens to each User in such 
III.1. 
manner as it chooses. 
III.2. 
Hard tokens remain the property of IFAD. 
III.3. 
Hard tokens contain delicate and sophisticated instrumentation and therefore must 
be handled with due care, and must not be immersed in liquids, exposed to extreme temperatures, 
crushed or bent. Also, hard tokens should be kept more than five (5) cm from devices that generate 
electromagnetic radiation (EMR), such as mobile phones, phone-enabled PDAs, smart phones and 
other similar devices. Hard tokens must be carried and stored separate from any EMR device. At 
close range (less than 5cm), these devices can output high levels of EMR that can interfere with the 
proper operation of electronic equipment, including the hard token itself. 
IV.Replacement of hard tokens 
IV.1. 
be replaced at the expense of the Borrower. 
Lost, damaged, compromised (in terms of B.I.4, above) or destroyed hard tokens will 
4.11  Supporting Documentation  
 (i) For all cases described in (ii) through (vi) below:  
✓ The signed contract or purchase order - showing the specified amount that is due to  be  paid;  
✓ The bank guarantee for advance payment, as specified in the contract documents;  
✓ The bank guarantee for performance, as specified in the contract documents;  
✓ Copies of communications sent by the IFAD country programme manager to the lead project 
agency providing the  
46 
'no objection' (whether post or prior) to the contract award; and 
✓ Evidence of payment. 
(ii) For payment of goods, in addition to (I): 
✓ Supplier's invoice, duly certified for payment by the project director - specifying the goods, their 
quantities, and prices;  
✓ Bills of lading or similar documents; and 
✓ As appropriate, the certificate of delivery (to include condition of goods on delivery).  
(iii) For payment of consultants' services and other services, in addition to (I):  
✓ The supplier's or consultant's claim, duly certified for payment by the project director and showing 
sufficient detail. If such services relate lo the importation of goods (for example, freight and insurance 
payments), adequate reference should be given to enable the Fund to relate each of these items to 
specific goods whose cost has been or is lo be financed by the financing closing date; and  
✓ As appropriate, a certificate of delivery of satisfactory services. If the consultant provided training it 
should be specified how many workshops/people trained together with a list of participants. If the 
Consultant developed a manual or a study this study should be attached or indicated in the 
certificate, etc.  
(iv) For progress and retention payments of civil works, in addition to (1):  
✓ The claim of the contractor, including a financial progress report, staling the work performed and 
the amount due; 
✓ A certificate - signed by the project consultants or owner's representative, if any, or by the 
borrower's chief engineering officer or resident supervising engineer assigned to the project, to the 
effect that the work performed is satisfactory and the payment claimed is due in accordance with the 
terms of the contract; and 
✓ A copy of the contract payment monitoring form.  
(v) For payment of credit lines/grants etc. in addition to(i):  
✓ Duly certified financial reports;  
✓ Copies of the sub-agreements with the PFls;  
✓ Approved minutes of the technical committee (if applicable); and/or 
✓ Payment requests from the PFl and evidence of payment.  
(vi) For payment of Trips, fuel, stationary and other expenses in addition to (i): 
✓ Supplier invoices;  
✓ Evidence of payment;  
✓ Back to office report; 
✓ Travel authorization; and/or  
✓ Expense reports by the traveller (including invoices). 
47 
APPENDIX 1. INTERIM FNANCIAL REPORT 
48 
ATTACHMENT 3INTERIM FINANCIAL REPORTFORM 100 - APPLICATION FOR WITHDRAWAL1IFAD Loan/Grant/Financing No.: 2Application No.:xTo:  International Fund for Agricultural DevelopmentVia Paolo di Dono, 4400142 Rome, Italy3Please indicate the disbursement procedure used4Please Pay:xxxCurrency NameWe hereby apply for withdrawal from the Loan/Grant Account opened under the IFAD Financing Agreement and hereby certify as follows:The undersigned has not previously withdrawn from the Loan/Grant Account to meet these expenditures and has notand does not intend to obtain funds for this purpose out of the proceeds of any other Loan/Grant/Financing.The goods and services covered by this application have been or are being purchased and/or procured in accordancewith the terms of the General Conditions Agricultural Development Financing approved on 29 April 2009.C.This Application for Withdrawal covers a reporting period:xx/xx/xxFrom (dd/mm/yy)The undersigned hereby certify that the expenditures for which replenishment is claimed in Form 102 Aand 102 B are correct, for the Project as provided in the IFAD Financing Agreement. We certifythat the expenditures incurred are within the Statement of Expenditure (SOE) thresholds and representresources used in compliance with the principles of legality, regularity and sound financial management.We certify that the audit requirement outlined in article VIII and section 9.01 of the General Conditions will be complied with, and that the requirements for maintaining records and documentation for expenditures disbursed using the Statement of Expenditure (Form 102/A) modality and outlined in section4.04(c) and (d) of the General Conditions, will be complied with. This includes, inter alia, that an annual auditwill be carried out and that the documentation (including purchase orders, invoices, evidence of payment and delivery and any other relevant documentation evidencing the expenditures) will be retained for 10 years after the Closing Date of the IFAD Financing, and that such records and documentation will be made available to IFAD representatives for review on requestDetails of Expenditure(Use summary sheet(s) if additional space is required or if expendituresrelate to more than one supplier, category or subcategory5Name and Address of Contractor or Supplier8Payee's BankName:Address:6Procurement Detailsa) Contract or Purchase Order No. and Date:Account No.:b)Description of Goods, Work or Services:9Payee's Name and Addressc)Currency and Total Amount of Contractd)Invoice No. and Net Amount of Invoices covered by this Application10Correspondent Bank(not required when using the Direct Payment procedure)7Withdrawal Detailsa)Category or Subcategory No.:b)Percentage of Expenditures to be Financed by IFAD:11Special Payment Instructions and References:12131415IFAD XXXXXXXXXXxx/xx/xxFrom (dd/mm/yy)D.xxxAmount to be Paid in FiguresA.B.xxxxxxxxxPayment Intructionsxxxxxxxxxxxx(If different from Payee)xxxxxxxxxxxxSignature(s) of Authorized Representative(s)xxxxxxxxxName of Borrower/RecipientxxxName(s) and Title(s) of Authorized Representative(s)xx/xx/xxDate (dd/mm/yy)xxx 
APPENDIX 2: Designated Account Activity Statement  
FORM 1-A 
LOAN XXXXXXXXXXXX 
Designated Account Activity Statement  
__________________ 
Bank and Account No. 
Part 1 
1.  Cumulative advances to end of current reporting period 
__________ 
2.  Cumulative expenditures to end of last reporting period 
__________ 
3.  Outstanding advances to be accounted for (1 minus 2) 
__________ 
        USD 
    USD 
Part II 
4.  Opening DA Balance at beginning of reporting period (as of_________) 
__________ 
5.  Add/Subtract Cumulative adjustments (if any) * 
__________ 
6.  Advances from IFAD during reporting period  
__________ 
7.  Add 5 and 6  
__________ 
8.  Outstanding advances to be accounted for (4 +7) must be same as item 3 
9.  Closing DA balance at end of reporting period (as of ____________)   
__________ 
10.  Add/Subtract cumulative adjustments (if any) ** 
11.  Expenditures for current reporting period 
__________ 
__________ 
12.  Add 10 and 11 
13.  Add 9 and 12 
__________ 
14.  Difference (if any) 8 minus 13 *** 
Part III 
15.  Total forecasted amount to be paid by IFAD   
16.  Less: Closing DA balance (as per item 9) 
17.  Cumulative adjustment (if any) 
18.  Add 16 and 17 
19.  Cash requirements from IFAD for the next six months (15 minus 18) 
__________ 
__________ 
__________ 
__________ 
__________ 
__________ 
__________ 
49 
20.  Amount requested for advance to DA (rounding) 
__________ 
*Explanation for item 5 (if not 
zero 
FMR & AW Ref 
Amount (+/-) 
Remarks 
*Explanation for item 10 (if not 
zero 
FMR & AW Ref 
Amount (+/-) 
Remarks 
*Explanation for item 14 (if not 
zero 
FMR & AW Ref 
Amount (+/-) 
Remarks 
*Explanation for item 17 (if not 
zero 
FMR & AW Ref 
Amount (+/-) 
Remarks 
50 
APPENDIX 3: Summary Statement of Expenditures (Sum-SOE) for expenditure not subject to Prior Review 
FORM 1-C 
LOAN XXXXXXXXXXXX 
Summary Statement of Expenditures (Sum-SOE) for expenditure not subject to Prior Review 
Quarter 
Ln/Cr/TF No.: 
Street No.: 
4 
Number of 
SP2D 
Covered 
5 
Country of 
Supplier / 
Consultant / 
Training 
6 
Total Paid to 
Contractors / 
Expenditures 
(GoG + IFAD) 
7 
IFAD 
Financing % 
8 
Amount of 
IFAD portion 
paid 
9 
Average 
Exchange 
Rate 
10 
Amount 
charged to 
DA (USD eqv) 
1 
SR  Disbursement Category 
2 
Cat. No.                       
3 
Threshold 
for SOEs 
(USD Eqv) 
Description 
(1)  Category 1* 
(2)  Category 2 
(3)  Category 3 
(4)  Category 4 
GRAND TOTAL 
  Please have a separate line item if GCF financing percentage is different 
ATTACHMENT 6: Summary Sheets for Payments of Contract Subject to Prior Review 
LOAN XXXXXXXXXXXX 
Summary Sheets for Payments of Contract Subject to Prior Review 
Quarter:  
Ln/Cr/TF No.:________________ 
  Street No.:________________ 
51 
2 
1 
SR 
Disbursement 
Category 
3a 
Office 
Issuing 
SP2D 
3b 
Cross 
Ref 
SP2D 
4 
Date of 
Payment 
(SP2D) 
5 
Contract 
No. and 
Date 
6 
Supplier / 
Contractor 
Name 
7 
Contract 
Value 
(Incl 
Add) 
8 
Total 
Amount 
Paid to 
Contractor 
9 
IFAD 
Financing 
% 
10 
Amount 
of IFAD 
portion 
paid 
11 
Exchange 
Rate 
Applied 
13 
IFAD 
Contract 
Ref 
12 
Amount 
Charged 
to DA 
(USD 
eqv) 
(1)  Category 
1* 
Subtotal 
(2) Category 
2 
Subtotal 
(3) Category 
3 
Subtotal 
(4) Category 
4 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
Subtotal 
Grant Total 
APPENDIX 4: Project Cash Forecast 
52 
Form 1-D 
LOAN XXXXXXXXXXXX 
Project Cash Forecast 
For the Quarter Ending MM/DD/YYYY 
SR  Disbursement category 
GoG + IFAD Cash 
Requirement for 
Quarter Ending 
mm/dd/yyyy 
GoG + IFAD Cash 
Requirement for 
Quarter Ending 
mm/dd/yyyy 
GHS 
GHS 
Total Cash 
Requirement for 
next Two 
Quarters (six 
months) 
GHS 
Total Cash 
Requirement for 
next Two 
Quarters (six 
months) 
GHS 
IFAD Cash 
Requirement for 
next Two 
Quarters (six 
months) 
GHS 
IFAD Cash 
Requirement for 
next Two 
Quarters (six 
months) 
USD 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
APPENDIX 5: Project Uses of Funds by Category 
53 
Form IFR-1 
LOAN XXXXXXXXXXXX 
Project Uses of Funds by Category for the Quarter Ending MM/DD/YYYY 
Currency:__________ 
Actual 
1 
2 
3 
Planned 
4 
5 
6 
Variance 
7 
8 
9 
Sources of Funds 
Total Sources of Funds 
Uses of Funds (by Category) 
(1)  Category 1 
(2)  Category 2 
(3)  Category 3 
(4)  Category 4 
Total Uses of Funds 
NOTE: 
A. Sources of fund:  
1.  Actual includes IFAD portions, GCF, and GoG counterpart funds 
2.  Planned: to be completed with the approved budget; especially for the current quarter this must be completed with the previous quarter’s cash 
forecast. 
B. Uses of Funds: 
3. 
 Actual project expenditure by categories for the IFAD portions, GCF portions, and GoG counterpart funds 
4.  Planned: “Year-to-date” to be completed with the approved budget; “Cumulative-to-date” to be completed with amount in PA 
5.  “Current Quarter” covers the expenditures claimed to be eligible reported in the quarter 
6.  “Year-to-Date” covers accumulative expenditures during the year 
54 
7.  “Cumulative-to-date” covers expenditures since the beginning of the project with the current quarter. 
SN 
Uses of Funds (by 
Category) 
Actual / Planned 
1 
Total 
2 
GoG Counter-
part 
3 
Other Donors 
4 
Outstanding 
5 
Charged to IFAD 
DA 
6 
Charged to IFAD DA 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total Uses of Funds 
*Please use a separate line if GCF financing percentage is different. 
Average Exchange Rate:________________ 
55 
4.12 Schedule 2 of Financing Agreement: global budget per category  
Schedule 2 of the Financing Agreement gives the budget for each category for the entire project 
lifespan.  
When sending a WA, the WA must assess the available balance under each category. A maximum of 
30% surplus against budget may be reached at the condition of remaining balances under one or 
multiple categories, provided that the total loan amounts are not exceeded.  
Unallocated funds 
An allocated amount is shown in schedule 2. Usually at midterm review (or in case of significant 
changes before midterm, PROSPER will request a reallocation in order to be able to use the funds in 
defined categories. The reallocation will result in the signature of an amended Financing Agreement 
with new budget lies per category.  
4.13 Eligible expenditures  
The financing Agreement specifies when the Expenditures are deemed Eligible. The following conditions 
have to be met:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
The expenditure shall meet the reasonable cost of goods, works and services required for 
the Project and covered by the relevant AWPB and procured in conformity with the 
Fund’s Procurement Guidelines.  
The expenditure shall be incurred during the Project Implementation Period, except that 
expenditures to meet the costs of winding up the Project may be incurred after the 
Project Completion Date and before the Financing Closing Date.  
The expenditure shall be incurred by a Project Party.  
If the Agreement allocates the amount of the Financing to categories of Eligible 
Expenditures and specifies the percentages of such Eligible Expenditures to be financed 
by the Financing, the expenditure must relate to a category whose allocation has not 
been depleted, and shall be eligible only up to the percentage applicable to such 
category.  
The expenditure shall be otherwise eligible in accordance with the terms of the Financing 
Agreement.  
Hence the following checklist is provided for the assessment of expense eligibility:  
Expenditures are eligible if:  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
the cost of the goods/works/services is ‘’reasonable’ ’and if the goods /works/ services are 
required for the project 
it is required for the project 
the cost is covered by the approved AWPB 
goods/works/services are procured in conformity to IFAD’s guidelines  
it is incurred by a Project Party  
it relates to a category of the Financing Agreement which has not been depleted and shall 
be eligible only up to the percentage applicable to such category 
it is incurred during the project implementation period (up to completion date)  
it is for costs of winding up the project (after completion/before closing)  
it is NOT related to a coercive/collusive/corrupt/fraudulent practice. 
it is compliant with the terms of the FA (incl. tax, special covenants).  
56 
4.14 Exemption from taxes  
IFAD funding under the financing agreement is exempt of taxes. The Government will provide 
counterpart financing in the term of tax exemption spread over the duration of the project.  
4.15  SAPZ DISBURSEMENT MANAGEMENT 
The Project will mainly finance, small works (rural roads, irrigation infrastructure etc.), consultants' 
services (design, supervision and studies), goods (office supplies, computers, cars), microfinance in the 
form of grants and credit as well as PCU operating costs (salaries, travel expenditures etc.). Last section 
outlined how the PCU will receive funds from IFAD to cover the incurred expenditures related. This 
section will outline the different steps involved in the outflow of funds from the PCU to the 
Contractors, Suppliers, Consultants etc. The procurement process of these items, including the hiring 
process for consultants is detailed in the project procurement manual. 
4.16  General instructions 
All payments are prepared by the accountant and authorized by the Project coordinator after the 
review and clearance of the Financial Manager.  
a.  Expenditure of Project funds shall be incurred or committed only if: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
The expenditure item is part of the approved Work plan and Budget 
Funds are available under the relevant IFAD category and the expenditure is within 
approved Work plan and Budget 
The proposed expenditure is an eligible expenditure under the Financing Agreement  
The proposed expenditure is supported by adequate supporting documentation as defined 
in the IFAD disbursement hand book and letter to the borrower.  
The expenditure to be incurred is in line with approved Project policies and procedures, 
and  
The CPM’s No Objection (NO) has been obtained for expenditure above the prior review 
threshold or where applicable, as determined by IFAD. 
vii. 
The expenditure is in line with the disbursement schedule of the sub-agreement (if 
applicable). 
b.  The following shall however be observed by the Financial Manager before clearing the 
payment: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
The expenditure is included in the approved work-plan and budget. Any item not in the 
budget that becomes necessary for project implementation shall only be undertaken 
with approval of the IFAD CPM and subsequent modification of the AWPB.  
All expenditures must fulfil the eligibility requirements in the financing agreement, loan 
disbursement handbook and letter to the borrower. 
Payments shall receive the clearance of appropriate PCU officer (e.g. a 
component/sectional head or technical officer) before they are authorized by the 
Programme Coordinator. 
57 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
There must be evidence that the activity to which the payment is related has 
completed before the programme completion date with the exception of winding up 
expenditures that may be incurred after the completion date but before the closing 
date. 
The expenditure must be supported by necessary supporting documentation as per 
IFAD Letter to the borrower and disbursement handbook. 
If the expenditure item is part of a contract, the invoice must be in line with the 
disbursement schedule of the relevant contract.  
4.17  Invoice Related Payments 
a.  The programme shall enter into contracts for the procurement of three major items 
i. 
Goods 
ii.  Works 
iii. 
Consultancy services (for training, audit, etc.); and 
General Guidelines for Invoice Related Payments: 
a.  All invoices shall be addressed to the Programme Coordinator 
b.  When an invoice is received with the supporting documents at the NPCU, the accountant 
shall conduct an initial review and ensure that the documentation is in order and complete 
after which the documents are forwarded to the component/technical head for review. 
c.  The Component/Technical Head shall review the documentation.  If the payment is in 
order, the affected Component/Technical Head within the NPCU shall make 
recommendation to the PC for payment.  
d.  After the technical review, the project FM shall ensure that the payment meets all the 
eligibility criteria and that the supporting documentation is complete before clearing the 
payments.  
e.  After the FM's clearance the payment will be forwarded to the project coordinator who 
shall validate the checks and then authorize the invoice for payment. 
f.  The approved Invoice with related documents shall be sent to the FM Unit for processing 
and issuance of appropriate instruction for mandate/cheque preparation.  
g.  The Programme Accountant will carry out an internal check and ensure that the 
documentation is authentic and complete before approving the Invoice/Bill for settlement.  
h. 
If the documents are found to be in order, a Payment Voucher (PV) will be raised by the 
Project accountant.  
i.  The PV and the supporting documents required by IFAD and outlined in the 
LTB/disbursement handbook, including the CPM No Objection, will be sent to the FM who 
58 
will ensure that the correct account codes as well as the appropriate Project fund have 
been indicated on the PV.  
j.  Where the FM is satisfied with the internal checks, the PV will be approved for mandate 
and the appropriate instruction for writing a mandate will be issued to the Project 
accountant  
k.  Otherwise it will be returned to the Project Accountant with the appropriate query, who 
shall endeavour to correct the error noticed or forward the invoice and the (queried) 
documents back to where it originated, depending on the nature of the observation(s).  
l.  Confirmation letters will be written to the banks for all mandates, drawn on Project 
accounts before payment can be affected. 
m.  Approved PV together with the mandate, bank confirmation letter and the supporting 
documents will be forwarded to the FM who will review and if satisfied will sign his portion 
of the PV, the confirmation letter and the mandate and immediately send them to the PC. 
n.  The PC will equally review immediately and if satisfied shall sign his portion of the PV, the 
confirmation letter and the cheque and return them to the Project Accountant for 
documentation and release. 
o.  The turnaround time for settlement of invoices shall not exceed 3 working days. Before 
releasing the cheque to the payee, the accountant will ensure that the beneficiary signs 
the PV and Cheque Issued/Mandate Register.  
p.  Official receipts shall be obtained for all payment. Proforma invoices are not acceptable. 
4.18  Travel related payments 
The project will be involved in activities that will make it necessary for project staff and others 
involved in project implementation to travel outside project office locations. The project will 
advance project staff and individuals in project implementation for necessary and reasonable 
transportation and travel related expenses incurred in connection with project business travel. 
4.19  Accountable Imprest/Office Travel 
Generally, all cash advances to Programme staff to carry out an official assignment shall be treated as 
an accountable imprest and hence will not be considered as final expenditure until the cash taken has 
been accounted for. Cheques shall be drawn on the basis of the approved estimates and made 
payable to the officer involved or to the most senior officer in the case of group trek after approval by 
the NPC or his representative. Accountable imprest shall be retired within three (3) working days after 
the discharge of the official assignment and/or return to office. The retirement of accountable 
imprest shall include completing the accountable imprest retirement form (Refer to appendices). The 
officer must attach all relevant receipts, invoices, etc. in connection with the assignment. 
In the case of advances to officers on trek, the officer must complete the following forms: 
a.  Travel Authorization. The PROSPER Travel Authorization forms the basis of approval of the 
travel by the NPC. The form when completed will disclose the details of the activities to be 
carried out during the trek and the related budget and time to be spent on the trek. 
b.  Travel Matrix. This gives guidance on the amount to be budgeted for DSA and fuel for the 
59 
trek. (See below for details). 
TRAVEL COSTS MATRIX 
 In-country missions  
a) 
Fuel 
Vehicles of 2 years or less:  
5 gallons / 100 Km maximum 
Vehicles of more than 2 years:   6 gallons / 100 Km maximum 
NB: These fuel provision ceilings should be adjusted based on actual experience.  
b) Daily subsistence allowance 
Out-of-country missions 
Transport 
Cost is estimated based on three (3) pro forma invoices from a travel agency. 
Daily subsistence allowance 
IFAD (UN) DSA rates published at the beginning of each month shall be used for the computation of 
DSA. Total DSA shall be computed based on number of nights spent. Traveller(s) shall submit receipts 
from hotels, bus/train/air tickets and boarding pass on return form the trip as part of expense report.   
Travel Expense Claim Forms. This form shall be used to retire the accountable imprest taken for any 
official trek. The actual expenditure will be indicated and compared with budgeted amount and any 
difference resulting from this may either be refunded to the NPC or the staff.    (Refer to appendices) 
Back To Office Report. This sets out the objectives of the trek, persons met, activities carried out, 
findings, actions taken and recommendations by the officer. The officer shall submit this form within 
three (3) working days of their return from the trek (See appendix for sample) 
4.20  Daily Subsistence Allowance (DSA) 
The following procedure is used for DSA: 
a.  This shall cover cost of hotel accommodation, meals and other personal expenses related to 
nights spent away from the traveller’s home/duty station. 
b.  GASIP shall pay DSA at rates for which IFAD has given a “No Objection” 
c.  Reduced DSA rates—when accommodation and/or meals are provided free of charge to the 
traveller, the following DSA rates shall be applied: 
                          % Reduction                  Reduced DSA rate  
                       50% 
  Situation 
                                                                                                       (%of full DSA rate) 
 Free accommodation 
 Free meals:         
Breakfast  
Lunch or dinner   
Breakfast and lunch or dinner 
Lunch and dinner 
All meals free of charge   
Free accommodation and meals: 
18% 
24% 
70% 
88% 
30% 
12% 
6% 
82% 
76% 
94% 
50% 
60 
Accommodation and breakfast 
Accommodation and breakfast or dinner  62% 
Accommodation and breakfast + lunch 
Accommodation and breakfast + dinner 
Accommodation, lunch and dinner 
Accommodation and all meals 
56% 
68% 
68% 
74% 
80% 
38% 
44% 
32% 
32% 
26% 
20% 
Directors of implementing partners, NPSC members, NPC, and National directors of MOFA and MOF 
shall have the option to have free accommodation and 50% of DSA. 
4.21  Resource Persons’ Allowance 
Resource persons for the Programmes’ activities, e.g. workshops, training, etc, who undertake the 
responsibility of facilitation, delivery of paper, rapporteuring, and similar responsibilities, shall be 
entitled to Resource Person Allowance (RPA) of US$100 per/day, in addition to DSA and Transport 
Expense (Fuel). The RPA shall serve as an incentive to attract professionals who would show 
commitment to the successful delivery of the Programme. However, PROSPER staff is excluded from 
the payment of RPA. The RPA shall NOT be funded from loan funds. 
4.22  NPSC Sitting Allowance 
Members of the NPSC (Board of Directors) constitute the highest decision-making body of the 
programme. It is highly necessary that a full house attends such meetings. To encourage them to 
attend, they shall be entitled to sitting allowance of US$120 each in addition to DSA and Travel 
Expense / Fuel. The NPSC sitting allowance shall NOT be funded from loan funds, except prior 
approval is sought from IFAD. Approval shall be granted for persons from the private sector only. The 
Programme shall seek approval for the budget of NPSC meetings prior to the meetings. 
To mitigate the risk of:  
i. 
unretired travel advances and provision of inadequate or inappropriate/fraudulent 
documentation to justify the travel advances and 
unjustifiable claims for travel not undertaken, 
ii. 
the project will undertake steps listed below which are aimed at arresting any such eventuality.  
The steps are as follows: 
  The project with the approval of the MoF shall establish a standard allowance rate to be used in 
respect of local travel.  
 
In respect of overseas/foreign travel, the applicable allowances shall be the UNDP rate published 
at the beginning of each month which normally involves lump sum payment for hotel and DSA. 
  Reduced DSA rates. When accommodation and/or meals are provided free of charge to the 
traveller during local or foreign travel, the commensurate amount shall be deducted from the 
DSA/allowance rates. 
  Where actual travel days fall short of the local or foreign travel days for which the advances were 
paid, the official will be required to reimburse the difference. 
  Air tickets will continue to be reimbursed or paid on actual basis and used air tickets and 
boarding passes will need to be submitted as evidence of travel. 
61 
In order to justify the travel advances the following supporting documentation must be attached to 
the travel expense claim (as applicable): 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii.  Medical certificate fee (Consultants only) and/or vaccination cost 
viii. 
Hotel accommodation (in case of rates higher than DSA) 
back-to-office report (signed and dated)  
Air ticket receipt and boarding passes  
Fuel receipts 
Excess luggage 
Passport / Visa fees / Airport taxes 
Other expenses (e.g. room or equipment rental, secretarial services, purchase of office 
suppliers, Telephone, Fax or Internet charges etc.) 
Only after the expense report and the full supporting documentation (as applicable) has been 
submitted can the expenditures be recorded in the accounting software and claimed from IFAD. Until 
a proper justification has been completed, the travel related expenditure has to be considered as an 
advance to the staff member. 
Any unjustified travel advances will need to be reimbursed to the project by the traveller within one 
month after the travel date or the amount will be deducted from the payroll. 
4.23  Processing of payments for Civil Works and Goods 
Project will incur expenditures related to works under components 1.2 (Development of Socio-
economic infrastructure) in the form of off-farm / watershed works, feeder roads and farm 
tracks, and communal social infrastructure etc. and goods under components 1.ab. (Capacity 
building of rural institutions, enterprises and households) and 3 (Project Management and 
Coordination) in the form of computers, cars etc. 
The Expenditure Cycle for works and goods is detailed in the following chart: 
(Chart: Processing of payments for Works and Goods) 
Before releasing the payment to the contractor or supplier, the Financial Manager will make 
sure the following processes are followed:  
a.  The quantity of goods is checked back to the purchase order and to contract and bid 
62 
award letter (if applicable). The goods are certified by the internal auditor and the stores 
officer and in the case of engineering goods like motor vehicles, an appropriate director in 
the ministry of transport after confirming that quality of goods is compliant with the 
contract conditions. The Financial Manager will ensure that the Procurement Officer 
provides all the necessary documents including the invoice and the acceptance/compliant 
report before proceeding with the payment.  
b.  The conditions of the goods are reviewed for any damage or impairments. Damaged goods 
are to be identified and returned to the supplier for replacement. If any goods are rejected 
or returned to the supplier because they are not as ordered or are of sub-standard quality, 
the Financial Manager should be notified. Financial Manager must keep a central record of 
all goods returned to suppliers and maintain a separate record of all goods and equipment 
delivered by suppliers by contracts funded by the IFAD financing. 
c.  All works are to be monitored by an architect or engineer. It is good practise to assign the 
architect/engineer responsible for the design to monitor and assess the works of the 
contractor.  The architect or engineer is responsible for sending compliant 
reports/certificate of completion to the Procurement Officer in the PCU which includes the 
percentage of completion of the construction and if the construction materials are 
compliant with the contract conditions and specifications.  A request for payment is 
prepared by the Procurement Officer to be sent to the Financial Manager. The Financial 
Manager will ensure that the payment request includes all the necessary documents 
including the invoice and the compliant reports/certificate of completion before 
proceeding with the payment to the contractor for the completed phase.  
4.24  Processing of payments for Consultants' Services 
Under the Project there are two types of consultants' services; a) Consultants with a lump sum contract, 
and b) Consultants with a time-based contract. For type (a) consultants, payments will be made against 
the delivery of outputs as detailed in their contracts. For type (b) consultants, payments will be made 
against the submission of a time sheet and a summary of activities performed. The Expenditure Cycle for 
type (a) consultants is detailed in the following chart: 
Chart: Processing of Payments for consultants - type A   
The Expenditure Cycle for type (b) consultants is detailed in the following chart: 
63 
Chart: Processing of Payments for consultants - type B  
Before releasing the payment to the consultant (firms), the Financial Manager will undertake the 
following steps: 
A.  The consulting services reports are monitored by the technical committees, assigned by 
the NPC for the purpose of evaluating the deliverables submitted by the consultant (firms). 
Therefore, the Financial Manager will ensure that no payment to the consultant is 
prepared unless an approved committee report or letter of approval received from the 
committee assures that the deliverable submitted by the consultant is compliant with the 
contract conditions, these documents should be passed through the Procurement Officer. 
B.  The consulting services reports are monitored by the specialist responsible for the activity 
for the purpose of evaluating the deliverables submitted by the consultant (Individual 
Consultant). Therefore, the Financial Manager will ensure that no payment to the 
consultant is prepared unless an approved report received from the specialist assures that 
this report is compliant with the contract terms and conditions, these documents should 
be passed through the procurement officer. 
All Supporting Documents and Internal Forms must be retained at the PCU Office and must be 
maintained and archived in accordance with the maintenance of records section of this manual.  
4.25  Processing of Payments for Office Supplies and Other Operating Costs  
The payment for office supplies and operating cost will be against the preparation by the procurement 
officer of a serially numbered checklist evidencing the receipt of office supplies, and the presentation 
of the Purchase order and supplier invoice. The Financial Manager will compare the information on the 
checklist to the purchase order and supplier invoice, then sign the checklist. The payment for services is 
against the presentation by the supplier performing the service of a service invoice.   
 At the end of each month, the Financial Manager will prepare a serially numbered "List of Payments" 
that detail all the incurred costs for office supplies and operating costs during the month and present it 
to the project director for review and authorization. After the project director's authorization of the 
payments, the Financial Manager will prepare the checks and send them to the project director who 
will prepare an "Internal Memorandum" detailing the check numbers, amounts, suppliers and 
explanation of payments. The "Internal Memorandum" and the checks will be presented to the 
Minister of Finance and his Advisor to approve the payments and sign the checks. The following chart 
64 
summarizes the Processing of Payments for Office Supplies and Other Operating Costs 
4.26  Financing of Matching Grants  
The financing of matching grants will follow the steps outlined below: 
i. 
Eligible beneficiaries/grantees are identified and selected according to the selection 
criteria outlined in the matching grants manual. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
The qualified applicant applies to the financial institution of his/her choice using the 
letter from PROSPER and a minimum 10% equity contribution to complement the loan 
application. 
If the financial institution approves the loan, the qualified applicant will open a current 
account at the financial institution and deposit his/her 10% equity contribution; 
The financial institution will conditionally disburse at least 50% of the loan amount to the 
qualified applicant’s current account (this cannot be withdrawn prior to the following 
three steps); 
The financial institution (RCB/PFI) will contact the PROSPER Rural Finance Officer and 
forwards documentary evidence of the approved loan, and the balance held in the 
qualified applicant’s current account and requesting PROSPER to provide the matching 
grant up to max 40% of the total financing. The banking details must be duly disclosed in 
the request. The documentation package should contain the following documents: 
a.  Matching grant request form from the RCB/PFI 
b.  Copy of the sample matching grant application form by the client 
c.  Copy of the matching grant fund offer letter provided by PROSPER 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
The Rural Finance Officer reviews the request, and if found in order and provides a 
technical clearance after which the documentation package is forwarded to the Financial 
Manager who reviews the accuracy and completeness of the documentation, and 
confirms the availability of funds etc. and if found in order forwards it to the Project 
coordinator for approval; 
The Project Coordinator instructs the Financial Manager to transfer the authorized MG 
to the qualified applicant’s current account; and 
The financial institution disburses the loan by purchasing the appropriate asset and 
causing the asset to be made available to the qualified applicant. 
65 
4.27  PAYROLL EXPENDITURE 
Overview 
To achieve successful implementation of project activities it may be required to engage personnel for 
the duration of the programme, or be required to pay allowances or supplements for additional 
project work undertaken by existing government employees. It may also be necessary to pay 
performance allowances to government employees engaged in project activities, based on 
performance standards and targets. As there are payroll expenditures for the Project, the PCU must 
establish a proper payroll expenditure sub-system to effectively manage and control such payments. 
The system should provide for regular calculation and payment of the payroll expenses to project 
personnel, as well as providing complete and accurate records in support of the payments and their 
disbursements, and posting to the accounting ledgers of the project. 
The PCU Responsibilities 
The PCU shall be responsible for ensuring that: 
  The engagement of employees should be merit based, be properly approved in accordance 
with the Project Design Report, terms and conditions, or other relevant instructions or 
approvals, and that 
  There must be proper contract documentation supporting the engagement of project staff. 
  Salaries and allowances are based on the term of the employment contract with the 
employee in the Project 
  Salaries, and/or allowances, are paid from the appropriate funding source. 
  Proper records of attendance, leave, overtime, and performance (for performance related 
allowances), are maintained. 
  Payroll information and authorities are submitted in a timely manner. 
  Payroll payments are checked and certified for payment, by the FM/SPA before payment 
mandate is prepared. 
  Distribution of pay-slips/payment advices to the project staff, are controlled. The employee 
must be required to sign for the receipt of the salaries/allowances, where cash payments are 
made. 
  The cost of payroll expenditure compared to project budgets and annual budgets, is 
monitored in a timely manner. 
Key Internal Controls 
The key internal controls that must be included are: 
General controls 
  Adequate segregation of duties: 
- 
- 
- 
Approval of payroll authorities and payment transactions. 
Input/recording of payroll transactions to the payroll sub-system. 
Checking of completeness and accuracy of payroll transactions processed. 
  Adequate management information is produced and used to manage the payroll 
expenditures and entitlements of project personnel. 
Payroll processing controls 
  Approval of all payrolls is done by only by the PC. 
  Payroll transactions are prepared and processed only on the basis of approved amount 
stipulated in the contract of engagement. 
  Payroll transactions are processed completely, accurately, and only once. 
66 
  Prompt and timely processing and payment of payroll entitlements on a regular cycle of 
payment i.e. monthly. 
  Payroll transactions are posted accurately and in the proper accounting period. 
  Payroll payments are made to the correct person, or their authorized agent. 
  Prompt investigation of unclaimed pays or complaints. 
  Regular and timely review of payroll expenditures by PC. 
Computerized system controls 
  Systematic/periodic data used in the payroll sub-system is regularly reviewed and any 
changes are approved by an authorized officer. 
  Access to payroll processing functions and data is restricted to authorized personnel. 
Payroll Procedures 
  Each pay period: 
-  Calculate the pay of each eligible person from the details in the Payroll Register (for 
standard pays and allowances) 
-  With computerized accounting systems, enter the relevant pay data and run the payroll 
and the system will calculate the pays. 
  Timesheet/daily time record: 
-  A timesheet must be used as a reliable basis for the payroll computation, and must 
include a record of dates, times, absences, and leave forms, all of which are necessary 
information for payroll computation. 
  Employment contract: 
- 
This serves as a basis for determining the eligible members of the project. This contract is 
the basis for payments of services that have been rendered for the project. 
  Payroll calculation: 
-  Calculation of payroll entitlements must be prepared by a person not connected with the 
preparation of the payroll cheques or mandate schedule, or with the distribution of the 
pay entitlements.   
The calculation must be based on the provisions stipulated in the employment contract, 
or other approved instructions or guidelines. 
- 
  Payroll register (Annex 14) 
- 
- 
This shows details of the staff payroll computation.  
It must be prepared on monthly basis by the person as mentioned above for 
confidentiality purposes. The Register should show the following: 
o  Gross pay. 
o  Allowances. 
o  Tax deductions. 
o  Advances (if any). 
o  Other deductions. 
o  Net pay. 
  Pay slips: 
-  Pay slips are the acknowledgment of the pay received from the project.  
-  Pay slips must be given to each employee showing each pay period, salary rates, taxes, 
other deductions and net pay. 
  Payment procedures: 
-  After the Payroll Register has been approved by the PC, payment shall follow.  
- 
The e-payment process or cheques may be used for payment of salaries and advances to 
Project staff 
67 
4.28  Petty Cash Account 
In addition to the bank accounts outlined in the section above, the PCUs will operate a petty 
cash account maintained under the imprest system. Amount authorized for the PCU shall be 
the Ghana Cedi equivalent of USD500 or near equivalent. Hence for the first year, the amount 
shall be maintained at GHS3000. The Petty cash will be operated by the project accountant. 
Payments through petty cash will only be allowed for amounts up to GHS300 in a single 
transaction but no individual payment above GHS150. The float shall be kept in a safe locker or 
box which is kept in the PCU safe. Disbursements from the fund shall be through the Petty Cash 
Voucher (PCV) which shall be approved by the NPC and signed by the payee to acknowledge 
the amount received.  The official receipts or its equivalent shall be attached to the PCV. 
Use of Petty Cash 
The petty cash shall be used for the following purposes 
a.  Minor repairs, 
b.  Small and sundry office supplies,  
c.  Newspapers,  
d.  Taxi fares,  
e.  Sundry office expenses 
f.  Small communications and internet expenses 
Types of expenditure that the Petty Cash Advance must not be used for 
a.  Expenditures above threshold (GHS300) 
b.  Personal expenses 
Key Internal Controls   
The key internal controls that must be included are:   
a.  Standard approved form must be used for petty cash use and management.  
b. 
 Petty cash advances must be regularly reconciled with the Petty Cash Account and 
balanced regularly (at least monthly).  
c.  There must be segregation of duties between approval of petty cash payments, and 
the custodianship of petty cash advances. 
d.  Petty cash will only be reimbursed for expenses where receipts have been obtained, 
e. 
or other acceptable documentation is provided.  
Irregular spot cash counts of the Petty Cash Float using a standard cash count sheet 
must be carried out by the internal auditor and evidenced.  
f.  The cash and documentation must be maintained separately. 
g.  Petty Cash Advances must be liquidated within a specified period of time. This 
period of time should be set by the Financial Manager, in the instructions on the use 
of petty cash.   
h.  There must always be a set of written instructions developed for the operation of 
the petty cash system.  
Replenishment of the Petty Cash Fund 
a.  The cash float shall be replenished before the end of each month or as soon as 75% 
of the fund has been disbursed.   
b.  The request for the replenishment of the PCF shall be supported by the following:   
i.  Petty Cash Book containing details of the disbursement of the previous float  
ii.  Petty Cash Vouchers supported by receipts and other relevant supporting 
documents depending on the nature of the expenditure.   
iii.  Figure of the amount unspent at the time of request 
iv.  Amount of the request  
68 
Using Petty Cash   
a.  The Petty cash disbursements may be in the form of an advance or a 
reimbursement (when the staff member has personally advanced the funds). Such 
member must receive the approval of the PC before making such payment. In all 
cases, the requesting staff fills out a petty cash request form. The payee name, the 
description of the goods or services, the estimated (or actual) cost and the 
transaction coding are indicated on the form, which is forwarded to the Project 
Coordinator for approval and subsequently to Finance Officer through the Financial 
Manager/State Programme Accountant for payment and recording in the accounts. 
b.  For advances, the Finance Officer delivers petty cash advances on the basis of the 
approved request. After the purchase is made, the requestor must return the 
invoice/receipt along with the change, if any, to the PFO for recording into the 
Accounting system. 
c.  For reimbursements (i.e. when the goods or services have already been delivered), 
the invoice or receipt is attached to the petty cash request form before presenting 
to the PC for approval and the FO then reimburses the requesting staff member or 
directly pays the supplier. The form is signed by the individual who receives the 
money. 
d.  The petty cash transactions will be recorded in the accounting software petty cash 
journal as they happen as described in the accounting manual. At the end of each 
week, the Project Accountant will reconcile the petty cash journal with the physical 
cash count. In addition, a surprise cash count will be conducted by the Internal 
Auditor once a month. It will also be followed by a reconciliation of the petty cash 
balance per the cash journal with the actual cash held in the petty cash box.  
e.  When approved, the payment from the Petty Cash float may be made by the PFO, 
who must obtain the signature of the recipient on the PCV as evidence of them 
receiving the cash.   
f.  The PFO records the expenditure in the Petty Cash Book, and files the Payment 
Voucher. 
g.  Posting is made to the PCB from the Petty Cash Voucher as follows:   
Dr Expense (Recorded in the relevant column in the multi-column PCB)  
Cr Petty Cash      
Example   
Paid office supplies by cash GHS100. The entry is posted to the ledger accounts as 
follows:   
Dr Office supplies   100   
Cr Petty Cash         100    
h.  At regular intervals (daily or weekly), the Petty Cash Float must be reconciled, and 
the expenditure posted to the General Ledger:   
4.29  Bank reconciliation 
The FM is responsible for managing the Designated Accounts and the project accounts 
including receiving, on a monthly basis, the Designated Account Statement of Account from the 
bank(s) and reconciling it against PCU records. The designated account reconciliation must be 
performed immediately upon receipt of a bank statement of the Designated Accounts. 
69 
Disbursements from the DA should be recorded in the PCU account records as of the date they 
are made, that is when the cheques are issued. 
Bank account reconciliations are performed because: 
  Reconciliation decreases the possibility of misappropriation of funds and fraudulent 
financial reporting.  
  This control procedure ensures eliminating the possibility of non-disclosure of thefts by 
the staff working with the bank accounts through modification of the primary bank 
statement for the purpose of concealing suspicious transactions or discrepancies in the 
account balances. 
Before submission of bank statements to IFAD, they must be verified by the FM with a view to 
ensure validity of transaction with the project funds. 
The FM must perform monthly reconciliations between the designated account(s) balance 
recorded on bank statements and cash book balance, recorded on the system. Performance of 
the monthly reconciliation should follow the following steps: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Designate Account balance recorded on bank statement on reconciliation date is taken as 
starting figure; 
Add reimbursements/replenishments/other deposits that have been processed and are 
due to designated account, but not yet recorded on bank statements;  
Subtract undelivered cheques. Any long-outstanding cheques should be identified and 
investigated  
Following these adjustments, the bank statement and local finance system cash totals 
should agree. Any remaining difference should be reported and investigated; 
The completed bank reconciliation statement should be signed and dated by the FM; and 
The reconciliation should be reviewed and countersigned by independent finance team 
member who understands the reconciliation process, i.e. the Internal Auditor 
Other Project Banks 
Monthly reconciliations shall also be performed for all other bank accounts in operation  at the 
PCU  whether or not there were transaction(s) in the accounts in any month. 
4.30  ADVANCES TO IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS 
Implementing partners are responsible for the implementation of some of the activities of the 
project. These activities are detailed in approved AWPB. Based on the approved AWPB, the project 
signs a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the relevant implementing partner; The 
implementing partner will make a request for payment based on the terms of the MoU. Project 
Coordinator reviews the request with help of Financial Manager; The Project Coordinator approves 
the payment; and Financial Manager will release an advance to the implementing partners by writing 
a cheque in the name of the implementing partner. 
All implementing partners must maintain an account cashbook. The objectives of the Cashbook are: 
To provide precise information on how much money has been spent; What it has been spent on; and 
ow much is left. 
70 
RECEIPTS 
The responsible official of the implementing partner must keep receipts against all expenses in proper 
order.  Issuance of a receipt is the responsibility of the person who is receiving money from the 
project.  However, there are instances when an official receipt is not available. In such a case, the 
responsible official should prepare an unofficial receipt and obtain the person’s signature or thumb 
impression. Official receipts are provided by the person or vendor from their own receipt book after 
being paid for their services 
Unofficial receipts are acceptable only in the case when a person or vendor does not have his/her 
own receipt book. This is usually the case with laborers and small vendors.  The unofficial receipts 
should be on a blank piece of paper providing the information on the identity of the person/vendor 
receiving the money, the purpose of payment, location where the payment was made, date of 
payment, the amount of payment and the signature or thumb impression of the recipient. 
IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS FINANCIAL REPORTS 
Preparing expenditure reports is the responsibility of implementing partners. The implementing 
partner must ensure that the expenditure reports are prepared on a timely basis. 
An expenditure report format is suggested below. All receipts in original must be attached to the 
expenditure reports and sent to the accounts department. 
71 
SECTION 5: ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
72 
5  ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
5.1  Accounting system 
a.  The primary objective of PROSPER financial accounting system is to record in a systematic and 
controlled manner, the financial transactions and events of the project, and to report 
financial information for monitoring and controlling project funds and project 
implementation. 
b.  The financial accounting system is made up of the General Ledger and sub-systems, accounts 
and records for processing, recording and reporting assets and liabilities, revenue, and 
expenditure of the project.    
c.  The success of the project to a great extent depends on its financial discipline and its 
accountability for the funds provided. Therefore, accounting plays crucial role in directing and 
guiding the project to its goals and objectives. A sound accounting system reflects the 
variations from planned goals and alarms the organization of any major changes or adverse 
situations so that corrective action is taken.   
The majority of project activities result in the receipt, commitment or expenditure of funds. The 
accounting system records, processes and organizes this data in order to produce useful financial 
information in form of AWPB, Financial Reports, Withdrawal Applications, Financial Statements etc. 
needed by the Project Financiers (IFAD, Government, Beneficiaries) as well as the PCU management. 
The accounting system should reflect the project’s needs and be designed to provide the financial 
information required by all interested parties (PCU, MoFA, MoF and IFAD). It should also fulfil all the 
legal and regulatory requirements of the Government. The accounting system is a critical part of the 
project’s financial management system and its design. 
The Project will record all its transactions in the GIFMIS Accounting software. The GIFMIS Secretariat 
shall support the project  to customize accounting software to meet the reporting needs of the 
project as necessary. In this regard, the structure of the Chart of Accounts should conform closely to 
the project cost tables (as presented in the project design report and section 1 of this manual) to 
enable comparison of actual project costs during implementation with those estimated during the 
project preparation.  
5.2 
FM Staff Responsibility for the Accounting System 
The Financial Manager is responsible for the following key areas related to the accounting system of 
the project:  
  Designing the accounting system of the project   
  Selection and maintenance of an accounting software.  
  Development of an accounting manual 
Specifically, the FM staff shall: 
a.  Act with honesty and integrity, avoiding actual or apparent conflicts of interest in personal and 
professional relationships. 
b.  Provide IFAD and Government with information that is accurate, complete, objective, relevant, 
timely, and understandable 
73 
c.  Comply with rules and regulations of federal, state, local governments, and IFAD. 
d.  Act in good faith; responsibly; and with due care, competence, and diligence, without 
misrepresenting material facts or allowing one's independent judgment to be subordinated. 
e.  Respect the confidentiality of information acquired in the course of one's work except when 
authorized or otherwise legally obligated to disclose. Confidential information acquired in the 
course of one's work will not be used for personal advantage. 
f.  Share knowledge and maintain skills important and relevant to projects' needs. 
5.3  The Accounting Policies 
The Project Accounting Systems shall be based on a rational combination of Accounting Policies and 
Practices best suited to report the financial affairs of the project. The policies and practices are 
generally in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles namely: 
a.  Going Concern - Project operations will be sustained into the foreseeable future and that there 
will be no significant liquidation of its assets due to a reduction in the scale of operations or 
credit closure/ cancellation.  
b.  Consistency - Accounting policies set forth below will be applied consistently from one 
accounting period to another, and within accounting period, except when there is a special 
reason to depart from such policies. However, such reason(s) will be fully disclosed in the 
Project’s Financial Statements.  
c.  Prudence - Adequate restraint will be exercised in the determination of income to be included 
in the Income and Expenditure Account and that all known costs and liabilities are charged in 
relevant period accounts with due regard to the accounting basis. 
5.4  Basis of Accounting 
The cash basis shall be adopted in the preparation of Project’s Financial Statements. 
Cash accounting method is mostly acceptable as the basic accounting methodology for the project: 
the income/expenditure is identified upon receipt/disbursement of cash, no matter when the goods 
or services have been received. In accordance with IFAD requirements in respect of its projects, the 
project will use the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) – Cash Basis.  
When using the cash accounting basis, the project accounting should be consistent with the following 
principles: 
  The income/expenditure is identified upon receipt/disbursement of cash, no matter when the 
 
goods or services have been received. 
Liabilities are not considered until payment; therefore, liability accounts are not used 
normally. However, advances to individuals or implementing partners cannot be considered 
as expenditures before these have been properly justified. It is also best practice to disclose 
liabilities /receivables separately in the notes of the financial reports. 
Adjustment of expenditures over the accounting period may be required for the purposes of auditing 
and reporting. If so, expenses that are actually incurred yet unpaid are adjusted and taken into 
account in the current accounting period. This also applies to the expenditures that have been 
incurred during in the past, yet paid during the current period 
74 
5.5 
Fixed Assets and Depreciation 
i.  Fixed Assets are those intended for use over a period exceeding one accounting year and whose 
value per unit is not below USD500 (GHS3,000). 
ii.  Items with respective unit costs below USD500 (GHS 3.000) are classified as “Special Project 
Assets” and included in a Special Project Assets Register. 
iii.  In applying the capitalization policy, all related (landed) costs and installation costs are included in 
the acquisition cost of the fixed asset item. 
iv.  Capital expenditure on contract works will be included on the basis of valuation certificates 
including retention.     
v.  No Depreciation is charged on the project’s fixed assets as there are no revenues to be matched 
against such charges and because the cash basis of accounting is in effect.   
5.6 
Foreign Currency 
Income and Expenditure items in foreign currencies are converted to Ghana Cedis at the rates ruling 
at the transaction dates. Assets and Liabilities expressed in foreign currencies are converted to Naira 
at the rates ruling at the balance sheet date and gains or losses on such conversions are credited or 
charged to Reserve in the period which they arise. 
5.7  Tracking and Recording of In-kind Contributions and tax exemption 
In order to comprehensively monitor the financial performance and the contributions made by all 
stakeholders of the project, it is important that the PCU is able to estimate the value and record the 
following:  
 
the in-kind contributions made by the different financiers, usually beneficiaries and the 
government; and, 
 
the tax exemptions provided by the government.  
Moreover, to ensure reliable measurement, accurate records of in-kind contributions must be 
retained (e.g., calculation of tax exemptions, total hours of labour contributed by communities, value 
of goods contributed by communities, government tax exemptions etc.) and duly filed just like other 
financial records. How to calculate the value of the in-kind contribution and the necessary supporting 
documentation to be retained for different cases is outlined in the table below:  
Type of in-kind 
Contribution and 
unit of measurement 
Labour = total 
hours of labour 
contributed by 
communities. 
Goods = value of 
goods/land 
contributed by 
communities. 
How to calculate it 
Supporting documentation to be retained  
Value =total hours 
worked X applicable 
wage rate (in most 
cases the applicable 
minimum wage rate 
for uneducated labour 
in the country) 
Value = number of 
goods/lands 
contributed X their 
estimated value.  
Time sheet by the community group 
outlining the persons, and the hours they 
contributed during a specified time 
period. The time sheet should be duly 
signed by the community representative 
and Project technical/M&E staff   
Sheet by the community group outlining 
the number and type of goods or area of 
land, contributed during a specified time 
period. The sheet should be duly signed 
by the community representative and 
Project technical/M&E staff   
75 
Government 
pro-rata shares 
of staff salaries.  
Government 
pro-rata shares 
of utilities. 
Value = government 
monthly salary X % of 
time worked for the 
project. 
Value= monthly salary 
x the % covered by the 
government 
Value= 
monthly/annual value 
of utilities X the % 
covered by the 
government 
The calculation of tax and duties exemptions should be done using the prevailing tax or duties rates as 
outlined in the table below. The tax/duties exemptions should be supported by adequate 
documentation.    
Category 
Tax/duties rate  
Goods 
Works 
Services 
Value added Tax rate YY%, 
Import duties XX% 
Value Added Tax rate YY%, 
Import duties XX% 
Value Added Tax rate YY%, 
Import duties XX% 
Example how to calculate 
the VAT exemption on an 
item that cost USD 1 000 
net of tax. 
0.75*1000=75 
0.75*1000=75 
0.75*1000=75 
The tax-exemptions should be duly recorded in the accounting software if possible. If the accounting 
software is not able to accommodate this, then separate excel spreadsheets should be maintained in 
such a format that they can be easily harmonized with the other financial reports as necessary.  
When recording the in-kind contributions, it is important that the in-kind contributions are classified 
according to the same principles as regular project expenditures; that is, every contribution must be 
by linked to an activity/component, by category and by financing source (government and/or 
beneficiaries) to ensure that consolidated financial reports can be produced without any extra effort.    
All data (including excel spreadsheets) with regards to in-kind contribution should be backed up 
regularly.   
In-kind contributions should be disclosed in the notes of the financial statements in the agreed 
format. The notes of the financial statements should also briefly explain the methodology of how it 
was calculated. On the other hand, when in-kind contributions cannot be reliably measured, for 
example the use of office space, then these should also be discussed in the notes to the Project 
financial statements. 
The finance team will be guided by the IFAD In-kind Domestic Financing Technical Note to identify, 
acknowledge and quantify GoG in-kind contributions that shall include the provision of office space, 
the provision of audit services, the staff time of MOFA Directorates that shall implement PROSPER 
activities in the fields. Beneficiary in-kind contribution shall also be identified, acknowledged and 
quantified with guidance from the IFAD Technical Note. The referenced IFAD document is available at: 
https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/125/docs/EB-2018-125-R-7-Rev-1-Add-6.pdf 
76 
5.8 
Income from project activities 
During the project life, PROSPER may receive funds from different activities including but not limited 
to: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
sale of bids (Construction, vehicles and equipment etc) 
Sale of an asset (old vehicles etc)  
receipt of funds from farmers as part of the recovery of purchased and delivered inputs and 
equipment/machinery from farmers (crops, equipment etc). 
iv)  Other reflows from project activities 
All income from the activities listed above must be deposited in the counterpart account. All income 
will need to supported by adequate financial documentation and registered in the accounting 
software by the Project Accountant under "other income" and disclosed in the financial reports.  
The notes of the financial statements will include a breakdown of all the income received from sale of 
bids, recovery of funds from beneficiaries, etc. and an account reconciliation. All income will be 
audited as part of the annual audit exercise, like with the rest of the project funds.  
5.9 
Year-end accounting activities.  
By the end of January, the Financial Manager will ensure that the following checks and activities are 
performed to ensure the accuracy of the project financial statements: 
  Ensure all project expenditures, including IFAD, GCF, GoG, beneficiary and other co-financiers 
expenditures have been properly captured and included. In-kind contributions may be tracked 
outside the accounting software. 
  Conduct a reconciliation of Withdrawal applications submitted to IFAD and the amounts paid 
by IFAD. This can be done with the help of the Historic transaction reports which can be 
accessed through the IFAD Client Portal or by asking IFAD to submit it. 
  Conduct a verification of financial reports from districts and Implementing Partners and 
analysis of outstanding advances. Are there any outstanding advances? Follow-up as 
necessary.  
  Conduct a verification of completeness of transactions recorded in the accounts.  
  Conduct a Bank reconciliations for all accounts including designated accounts, programme 
accounts, and petty cash reconciliations. Remember to list and analyse the reconciliation items 
(if any). 
  Analysis of account balances in the General Ledger and verification of Trial Balance. 
Remember, for any time period the total debit entries should equal the total credit entries in 
the Trial Balance. A Trial Balance can be performed at intermediate stages to ensure errors are 
spotted as early as possible. 
  Conduct corrections and adjustment of entries (omissions, coding errors, double-counting, 
etc.) 
  Conduct an analysis of the execution of the approved/re financial execution (budget-to-actual 
by activity). Remember to briefly explain any significant variations in the notes of the financial 
report. 
  Reconciliation of IFAD statements with project accounts 
  Conduct an inventory of assets, supplies and materials. All missing assets should be reported 
to the police and properly investigated and reported separately in the inventory report and in 
the notes of the financial statements.   
77 
5.10  Key accounting control objectives and respective controls  
a.  The following key control objectives and their respective controls are essential to the system of 
accounting operated at the field office where the project will be implemented.  
i. 
Accuracy:  the information in the accounts and the supporting subsidiary records shall be 
accurate, representing the actual substance of past events, without undue errors or 
omission. This shall include correct and consistent classification of transactions and the 
recognition of revenues and expenditures in the correct time period.  This objective shall be 
addressed by:  
  budgetary control procedures  
  a proper approval, certification and authorisation process for payments  
 
review and authorisation of payroll schedules by a delegated authority  
 
reconciliation of cheque/transfer advice to claim prior to signing by authorised 
signatory  
control over maintenance of permanent accounting records 
  a regular, complete and up-to-date bank reconciliation  
  procedures and control for recording inter-entity transactions  
  maintenance of fixed assets registers  
 
  procedures and control for making adjustments to accounting records  
 
  detailed Chart of Accounts for classifying transactions 
  a regular post-audit process, both internal and external  
reconciliation of the general ledger to sub-ledgers, registers and source documents  
ii. 
Completeness: The information in the accounts and the supporting subsidiary records shall 
be a complete representation of all past transactions that have occurred during the reporting 
period.  This objective shall be addressed by:  
  budgetary control procedures  
 
 
recognition of significant commitments, using a commitment register  
regular checks for transactions not brought to account, using an outstanding claims 
register  
issue and review of sequentially numbered receipts for all revenue 
regular, complete and up-to-date bank reconciliation 
 
 
  physical assets shall be recorded in a register disclosed in a memorandum account  
 
 
  a regular post-audit process, both internal and external  
  a systematic and verifiable consolidation of accounts from subsidiary ledgers, registers 
regular and systematic, review and clearance of suspense accounts  
reconciliation of general ledger to sub-ledgers, registers and source documents  
and source transactions.  
iii. 
Existence/Validity: All transactions accounted for must be genuine transactions. This 
objective shall be addressed by:  
claims shall be stamped as paid on authorisation for payment 
  a proper approval, certification and authorisation process for payments  
 
  audit trail from the payment to the source documents supporting the claim 
 
review and authorisation of payroll schedules by a delegated authority  
 
reconciliation of cheque/transfer advice to claim prior to signing by the delegated 
authority 
78 
  no duplicate receipts provided 
 
  maintenance of physical asset register, including procedure for disposal and existence 
regular, complete and up-to-date bank reconciliation 
checks of assets 
  a regular post-audit process, both internal and external.  
iv. 
Economy:  The accounting system shall include controls to ensure the prudent allocation of 
project resources.  This objective shall be addressed by:  
  expenditure approval, certification and authorisation procedures  
  a competitive procurement process 
 
central procurement facilities 
  asset management policies and procedures.  
v. 
Effectiveness: The accounting system shall include controls to ensure the effective 
performance of project responsibilities.  This objective shall be addressed by: 
clearly defined responsibilities, scheme of delegation and reporting lines  
comprehensive procedure notes 
 
 
  human resources program including recruitment, training and appraisal.  
vi. 
Efficiency: In practice there will often be a trade-off between economy and effectiveness.  
The accounting system should seek to operate as efficiently as possible by optimising the 
relationship between these two variables.  This objective shall be addressed by:  
issue of payment through direct bank transfer 
  post-audit (certification) of payments. 
 
  use of imprest system for small payments 
  hierarchical organisational structure in which there is a clear scheme of authority 
delegation to perform the tasks 
  production of monthly semi-annual and annual financial reports 
 
 
limited duplication of roles 
consolidation of accounts.  
vii.  Minimise risk of fraud and corruption: The accounting system shall include controls to 
minimise the risk of fraud and corruption.  This objective shall be addressed by:  
 
segregation of duties, so that certain accounting functions should be performed by 
different officers, including: - accounts and audit - recording of receipts and collection of 
money approval/authorisation and issue of payment, recording of expenditures and 
issue of payment  
  budgetary control procedures 
  post-audit of claims for payment  
  maintenance of an authorised signatories list by the bank 
 
requirement of a double signatory for issue of payment 
 
issue of payment through direct bank transfer and cheques 
  maintenance of a physical assets registers 
 
  procedures and control for making adjustments to accounting records 
 
 
control over maintenance of permanent accounting records 
reconciliation of the general ledger to sub-ledgers, registers and source documents 
clearly defined responsibilities, scheme of delegation and reporting lines 
79 
  a regular post-audit process, both internal and external 
5.11  Key reporting control objectives and respective controls  
i. 
Sufficient:  the accounting system must produce sufficient information for the adequate control 
of the project’s finances.  This objective shall be addressed by:  
  preparation of monthly, semi-annual and annual accounts 
  availability of an audit trail through sub-ledgers, registers and source documents to 
substantiate the financial reports 
  preparation of additional operational information by PCU/PSIUs as required  
  on-going review of information requirement by users.  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Relevance: The accounting system must produce financial information which is relevant and 
understandable to the users of the information.  The financial reporting from the accounting 
system must be based on the accountabilities required of users, and their decision-making 
requirements.  This objective shall be addressed by on-going review of information 
requirement by users.  
Reliable: The accounting system shall produce reliable financial information.  This objective shall 
be addressed by the controls over completeness, accuracy and validity.  
Consistency: The accounting system must enable consistent information to be produced in 
financial reports, in order to be useful for decision making.  This objective shall be met by:  
  a consistent reporting period and unit of currency 
 
 
  Accounting policies consistently applied by all project parties. 
consistent accounting basis and policies 
consistent reporting formats and disclosures 
5.12  Method of Accounting:   
a.  The PCU and each PSIU would adopt Double Entry System of book keeping on Cash basis. 
b.  All payments will be charged off to relevant project activity account head at the time of making 
the payments, except advance payment. 
c.  Advance payments will be charged off to the relevant project activity account head on 
retirement   
d.  Assets created out of project will be accounted at cost.   
e.  No depreciation will be provided on Fixed Assets acquired under the project. 
f.  Materials purchased for project activities will be charged off to the relevant project expenditure 
head (Category/Component) at the time of purchase itself.   
g.  Release of funds to States will be accounted for as advance in the books of accounts of the PCU 
and treated as expenditure only upon submission of expenditure information.     
h.  Release of funds to staff/ suppliers will be accounted for as advance in the books of accounts and 
treated as expenditure only upon submission of expenditure information.   
5.13  Project Accounting & Standard Books of accounts to be maintained:   
a.  Cash Book: 
b.  Petty Cash Book:    
c. 
d.  General Ledger:   
e.  Stock Register:   
Journal Book and Journal Voucher:   
80 
f.  Fixed Asset Register:   
g.  Advances Register:   
h.  Register of Contracts:   
5.14  Accounting Entries for the Project:   
a.  Expenditure under the project   
b.  Advances for goods    
c.  Advances for services   
d.  Advances for works    
e.  Advances to staff   
f.  Adjustment of advances for goods / services / staff   
g.  Regular payment of work / adjustment of advances   
h.  Regarding interest income   
i.  Regarding Stale cheques 
5.15  Accounting Entries Only for PCU:   
a.  Receipt of Loan from IFAD/Initial Advance/Replenishment/Repayment   
Debit:  Designated Account   
Credit: IFAD Loan Account 
b.  Release of funds to DADUs (The PCU will open a ledger account for each DADU tagged advance 
to DADUs)   
Debit: [Advances to Respective DADU] A/C, 
Credit: DA for transfer to DADU and debit DD Account and later credit the DD when the transfer 
to DADU is made   
Explanation: These entries are to be passed whenever PCU releases funds to the DADUs.   
c.  On receipt of SOE from the DADUs: 
Debit: the respective expenditure heads and 
Credit: advances to the DADUs account 
5.16  Accounting Entries Only for PSIU:   
a.  Regarding receipt of funds from PCU 
Debit: DD Account by each DADU 
Credit: Advances received from PCU   
b.  Regarding state expenditures and funds transfers to service providers 
Debit: Respective expenditure heads 
Credit: DD Account 
c.  When SOEs are prepared and sent to the PCU 
Debit: Advances from PCU 
Credit: IFAD Loan Account  
5.17  Chart of Accounts   
The Chart of Accounts is a listing of General Ledger accounts.   
The Chart of Accounts for PROSPER will provide the structure for recording and controlling budget 
and accounting data, and for summarising the data for monitoring and reporting.  The coding for 
accounts should ensure proper recognition of revenue and expenditure, as well as assets and 
liabilities of the project.    
In constructing the Chart of Accounts, the following basic principles will be observed:   
a.  Accounts will be arranged and designated to give maximum information without the need for 
supplementary analysis. 
b.  The account code structure will be designed to support accuracy in the coding of financial 
81 
transactions. 
c.  Account titles will reflect, as far as possible, both the purpose and nature of the revenue or 
expenditure. 
d.  Account codes should be structured to enable identification and reporting of financial 
information for financial management of project activities (components and categories), and to 
facilitate monitoring of the quality and reliability of the financial information.    
The Chart of Accounts for the project will be structured to enable the following characteristics of 
transactions to be identified and reported:   
i.  Nature of transaction – Asset, Liability, Revenue or Expense (including sub – category)  
ii.  Source of Funds – IFAD, GCF, GoG, others 
iii.  Disbursement Category 
iv.  Project Component and Sub-Component 
v.  Expenditure location – National, Regional, District,  Communities/Farmer Organization.   
The Chart of Accounts structure will be documented, and guidelines on the use of the account codes 
will be provided to all relevant staff of the project.   
The Chart of Accounts will be reviewed regularly, to ensure that it adequately supports the financial 
management and internal control requirements of the project.  A review of the Chart of Accounts will 
be undertaken prior to the start of each financial year, based on the annual work plans and annual 
budgets of the project.   
Modifications to the Chart of Accounts must be controlled, with the Financial Manager being 
responsible for the project’s finances and approving any required modifications.  
Budgeting and budgetary control: The project budget will be recorded in the budget module of the 
accounting software, i.e. GIFMIS.  
The accounting software would be  maintained by the service provider in collaboration with the 
GIFMIS Secretariat. The Financial Manager/GIFMIS Secretariat is responsible for the following key 
areas related to the accounting system of the project: 
  Designing the accounting system of the project  
  Maintenance of the accounting software. 
  Development of an accounting manual 
5.18  Designing the project accounting system. 
When designing the accounting system of the project the Financial Manager must undertake the 
following steps: 
Step one: Identify the different kind of reports the system is expected to generate, based on the 
different stakeholders’ requirements. - What information and in what format that needs to be 
produced by the PCU? As a minimum requirement the Accounting system will need to produce the 
following reports:  
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category and by financier),  
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component),  
  Statement of comparative budget and actual amount by component,  
82 
  Statement of Special Account movements,  
  Statement of Special Account Reconciliations,  
  SOE - Withdrawal Application Statement. 
Step two: List the transactions and activities, which the system must account for. As a minimum 
requirement the accounting system must include: 
a)  Purchase orders, receipts, cheque books and other similar documents evidencing receipt, 
commitment or expenditure of funds. 
b)  A journal for primary entry of all transactions, including adjustments, destined to be posted to 
the ledger. 
c)  A petty cash book (PCB) for small cash expenditures below a certain low threshold. The credit 
side of the PCB should be analyzed into columns, one for each project component, The totals to 
be posted to ledger accounts monthly. 
d)  A bank cash book (one for each source of financing). The credit side should also be analyzed into 
columns, one for each project component (like PCB). Total of these columns should be posted to 
their respective ledger accounts monthly. 
A ledger containing separate ledger accounts for each project component. The debit side of each 
ledger account should be analyzed into the expenditure categories defined in the IFAD Financing 
Agreement (Civil Works, Equipment, Goods and vehicles, Technical Assistance and Studies, 
Training and Workshops, PCU Management cost). The ledger accounts should be closed and trial 
balance prepared at the end of each month. 
e)  Fixed asset registers to record location, price and date of acquisition (or completion) of all 
buildings, vehicles, computers, printers, major equipment and furniture. There register should 
have a separate section for each type of fixed asset. 
Step Three: Design the specific accounting books, including a chart of accounts and records to be 
maintained, the transactions to be recorded therein and the precise accounting entries on the 
occasion of each transaction. 
Step Four: Incorporate the systemic accounting issues as agreed with IFAD and the government 
including the used accounting standards and valuation criteria. -  In accordance with the project 
design document, all project accounts will be kept on a double entry system and the used accounting 
standards will be IPSAS Cash. 
Step Five: Resolve accounting issues (if any) rising from the fact that the project is being implemented 
and expenditures are being incurred in different locations. The DADUs and PFIs  are to provide 
monthly reports to FM of the PCU electronically by using the internet connection. 
Step Six: Determine a tentative list of users and user rights for each staff member in line with their 
terms of reference in order to maintain a proper level of security.  
Step Seven: In the light of steps 1-5 decide, the Financial Manager needs to work with the GIFMIS 
Secretariat and CAGD to customize the the  software to satisfy the needs of the Programme. The 
Financial Manager needs to have an answer to steps from 1 to 5 before approaching the GIFMIS 
Secretariat and CAGD. It is important to be aware that most software do not automatically provide 
the required reports but have to be customized. As a result, it is important to inform the Secretariat  
about the requirements and reports and formats. The GIFMIS Secretariat shall conduct a sensitization 
and  training in the package (including how to modify the reports). 
83 
Step Eight: Incorporate all decisions of the previous seven steps in an accounting manual. This manual 
will need to be reviewed and updated once every 2 years. 
5.19  The Selection of an Accounting Software 
The accounting software of the Programme is an important tool for collecting, analysing, storing, and 
disseminating information that is vital for decision making. In addition, it enhances transparency and 
accountability of the project activities, provides timely reports, helps detecting errors and shortfalls 
during project implementation and indicates necessary corrections. 
When choosing the accounting software, the Financial Manager should ensure that the software is 
able to meet the following criteria:  
  Reflect project needs and be designed to provide the minimum financial information required by 
all interested parties (PCU/PSIUs, MoFA, IFAD, GCF, GoG)  including the provision of accurate, 
timely, complete, reliable and consistent information and reports as well as fulfil the legal and 
regulatory requirements of MoF. 
  The accounting software should be configured as a modular solution and the different modules 
should be suitably integrated. The software should contain the following modules: i) general 
ledger module, ii) accounting module incl. petty cash, iii) budget module, iv) fixed asset module, 
v) withdrawal application module vi) contract management and procurement management 
module. - The integration of budgeting module accounting module/system is important to 
enable comparison of the actual performance with budgets/targets (quarterly, annual, and 
cumulative for the Project).  
  Use the double-entry system of transactions. 
  Allow for multi-period and multi-user processing and reports; 
  Able to output financial reports in a variety of formats including hard copy printouts, as an excel 
spread sheet and as an HTML file; 
  Provide adequate documentation and complete audit trail to facilitate audit. 
  Have security settings and different access levels for different users 
  Be user friendly. Technical support, training and installation & configuration should be offered by 
the supplier and be easily accessible during project implementation.    
  For procurement needs, the accounting software should capture and report on the following: 
Prior review thresholds; Procurement methods; Procurement reference; Activity description; 
Component (as per the description schedule of the Loan); Category (as per disbursement 
schedule); Estimated amount; Procurement method used; Prior/Post review; Date of issuance of 
advertisement; Fund No objection on bidding documents (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants); 
Date of bid (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants) submission; Bid opening date (goods/works) or 
Financial Proposal opening date(consultants); Fund No objection to evaluation report;  Fund NO 
to contract draft; Date of submission to the Fund of the Copy of signed contract; Contract related 
data (date of signature, date of completion, contract amount, contract amendments and 
payments terms). 
In the installation phase of the accounting system, Financial Manager will need to determine the 
following: 
  access level and different user rights e.g.  (i) active use for inputting/editing of data for 
different modules; (ii) read-only use; or (iii) no-access. 
84 
 
Information storage and back-up 
  Design of the chart of accounts and the detailed list ledger accounts required to account for 
transactions under the project. 
  Design the detailed formats of various accounting books, records, and statements (e.g., cash 
and bank books, journals, various ledgers, trial balance, voucher formats, etc.). 
5.20  Legal basis:  
Accounting methodology for the PROSPER has been elaborated in accordance with the IFAD 
requirements for non-revenue earning projects and the existing legislation of the Government of 
Ghana. As both IFAD and GoG requirements are the same – IPSAS Cash, the accounting system is 
characterized by many features indispensable to meet these requirements.  
Accounting methodology is a system of special principles, methods, rules and practical procedures 
that have been elaborated in accordance with the IFAD accounting, reporting and auditing 
procedures.  
Main objective of the Project’s accounting policy is the development of an information system 
capable of generating timely financial information that would be useful for the evaluation of the 
project performance and efficiency of using the loan and co-finance.  
5.21  Used accounting standards:  
Cash accounting method is mostly acceptable as the basic accounting methodology for the project: 
the income/expenditure is identified upon receipt/disbursement of cash, no matter when the goods 
or services have been received. However, unlike the method of accruals, the cash flow accounting 
method does not give an insight of the income, expenditures, assets and liabilities of an entity. In 
accordance with the IFAD requirements in respect of its project, PROSPER will use the International 
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPAS) – Cash Basis.  
When using the cash accounting basis, the project accounting should be consistent with the following 
principles: 
o  Expenditures are only considered upon payment; and 
o  Liabilities are not considered until payment; therefore, liability accounts are not used normally. 
Adjustment of expenditures over the accounting period may be required for the purposes of auditing 
and reporting. If so, expenses that are actually incurred yet unpaid are adjusted and taken into 
account in the current accounting period. This also applies to the expenditures that have been 
incurred during in the past, yet paid during the current period 
5.22  Chart of Accounts  
The Chart of Accounts is used to: (i) capture the financial data under the appropriate headings and (ii) 
classify and group financial data for the various financial reports. The structure of the Chart of 
Accounts caters data to be captured by: (i) the Project components, sub-components activities (ii) 
expenditure items under each component and sub-component, (iii) The IFAD expenditures categories 
for the Project, and (iv) sources of funding.  
Expenditure categories may also be recorded by using “cost centre” functionality which is commonly 
available in accounting software’s. 
The structure of the Chart of Accounts should conform closely to the project cost tables (as presented 
85 
in the project design report) to enable comparison of actual project costs during implementation with 
those estimated during the project preparation.  
5.23  Budgeting and budgetary control 
The project budget will be recorded in the budget module of the accounting software. Budgeting is 
discussed more in detail in section 2 of this manual. 
5.24  Multi-component accounting 
The integrated project accounting and financial management system will be centralized in the PCU. 
This system will be a combination of all of the components. The PCU will be responsible for the overall 
consolidated (across the entire project) reporting and accounting, as well as the operation of the 
Special Account. For the purpose of consolidation, the PCU disbursement accounts will have several 
levels of sub-accounts, so that the multi-component nature of the project is reflected. 
5.25  Recording and processing of transactions 
Whenever a transaction takes place under the Project, it should be recorded and processed using the 
accounting software that meets the project’s specific accounting requirements. Processing of 
payments is discussed in detail in section 8 of this manual. 
The recording of transactions under the Project follows the Cash basis of accounting with allows for 
the recognition of cash inflows in the period they are received and the reporting of expenses in the 
period those expenditures are paid.  
Individual records of transactions are treated as source documents. For the project accounting 
purposes, the following source documents are considered:  
  Purchase orders/ Contracts 
  Purchase invoices 
  Service invoices 
  Consultants/engineers’ reports 
All transactions should be registered in the accounting software in accordance with the date of 
occurrence and under the form of journals. The journal should contain sufficient and detailed 
information about the date of the transaction, its type, amount and reference to the source 
document. All the transactions should be entered on the accounting software using the principle of 
double entry, which means that each transaction should be recorded twice, once on the debit side of 
the transaction and once on the credit side of the transaction. The accounting software will 
automatically process those transactions and post them to the ledger accounts, which are accounts 
where all transactions of similar type are recorded. This processing of transactions also allows for the 
production of timely reports.  
The project accountant should reconcile the project accounts on a monthly basis. In case certain 
adjustments of entries in the accounting process have to be made, the accountant should produce a 
memorandum in which the reasons and the way in which the adjustment has been made is explained. 
The memorandum will be authorized by the National Programme Coordinator after being cleared by 
the Financial Manager. 
86 
5.26  Petty cash management. 
The accountant will manage and periodically reconcile the petty cash account. The petty cash account 
is discussed more in detail in the section 5.9 of this manual. 
5.27  Bank account reconciliations 
The accountant will need to perform monthly bank account reconciliations between the different 
accounts. The reconciliation is discussed more in detail in section 5.10 of this manual. 
5.28  Withdrawal of funds 
The Financial Manager will be responsible for preparing withdrawal applications to be submitted to 
IFAD for eligible expenditures at both the PCU, DADUs and Implementing Partners. The necessary 
procedures are explained in section 7 of this manual and in the IFAD disbursement Handbook.  
5.29  Financial reporting 
The accountant is not only in charge for recording the financial transactions on a daily basis but also 
for summing up the expenditures made under each component and sub-component and for each 
activity under those and posting the data on accounting/financial reports on a periodic basis during 
the reporting periods specified in the Letter to the Borrower and in the Financing Agreement. The 
accountant will also need to keep track and report on the availability of project funds in the different 
accounts (Designated accounts, project accounts and petty cash) as well as the commitments made 
by the PCU. The produced reports will be approved by the Project Coordinator after being cleared by 
the FM. The different financial reports are discussed more in detail in section 9 of this manual. 
5.30  Multi-currency accounting  
The Project will record dual-currency financial transactions, primarily, with two currencies –Ghana 
Cedis and US dollars. Subsidiary SDR denominated records will be maintained only for reconciliation 
and monitoring of exchange movements between the SDR and USD. The SDR shall be used by IFAD if 
the loan is contracted in SDR. The GCF Loan and Grant are likely to be denominated in US Dollars. Rule 
of thumb – Monitor exchange movements based on the currency used for the loan or grant in the 
Financing Agreement.  
The computerized accounting system should have multi-currency features for operating in a multi-
currency environment.  The Central Bank of Nigeria conversion rate as of the date of transaction 
should be used in recording all accounting transactions. 
All payments to the local contractors, suppliers and consultants, including those from the IFAD loan 
and other financing sources, are to be made in the national currency (Ghana Cedis) only as per Bank 
of Ghana regulation. All international payments from any financing source are to be made in the US 
dollars.  
5.31  Reporting requirements 
Financial and accounting reports to be submitted to the IFAD shall have information denominated in 
USD. 
Financial and accounting reports to be submitted to the governmental institutions shall be 
denominated in USD or Ghana Cedis, or both currencies as per requirements. 
87 
5.32  Fixed Asset Register 
The FM/Accountants need to maintain fixed asset registers recording all fixed assets in the fixed asset 
module of the accounting software. Fixed asset management is discussed more in detail in section 8 
of this manual. 
5.33  Period for which records are to be kept   
The accountant needs to file the original records in an organized way to be maintained by the PCU for 
a minimum 10 years after the project completion. Record management is discussed more in detail in 
section 4 of this manual. 
5.34  Access Levels  
The access to the accounting system should be governed by the privileged metrics defining the levels 
of access by different users: (i) active use for inputting/editing of data; (ii) read-only use; or (iii) no-
access. This would allow a separated and controlled access to the Accounting module (i.e. Journal 
recording, posting to the General Ledger). Each accounting transaction records the user’s ID, 
preventing unauthorized access to the system and an adequate level of protection against the input 
of false data or the destruction of the records.  At the same time, the data-sharing nature of the 
system involves a strict coordination and active data exchange among its various users (primarily the 
PCU). In this respect the system should ensure the reliability in information storage and fast data 
processing. 
5.35  Revision of accounting manual 
The accounting manual is to be reviewed and updated once every two years.  
5.36  Project financial reports & statements 
Periodic financial progress reports are a formal requirement of the GoG and IFAD Financing 
Agreements. It is the responsibility of the Project Coordinator to ensure that the reports and financial 
statements are submitted on time to donors and other stakeholders. The Financial Manager is 
responsible for the preparation of accurate financial reports under the prescribed formats and on a 
timely basis as follows: 
1.  Monthly financial reports for PCU management use (These reports will be verified during IFAD 
supervision missions.)  
2.  Periodic (quarterly) interim financial reports, to be sent to IFAD within 45 days after the reporting 
period.  The FM will be positively appraised in correct financial reports are sent after 15 days at the end 
of each quarter. The delay of 45 days is a far limit that should not be reached.  
3.  Annual financial statements, to be provided to IFAD preferably within two (2) months but not later than 
four (4) months after the end of the project fiscal year. 
4.  Annual financial statements audited by an independent auditor acceptable to the Fund and in 
accordance with internationally accepted auditing standards and terms of reference cleared by IFAD, to 
be provided to IFAD within four (4) months but not later than six (6) months after the project fiscal 
year.  The FM should target sending the report in April or May, for a good performance.  
88 
5.37  Content of the Interim Financial Reports (IFR) 
The importance of the periodic progress reports lies in the fact that they provide GoG, PCU and 
Donors with sufficient information to determine whether the funds disbursed to the project are being 
used as intended, the project implementation is on track and the budget will be fully implemented.  
The financial information should be linked to the information on physical progress and procurement 
to give assurance that the financial and physical progress are consistent. 
i) 
Quarterly financial progress reports include the following:  
The IFRs include the following statements to be produced directly from the computerized accounting system: 
Sources and uses of funds by category and by financier during the reporting period and 
cumulative for the project life. This report details the project expenditures by each 
expenditure category or sub category 
 Project Actual vs. planned expenditures by component and financier during the reporting 
period and cumulative for the project life 
SOE-WA table showing Withdrawal applications sent to IFAD and other donors,  
Special Account reconciliation statements for each financier,  
Fixed asset register. 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
ii) 
In addition to the statements deriving from the computerized accounting system, the IFR should 
comprise the following:  
vi) 
vii) 
 procurement reports and  
status of audit recommendations (if any).  
5.38  Records Management 
Financial records must be created and preserved for every financial transaction performed under the 
project. Financial records are defined as any financial information including written, computer data, 
internal forms, e-mails, or any other form of storage information originated from the PCU such as 
internal forms, journal vouchers financial reports (Monthly & quarterly) copies of checks and 
withdrawal applications etc. or received by the PCU such as supplier invoices and receipts, bank 
statements, IFAD documents etc. within the framework of the project's official activities. The 
objective of this procedure is to preserve the financial records and files for further official use by the 
MoFA, for financial audit and for review by the Fund during the supervision missions. The projects 
financial records are the property of the MoFA and cannot be removed or destroyed.   
It is important to note that in accordance with the IFAD general conditions, the recipient/borrower 
has to maintain the original records for a minimum 10 years after the project completion. 
Stored at the project level during the project lifetime + microfilms, etc.; then transferred to MoFA. 
Filing of the financial records 
The accountant is responsible for filing the financial records created or received by the project. To 
fulfil this responsibility, the accountant must maintain chronological files in which the financial 
documents have to be filed for future reference. Filing should be performed daily to prevent the 
accumulation of papers and to ensure that the financial records are maintained in an up-to-date 
manner at all times. Each financial record should be filed under its code in a chronological order, with 
a sequential number assigned to every document. Any kind of additions or amendments to the 
financial document should be filed in a chronological order immediately following the principal 
document. 
Storage of financial records 
The financial records of the project should be stored by MoFA for a minimum 10 years after the 
project completion. The data should be stored within the accounting software, as paper copies, as 
89 
scanned copies and as external drives. The Financial Manager should allocate an appropriate storage 
area for the financial records in paper format and maintain them in locked cabinets, safe from water 
and fire, to which access is controlled and limited. The Financial Officer should also classify the 
financial records as "Confidential", or "General". All-important correspondences should be filed. 
Micro film archiving may also be considered.  
Archiving of financial records 
In order to prevent an unnecessary pile-up of files in a limited office space, the Financial Manager 
should make sure that the financial records are archived on a regularly basis. Once a year, the 
Financial Manager should make sure that the completed or inactive files are archived in a manner 
that will allow for easy retrieval of the files in case they are required at some future date.  
Back- up procedures 
To avoid the loss or damage of financial data, the information should be kept in two copies: i) at the 
computer server of the PCU/MoFA and ii) in the locked cabinets of the PCU office. Only the Project 
Coordinator, the Financial Manager, and the Programme Accountant are allowed to access the 
financial records without authorization. The access of external persons is prohibited except for the 
auditors & IFAD staff. The finance manager must make weekly back-ups of all accounting data and 
store it on an external hard drive.   
5.39  Fixed Asset Management 
Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets for the purposes of financial 
accounting and to ensure preventive maintenance, and theft deterrence. Adequate Fixed asset maintenance 
also increases the sustainability of the project. 
There are three elements in fixed asset management that require the attention of the Finance Manager  
  Purchase of Equipment 
  Setting up and maintaining an asset register including verification 
  Setting up a plan for disposal and/or handover of the asset once the project is completed  
Purchase of Equipment 
All procurement and payments for project equipment will be processed in line with the guidance 
provided in the procurement procedures manual. The accountant financial officer should assign a 
unique, sequential asset number to all furniture and equipment items purchased (excluding minor 
items such as stationary). This must be clearly labelled on each item. Each item of equipment must be 
recorded in the fixed asset register 
Fixed Asset Register 
The accountant must maintain a register of all (material) project equipment. This will be recorded on 
the asset management module of the accounting software. The asset register should record the 
following information for each individual piece of equipment: 1) Asset description, 2) Asset number, 
3) Serial number of the item, 4) Officer responsible for asset, 5) Funding of asset (IFAD, government 
etc.), 6) Location; Date of purchase; and 7) Estimated life. The   
Asset Verification Review 
The Financial Manager must ensure that a verification count of all equipment recorded in the fixed asset 
register is performed at least once a year. This should include the following checks: 
  Verify that all equipment is still held in the location recorded on the register; and 
  Check that equipment is still in a reasonable state of repair. 
  Discrepancies between the verification exercise and the fixed asset register should be investigated.  
  Where assets are missing or seriously damaged, they should be removed from the asset register. 
The removal should be formally documented and approved by the Financial Manager and by the 
MoFA.  
  The verification review must be performed by different staff from those who use the equipment, to 
ensure adequate segregation of duty. 
90 
Accounting of fixed assets:  
Fixed assets are accounted for at cost. At the acquisition date of the fixed asset, cost is measured by 
the amount of consideration given. The cost of a fixed asset includes not only its purchase price, but 
also ancillary charges necessary to place the asset in its intended location and condition for use. 
Fixed asset reference code 
Each fixed asset is assigned a unique reference. The unique reference code comprises three 
segments: Category, Type and Purchase Sequence Number. All three segments are used as 
appropriate when coding an asset. 
Category 
Category is the first segment of the PROSPER’s fixed asset reference code and it describes the 
category to which the asset belongs.  
The category codes are follows: 
CATEGORY                Code 
Motor vehicles 
Motor cycles 
Furniture & Fittings 
Office Equipment 
IT Equipment 
Other Equipment            
MV 
MC 
FF 
OE 
IT 
OE 
 
 
Type is the second segment of the PROSPER’s fixed asset reference code and it abbreviates 
the type of the asset acquired. For example, AC stands for Air Conditioners; FC stands for 
Filing Cabinet; OT stands for Office Table; etc. 
Purchase Number is the third segment of PROSPER’s fixed asset reference code and it 
describes the sequential number - the order in which the fixed assets in that particular 
category were acquired. For example, 001 for the first asset acquired in that category. 
Example:   
Codes 
Description 
FF 
OT 
Furniture & Fittings 
Office Table 
001 
FFOT001 
Purchase number 
Office Table in the accounts office 
Record of vehicles 
Segment 
Category 
Type 
Purchase number 
Reference Code 
The project maintains as part of its fixed asset register, a record of all vehicles (including any 
donations of such), which shall be entered immediately on acquisition. Each vehicle shall have a file 
containing details of its purchase, its service history, insurance certificates, accident reports, old 
logbooks and disposal details. 
91 
Vehicle log 
Project vehicles shall only be used on official business except where individual officers have been 
authorized to use the vehicle on a personal to holder basis. 
A logbook is kept for each vehicle, recording for each journey: 
 
 
 
 
The date and time of use 
The start and end destination 
The start and finish kilometer readings 
The total Km travelled 
Any defects or damage to the vehicle shall be recorded in the logbook and brought to the attention of 
the Project Director. 
Driving licence 
A driver shall only drive those classes of vehicles for which he has a valid license. PROSPER shall have a 
policy of inspecting all driving license of drivers on an annual basis. 
Maintenance of vehicles 
The driver/officer shall ensure that regular checks and maintenance are carried out on all vehicles.  It 
is recommended that vehicles in an unsound mechanical condition shall not be driven. Each driver 
shall inspect the condition of his vehicle before driving it and shall immediately report any defects to 
the section head and shall record such defects in the logbook. Where possible and practical, a vehicle 
should be allocated to a single driver who shall be held responsible for its maintenance and security 
while in use. 
Reporting of accidents 
At the scene of an accident, a driver shall be responsible for ensuring that: 
 
Anyone who is injured obtains medical assistance as soon as possible; 
 
The names and addresses of witnesses are obtained; 
 
Police report is obtained 
 
The details of the driver(s) of any other vehicles involved are obtained including: 
  Names and address of the drive; 
  Name and address of the owner; 
 
  Name and address of the insurance company. 
Any accident involving PROSPER’s motor vehicle shall be initially reported to Project Coordinator as 
soon as possible.  
Vehicle type, color and registration number; and 
Log book for vehicles 
Vehicle operating cost is one of the major items of recurrent cost. A log book will be maintained for 
each vehicle. This will be prepared in duplicate and signed by the officer in charge. At the end of the 
month, the original will be sent to Financial Manager for scrutiny. The log book will provide very 
useful information for the comparison of the fuel consumption of project’s vehicles. 
Asset handover and disposal plan 
In order to maximise the sustainability of the project, it is important to ensure that: i) all assets are 
handed over to the lead project agency at the end of the project instead of disappearing with 
individuals, and ii) any asset that is not in acceptable condition or beyond repair is properly disposed 
of. Therefore, as part of the winding up activities, the Financial Manager must together with the lead 
92 
project agency develop an asset handover and disposal plan. The plan should include brief report 
outlining the following: 
  The value of all the assets bought under the project  
  Summary of the current condition of the assets, 
  To which entity, will the assets be transferred to and on which date and for what purpose. 
 
List the assets that will be disposed and the reason for being disposed. 
The up-to-date fixed asset register should be attached to the handover and disposal plan and it 
should clearly specify for each asset to which entity it will be handed over or disposed.  
The handover and disposal plan should be signed by both the project management and a 
representative of the lead project entity and a copy should be shared with IFAD and the project 
auditors conducting the final audit. 
93 
SECTION 6: INTERNAL CONTROL 
94 
6 
INTERNAL CONTROL 
6.1  Overview 
It is important to ensure that sound internal control arrangements are in place in the implementation 
of the Project, to assure the donors and other providers of Project funds that their funds are being 
used in the most efficient and effective manner. 
Internal controls comprise all of the policies and procedures adopted by a management unit to assist 
in: 
  Achieving the orderly and efficient implementation of the project 
  Compliance with government and donor policies and rules 
  The safeguarding of financial resources  
  Complete and reliable processing 
  The recording and reporting of financial transactions and events 
  The timely issue of FM reports for monitoring and management decision making, and 
  The detection of fraud and error. 
Internal control is aimed at: 
  Ensuring that accounts and records are reliable and complete. 
  Securing compliance with legislative, statutory, and Project agreement requirements, and 
adherence to organizational policies. 
  Protecting assets, especially cash receipts, from being lost or stolen and safeguarding assets 
against wastage, fraud and inefficiency. 
  Discouraging dishonesty through the implementation of systems and procedures that would 
make concealment of irregularities possible only through the collusion of two or more persons, 
and 
  Promoting disclosure and transparency. 
6.2  Responsibilities for Internal Control 
The PCU, the DADUs, the PFIs and benefiting communities, are all responsible for developing, 
implementing, and monitoring, a sound system of internal controls. 
6.3  Critical Elements of Internal Control 
The critical elements of internal control are: 
Management commitment to effective internal control: All partners in the Project must be committed 
to implementing effective internal controls. PCU is responsible for maintaining and reviewing the 
control structures on a regular basis, to ensure that all key controls are operating effectively, and 
remain appropriate. The attitude exhibited by PCU towards the enforcement of controls, will strongly 
influence the effectiveness of the internal control mechanism in the Project. 
Effective organizational controls: Operational controls include effective organizational structures, well-
defined responsibilities, and the segregation of functions. Segregation of functions and separation of 
duties, within finance functions and the accounting systems should be ensured, in order to assist with 
the detection and prevention of errors, fraud, or the misuse of funds. The clear specification of 
financial authorities and delegations is a critical part of effective organisation internal controls. 
Capable, trained and honest officers: The PCU should engage qualified and experienced personnel 
within their structures and ensure that both formal and informal (on-the-job) training is provided to 
staff, to enable them to effectively carry out their assigned duties. 
Clearly understood procedures and documentation: Internal controls should be clearly documented 
and job descriptions should be made available to all relevant staff. All staff involved in accounting for 
95 
expenditure, revenue, assets and liabilities, must understand both the Government and Project 
policies and procedures. Documents should be simple, easy to use, and designed to ensure that they 
will be completed correctly, to help reduce misinterpretation of information and errors. 
Effective operational controls: Operational controls relate to the completeness and accuracy of 
processing for financial transactions and events, and are aimed at preventing and detecting errors. 
Operational controls include sequence checking, use of control totals, reconciliations, and 
independent checks. Regular reconciliations of bank accounts, and control accounts, will help ensure 
that the accounting systems are functioning properly, and that the accounting data is being accurately 
recorded and maintained. 
Adequate physical controls: Physical controls are required to safeguard cash and other negotiable 
instruments (e.g. cheques), as well as inventories and assets. Controllable forms such as receipt books 
and cheque books must be kept secure, and records must be kept for issues and usage of assets, and 
controllable forms. Physical assets must be safeguarded and properly maintained, to retain their value 
and effectiveness. 
6.4 
Financial Delegations and Authorities 
The PCU, in conjunction with the DADUs, must clearly define the financial delegations and authorities 
for project implementation. Such delegations and authorities should be agreed between PCU and 
these other stakeholders. The following delegations and authorities are the minimum that should be 
addressed in establishing the financial arrangements and internal control system for the Project: 
  Bank account operations: Authorized signatories for drawing funds from the project bank 
accounts and the signing requirements for payment withdrawals. Authorized signatories for 
loan fund replenishment WAs 
  Contracts: Authorities to approve contracts for civil works, goods and services, including 
approval ceilings. Contracts valued below GHS6, 000,000 (USD1, 000,000) should be signed by 
the Project Coordinator and the Financial Manager (witness) on behalf of PROSPER. Contracts 
valued from GHS6, 000,000 (USD 1,000,000) should be signed by the Chief Director of MoFA 
and Project Coordinator (Witness). 
  Receiving of civil works, goods and services: Authorities to certify the completion/acceptance 
of civil works, goods and services 
  Expenditure payments: Authorities to approve expenditure claims/vouchers, including 
approval ceilings, authorities to approve petty cash expenditure claims and authorities to 
approve advances of funds. 
  Receipts: Authorities to receive funds and to issue official receipts. 
6.5  General Financial Internal Controls 
Financial controls consist of measures adopted by the PCU to protect assets and ensure the accuracy 
and reliability of accounting records and financial reports. Key internal controls to be implemented by 
concerned agencies include: 
  Competent and reliable personnel: The internal control system relies on the people administering 
it. Employees should therefore be adequately trained, and properly supervised, to enable them to 
carry out their duties and responsibilities effectively. 
  Separation of functional responsibilities: One person should never have complete control of a 
transaction from beginning to end. A clear understanding should exist as to who will issue an 
approval, what is to be approved, and the limitations of authorization. Approving officers should 
not have responsibility for posting, or the ability to change accounting records. 
  Assignment of responsibility for every function: Employee responsibilities should be clearly defined 
(e.g. an organization chart should be prepared), to avoid overlapping or unassigned areas of 
responsibility. Staff must know their responsibilities, and whom they report to. 
96 
  Separation of asset custodianship and accounting: The accounting function should be separated 
from the custody of assets (e.g. an employee who is entrusted to receive cash should not have 
access to the cash journals or ledgers). 
  Security measures: Techniques, procedures, and measures, should be employed to protect assets, 
and ensure reliable accounting data and reports (e.g. use of mechanical devices such as vaults 
and cash registers; use of control accounts and subsidiary ledgers). 
  Supervision: Internal regulations should include the supervision of staff (e.g. establishment of 
annual estimated expenditures under the supervision of the PC; or the process of setting or 
recording transactions made by assistants, and the preparation of financial statements, under the 
supervision of the FM). 
  Regular independent review: Internal auditors should regularly review and evaluate the system of 
internal controls, to determine whether it is functioning effectively as planned (e.g. the findings 
and recommendations of the internal auditor should be submitted to senior management for 
action).  
  Control of transactions: Every transaction should be authorized, approved, executed and 
recorded, according to prescribed procedures (e.g. cash cannot be paid without the authority of 
PC/SPC). 
  Serially numbered documents: Project documents should be serially numbered to check 
completeness of transactions (e.g. cheques, invoices, and vouchers, should be serially numbered). 
  Sequencing: An accounting control system should be set up in such a manner that proper 
sequencing is followed with regard to payments and the posting of transactions to ledgers (e.g. 
payments should not be authorized or made before the goods or services to which the payment 
relates to has been received). 
6.6  Transaction Processing Controls 
With sound transaction processing internal controls, employee duties are arranged, and records and 
procedures are designed, to exercise effective accounting control over assets, liabilities, revenues, 
and expenditures. The work of employees is also divided, to ensure that no one employee performs a 
complete cycle of operations (e.g. an employee handling cash would not be assigned to post 
collections in the accounting records). Procedures to be followed must be defined, and such 
procedures should require proper authorizations by designated officials, for all actions to be taken. 
The table below summarizes general transaction processing, internal control objectives, and internal 
control outcomes.  
Table: Transaction processing controls and outcomes 
General objective 
Validity 
Completeness 
Authorization 
Internal control outcome 
Recorded transactions are valid and documented 
All valid transactions are recorded and none omitted  
Transactions are authorized according to IFAD and Government 
policy 
Transactions are properly classified in the Accounts 
Classification 
Accounting/Posting  Transaction accounting is completed 
Proper period 
Transactions are recorded in the proper period 
6.7  Computerized Accounting Systems Controls 
At the PCU, computerized accounting system should be used. When using computerized accounting 
systems, internal controls must also encompass the security and back up of financial accounts and 
records. The key computerized accounting systems internal controls that must be adhered to include: 
97 
  Password Protection: Password protection should be implemented and maintained for all IT 
accounting systems. 
  Back up Procedures: All IT systems/Accounting Software should be regularly backed up (i.e. 
daily if possible), and procedures established to restore data and or software, following any 
operational disruption. Emergency procedures should be set up, to provide business 
continuity following loss of IT systems. Daily printouts of daily transactions (journals) should 
be made, checked, and signed by the FM and filed for future reference. 
  Virus Protection: All IT systems should be protected against the threat of software viruses. 
Regular virus scan should be carried out (at least once a week). 
  Emergency Procedures:  
- 
Electrical power systems supporting IT equipment should have appropriate UPS systems 
in place, together with backup batteries, which are automatically invoked following a 
power loss.  
-  Batteries will be able to provide power for sufficient time to allow an emergency 
- 
generator to start up and run at full load.  
Emergency procedures detailing what actions to take, and including manual procedures 
to be followed in the event that IT systems are unavailable, should be fully documented. 
-  All staff should be aware of the documented emergency procedures, and these should be 
tested, reviewed and updated at regular intervals. 
98 
SECTION 7: SUPERVISION MISSIONS 
99 
SUPERVISION MISSIONS  
7 
Throughout project implementation, GoG and IFAD, will conduct annual financial supervisory missions 
to develop financial management ratings and ensure compliance with the IFAD’s requirements. 
During the supervisory missions, IFAD and GOG will assess and monitor the adequacy of the PCU 
financial management arrangements such as accounting, budgeting, internal controls, flow of funds, 
financial reporting and the auditing practices. The key findings and recommendations of the mission 
will be captured in the Aid Memoire. 
When preparing for and during a supervisions mission, the necessary supporting actions by the 
Finance Manager generally will include the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Update and make available for the mission, the project financial information and 
especially the incurred expenditures by component, by category and by financier as 
of the last day of the preceding month.  
Update and make available reports on the status of counterpart funding (has the 
Borrower/Lead Project Agency made available financing proceeds to the Project as 
planned?).    
Provide a walkthrough of the existing accounting system including its main modules, 
budgeting, accounting, financial reports, fixed asset register as well as the security 
settings in use. 
Facilitate checking of the internal controls, by system “walk through” to ensure that 
approved procedures are consistently being followed.  
Make available Withdrawal Applications, Statement of Expenditures and all 
supporting documentation regarding expenditures claimed under the SOE thresholds 
to facilitate the verifying of adequacy, completeness and validity of claims.  
Make available evidence of qualifications and educational background of the financial 
staff including, organogram of the PCU, CVs, TORs of each position and PCU training 
plan.  
Update and make available a complete a fixed asset register and facilitate sample test 
check of physical existence of the asset. 
Make available the manual of procedures regarding financial operations such as 
processing of transactions, financial management, accounting policies, fixed asset 
maintenance and records management as well as the lead project agency’s 
anticorruption policy and whistle blowing procedures. 
Prepare and make available the updated bank account reconciliation statement and 
bank account statements for all designated and project accounts. 
Arrange meeting with the auditors and any other selected party requested by the 
mission. 
Make available all necessary documentation and contracts regarding procurement 
not subject to prior review. 
Provide an update on the actions taken regarding past audit recommendations as 
well as action points outlined in the past aide memoires. 
Make available the most recent AWPBs, annual and Interim Financial reports  
Provide with the latest Budget vs. Actuals reports and analysis.  
Supervision, mid-term review and completion report 
Project supervision. IFAD will ensure overall PROSPER project technical, fiduciary and financial 
supervision and will undertake at least one supervision mission annually. This mission will include field 
100 
visits for: (i) providing technical guidance; (ii) interacting with the beneficiaries to obtain their views; 
and (iii) evaluating project outreach and impact on the target group. 
Mid-term review. A mid-term review (MTR) will be undertaken, during the first quarter of Project year 
4. The main objectives will be to assess: (i) the project achievements against targets (ii) interim 
project impact; (iii) efficiency and effectiveness of project management; (iv) sustainability 
arrangements; (v) the validity of project design. The MTR team will also identify implementation 
constraints and measures to improve the project performance. Based on its findings, the project and 
its PIM will be adjusted for the remaining project life. 
101 
SECTION 8: INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL AUDIT 
102 
8 
Internal Audit Process 
In order to strengthen the quality of the project’s fiduciary and financial oversight the Internal Audit 
Directorate of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, shall include PROSPER in their annual auditing 
plan and funds be explicitly allocated from PROSPER to ensure that the project transactions, both 
financial and procurement-related, are reviewed according to a risk-based selection.  The internal 
audit function will not participate in clearance or approval activities prior to payment so as to 
maintain an appropriate independence from operational activities.  
The determination of the processes, transactions and accounts reviewed will be fully under the 
authority of the Internal Audit Directorate.  Being risk-based will involve the professional judgement 
of the auditor and take into consideration materiality, complexity, inherent risk, adequacy of controls, 
criticality to project success and financial reporting, and other aspects as deemed relevant by the 
internal auditors. 
It is key to the success of such arrangements with the Internal Audit Directorate that the internal 
audit reviews be explicitly included in both the Internal Audit Directorate’s annual work plan, and the 
budget of PROSPER.  
8.1 Internal Audit TOR 
Scope: 
  All PROSPER project activities are within the scope of the Internal Audit Unit. Annually, the 
Internal Audit Unit develops a work plan that includes areas within the scope to be covered in the 
year. The areas of focus will be determined based on risk and in consultation with the National 
Programme Coordinator 
  An audit work plan is produced two months before each calendar year.  
  Checks are performed according to the audit work plan. Methodology: document review, 
interviews with PCU staff and field visits.  
  The Internal Audit Unit implements the work plan and reports on a timely basis to the Chairman 
of MoFA Audit Committee, National Programme Coordinator and IFAD. 
Audit Scope: 
The internal audit reviews would be conducted on the following basis: 
  Transactions to be reviewed on an ex-post basis ONLY; 
  Field/project office visits bi-annually by the internal audit would be scheduled in advance in 
agreement with the PCU; 
  The internal audit review would cover a sample of financial and procurement transactions 
selected on a risk basis as determined by the internal audit directorate and assess if they are 
true, valid, complete and accurate,  
  The review would also assess for the sampled of transactions if the expenditures are in 
agreement with the respective Statement of Expenditure sent to IFAD for approval, and if the 
designated project account with the Central Bank has been used for the purposes of the 
project only; 
In addition to the accuracy and validity of the sampled transactions, the internal audit would 
assess the adequacy of the internal controls and seek to identify potential efficiencies in the 
processes; 
 
  The resulting reports of the Internal Audit Directorate on the PROSPER will be provided to the 
PCU and to IFAD for information, action and follow-up. 
  Funds (from all financiers, i.e. IFAD, GCF, GoG) are being used in accordance with Loan and 
Grant Agreements, and only for the purposes of the project. 
103 
  Goods and services are being procured in accordance with the relevant IFAD procurement 
guidelines and Government regulations. 
  Review the adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls and make recommendations for 
improving systems and tools. 
  Carry out regular review and monitoring of FM and procurement functions, to ensure 
compliance with the relevant policies, procedures and practices and appropriateness of 
system of the project. 
  Verify payments for Project activities to ensure appropriateness of documents and 
transaction. 
  Undertake random visits to assess the adherence of the established procedures at all levels, 
particularly States and communities and to ensure physical existence of project assets and 
results. 
  Review eligibility and appropriateness of the project expenditures incurred at all the levels as 
well as to provide basic technical services (as required) for the proper recording and 
maintenance of project accounts at those levels. 
  Randomly review procurement transactions to ensure procurement transactions have been 
procured in accordance with the applicable procedures, the deliveries of goods, works and 
services are in accordance with contract quantities and quality. 
  All necessary supporting documents, records, and accounts are being kept in respect of all 
project revenues and expenditures. 
  There is proper control and safeguarding of cash and portable assets. 
  Compliance with the PIM and its supplements, and also compliance with all the Regulations 
on FM for Use with IFAD-funded Programmes. 
  Review the fixed assets procured, including verification through physical checks of inventory 
and ascertain whether the vehicles and other equipment are appropriately identified as being 
funded under IFAD assistance, such as project logo on vehicles. Also, to ascertain whether 
such assets are being utilized in accordance with the relevant Loan Agreements. 
Authorization and Reporting Lines of the Internal Audit Unit 
The Internal Audit Unit in the discharge of its duties is authorized by the Director of the Internal Audit 
Agency  to have full and complete access to any of the organization's records, properties, and 
personnel. The Internal Audit Agency is a Public Service institution established by the Internal Audit 
Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658). The Agency exist as a Central Agency with the object to co-ordinate, 
facilitate and provide quality assurance for internal audit activities within the Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies and the Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies. 
The Internal Audit Unit reports directly to the Director-General of the Internal Audit Agency. 
Ethical Requirements of the Internal Audit Unit 
 
Internal Audit staff do not have any direct operational responsibility or authority over any of the 
project activities they review.  
  Any Internal Audit staff with real or perceived conflicts of interest must inform the Programme 
Coordinator immediately. 
  The Internal Audit function performs its duties with professional competence and due care. 
 
Internal Audit ensures confidentiality is maintained over all information and records obtained 
while carrying out their audit activities. 
  The Internal Audit Unit will comply with all IFAD, National and Programme policies, processes, 
and procedures. 
104 
Recommended Internal audit cycle 
The internal auditor in the PCU/PSIU will ensure that the following internal audit cycle is followed: 
  An audit work plan is produced two months before each calendar year. 
  Checks are performed according to the audit work plan. In addition, past years audit 
recommendations are followed up on  
  Methodology: document review, interviews with project staff and field visits.   
  Quarterly reports are produced, and the draft report is shared with management for comments  
  Finalize the report –quarterly audit reports to be shared with project management for 
managements response within 6 weeks after the end of each quarter and then with IFAD within 
8 weeks after the end of each quarter.  
Recommended structure of the internal audit report. 
All the internal audit reports submitted to the PCU are recommended to follow the following 
structure: 
Part A: Brief details of the Auditee and Audit: 
Part B: Executive Summary 
Part C: Follow up on previous Audit Reports 
Part D: Findings and recommendations 
Annex 1: Summary table of the status of past Audit recommendations. 
All IA reports must be to be shared with project management for managements responses within 6 
weeks after the end of each quarter and then with IFAD within 8 weeks after the end of each quarter. 
8.2  EXTERNAL AUDIT 
The project audit is an ex-post review of financial statements, records of transactions & financial 
systems; It examines the adequacy of accounting systems & procedures, capacity to maintain 
appropriate accounts & documentation of the project expenditures. The objective of the project 
audit is to provide credibility and assurance of accountability. 
In accordance with the IFAD general conditions and the FAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and 
Auditing for IFAD Financed Project, the PCU must have its financial statements audited by an external 
auditor acceptable to IFAD in accordance with internationally acceptable audit standards (ISA or 
INTOSAI/ISSAI). The Audited financial statements must be sent to IFAD no later than 6 months after 
the end of the fiscal year. The detailed instruction regarding project audit are outlined in the IFAD 
Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing for IFAD Financed Projects available at:  
IFAD is committed to the use of country's financial management systems whenever these are 
deemed to meet IFAD's minimum requirements. Consequently, the project will be  audited by the 
Ghana Audit Service on a bi-annual basis. 
The Audit Cycle and Appointing the Auditor 
Annual audits will be conducted at the end of each Government of Ghana’s Fiscal Year for the project. 
In line with its mandate as per the Ghana Audit Service Act (Act 584), the Auditor General is solely 
responsible for auditing funds under the Consolidated Fund and all public funds as received by 
Government ministries, agencies and departments. In this regard, and consistent with IFAD’s policy to 
maximise the use of country systems where feasible, the Ghana Audit Service (GAS) will conduct the 
external audit of AAFORD’s financial statements and furnish copies to IFAD within six months of the 
end of the fiscal year. The technical capacity of the GAS is considered satisfactory having successfully 
and timeously audited other IFAD-funded projects, namely, RAFIP, GASIP and REP. with qualitative 
results.  
105 
The Interim financial statements of the project will be audited by the Ghana Audit Service on a bi-
annual basis: the mid-year audit will concern the IFRs of the first two quarters, while the final year 
audit will combine the audit of the consolidated annual financial statements and the audit of the IFRs 
for the third and fourth quarter of the year. The bi-annual audit report of the Project’s IFRs will be 
submitted within a delay of 60 days from the end of each audited period. In case of delays on the 
submission of the biannual verification and audit report, advance withdrawals for the subsequent 
reporting period will not be processed.  
The ToR of the auditors will be approved by the Fund. The project financial statements including 
movements in the designated accounts will be audited in accordance with International Standards on 
Auditing (ISA) and a single opinion will be issued to cover the project financial statements in 
accordance with the Fund’s audit policy. The auditors’ report and opinion with respect to the financial 
statements, including the management letter, will be furnished to the Fund within six months after 
the end of each fiscal year. 
If due to work overload, the GAS will be unable to carry out the audits, the Project will proceed to the 
recruitment of an independent and qualified audit firm to carry out the audit of the project. The 
selection of auditors other than GAS shall be on competitive basis and in accordance with the IFAD's 
procurement guidelines and would be completed within six months of project effectiveness.  
The complete audit cycle can be divided into the three main roles carried out by the Financial 
Manager/PCU, the Auditor and IFAD. 
The PCU and the Financial Manager will: 
  Timely prepare TORs of the Audit and submit these to the Fund for No Objection,  
  manage the selection process of the auditor (if relevant) and appoints the auditor 
  Prepare the financial statements for the reporting period  
  Make available all the financial information necessary to the auditors 
  PCU should respond to the audit findings and recommendations within 2 weeks 
  Submit the audit report to the relevant stake holders but to reach the Fund no later than 6 months after 
the end of the project fiscal year. 
The Auditor will: 
  perform the audit work including the three audit opinions (on the financial statements, the Designated 
Account and the SOEs) 
 
Indicate any ineligible expenditures 
  Provide a management letter 
The Fund will: 
  Provide a no-objection to the auditors TORs 
  Monitor timely submission and review of audit reports 
106 
  Follow up on remedial action\apply sanction and /or remedies if relevant including suspension of 
disbursement and or cancellation of loan balance (Legal Notice is sent to the LPA after 3 months of delay. 
Suspension of disbursement to the project after 6 months delay.) 
8.3 Anticorruption policy 
The management of the project funds shall be sufficiently rigorous to safeguard against Fraud and 
Corruption. Fraud and corruption include, but are not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
corrupt practice - offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, anything of 
value to influence improperly the actions of another party 
fraudulent practice - any act or omission, including a misrepresentation, that knowingly or 
recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain a financial or other benefit or to 
avoid an obligation 
collusive practice - an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve an 
improper purpose, including influencing improperly the actions of another party 
coercive practice - impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of the party, to influence improperly the actions of a 
party 
IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in 
projects financed through its loans and grants. ‘Zero tolerance’ means that IFAD will pursue all 
allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied where 
the allegations are substantiated. IFAD takes all possible actions to protect individuals who submit 
allegations of fraudulent or corrupt practices in its activities from reprisal. The IFAD anticorruption 
policy is available on the IFAD website at https://www.ifad.org/en/anti-corruption. The IFAD website 
also provides instructions on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and 
Oversight. 
It is the Project Coordinator’s and the Financial Manager’s responsibility to make sure that all PCU 
staff including the financial department are aware of IFAD’s and the lead project agency’s 
anticorruption policy and whistle blowing procedures. 
8.4  Compensation of costs and logistics.  
In line with the adopted practice by other International Financing Institution, IFAD is in favour of 
having the project cover all reasonable incremental cost associated with the audit.  
107 
It is advised that the cost estimates for the audit are prepared and agreed between GAS and the 
project well in advance. It should also be noted that IFAD expects fully that field visits will be carried 
out during the course of the audit, to be planned in advance in collaboration with project in order to 
facilitate logistics. 
8.5  The Audit Report  
The Audit Report must include the following elements which should also be reflected in the auditor’s 
TORs:  
  An opinion on the Project’s financial statements  
  A separate opinion on the eligibility of expenditures included in the WA /Statement of Expenditure 
procedure  
  A separate opinion if the use of the Special Account/Designated Account is in compliance with the 
financing agreement  
 
In addition to the audit report, the independent auditor will prepare a management letter. This will include 
comment and recommendations on the adequacy of the financial management system, and on the system 
of internal control. The management letter should also include a follow up section on the status of 
implementation of previous years recommendations 
108 
SECTION 9: PROJECT COMPLETION AND CLOSURE 
109 
9  PROJECT COMPLETION AND CLOSURE   
Loans and Grant completion and Closing 
The closing of the loans and grant is due six months after the project completion date. Both the 
completion and the closing date of the loans and grant have financial implications on the project 
management: 
  To ensure that the designated account is completely and timely justified, the Chief 
accountant/PMU has to develop and submit to the Fund a so-called recovery plan outlining 
the percentages per withdrawal application that will be recovered and paid respectively. The 
recovery plan should be submitted to the fund around 6 months before the completion date.  
  By the completion date all the project activities must have been finalised. The payments can 
be done also after the completion date, as long as the commitments/ contracts are signed 
prior to the completion date. Activities that have continued after the completion date are 
considered as ineligible expenditures and can therefore not be financed by the IFAD funds. 
  After the completion date but no later than the closing date (six months after the completion 
date) the PMU can still incur expenditures related to so called winding up expenditures e.g. 
Final Audit, Project completion report, Project staff salaries involved in the winding up 
activities, PMU maintenance cost, project completion workshop 
In order for the Loans and the grant accounts to be closed by IFAD, the Fund requires the 
confirmation of the last WA, the submission of the Final Audit report and submission of project 
completion report. The Final Audit Report has to cover, the final project year up to the final 
expenditures and it can be paid from the loans or grant available balance by using, for example, direct 
payment or Reimbursement of pre financed expenditures. 
Initial Advance Recovery Plan: To ensure that the designated account is completely and timely 
justified, the Financial Manager/PCU has to develop and submit to the Fund recovery plan outlining 
the percentages per withdrawal application that will be recovered and paid respectively. The recovery 
plan should be submitted to the fund around 6 months before the completion date or when the 
outstanding balance (amount still undisbursed by IFAD is less than the double of the authorized 
allocation.  
Project Completion:  At the end of the project, the PCU will prepare a Project Completion Report 
(PCR), which will include an assessment of the achievements versus the planned project results. The 
PCR preparation process will include a validation workshop to ensure that key project stakeholders 
evaluate the project performance. This PCR will be submitted to the Government and IFAD within 
three months after project completion. The PCR preparation will include the capitalization of 
innovations, lessons learnt and good practice generated by the project. The PCR will assess the 
possible scaling-up of some of the project interventions. The internal PCR will be used as the basis for 
IFAD’s PCR. The IFAD’s PCR will be focus on an assessment of: (i) the project outcomes and their 
sustainability and (ii) the projects impacts. 
Project Closing : The closing of the IFAD is due six months after the project completion date. Both the 
completion and the closing date of the loan have financial implications on the project management 
such as: development and submission of a recovery plan, ensuring eligibility of expenditures and 
submission of the necessary documents outlined below. Please also refer to section 1.3 of the IFAD 
Disbursement Handbook.   
By the completion date all the project activities must have been finalized, achieved and delivered to 
the Project. 
110 
Activities that have continued after the completion date are considered as ineligible expenditures and 
can therefore not be financed by the IFAD funds. However, after the completion date but no later 
than the closing date (six months after the completion date) the PCU can still incur expenditures 
related to so called winding up expenditures e.g. Final Audit, Project completion report, Project staff 
salaries involved in the winding up activities, PCU maintenance cost, project completion workshop. 
IFAD requires the following to be provided by the PCU in order to close the financing: 
  Full recovery of any IFAD advances to the project. In there is balance of funds in the 
designated account at completion date, the transfer has to be made to the account IFAD 
indicated 
  Confirmation of last withdrawal application 
  Submission of final audit report 
  Submission of project completion report 
The Final Audit Report has to cover, the final project year up to the final expenditures and it can be 
paid from the loan available balance by using for example direct payment or Reimbursement of pre 
financed expenditures.  
111 
ANNEX A: POTENTIAL RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
CREDIT & GUARANTEE FUNDS AND GRANTS & SUBSIDIES. 
1. CREDIT FUNDS 
Risk 
1. Diversion of credit to non-
productive activities 
Rating 
Medium 
2. Untimely disbursement of 
credit funds leading to 
disbursement not coinciding 
with the crop calendar. Crop 
calendars  captured in business 
plans are not properly used 
and disbursements are made 
without recourse to them  
3. Late loan approval leading to 
late disbursement 
4. Production risk due to 
drought, pests and diseases 
High 
High 
High 
5. Marketing risk including side 
selling, price volatility 
6. Non-participation of 
financial institutions in credit 
administration. 
7. Default risk – perception of 
rural small-holder farmers is 
that loan funds are 
government money. 
High 
Medium 
High 
8. Risk of Default by financial 
institutions 
Low 
Mitigating Measures 
1. Tranche disbursement with close monitoring to 
see whether previous disbursement have been 
applied to the letter 
2. Cashless disbursement, where in place of cash, 
inputs are given as package. This would minimize the 
diversion. 
Some IFAD projects (NRGP, GASIP) adopted this 
practice in Ghana. 
1. Disbursements should be made in strict adherence 
to the crop calendar. 
2. Loans approved should be  disbursements strictly 
according to the crop calendar. Business plans should 
incorporate crop calendars. 
When approval is late, disbursement should not be 
made in the same year but be done the following 
cropping season for effectiveness and efficiency. 
1. General peril insurance from GAIP 
2. Supplementary irrigation through boreholes and 
solar pumps 
3. Use of drought resistant seeds for adaption. 
Strong off-taker agreements binding on all parties 
through the value chain approach. 
Strong Tripartite arrangement which should be 
implemented to the letter with conditions binding on 
all parties. 
1. Loans should go through participating financial 
institutions by wholesaling through the PFIs and not 
directly from the project.  This would help to nib the 
freebie mentality of rural farmers in the bud. 
2. Use of GIRSAL to underwrite up to 70% of losses 
3. Adequate collateral should be provided and cash 
collateral (10%) through voluntary savings used as 
part collateral. 
Loans to PFIs are to be deducted at source and so 
PFIs should provide bank guarantees.  
T-bills/Government Bonds to be used to secure loan 
funds from wholesale institution/fund manager. 
2. GRANTS AND SUBSIDIES 
Risk 
1. Distortion of financial 
market 
Rating 
High 
Mitigation 
1. Proper targeting of beneficiaries for inclusive 
growth. 
112 
2. Smuggling 
High 
3. Operational risk regarding 
application process and overall 
management 
Medium 
3. GUARANTEE FUNDS 
Risk 
1. Credit risk: crystallization of 
the guarantee. 
2. Timeliness of Guarantee 
funds to honour due liabilities. 
3. Political risk 
Rating 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
4. Overall operational risk of 
the guarantee funds with 
respect to application 
assessment, portfolio 
monitoring, etc. 
The use of output-based subsidies through procuring 
with higher prices. This should however be done 
within the system of smallholder farmer-off-taker 
model to ensure inclusiveness 
Regular audits, 
Monitoring and reporting 
Mitigation 
Re-insurance by Guarantee institution 
Re-insurance 
Loan applications and all processes to be done by the 
private sector. Guarantee fund to be run by private 
company. 
Regular audits, 
Monitoring and reporting. 
113 
Chapter 7: Procurement and contracting 
Country Level Procurement Framework  
The Ghana Public Procurement Act 2003 (Act 663) as Amended Act 2016 (Act 914) (“the Act”), is the 
law exclusively governing public procurement of goods, works and services by all departments and 
ministries and agencies (MDAs). Regulations Rules and Directives have been provided to attend the 
Act. The Public Procurement Authority (PPA) is exclusively responsible for defining procurement 
policies, overseeing compliance and grievance redressal systems. In the MDAs, there are dedicated 
staff for procurement. However, there is a lack of procurement skills/expertise.  
Features of the Amended Act 914 of 2016 
  The Amended Public Procurement Act 914 has taken good steps toward aligning the public 
procurement system with international standards. Notable developments include solidifying 
the scope of application of the law by reducing non-competitive procurement procedures, 
enabling the use of e-procurement, and introducing framework agreements. Furthermore, 
the Amended Act includes provisions on institutional arrangements in procuring entities, adds 
a code of conduct for public officials and employees and private sector participants and 
addresses conflicts of interest in public procurement. 
  Prohibits resorting to the splitting of contracts in order to circumvent the conditions, rules 
and procedures.  
  The Amended Act 914 kept the methods of public procurement that existed under the Act 
663 and supplement them with some new and special mechanisms such as the ‘two-stage 
tendering process’, as well as different procurement methods for complex transactions and 
contracts of interrelated and multilateral nature such as, separate Standard Bidding 
documents procurement of IT equipment, Textbooks, Health Sector Goods and also standard 
Complex time/lumpsum and framework contract templates. 
  Obligates the procuring entities to use the Standard Bidding Documents that will be issued by 
the Ghana Public Procurement Authority for public procurement. 
  Provides unit costs of common user items to assist procuring entities estimate costs. 
  Obligates procuring entities to publish all tender opportunities on the newly established E-
Procurement portal (Ghaneps) that include bidding documents and the recommendations for 
award. Also, the procuring entities should publish its Procurement Plans. 
  Obligates procuring entities, before initiating the procurement process to verify the 
availability of funds allocated to them through the GIFMIS. 
  The Amended Act 914 requires businesses to register with the PPA to be able to bid for goods 
and services so that a complete register of potential businesses is maintained and available to 
procuring entities.  
Introduces techniques specifically to promote greater opportunities for SMEs in the public 
procurement market, either directly or through subcontracting opportunities. Additionally, 
the law mandates the application and full rollout of e-procurement. 
 
A complaint mechanism for protests/grievances exists, though not robust. The contract provisions 
provide for dispute resolution amicably for contracts awarded. In case the amicable resolution is not 
successful, the affected party can initiate arbitration under the Ghana Arbitration Act, to settle the 
disputes and/or differences.  
Procurement assessment of MoFA & GASIP 
MOFA has experience of implementing IFAD funded projects. However, the procedures and processes 
adopted for the projects have not been made applicable to the organization as such. In the absence 
of national law which safeguards the interests of transparency, fairness, and grievance redressal of 
the participating bidders/suppliers, it is recommended that IFAD Procurement Guidelines shall be 
114 
followed both at the central level and at the decentralized level by all implementing entities. 
Procurement under the project will be done in compliance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines and 
IFAD Procurement Handbook.  
A Procurement Risk Matrix assessment was carried out for MOFA. Using the tool, the inherent risk 
rating is 2.43 (Medium risk) and if the risk mitigation measures recommended are fully adopted and 
complied, the Net Risk Rating becomes 2.63 (medium risk).  
The detailed PRM assessment is shown below:
115 
IFAD Procurement Risk Matrix 
  Division 
Country 
Project 
  Mission 
WCA 
Ghana 
PROSPER 
Design Mission 
IFAD Procurement Consultant  Fuseini  Ahmed Abu 
  Date 
1st August - 3rd September, 
2021 
INHERENT RISK RATING 
2.43 
#  Description of Risk Feature 
A  COUNTRY RISK ASSESSMENT 
Rating  Assessment Basis 
2.20 
Remarks 
1 
Legal and Regulatory 
Framework 
2.60 
NET  RISK RATING 
Recommendation /Mitigation 
a 
Country procurement law, 
regulations and manual exist 
3 
3 they all exist, 2 only 
two exist, 1 only one 
exist or none 
Public Procurement Act , 2003 [Act 663) 
as Amended Act 2016 (Act 914) is in 
place . Public Procurement regulations 
exist. There are desk instructions on 
public procurements with step by step 
guidance (2003-Act 663). However, 
Regulations are out of date and 
inconsistent with the Amended Act 
2016 (Act 914). Since 2006, the 
Regulations (Manual) has not been 
revised. 
The Public Procurement Authority 
should ensure that the Attorney-
General develops Regulations to 
attend the Amended Act 914. 
Where there are any unclear 
clauses in the law, IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines will be 
applied. Morover the Project 
Implementation Manual will 
include the detailed procedures to 
ensure no gaps in the 
procurement cycle. 
116 
2.63 
Rating 
2.30 
2.60 
2 
b 
Existence of Standard Bidding 
Documents for Goods, Works 
and Services 
3 
3 all exist, 2 only for 
NCB & ICB, none for 
Shopping, 1 none 
exists 
c  Procurement Monitoring 
1 
Use PEFA 
Framework, see 
worksheet for details 
Use the national bidding 
documents for national 
competitive bidding. For ICB use 
the IFAD Standard Bidding 
Documents for Procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services, (1st 
Editions, December 2020). 
A template for Notice of Intention 
to Award/Standstill Period and 
IFAD Policy on Sexual Harassment 
(SH) and Sexual Exploitation and 
Abuse (SEA) should be included in 
the RFB for National Competitive 
Bidding 
3 
Use the IFAD internal tools as 
NOTUS and the CMT, which would 
publish information regarding 
contract award, value of contract, 
method of procurement, and the 
successful bidder. 
2 
All 3 exist. Large number and type of 
tender documents are available on the 
Public Procurement Authority website 
(https://ppa.gov.gh/online-
documents/standard-tender-
documents-revised/). They include 
Bidding Documents for specialized 
procurement such as, Development of 
Textbooks, Information Technology and 
Health Sector Goods. 
The database of the Public Procurement 
Authority (PPA)  captures 70 percent 
(by value) of public procurement; the 
information provides details of contract 
awards, the value of the contract, the 
method of procurement, and the 
successful bidder. However, the 
information from the PPA database is 
provisional for FY2016 and FY2017 and 
has not been independently verified by 
the Auditor-General. The proposal of 
publishing the proposed monthly 
procurement bulletin and implementing 
the already 
developed procurement monitoring 
tool has been addressed. 
117 
d  Procurement Methods 
3 
Use PEFA 
Framework, see 
worksheet for details 
e 
Public access to procurement 
information 
3 
Use PEFA 
Framework, see 
worksheet for details 
2 
Accountability and 
Transparency 
1.80 
a 
Procurement Complaints 
Management 
2 
Use PEFA 
Framework, see 
worksheet for details 
At least, 70.1 percent of public 
procurement is conducted through 
competitive methods (restricted 
tenders, National Competitive Bidding 
[NCB], and International Competitive 
Bidding [ICB]). 
At least, five of the key six procurement 
information elements are made 
available to the public in a timely 
manner through the PPA’s website. 
However, Annual statistics is outdated; 
the most recent published consolidated 
procurement statistics report relates to 
FY2012. 
Use competitive methods outlined 
in the procurement law, following 
IFAD guidelines and procurement 
manuals. 
PROSPER will use the IFAD, UNDB 
Online, PPA, MoFA and GASIP 
project websites to publish 
information regarding contract 
award, value of contract, method 
of procurement, and the 
successful bidder. 
Section 82 of Act 663 (as amended by 
Act 914) outlines the legal framework 
for suspending all procurement 
activities once the ACB receives an 
official complaint from a dissatisfied 
bidder. In practice, however, 
suspension of the procurement process 
is not always done, especially for very 
sensitive national issues. Also the ACB is 
not an independent body but a select 
body of the PPA that also gives advice 
and clearance to Procuring Entities for 
use of Restricted and Sole-Sourced 
Tendering. 
Ensure that the SBD and website 
of the PROSPER Project indicates 
clearly information regarding 
complaints mechanism for 
procurements conducted under 
the Project. Also Bidders will be 
informed at pre-bid meetings of 
the existence of a Bid Complaints 
System that can be used if they 
want to complain a particular 
procurement action. 
3 
3 
2.00 
2 
118 
b 
Country Corruption 
Perception Index score 
2 
The score is 
published on 
Transparency.org. 0 
to 29 = 1, 30 to 60 = 
2, 61 to 100 = 3 
c 
2-tiered system to handle 
complaints 
2 
3 as stated, 2 only a 
single level system, 1 
no system 
All procuring entities as well as 
bidders and service providers, that 
is: suppliers, contractors, and 
consultants shall observe the 
highest standard of ethics during 
the procurement and execution of 
contracts financed under the IFAD 
funded Projects in accordance with 
paragraph 84 of the IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines. The 
Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing 
Fraud and Corruption in its 
Activities and Operations applies 
to the Project. 
There should be a 2nd Level 
Appeal system established within 
the Project that is independent of 
the Project management for 
dissatisfied Bidders/Consultants to 
appeal against the 1st Level 
decision. 
2 
2 
Ghana ranks 75 out of 180 countries in 
the 2020 Corruption Perception Index 
according to Transparency 
International. Nonetheless, the findings 
on internal and external audits, and 
assessment of institutions like 
Transparency International, indicate 
that integrity and ethical values still 
require strengthening. Ghana scored 43 
points out of a total of 100 points. 
The ruling of the Appeals and 
Complaints Board does not prevent any 
aggrieved party from proceeding to the 
law courts for redress, as prescribed 
under Section 78(5) of PPA 663 (as 
amended by Act 914). However, there is 
lack of confidence in the complaints 
mechanism because the body is not 
independent, given some of it members 
are representatives from the regulator 
who are directly involved in 
procurement operations notably 
granting concurrent approvals for  
Restricted Bidding and Sole Sourcing. 
Again, in instances where the Regulator 
is also a purchaser, then a complainant 
in such a case will not have confidence 
in the review system. Besides there is 
no Standstill Period in Award of 
119 
contracts that would mandate 
Procuring Entities to notify all Bidders of 
an impending award for an interested 
Bidder to decide whether to take action 
or not. 
d 
Existence of a debarment 
system 
e 
Existence of an independent 
and competent local 
authority responsible for 
investigating corruption 
allegations 
1 
2 
3 full existence, 2 
existence of 
complaints body that 
is the authority, 1 
does not exist 
3 existence of 
independent Anti-
Corruption agency, 2 
existence of an office 
within a government 
ministry/agency that 
carries out some/all 
of these functions, 1 
does not exist 
B 
PROJECT INSTITUTIONAL RISK 
ASSESSMENT 
2.66 
The debarment process is not yet 
established by the Public Procurement 
Authority (PPA) even though the legal 
regime has provisions for debarment. 
PROSPER will ensure that IFAD’s 
debarment list is respected in 
awarding contracts under IFAD 
financing; and assist IFAD 
investigations pertaining to the 
funded activities. 
The Office of the Independent Special 
Prosecutor carries out such 
investigations into instances of 
corruption by Public Officials. However 
it has not been able to successfully 
prosecute a single case. 
Other bodies such as Imani Africa, 
Ghana Anti-Corruption Coalition 
and Ghana Integrity Initiative puts 
the government on its toes to 
investigate and prosecute corrupt 
government officials. 
2 
2 
2.96 
120 
1 
Capability in Public 
Procurement 
3.00 
a 
Existence of a Procurement 
Unit with at least 2 staff 
members (Design stage, 
reference is to govt agency) 
Existence of a Procurement 
Officer (Implementation) 
3 
b 
Staff member(s) have at least 
7 years experience in donor-
funded public procurement 
3 
3 as stated, 2 one 
staff member, 1 does 
not exist (at Design 
stage) 
3 as stated, 2 
someone else doing 
Procurement, 1 
procurement 
function not 
consistently handled 
by anyone 
3 as stated, 2 for less 
than 7 years and/or  
experience in public 
procurement but not 
donor-funded, 1 for 
less than 3 years 
experience 
3.00 
The Ministry of Agriculture (MoFA) has 
a Procurement Unit that is staffed with 
competent procurement personnel. 
Recruit an additional procurement 
officer to assist the GASIP 
Procurement Manager carry out 
procurement under PROSPER. 
3 
The head of the MoFA Procurement 
unit has an MSc and is very experienced 
in donor procurement management 
with not less than 15 years experience 
in procurement management. He is 
assisted by 4 staff, 2 of them have 
Master’s degrees in various Supply 
Chain disciplines.  
Also GASIP has an experienced 
Procurement Manager who is in charge 
of GASIP (IFAD-funded project), 
Procurement. He has a BSc. Building 
Technology and an MBA in Strategic and 
Project Management with not less than 
15 years of experience in 15 years’ 
experience in Public Procurement and 
Contract Administration, including 
donor-funded procurement. He is 
currently the Procurement Manager for 
the IFAD-funded Project, GASIP. 
121 
There is the need to recruit an 
additional procurement officer to 
assist the GASIP Procurement 
Manager carry out procurement 
under PROSPER. 
3 
c 
What is the general quality of 
documents produced by the 
procurement office? 
3 
3 for very good 
bidding documents, 
evaluation reports 
and contracts, 2 for 
mediocre 
documents, 1 for 
documents with bad 
quality 
PROSPER should ensure that 
Procurement staff are well 
experienced in producing bidding 
documents and evaluation reports 
3 
Nine (9) Contracts for Goods, Works 
and Services (3 per category) were 
reviewed at MoFA.  The review of 
documentation includes request from 
user department all through to contract 
close out. The quality of documentation 
on file were of satisfactory quality 
except for Technical Evaluation Reports 
for Consultancy Services where Annex 1 
(ii) "Key Staff", were left out.  
Similarly, nine (9) contracts for Goods, 
Works and Services for GASIP were 
reviewed (3 per category). 
Documentation on file was good. 
However, some gaps have been 
identified at the level of the application 
of standard procedures for 
procurement methods and evaluation 
process. 
e.g, (i) Bidding document for Goods 
(Supply of Vehicles); Section III, 
(Evaluation & Qualification Criteria), did 
not indicate how deviations from 
Delivery Period and Payments will be 
evaluated. 
(ii) Technical Evaluation Report for 
Consultancy Services did not have 
Annex 1 (ii) Evaluation of Key Staff, (iii) 
Use of wrong template for consultancy 
services assignment.. 
122 
d 
Do procurement staff have 
immediate access to the legal 
and regulatory framework 
documents? 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
e 
Are the procurement and 
financial management 
functions separated? 
3 
3 for total 
separation, 2 for 
some separation, 1 
for procurement 
being done by FM 
staff 
All Legal and regulatory framework 
documents are on the Public 
Procurement Authority website and are 
available for free download 
Yes, There is a Procurement Manager 
and a Project Accountant in GASIP with 
separate terms of reference. As 
indicated in the Procurement Act of 
2003 (as amended in 2016), a 
procurement unit facilitates the 
process, and a procurement committee 
evaluates bids. The Procurement Unit 
initiates the Purchase. After the goods 
and services are received, a Store 
Receiving Voucher (SRV) is completed 
by a stores officer. Supplier invoices are 
processed by the Financial Controller. 
PROSPER staff should know how to 
get all procurement related 
regulations and SBDs 
3 
PROSPER should ensure that the 
procurement function and FM 
function are separated under. 
3 
2 
Public Procurement 
Processes 
i  Procurement Methods 
2.33 
2.00 
2.92 
3.00 
123 
a 
Procurement methods for 
Goods consistent with IFAD 
Guidelines 
2 
3 as stated, 2 for 
national or 
international, 1 for 
none 
The PIM for PROSPER should 
include clear procurement 
procedures, responsibilities, and 
process timelines that are 
consistent with IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines. 
3 
A sample of three (3) Procurement 
acctivities for MoFA for procurement of 
Goods were reviewed. To a large 
extent, the National systems for Goods 
procurement are consistent with IFAD 
guidelines. 
The National Standard Bidding 
document (NSBD) for Goods includes 
General Conditions of Contracts (GCC) 
for public sector contracts, the dispute 
resolution mechanism and enforcement 
procedures of outcome of the dispute 
resolution process. 
However, there is a deviation for 
periods allowed for advertising under 
NCB. The PPA stipulates 2 - 6 weeks 
whilst IFAD requires a minimum of 4 
weeks advertising. 
Similarly, 3 procurement for GASIP were 
also reviewed. The results of the 
findingswere the same as the findings 
under MoFA Goods procurement. 
124 
b 
Procurement methods for 
Works consistent with IFAD 
Guidelines 
2 
3 as stated, 2 for 
national or 
international, 1 for 
none 
The Works Procurement methods 
should be strengthened to include 
a template in the Bidding 
documents for Environmental, 
Social, Health and Safety 
Performance Security so as to 
ensure compliance of Contractors' 
C-ESMP plans during construction. 
The PIM for the PROSPER will 
include clear procurement 
procedures, responsibilities, and 
process timelines 
3 
A sample of three (3) Procurement 
activities for MoFA for procurement of 
Works were reviewed. To a large 
extent, the National systems for Works 
procurement are consistent with IFAD 
guidelines. 
The National Standard Bidding 
document (NSBD) for Works includes 
General Conditions of Contracts (GCC) 
for public sector contracts, the dispute 
resolution mechanism and enforcement 
procedures of outcome of the dispute 
resolution process. 
However, there is a deviation for 
periods allowed for advertising under 
NCB. The PPA stipulates 2 - 6 weeks 
whilst IFAD requires a minimum of 4 
weeks advertising. 
Similarly, 3 procurement for GASIP were 
also reviewed. The results of the 
findings were the same as the findings 
under MoFA Works procurement. 
However the there is a deviation for 
periods allowed for advertising under 
NCB. The PPA stipulates 2 - 6 weeks 
whilst IFAD requires a minimum of 4 
weeks advertising. 
Also the Bidding document does not 
include a template for Environmental, 
Social, Health and Safety Performance 
Security. 
125 
c 
Procurement methods for 
Services consistent with IFAD 
Guidelines 
2 
3 for large-value 
method for firms, 
small value method 
for firms and method 
for individual 
consultants; 2 for 
two of the above; 1 
for only one or less 
d 
Easy access to bidding 
documents by foreign firms 
2 
3 bidding documents 
are free and could be 
issued/sent 
electronically; 2 
foreign bidders have 
A sample of three (3) Procurement 
activities for MoFA for procurement of 
Consultancy Services were reviewed. To 
a large extent, the National systems for 
Services procurement are consistent 
with IFAD guidelines. 
The National Standard Bidding 
document (NSBD) for Services includes 
General Conditions of Contracts (GCC) 
for public sector contracts, the dispute 
resolution mechanism and enforcement 
procedures of outcome of the dispute 
resolution process. The PPA has 
templates for Large & Complex Time-
based/Lumpsum Consultancy 
assignments, Small Time-
based/Lumpsum Consultancy 
assignments and Minor Consulting 
Services. 
However, there is a deviation for 
periods allowed for advertising under 
NCB. The PPA stipulates 2 - 6 weeks 
whilst IFAD requires a minimum of 4 
weeks advertising. 
Similarly, 3 procurement for GASIP were 
also reviewed. The PPA stipulates 2 - 6 
weeks whilst IFAD requires a minimum 
of 4 weeks advertising. 
Though in principle, foreign Bidders are 
allowed to bid, yet the eligibility 
requirements do not favour them, such 
as, Social Security and Tax Clearance 
certificates requirements for National 
126 
The Procurement methods for 
Services under PROSPER would be 
included in the PIM for the Project 
including clear procurement 
procedures, responsibilities, and 
process timelines 
3 
The Procurement methods should 
be included in the PIM for the 
PROSPER including clear 
procurement procedures, 
responsibilities, and process 
3 
to wire funds to 
Project to buy 
bidding docs; 1 
bidding docs not 
practically available 
to foreign bidders 
Competitive Bidding. 
Electronic copies of Bidding Documents 
for MoFA and GASIP are sent to Bidders 
free of charge. 
timelines. These should be in line 
with IFAD guidelines. 
i
i 
Procurement Planning 
2.33 
a 
Are procurement plans 
prepared ahead of time and 
consistent with annual work 
plans/budgets? 
2 
3 prepared ahead 
and consistent, 2 one 
of either, 1 none 
b 
Do procurement people 
participate in the annual 
work planning processes? 
2 
3 if required by 
regulation  and 
practised, 2 if 
required by 
regulation, 1 if none 
of above 
3.00 
3 
3 
The PIM for the PROSPER should 
include detailed description for the 
Procurement Plan and a realistic 
Cashflow forecast to attend the 
procurement plans for IFAD's 
approval. 
The PROSPER PIM would clearly 
stipulate the participation of the 
procurement staff in the 
preparation of the AWP&B 
Section 21 of PPA Act 663 (as amended 
in 2016) mandates all procuring entities 
to prepare and submit annual 
procurement plans not later than one 
month before the end of the financial 
year to its entity’s tender committee for 
approval and publication. A review of 
the MOFA 2020 Procurement Plans 
indicated that procurement plans were 
approved several months late in the 
year to which the plan relates due to 
delays in Parliamentary approval of 
budgets for MDAs. GASIP Procurement 
Plans showed instances of some delays 
in approval of their plans and in some 
instances, expected cashflows were not 
met, leading to chnages in the 
procurement plan. 
Budget preparation serves as a 
coordinating mechanism for the the 
MOFA and GASIP. Both MOFA and 
GASIP Procurement staff participate in 
the preparation of their Annual Work 
Plans and Budgets. 
127 
Are Procurement Plans done 
using an effective format 
with planned and actual rows 
across 3 different categories 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Procurement Processes 
2 
c 
i
i
i 
a 
Minimum number of 
quotations established by law 
3 
3 for three or more; 
2 for two, 1 if it does 
not state or less than 
two 
b 
Minimum number of days for 
advertised procurement 
under competitive bidding 
processes 
1 
3 for minimum of 30 
days; 2 for minimum 
of 20 days; 1 for less 
than 20 days or not 
stated 
The MOFA Procurement Plan uses the 
PPA procurement planning template 
which is available on the ppa.gov.gh 
website for free download.  GASIP uses 
the current IFAD procurement planning 
template which is available on the IFAD 
website. 
Section 43 (A) of the Amended PPA Act 
2016 (Act 914) provides for evaluation 
of at least 3 quotations. A review of 
Request for Quotation method used by 
MoFA showed that at least 3 quotations 
were evaluated 
Section 44 (7) of the PPA Act 2003 as 
amended provides for at least 2 weeks. 
For major procurements, 2 weeks may 
not be sufficient to enable bidders 
submit competent bids.  
The Bidding documents/Request for 
Proposals for both MoFA and GASIP all 
showed that at least 4 weeks was 
provided to Bidders/Consultants to 
prepare and submit their 
Bids/Proposals. 
The PROSPER PIM would clearly 
stipulate the right procurement 
planning template to use. 
The PIM for the PROSPER would 
include clear procurement 
procedures, responsibilities, and 
process timelines for all methods 
PROSPER will ensure that the 
Procurement Plan will include the 
minimum bidding period, suitable 
for the different procurement 
methods. 
3 
3 
3 
2 
128 
c 
Is there enough time 
provided for bidders to ask 
questions and receive 
answers in the bidding 
process? 
3 
3 if bidders have a 
minimum of 3 days 
for the RFQ method 
and 7 days for 
competitive methods 
to ask questions, 2 if 
less than 3 days for 
RFQ and less than 7 
but more than 4 days 
for competitive 
methods, 1 if not 
mentioned in RFQ 
and less than 4 days 
for competitive 
procurements 
Bidders of the MOFA and GASIP 
procurement under ICB and NCB are 
usually given at least 10 days to bid 
submission to request for clarification 
and all clarification requests were 
responded to by both MoAF and GASIP. 
For RFQ, Bidders are usually given a 
minimum of 3 days to request 
clarification. 
PROSPER will ensure that bidding 
documents include the minimum 
bidding period, suitable for the 
different procurement methods 
and also provide sufficient period 
for bidders seeking clarification. 
d 
Are clarifications provided to 
all bidders? 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Yes, A review of 18 Bidding documents 
for the 3 categories of procurement (9 
from MOFA and 9 from GASIP), shows 
that clarifications are sent to all Bidders 
concurrently. 
e 
Are bids received prior to the 
deadline securely stored? 
f 
Are procurement securities 
securely stored? 
3 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Yes, both MOFA and GASIP have Tender 
Boxes that are secured during Bidding. 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Yes, Securities are kept by the MOFA 
Contracts Officer while in GASIP they 
are kept in a safe in the Finance 
Department. 
129 
The PIM for the PROSPER will 
include clear procurement 
procedures, responsibilities, and 
process timelines for all methods. 
PROSPER will ensure the 
Procurement Plan will include the 
minimum bidding 
period/clarification requests, 
suitable for the different 
procurement methods. 
The PROSPER PIM will include in 
the procedures that all bids 
received before the deadline 
should be securely stored. 
The PROSPER PIM will include in 
the procedures that all bid 
securities will be securely stored. 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 for both, 2 for bid 
openings being 
conducted more 
than an hour after 
receipt, 1 for bid 
openings not being 
conducted 
3 for both, 2 for 
minutes being taken 
but not being sent, 1 
for none 
3 for both, 2 for 
qualified but not ad-
hoc, 1 for ad-hoc or 
none 
g 
Are public bid openings 
conducted for advertised 
procurements, and within an 
hour of receipt of bids? 
h 
Are minutes of bid openings 
taken, and sent to bidders 
who submitted bids? 
i 
j 
Are evaluations conducted by 
a suitably qualified ad-hoc 
evaluation committee? 
In evaluation, is 
responsiveness based on 
criteria requirements in the 
bidding documents? 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Yes, in MOFA and GASIP, 
responsiveness is based on criteria 
requirements in the bidding documents 
k 
Are evaluations completed 
within the bid validity period? 
2 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
There are usually some delays in the 
evaluation of Bids. 
l 
Are conditions precedent to 
contract effectiveness clearly 
stipulated in the contract? 
(i.e., advance payment 
security, performance 
security, insurance, etc) 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Yes 
130 
Yes, A review of the 18 Bid/Proposal 
Opening  and Evaluation Reports from 
both MOFA and GASIP showed that 
Bids/Proposals were opened within an 
hour of receipt of Bids/Proposals. 
The PROSPER PIM will include that 
public bid openings are conducted 
for advertised procurements, and 
within an hour of receipt of bids 
Yes, minutes of bid opening are 
recorded. However,  there were 
instances where minutes of Bid Opening 
were recorded but not sent to Bidders. 
Yes 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
The PROSPER PIM will include 
requirement that minutes of bid 
openings be recorded and sent to 
all bidders who submitted bids. 
The formation of the evaluation 
committee should be based on the 
nature of the procurement. This 
should be in the PROSPER PIM. 
The PROSPER PIM should refer to 
the procedures for evaluation. 
IFAD through its close follow up 
monitoring will ensure proper 
procedures are followed. 
The indicative timelines and IFAD 
service standards for the 
procurement procedures that will 
be incorporated in the PROSPER 
PIM will be closely monitored by 
IFAD 
The PROSPER PIM will include clear 
procurement procedures, 
responsibilities respecting contract 
management 
m 
Does the agency maintain a 
complete record of the 
process? This would include 
copies of all public 
advertisements, pre-
qualification documents (if 
used, the pre-qualification 
evaluation report 
documenting any decisions 
not to pre-qualify certain 
potential bidders), the 
bidding documents and any 
addenda, a record of any pre-
bid meetings, the bid opening 
minutes, the final bid 
evaluation report (including a 
detailed record of the 
reasons used to accept or 
reject each bid), appeals 
against procedures or award 
recommendations, a signed 
copy of the final contract and 
any performance and 
advance payment securities 
issued, etc. 
1 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
A review of MoFA and GASIP 
procurement files showed some 
instances of incomplete 
documentation. 
n 
Are all contracts awarded 
advertised publicly? 
2 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Some contracts were yet to be 
published on the PPA website. 
131 
PROSPER will ensure that complete 
documentation of procurement 
processes is kept on procurement 
files at the Project Office, including 
all related documents and the 
records for transactions 
implemented by other 
implementing agencies. Provide 
sufficient working area/rooms and 
space for record keeping/filing. 
This will be included in the 
procurement section of the PIM. 
The project will start using NOTUS 
as this will ensure that all 
procurement documentation is 
filed in NOTUS for No Objection in 
all stages of procurement and non-
procurement activities (AWPB/PP). 
2 
PROSPER will ensure that all 
contracts awarded are published 
on the relevant websites (PPA, 
UNDB Online, IFAD, PROSPER) 
2 
i
v 
Contract Administration and 
Management 
2.55 
a 
Existence of authority levels 
in the contract management 
process 
3 
3 for existence, 2 for 
some practice, 1 for 
none 
b 
Existence of approval 
thresholds for contract 
amendments 
c 
Is there an effective contract 
monitoring 
system/framework in place? 
d 
Is there a process to monitor 
delivery of goods to verify 
quantity and quality? 
3 
2 
2 
3 for existence, 2 for 
some practice, 1 for 
none 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
There's always a client's representative 
for each contract in MoFA and GASIP. In 
contract management at MoFA, for 
example, in terms of payment, invoices 
from suppliers or contractors are taken 
through series of approval levels before 
final approval by the Chief Director of 
MoFA.  
Similarly in the case of GASIP the 
National Projects Coordinator does the 
final approval after initial review by 
technical lead for an activity. 
All Contract amendments under MoFA 
are approved by the Chief Director of 
tMoFA. 
GASIP goes through IFAD's NO objection 
processes. 
The M&E teams and Technical Leads for 
all activities of MoFA and GASIP 
undertake regular monitoring of all 
projects. Components Heads and their 
respective officers all conduct regular 
supervision exercises to ensure 
successful execution of projects. 
Yes, the MoFA has a Contract 
Management Team which inlcudes End 
Users to receive, inspect and accept 
goods delivered. 
 In GASIP, there is an effective system 
for goods reciept note affirmation by 
132 
The procedure will be well 
illustrated in the procurement 
section of the PIM 
The procedure will be well 
illustrated in the procurement 
section of the PIM 
The procedure will be well 
illustrated in the procurement 
section of the PIM 
The procedure will be well 
illustrated in the procurement 
section of the PIM 
2.91 
3 
3 
3 
3 
e 
Is there a framework for 
approval of deliverables and 
payment process for 
consulting services contract? 
f 
Is there a process for 
resolution of final payment 
and contract closure? 
3 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
g 
Are contract disputes 
handled in accordance with a 
formal complaints/arbitration 
system? 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
both the supplier and the receiver of 
goods. 
in both MoFA and GASIP, Consultants 
are paid on deliverables in the contract 
and components heads in charge of 
implementing such activities will 
certifity alongside M&E 
recommendation before payment is 
made. 
In MoFA and GASIP, final payments are 
normally issued on completion of 
contracts. In works contract for 
instance, the Infrastructure engineer 
and the independent consultant 
confirm that all defective works have 
been corrected before final payment. In 
goods and consultancy procurement 
similar measures are taken by the 
relevant heads before final payments 
are issued. 
The MoFA and GASIP have not suffered 
any issue of contractual disputes yet. 
However, the form of contracts signed 
between the project and suppliers & 
contractors has provisions on dispute 
resolution, mainly through amicable 
resolution or by arbitration. 
133 
The procedure will be well 
illustrated in the procurement 
section of the PIM 
The procedure will be well 
illustrated in the procurement 
section of the PIM 
IFAD through its close follow up 
will ensure proper procedures are 
followed. These procedures would 
be included in the PIM. 
3 
3 
3 
h 
Are works contracts 
supervised by independent 
engineers or a named project 
manager? 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Works contracts under MoFA and GASIP 
are supervised by independent 
engineers who are also engaged 
separately. The Infrastructure Engineer 
is the Project Manager for low value 
works contracts at MoFA and GASIP. 
i 
Are contracts completed on 
schedule and within the 
approved/ contracted 
contract price? 
1 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
Most contracts are completed on 
schedule and are completed within 
budget. In an stance at MoFA where the 
final contract price was higher than the 
budget, the scope was reduced. 
j 
Does the organization have 
contract registers that 
register all contracts (with 
names, prices and dates), per 
procurement category? 
3 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
MoFA Procurement Unit does have a 
Contracts Register though not 
compliant with IFAD's requirement.  
In the case of GASIP, procurement unit 
keeps a contract register for all 
contracts under the project, though it is 
not submitted regularly to IFAD. 
134 
3 
2 
Whenever needed, an 
independent consulting 
firm/individual consultant will be 
recruited to supervise the works. 
These procedures will be 
illustrated and included in the 
PROSPER PIM. 
Contract supervision and 
monitoring, and application of the 
conditions of contract will be 
improved through formation of 
contract management and 
monitoring teams, led by the 
National Projects Coordinator and 
Focal persons, including the 
technical and the procurement 
teams, and beneficiaries (if 
necessary); Close monitoring will 
be carried out to ensure 
adherence to stipulates of the 
sections in the respective Contract 
Documents and to minimize poor 
performance of service providers. 
These procedures will be included 
in the PIM. 
The PROSPER PIM will require 
submission of Contracts Register 
to IFAD monthly. 
3 
2 
3 for all, 2 for some, 
1 for none 
In both MoFA and GASIP, contract 
records are maintained satisfactorily. 
Payments are based on deliverables in 
the contract and components heads in 
charge of implementing such activities 
will certify alongside M&E 
recommendation before payment is 
made. Variation and change orders are 
well documented. 
PROSPER will ensure that complete 
documentation of procurement 
processes is kept on procurement 
files, including all related 
documents and the records for 
transactions implemented by 
other partners will all be Included 
in the PIM. 
3 
k 
Are adequate contract 
administration records 
maintained? (These would 
include contractual notices 
issued by the supplier, 
contractor, purchaser or 
employer; a detailed record 
of all changes or variation 
orders issued affecting the 
scope, qualities, timing or 
price of the contract; records 
of invoices and payments, 
progress reports, certificates 
of inspection, acceptance and 
completion; records of claim 
and dispute and their 
outcomes; etc.) 
Risk Rating System 
3  L: Low Risk 
2  M: Medium Risk 
1  H: High Risk 
135 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Risk Mitigation measures proposed  
The major risk mitigation measures recommended are adoption of (i) setting up of a procurement unit 
with a procurement specialist; (ii) Standard Bidding Documents including contract templates embedding 
the bid process, clarifications, evaluation and complaint handling mechanism and policy on preventing 
fraud and corruption and dispute resolution; (iii) contract management maintenance of contract registers 
and contract monitoring.  
It is to be ensured that contract management is not merely reporting the contracts but continuously 
monitoring the performance against the deliverables, conditions of the contract, validity and frequent 
review and resolution of implementation bottlenecks; (iv) preparation and adoption of procurement 
manual consistent with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook which will require 
IFAD’s concurrence. Any changes/amendments/modifications in the approved Procurement Manual also 
requires IFAD’s no objection and (v) Procurement plan for the initial 18 months of project implementation 
listing out all procurement activities to be taken up by the project consolidated at the PCU level to be 
prepared and submitted along with the first AWP&B-For the subsequent years of implementation 
procurement covering the 12 month period will be sufficient -The procurement plan will be updated at 
least semi-annually or as required to reflect the actual project implementation needs - All procurement 
plans and its revisions will have to be approved by IFAD- Any procurement undertaken which is not as per 
the approved plan will not be eligible for IFAD financing; The summary of the risk matrix is provided 
below.  
The risk matrix will be reviewed annually and based on the observations/ review, implementation 
arrangements mitigating measures will be revised.  
Initial Risk 
High 
Medium 
No. 
Key Issues of the Risk Assessment Matrix  
Risk factor 
Regulations are out of 
date and inconsistent 
with the Amended Act 
2016 
The database of the 
Public Procurement 
Authority (PPA) only 
captures 70 percent (by 
value) of public 
procurement 
Suspension of the 
procurement process 
when the ACB receives 
a complaint from a 
dissatisfied Bidder is 
not always done, 
especially for very 
sensitive national 
issues. 
High 
Residual risk 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Mitigation measures 
The Public Procurement Authority should 
ensure that the Attorney-General 
develops Regulations to attend the 
Amended Act 914. 
Use the IFAD internal tools as NOTUS 
and the CMT, which would publish 
information regarding contract award, 
value of contract, method of 
procurement, and the successful bidder. 
PROSPER Project will indicate clearly, 
information regarding complaints 
mechanism for procurements conducted 
under the Project. Also Bidders will be 
informed at pre-bid meetings of the 
existence of a Bid Complaints System 
that can be used if they want to 
complain a particular procurement 
action. 
The debarment process 
is not yet established 
High 
PROSPER will ensure that IFAD’s 
debarment list is respected in awarding 
Medium 
1 
by the PPA even though 
the legal regime has 
provisions for 
debarment. 
Low rating on 
Corruption Perception 
Index 
Lack of confidence in 
the complaints 
mechanism because 
the body is not 
independent 
The debarment process 
not yet established by 
the Public Procurement 
Authority (PPA) even 
though the legal regime 
has provisions for 
debarment. 
The Office of the 
Independent Special 
Prosecutor has not 
been able to 
successfully prosecute 
a single case even 
though there have 
been complaints from 
interested parties 
about corruption. 
Insufficient time to 
enable bidders submit 
competent bids. 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Incomplete records of 
procurement process 
Medium 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
contracts under IFAD financing; and 
assist IFAD investigations pertaining to 
the funded activities. 
PROSPER will ensure that procuring 
entities as well as bidders and service 
providers, that is: suppliers, contractors, 
and consultants shall observe the highest 
standard of ethics during the 
procurement and execution of contracts 
financed under the IFAD funded Projects 
in accordance with paragraph 84 of the 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
PROSPER should establish a 2nd Level 
Appeal system established within the 
Project that is independent of the 
Project management for dissatisfied 
Bidders/Consultants to appeal against 
the 1st Level decision. 
PROSPER will ensure that IFAD’s 
debarment list is respected in awarding 
contracts under IFAD financing; and 
assist IFAD investigations pertaining to 
the funded activities. 
Medium 
Medium  
Medium 
Other bodies such as Imani Africa, Ghana 
Anti-Corruption Coalition and Ghana 
Integrity Initiative puts the government 
on its toes to investigate and prosecute 
corrupt government officials. 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
PROSPER will ensure that the 
Procurement Plan will include the 
minimum bidding period, suitable for the 
different procurement methods. 
PROSPER will ensure that complete 
documentation of procurement 
processes is kept on procurement files at 
the Project Office, including all related 
documents and the records for 
transactions implemented by other 
implementing agencies. 
2 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
PROSPER will ensure all contracts 
awarded will be published on IFAD and 
PROSPER websites. 
PROSPER will ensure that Contract 
supervision and monitoring, and 
application of the conditions of contract 
will be improved through formation of 
contract management and monitoring 
teams, led by the National Projects 
Coordinator and Focal persons, including 
the technical and the procurement 
teams, and beneficiaries (if necessary) 
PROSPER will ensure regular updates of 
the Contracts Register 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
High 
High 
Publication of Contract 
awards on the PPA 
website not up to date. 
Contracts not 
completed on schedule 
and within the 
approved/ contracted 
contract price? 
Medium 
Contracts Register is 
not regularly updated 
and not submitted to 
IFAD Monthly as 
required 
Methods and Prior Review Thresholds 
In view of the above risk rating and given the specific thresholds for procurement financed under the 
Project will be stipulated in the Letter to the Recipient (LTR), the following procurement thresholds and 
prior review thresholds are recommended: 
Procurement Thresholds* 
Currency: US$ 
GOODS/NCS 
Shopping 
NCB 
≤ 70,000 
> 70,000 to < 200,000 
WORKS/NCS 
Shopping 
≤ 190,000 
CONSULTING SERVICES/NCS 
CQS 
≤ 70,000 
NCB 
> 190,000 to < 800,000 
ICB 
ICB 
QCBS 
≥  200,000  
≥  800,000  
≥  100,000  
* Direct Contracting, Single Source Selection, Fixed Budget Selection, Quality-based Selection and Least-
Cost Selection methods will be selected on a case by case basis. ICS is to be used for all selection for 
individual consultants, regardless of value. For Non-consulting Services (NCS), please use the thresholds 
for Goods, Works or Services, based on the procurement or selection methodology being used.  
Prior Review Thresholds (USD) 
Goods 
Works 
Services 
≤   70,000 
≤   150,000 
≤   60,000 
Procurement Regulations applicable to PROSPER: PROSPER will adopt the Amended Ghana Public 
Procurement Act 2016 (Act 914), the Procurement Regulations (to be revised soon), and the IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines 2010. The Ghana Public Procurement Regulations will be subject to further 
3 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
assessment by IFAD when it is issued. Ghana national procurement systems will be followed for 
procurement below ICB thresholds. For International Competitive Bidding (ICB), the IFAD Procurement 
procedures will be used.  
Applicability 
IFAD’s procurement guidelines specify that national procurement systems will be used under the 
conditions that the systems are assessed as satisfactory or better. The Project will adopt the Amended 
Public Procurement Act 914 of 2016, the Procurement Regulations, and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines 
2010. National systems will apply to all procurement except international competitive bidding (ICB) for 
contracts above an agreed threshold. The IFAD guidelines state that ICB procurement will follow the 
procedures recommended by IFAD. The Ghana procurement systems can be relied upon to undertake 
procurement below the agreed ICB thresholds. Procurement of goods and consultancy services shall be 
done in accordance with the provisions of IFAD Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook, 
2010, and as amended from time to time. (The IFAD Procurement Guidelines can be accessed from 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421027/procure_e.pdf/e1a99511-d57d4695-a05b-
3d9b597d0149 and the IFAD Procurement Handbook can be accessed from  
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421018/proc_handbook_e.pdf/2febc53a4244-4447-a788-
d06a632fd3b5). In the absence of national law which safeguards the interests of transparency, fairness, 
and grievance redressal of the participating bidders/suppliers, IFAD Procurement Guidelines shall be 
followed both at all implementing levels. IFAD Procurement guidelines takes precedent over Government 
of Ghana rules and regulations, to the extent such are inconsistent with the IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines.  
Institutional Arrangements 
The ‘Lead Implementing Agency for PROSPER is MoFA which has overall responsibility for the execution of 
the project and retains overall responsibility and accountability for the project to IFAD and the 
Government and will ensure linkages to other relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies, such as the 
Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI), the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of Roads and Transport (Department of Feeder Roads), Ministry 
of Sanitation and Water Resources (Community Water and Sanitation Department), the Ministry of Local 
Government and Rural Development, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Agricultural Extension 
Services Directorate of MoFA and the Departments of Agriculture at the Regional and District levels. 
A network of 166 Business Advisory Centres (BACs) and 57 Business Resource Centres (BRCs) that has 
been established across the country, would under a tripartite management arrangement between REP, 
GEA and participating District Assemblies, provide high-value business development services to the 
business community. 
PROSPER Procurement Activities will be implemented under two institutional arrangements, namely the 
PCU and the ARB APEX Bank at the Bank of Ghana. With regard to procurement management, a 
Procurement Manager and Procurement Officer with the required qualifications and experience will be 
competitively recruited (See Annex 1 of this report for Terms of Reference). With additional Technical 
Assistance to strengthen procurement capacity, the institutions can undertake implementation, 
facilitation, and coordination of the Project with reduced risk.  
Project Management at the Central Level  
At the central level, the PCU will operate within the supervision of the Agricultural Extension Services 
Directorate (DAES), which will provide oversight and strategic direction. The responsibilities of the PCU 
will include the overall coordination of the activities implemented under the project and the 
implementation of Component 3: Project management and policy engagement. 
Procurement activities under the various components/subcomponents are as follows: 
4 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure. 
  Subcomponent 1.1 Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households comprises a 
range of institution-building and skills development activities to enable target communities to 
modernise their farming, move towards efficient off-farm as well as on-farm natural resource 
management, and take ownership of and accountability for their own development initiatives. 
Procurement activities under this subcomponent are further broken down into: 
  Community mobilisation, cluster identification and planning and Capacitation of rural institutions 
and enterprises 
Procurement arrangements under this subcomponent are as follows: 
The PCU will develop terms of reference for recruiting a consultant (Technical Support Agency) through 
an appropriate selection method (Depending on the size and complexity of the assignment). 
The TOR is submitted to IFAD for NO. 
The scope of the assignment will include: 
  Community mobilisation 
  Organization of Workshop/consultation with stakeholders at Regional and District level. It will 
also involve Regional/national departments of MoFA and other ministries. 
  Cluster identification 
  The technical support agency will  
  Assist in the establishment of a Cluster Committee, 
  hold Meetings at community level for identification of cluster 
  provide training of trainers for extension staff 
  Cluster planning 
  Cluster consultation and synthesisation meetings 
  Preparation of cluster plans 
  The ToR will have clear deliverables to be monitored through key performance indicators 
  A REOI is published as per IFAD requirements, 
  A shortlist is recommended to IFAD for NO, 
  Request for Proposal is sent to shortlisted firms, 
  Proposals are received and evaluated, and 
  A contract is signed between the Project and the Consultant to provide technical support to the 
Districts for the activities identified in the TOR.  
  Alongside the above activity, an MOU will be signed between PROSPER and the implementing 
District Assemblies to carry out public awareness campaigns. See Appendix 1 
Household nutrition and diet 
The procurement arrangements will be similar to 1.1.1 above. The scope will include the following 
activities: 
  a Participatory Needs Assessment in each target community and entail training on household 
(HH) methodologies and financial literacy.  
  A Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) study conducted to understand better the local issues 
around nutrition and diet, and to serve as a baseline for the SBCC(SBCC) strategy. 
  dedicated training on post-harvest management, and nutrition education and SBCC for 
communities around healthy and sustainable diets, considering socio-cultural triggers of 
malnutrition in all forms such as teenage pregnancies, gender-biased intra-household food 
5 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
distribution, household economy, gender imbalances as determinants of undernutrition, and 
environmental health. 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure seeks to realize the “public goods” 
investments prioritized by target communities through the Cluster Planning process with three 
complementary types of climate-resilient socioeconomic infrastructure: Off-farm/watershed works and 
hazard mitigation measures; Feeder roads and farm tracks; and Communal social infrastructure. 
Works Procurement under socioeconomic infrastructure will involve the following: 
soil and water conservation structures, such as contour bunds, reforestation and shelter belts, bench 
terraces, tied ridges, water harvesting and storage ponds, as well as climate change hazard mitigation 
measures.  
The procurement arrangements will be as follows: 
  The PCU will recruit an engineering firm to carry out feasibility studies (to determine the technical 
feasibility and economic viability of the investment), produce designs, assist the PCU with 
bidding/selection of contractors and supervise the construction of the infrastructure. 
  The Works procurement will follow the procurement process for Goods, Works and Non-
consulting Services outlined in section K below. 
  Upon completion of the works, the Project will hand over the management of the infrastructure 
to the District Assembly.  
  The maintenance of the infrastructure will be carried out through contributions from members of 
the Water Users Association. 
  The Ghana Irrigation Development Authority will provide technical support during construction 
and maintenance of the infrastructure. 
  The implementation of the “upgrading of strategic feeder roads and farm tracks” is similar to the 
“soil and water conservation structures” and would follow the same procurement procedures. 
The Department of Feeder Roads in the District will provide technical support during construction 
and maintenance upon completion. 
  The procurement approach under (i) and (ii) above will be followed for the “Communal social 
infrastructure.”  
  Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators around 
selected agricultural value chains. 
Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development 
Value chain analysis. This will involve studies to examine in depth the status and characteristics of the 
selected value chains and map the VC actors. This assignment will be carried out through a normal 
consultancy selection. 
Under this subcomponent, Advisory services contract (MOU) will be signed between PROSPER and 10 
BRCs and 20 BACs to provide support to the implementation of PROPSER at the various District 
Assemblies. The MOU will define the object of the engagement and obligations of each party to the 
agreement. 
Procurement under the Creation of and support for partnerships will involve: 
  Training for the preparation of 2 types of business plans; Basic BPs will be financed by the project 
Matching Grant scheme and Advanced BPs to be submitted to the Blended Finance Facility. A 
consultant will be recruited through the normal consultant selection process. The mode of 
6 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
selection will follow the normal consultancy selection process. The scope of the assignment will 
include: 
  Training sessions in the development of green bankable propositions, with particular attention to 
potential enterprises dedicated to women and youth. 
  Evaluation of BBPs for supporting request for a Matching Grant. 
Subcomponent 2.2 Access to rural financial services 
Under this subcomponent, PROSPER will act as a facilitator for the achievement of the outputs.  
Agreements will be signed between the ARB Apex bank and (Clusters and MSMEs) for the BFF. Common 
Management Arrangements will be developed between the ARB APEX Bank and other participating 
Institutions ((i) IGREENFIN Phase I from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) with concessional financing at 0% 
interest rate (1% for solar-power devices); (ii) IFAD’s Agricultural Refinancing Facility (ARF) on how the 
BFF will be managed and the obligations of the different parties under the arrangements. 
Again, the ARB APEX Bank will sign MOU with participating RCBs regarding the types of financial products 
they will offer to various value chain actors and other terms of the engagement.   
Component 3. Project management and Policy engagement 
  Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
  Recruitment of Project Delivery Team including: 
  Staff of the PCU  
  Safeguards and Climate Change Specialist (SCCS), 
  Social Inclusion, Gender and Vulnerability Specialist  
  This will be carried out using the most efficient and effective selection methods that are in 
consonance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
PCU Goods and Equipment 
Vehicles and equipment for project monitoring will be procured through the appropriate procurement 
methods for Goods and in line with IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
Project Monitoring 
A web-based M&E system will be installed and utilized using an appropriate consultant selection process. 
Audits and Independent Verifications would lend themselves to Least Cost Selection procedures as 
outlined in the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
The PROSPER PCU will be responsible to manage and oversee overall Project-related procurement 
including International Competitive Bidding (ICB), National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procurements and 
selection of consultants for consultancy contracts as well as National Shopping. The majority of the 
procurement activities under PROSPER will be implemented through the application of NCB method. 
Appropriate thresholds that can maximize the efficiency of procurement implementation but manage the 
governance risks will be specified in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB).  
The Procurement Manager and Procurement Officer will oversee and carry out PROSPER procurement 
activities (except those enrolled under sub-component 2.2 that will be implemented by ARB APEX Bank 
and other stakeholders (GCF & ARF) in coordination with PCU members and specialized and technical 
units of MoFA.  
The POs will report to the Project Coordinator and their main responsibilities are to:  
7 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  establish and update procurement procedures for the Project based on the IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines; 
  prepare and update the annual procurement plan (in coordination with relevant staff of the PCU) 
based on the AWPB; 
  ensure the timely and transparent procurement of goods, works and services as identified in the 
procurement plan and in accordance with the applicable rules and procedures; 
  prepare bidding documents and coordinate the preparation of relevant inputs such as TORs, 
 
technical specifications and bills of quantities by technical staff or consultants;  
supervise the bidding processes including advertisements, bid opening, bid evaluation, 
negotiation and selection of contractors; prepare bid opening minutes and bid evaluation 
reports;  
  draft contracts for signature by authorized Project representatives and contractors; 
  manage the procurement monitoring database system; prepare periodic reports on the status of 
 
procurement for the Project; 
compile and confidentially keep up-to-date reports, documents and records of all procurement 
activities, ensuring proper documentation, transparency and ease of reference; maintain 
procurement files; 
  monitor the administrative implementation of contracts in coordination with the Finance Unit; 
 
constantly review procurement arrangements in relation to the procurement plan to ensure 
consistency with the financing agreement and identify weaknesses, if any, and measures that 
should be undertaken to mitigate the risks posed by any weaknesses; 
  maintain close liaison with IFAD on all issues pertaining to procurement; 
  participate in Project management meetings and IFAD supervision missions, including the 
preparation of all information required, in particular the procurement records for facilitating 
post-procurement reviews;  
train Project and implementing partners staff on procurement issues; and  
carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project management 
 
 
PROSPER will establish a procurement monitoring system in order to i) fast track each step of PROSPER 
procurement process; ii) monitor the overall procurement processes of the Project putting in place 
corrective actions when needed; iii) ensure the right timing of procurement processes and that tender 
documents are accurately prepared; follow up on requests of No Objections. 
Performance based contracts: For Contracts, MoU and Framework Agreements between PCU and 
vendors, it is suggested that performance-based contracts in the delivery of hardware and software 
goods and services will be adopted. Such contracts will focus on outputs and outcomes of service 
provision, with clear milestones, with triggers for contract extension linked to achievements. There will be 
no automatic extensions in time or scope. All contracts, MOUs and Framework Agreements will include 
payment schedules with performance incentives and penalties, monitoring and quality assessment, and 
value-for-money assessment. They will also define the key responsibilities of the partners at national and 
field levels, and will be jointly monitored and supervised. This is not dissimilar to current government 
personnel procedures which incorporate performance-based assessment. 
Prior and Post Reviews: IFAD will undertake prior and post reviews of procurement made. (a) Prior review 
is when IFAD is required to provide a No-Objection (NO) at key stages of a procurement process. This 
requirement and the associated prior review thresholds will in the Letter to the Borrower. The Country 
Project Management Teams and the PCU are required to use the No-Objection Tracking and Utility 
System (NOTUS) to manage NOs. (b) Post review is the assessment by IFAD of the procurement processes 
conducted by the Borrower/Recipient for a sample of contracts that are not subject to prior preview. Post 
8 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
reviews will cover procurement planning, procurement process, contract awarding and management, and 
risk identification and mitigation. The project will be required to submit to IFAD the bidding document, 
the bid evaluation report and the draft contract documents for the prior review of procurement of goods, 
works and non-consulting services and the draft RFP, the technical evaluation report, the combined 
evaluation report and the negotiated draft contract and the minutes of negotiations in case of 
procurement of consulting services. 99 The procurements covered under prior review, thresholds for the 
same and the thresholds for the mode of procurement will be specified in the Letter to Borrower (LTB). 
Transparency and anti-Corruption. In line with the IFAD General Conditions on Agricultural Development 
Financing and IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its projects, the project should provide a 
commitment to abide by these provisions and establish credible deterrent mechanisms and internal 
controls and cooperate fully with IFAD and the notified Government investigative agencies/authorities. 
The consultants and the suppliers will also be made aware of the provisions and are compliant to these 
provisions. The detailed measures will be included in all the bid documents, contracts and Grant 
agreements ensuring IFAD rights for auditing, investigating provisions and debarment. 
Transparency framework. IFAD’s applies a zero-tolerance approach in cases where investigation 
determines that fraudulent, corrupt, collusive, or coercive actions have occurred in projects financed 
through its loans and grants. Project design includes several measures to promote transparency: (i) 
autonomous central project office and relevant district project management offices, operating on the 
basis of good governance; (ii) annual independent audit; (iii) verification of fiduciary compliance during 
supervision; (iv) independent impact assessments; and (v) more efficient public financial management 
systems and ensuring of transparency by strengthening state oversight. 
Guiding principles of Procurement 
General Provisions 
The procurement of goods and consulting services under the project is to be undertaken by observing the 
following specific requirements.  
Procurement is to be carried out in accordance with the IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines, the respective 
Loan/ Grant agreement, and any duly agreed amendments thereto.  
Procurement is to be conducted within the project implementation period, except where the financing 
agreement provides for retroactive financing and then within the limits therein specified.  
The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated funds as per the financing 
agreement.  
Procurement is to be consistent with the duly approved annual work plan and budget (AWPB) including a 
procurement plan for at least the initial 18 months and subsequently updated annually.  
Procurement is to result in the best value for money as defined by the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
Transparency, Competition, Fairness and Elimination of Arbitrariness 
Public procurement should be conducted in a transparent manner to bring competition, fairness and 
elimination of arbitrariness in the system. This will enable the prospective bidders to formulate 
competitive tenders with confidence. The following are some important measures to achieve the same 
and, thus, secure best value for money: 
The text of the bid document should be user-friendly, self-contained, comprehensive, unambiguous, and 
relevant to the objective of the procurement. The use of terminology used in common parlance in the 
industry should be preferred. 
The specifications of the required goods/terms of reference for consultants should be framed giving 
sufficient details in such a manner that it is neither too elaborately restrictive as to deter potential 
bidders or increase the cost of procurement nor too sketchy to leave scope for sub-standard supply. 
9 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
The bid document should clearly mention the eligibility criteria to be met by the bidders such as minimum 
level of experience, past performance, technical capability, manufacturing facilities, financial position, 
ownership or any legal restriction etc. Restrictions on who is qualified to bid should not stifle competition 
amongst potential bidders. 
The procedure for preparing and submitting the bids; deadline for submission of bids; date, time & place 
of public opening of bids; requirement of earnest money and performance security; parameters for 
determining responsiveness of bidders; evaluating and ranking of bids and criteria for full or partial 
acceptance of bids and conclusion of contract should be incorporated in the document in clear terms. 
Bids should be evaluated in terms of the criteria already incorporated in the bid document, based on 
which bids have been received. Any new condition, which was not incorporated earlier, should not be 
brought into consideration while evaluating the bids. 
Sufficient time should be allowed to the bidders to prepare and submit their bids. 
Suitable provisions should be kept in the bid document allowing the bidders reasonable opportunity to 
question the bid conditions, bidding process, and/or rejection of its bid and the settlement of disputes, if 
any, emanating from the resultant contract. 
It should be made clear in the bid document that bidders are not permitted to alter or modify their bids 
after expiry of the deadline for receipt of bid till the date of validity of bids. 
Negotiations with the bidders for procurement of goods must be avoided. In case of consultancy services 
negotiations may be conducted with the highest combined ranked consultant, to clarify certain aspects 
and to confirm the team of experts proposed. 
The name of the successful bidder to whom the contract is awarded should be appropriately notified by 
the project for the information of general public through its website or any other means. 
Efficiency, Economy and Accountability 
Public procurement procedures must conform to exemplary norms of best practices to ensure efficiency, 
economy and accountability in the system. To achieve this objective, the following key areas should be 
taken care of: 
To reduce delays, PROSPER will prescribe appropriate time frame for each stage of procurement; 
delineate the responsibility of different officials and agencies involved in the purchase process and 
delegate, wherever necessary, appropriate purchase powers to the lower functionaries with due approval 
of the competent authority. 
 PROSPER will ensure conclusion of contract within the original validity of the bids. Extension of bid 
validity must be discouraged and resorted to only in absolutely unavoidable, exceptional circumstances 
with the approval of the competent authority after duly recording the reasons for such extension. 
Value for money 
Underpinning all of the above is the need to obtain value for money for all project procurement activities 
through the optimum combination of several factors, including: 
Applying sound, internationally recognized procurement principles.  
Ensuring that the goods, works or services procured meet the requirements for the task and are not over-
specified.  
Ensuring that the goods, works or services are contracted on the best possible terms, taking into account 
their expected life cycle.  
Ensuring that the provider/supplier of the goods, works or services is qualified, legally entitled and 
competent to execute the contract. 
Best value does not necessarily mean the lowest initial price option, but rather represents the best return 
on investment, taking into consideration the unique and specific 101 circumstances of each procurement 
activity; the balance of time, cost and quality required; and the successful overall outcome of the contract 
in meeting its original objectives.  
10 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Codes of Conduct and Conflicts of Interest 
Codes of Conduct 
Negative perceptions of procurement can quickly and easily be formed by individuals or groups looking in 
at the process from the outside. It is therefore imperative that procurement is not only conducted in an 
ethical, transparent and fair manner, but that it is seen to be conducted that way. 
The ethical conduct require that no person shall use his/her authority, position or office for personal gain, 
which will be defined as soliciting, accepting or otherwise benefiting from anything of material value, in 
any form, either in person or indirectly through close relatives or associates, as a result of procurement 
financed by IFAD. The officials of PROSPER and its implementing entities shall respect the confidentiality 
of information gained in the course of duty and not use such information for personal gain or for the 
unfair benefit of any bidder or supplier or contractor. Information given in the course of his or her duty 
shall be true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
Gifts and Hospitality 
Any official of PROSPER involved in IFAD- funded procurement activity shall:  
not be permitted to accept any business gifts from current or potential suppliers, contractors or 
consultants unless such gifts are of very small intrinsic value such as a calendar or business diary.  
refrain from accepting any business hospitality that might be viewed by others as having an influence in 
making a business decision as a result of accepting that hospitality; and  
has a duty to promptly report refer any cases of irregular practices which include but not limited to fraud 
and corruption as defined in IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy by a colleague, bidder, supplier, contractor or 
consultant to IFAD and National Authorities as required. 
Mis-procurement 
IFAD shall have the right not to finance contracts which are not procured strictly following the procedures 
as set forth in the Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook, IFAD Letter to the Borrower, and 
will cancel such portion of the Financing. If mis-procurement continues, IFAD may suspend the Financing 
or even go up to the cancellation of the Financing. 
Good Governance and Accountability Policies 
The IFAD Procurement Guidelines and Anti Corruption Policy, which are adapted to this Project through 
the Financing Agreement and IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, require 
zero tolerance to prohibited practices. Therefore, the procurement process also requires a strict 
adherence to these Guidelines and Policy. 
Pursuant to this policy, the following provisions shall be applied throughout the project implementation: 
For the purpose of this provision, the terms set forth below are defined:  
 
 
 
 
“Corrupt Practices” mean the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting directly or indirectly of 
anything of value to influence improperly the actions of another party.  
“Fraudulent Practices” is any act or omission including a misrepresentation that knowingly or 
recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain financial or other benefit or to avoid 
an obligation;  
“Collusive Practices” is an arrangement between two or more parties, designed to achieve an 
improper purpose, including to influence improperly the actions of another party;  
“Coercive Practices” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party, or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a party.  
11 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
 
“Obstructive Practices” mean: deliberately destroying, falsifying, altering, or concealing of 
evidence material to the investigation or making false statements to investigators in order to 
materially impede an IFAD investigation into allegations of a corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, or 
collusive practice; and/or threatening, harassing, or intimidating any party to prevent it from 
disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to the investigation or from pursuing the 
investigation; or acts intended to materially impede the exercise of the IFAD’s inspection and 
audit rights provided for under sub-clause (e) below.  
The Borrower and IFAD will reject a proposal for award if it determines that the bidder or consultant 
recommended for award, or any of its personnel. Or its agents, or its sub-consultants, subcontractors, 
service providers, suppliers and/or their employees has directly or indirectly engaged in corrupt, 
fraudulent, collusive, coercive or obstructive practices in competing for the contract in question;  
IFAD will declare mis-procurement and cancel the portion of the loan/grant allocated to the contract if it 
determines at any time that representatives of the borrower or of a recipient of any part of the proceeds 
of the loan engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, collusive or obstructive practices during the 
procurement or implementation of the contract in question without the borrower having taken timely 
and appropriate action satisfactory to the DP to address such practices when they occur, including failing 
to inform the DP in a timely manner at the time they knew of the practices.  
IFAD will declare a consultant or firm ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time, to be 
awarded a future IFAD financed contract if it at any time determines that the bidder, supplier, contractor, 
service provider or consultant has engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, collusive or obstructive 
practices in competing for, or in executing, an IFAD-financed contract; and 
All contracts financed out of the proceeds of the project has a provision requiring supplier, contractor or 
consultants to permit both the Borrower and IFAD to jointly or separately inspect their accounts and 
records relating to the performance of the contract and to have them audited by auditors appointed by 
the Borrower and/or IFAD 
All staff involved in the procurement process has a duty to report to the Project Coordinator and IFAD (i.e. 
through its Country Director) of any suspected instances of prohibitive practices when identified. 
In the case of collusive behavior, if the evidence suggests that all or some of the bidders or consultants 
are involved, the evidence should be reviewed by the Project Coordinator, and if necessary, the 
procurement process is cancelled and all of the involved firms or individuals are sanctioned which could 
be up to the debarment. If the procurement is still in process, then the procurement must be cancelled 
and reinitiated only after the matters have been addressed properly. 
Complaint Handling Mechanisms (CHM) 
There are three distinct types of complaints that are typically found in a Project; i.e., (a) complaints 
concerning bid protest from aggrieved contractors, suppliers, service providers and consultants, which 
are addressed during or immediately after the bid process, (b) performance disputes, which are governed 
by the General Conditions of Contract (GCC) and Special Conditions of Contract (SCC), and, (c) non 
procurement related complaints from any parties.   
A complaint is any notification regarding an alleged illegal or improper procurement action and/or 
conduct of procurement officials, consultants, and/or sub-contractors directly or indirectly supporting a 
project or associated with its implementation, which the complainant believes is wrong, either under the 
law or on the grounds of unacceptable behavior.  
The PCU shall ensure the confidentiality of any complainant and shall hold harmless any person reporting 
a complaint, oftentimes referred to as a “whistle blower”, with provisions to shield complainant(s) or 
public official(s) from retaliation when they provide information that they reasonably believe to be a 
violation of the provisions of the agreed procedures.  
12 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
All procurement related complaints shall be addressed to the PCU and s/he shall respond within 7 
business days. If PCU needs more time due to complex investigation related to the complaints, then it 
shall state so in writing to the complainants, but in any case a complaint shall be put into closure within 
30 business days. 
The complainant need not be personally aggrieved or impacted, and may be acting merely in accordance 
with a sense of civic duty, such as an NGO or private citizen, in bringing an occurrence to the attention of 
project authorities.  
All complaints, whether notified by persons who feel personally aggrieved or acting out of a sense of civic 
duty, will be acknowledged and acted upon by responsible authorities in accordance with the procedures 
specified in this section.  
Concerning bid protests, from time to time, with and without justification bidders, suppliers, contractors, 
service providers and consultants may choose to lodge a complaint concerning some aspect of the 
contract award process. In the event the contract has been awarded and a contractual relationship exists 
between the parties, there are established dispute mechanisms in the GCC that shall be followed, up to 
and including judicial review.  
A formal mechanism to satisfactorily respond to bid protest complaints must be followed, consistent with 
this Manual and the steps to be followed by aggrieved bidders, suppliers, contractors and consultants and 
the complaints procedure will be specified in the Bid/Request for Proposal documents. 
Complaints may also be addressed directly to IFAD, to which IFAD will resolve the complaints within its 
service standard. 
Conflict of Interest 
It is a requirement of the IFAD Procurement Guidelines that any public official of the Borrower/recipient 
involved in IFAD-funded procurement activity shall declare any personal interest that may affect, or might 
reasonably be deemed by others to affect, impartiality in any matter relevant to his duties (conflict of 
interest).  
Upon being aware of such a situation of this nature arising or having the potential to arise, the official(s) 
concerned should immediately recuse themselves from any aspect of the procurement process to avoid 
being placed in a position of conflict.  
Where IFAD becomes aware of a situation where a conflict of interest may have existed but was not 
declared then this is sufficient grounds to declare mis-procurement in line with the IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines.  
Where there is doubt that a conflict of interest, or potential conflict of interest, may exist or arise, IFAD 
may be consulted for advice or guidance, however the general principle is that if it there is uncertainty 
then it is safer to recuse oneself from the process than to risk a negative perception of the process and 
mis-procurement being declared.  
A firm/entity/individual participating in a procurement process under this project shall not have a conflict 
of interest. Any firm/entity/individuals found to have a conflict of interest shall be ineligible for award of a 
contract.  
A conflict of interest is a situation in which a party has interests that could improperly influence that 
party’s performance of official duties or responsibilities, contractual obligations, or compliance with 
applicable laws and regulations, and that such conflict of interest is not acceptable under the FABS 
Project. The Recipient will take appropriate actions to manage such conflicts of interest which may 
include rejecting a proposal for award if it determines that a conflict of interest has flawed the integrity of 
any procurement process.  
A firm shall be considered to have a conflict of interest in a procurement process if:  
13 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
 
 
 
 
such firm is providing goods, works, or non-consulting services resulting from or directly related 
to consulting services for the preparation or implementation of a project that it provided or were 
provided by any affiliate that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common 
control with that firm.; or  
such firm submits more than one bid, either individually or as a joint venture partner in another 
bid, except for permitted alternative bids. This will result in the disqualification of all bids in which 
the Bidder is involved; or  
such firm (including its personnel) has a close business or family relationship with a professional 
staff of the Recipient (or of the project implementing agency, or of a recipient of a part of the 
grant) who: (i) are directly or indirectly involved in the preparation of the bidding documents or 
specifications of the contract, and/or the bid evaluation process of such contract; or (ii) would be 
involved in the implementation or supervision of such contract unless the conflict stemming from 
such relationship has been resolved acceptable to IFAD throughout the procurement process and 
execution of the contract; or  
such firm does not comply with any other conflict of interest situation as specified in the Bidding 
Documents relevant to the specific procurement process.  
It is the duty of all project staff and any other public employee directly or indirectly involved with the 
procurement process and particularly the preparation of bid documents, bid evaluation, contract 
negotiations, contract management and payments to avoid any potential conflicts of interest. A conflict of 
interest arises when the individual has a direct or indirect relationship with a bidder, consultant, 
contractor, service provider or supplier. 
In the event that a project staff or a member of the procurement committee (PC) or an employee who is 
directly involved with the procurement process feels that there is the potential for a conflict of interest 
they shall declare it to the PC and remove themselves from the procurement process. 
Standard of Ethical Conduct 
All project staff and consultants involved in procurement activities, shall observe the Code of Business 
Ethics as outlined below.  
No individual shall use his/her authority or office for personal gain. Personal gain includes accepting or 
requesting anything of material value from bidders, prospective bidders or suppliers for the individual, his 
or her spouse, parents, children or other close relatives, or for other persons from whom the individual 
might gain direct or indirect benefit of the gift. 
An individual shall seek to maintain and enhance the reputation of the Government by:  
  Maintaining the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all relationships both inside and 
outside the Entity in which he works.  
  Developing the highest standards of professional competence.  
  Using funds and other resources for which he/she is responsible to provide the maximum benefit 
to the Government  
Conflict of interest - An individual shall declare any personal interest that may affect or might reasonably 
be deemed by others to affect impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties.  
Disclosure of personal relationships – an individual shall declare any relationship with a bidder, supplier, 
contractor, service provider or consultant and shall take no part in either the decision making process or 
the implementation of any contract where such a relationship exists. A personal relationship is defined as 
consanguinity or affinity up to the third civil degree.  
14 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Confidentiality and accuracy of information - An individual shall respect the confidentiality of information 
gained in the course of duty and shall not use such information for personal gain or for the unfair benefit 
of any bidder, supplier, contractor or consultant.  
Information given by an individual in the course of their duty shall be true, fair and not designed to 
mislead.  
Competition - All bidders, suppliers, contractors and consultants shall be treated with fairness and 
impartiality, and avoid any business arrangement that might prevent the effective operation of fair 
competition. 
Examples of Unethical Conduct 
The following are examples of the type of conduct prohibited by this Code of Ethics: 
  Revealing confidential or “inside information” either directly or indirectly to any bidder or 
prospective bidder;  
  Discussing a procurement with any bidder or prospective bidder outside the official rules and 
procedures for conducting procurements;  
  Favoring or discriminating against any bidder, prospective bidder or consultant in the Preparing 
of technical specifications, terms of reference or standards or the evaluation of bids and 
proposals;  
  Destroying, damaging, hiding, removing, or improperly changing any formal procurement 
document;  
  Accepting or requesting money, travel, meals, entertainment, gifts, favors, discounts or anything 
of material value from bidders or prospective bidders, suppliers, contractors or consultants;  
  Discussing or accepting future employment with a bidder or prospective bidder, suppliers, 
contractors or consultants;  
  Requesting any other person to violate the public procurement rules or procedures; 
 
 
Ignoring evidence that the Code of Ethics has been violated; and 
Ignoring illegal or unethical activity by bidders or prospective bidders, suppliers, contractors, 
service providers or consultants, including any offer of personal inducements or rewards or 
otherwise. 
Debriefing: bidders and consultants whose offers are unsuccessful have the right to request a debriefing 
from the Project Manager, however no debriefing will be delivered until after the contract has been 
signed. The debriefing will be limited to the content of the bidder’s bid or consultants’ proposal and in no 
way will cover the content of any other firms offer or provide any information on the details of such other 
than information in the public domain such as minutes of opening and the Summary of Evaluation.  
The reasons for this are four-fold:  
It increases the levels of transparency in the procurement process,  
It will provide essential guidance (especially to local firms) on the relative strengths and weaknesses in 
their offers. Local firms will be able to take the opportunity to strengthen their bids and proposals in the 
future leading to a more competitive local market.  
The more equitable potential bidders and consultants feel the process to be, the more likely they are to 
submit bids or pursue shortlisting again increasing the overall levels of competition.  
It will provide a benchmark for unsuccessful bidders and/or consultants, i.e. they will become aware of 
the quality and pricing levels required to win contract awards. 
The overall goal of this debriefing process is to improve the level and quality of competition. 
15 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
When de-briefing bidders and consultants care should be taken to ensure that no commercial 
confidences are breached, i.e. it is acceptable to give an indication of where a bid or proposal was weak 
but not acceptable to disclose details of other bids and proposals received. Debriefing’s should be 
requested in writing and may either be delivered in writing or in a meeting chaired by the Project 
Coordinator at the Project Coordinator’s option. If a meeting is held it must be documented and signed by 
both parties and a copy of the minutes of the meeting placed on the relevant contract file. 
. To facilitate the de-briefing process simultaneously to the notice of award or award of contract 
(services) being sent to the successful bidder or consultant, all un-successful bidders and consultants will 
be sent a in a Notice of an Awarded Contract, the following details: 
  The name of each bidder or consultant submitting an offer  
  Bid prices as read out at bid opening 
 
  The name and evaluated price of each bid or proposal and in the case of services the financial 
In case of services, the technical points score of each consultant  
score  
  The name of bidders or consultants whose bids or proposals were rejected and the grounds for 
the rejection  
  Name of the winning bidder or consultant, the amount of the contact, the duration and final 
scope of the contract.  
  Details of how to request a de-briefing from the Project. 
 
In case an unsuccessful bidder or consultant feels that it has valid grounds for a complaint 
regarding the procurement process, it may lodge a complaint in accordance with the process 
outlined in the Bidding Document or Request for Proposals as the case may be. 
Project Procurement Plan 
It is a requirement of the IFAD Procurement Guidelines that at the outset of each project, the 
Borrower/recipient, in conjunction with IFAD, establishes a procurement plan covering the first 18-
months of the project followed by 12 months successive plans synchronised with the Annual Work Plans 
and Budget during implementation. 
Planning is a critical part of the procurement process to enable objectives and priorities to be set, 
workloads to be estimated and resources allocated. It enables the procuring entity to plan, organise, 
forecast and schedule its procurement activities and to identify potential areas for aggregation of needs. 
As far as possible, procurement planning should be integrated with financial planning of a project so that 
budgets and procurement needs are synchronised as far as is practical. 
Each procurement plan shall identify procedures which must be implemented by PROSPER to ensure 
consistency with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. As provided in appendix I, paragraph 1 of IFAD’s 
Procurement Guidelines, IFAD review of and no objection to the Borrower/Recipient’s procurement plans 
is compulsory and the first 18 months procurement plan and the update for the subsequent 12 months 
procurement plan submitted by the Borrower/Recipient must include as a minimum: 
  A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period and name of 
the implementing agency responsible for the procurement;  
  The estimate value of each procurement activity;  
  The method of procurement to be adopted for each procurement activity and; d. The method of 
review IFAD will undertake for each procurement activity indicating either post review or prior 
review. 
  Any amendments to the Consolidated Procurement Plan shall be subject to the Fund’s no 
objection. 
16 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Updating a plan 
As already stated above, the initial 18-month project procurement plan is required to be prepared at the 
outset of each project with successive 12 month procurement plans to follow during the course of 
implementation. 
Once this initial plan receives a ‘no objection’ from IFAD the plan should form the basis of the 
procurement activity for the project. 
It is important however that procurement plans are not static documents. They should be considered as 
‘live’ documents and updated on a regular basis. Any major adjustments or amendments should be done 
promptly, but in any event, plans should be reviewed and updated at least annually but ideally every six 
months. Any major adjustment or amendments would require IFAD no objection. 
Prior Review by IFAD 
In accordance with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, the following will be subject to prior review 
by IFAD: 
  Award of any contract for goods and equipment to cost USD 70 000 or equivalent or more. The 
following will be reviewed: 
  Prequalification documents and shortlist when prequalification is undertaken;  
  Bid Documents for goods and works;  
  Evaluation Reports and Recommendations for Award; and  
  Draft contracts and subsequent amendments 
  Award of any contract for works and equipment to cost USD 150 000 or equivalent or more. The 
following will be reviewed: 
  Prequalification documents and shortlist when prequalification is undertaken;  
  Bid Documents for works;  
  Evaluation Reports and Recommendations for Award; and  
  Draft contracts and subsequent amendments 
Award of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost USD 60 000 or equivalent or more. The 
following will be reviewed: 
Prequalification documents and shortlist when prequalification is undertaken;  
Request for Proposal (RFP);  
Technical Evaluation Report;  
Combined (technical and financial) evaluation report and the recommendation for award; and  
The minutes of Negotiation, draft contracts and subsequent amendments. 
All direct contracts above the prescribed procurement method thresholds (indicated in the Letter to the 
Borrower issued by IFAD) shall be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines for direct contracting and single source selection and subject to IFAD prior review. All the 
single source selection of consultancy services (national/international organizations/UN agencies) would 
require a detailed proposal including budget and deliverables, which will be evaluated by the project and 
submitted to IFAD’s prior review before entering into the contract. 
In addition to prior review threshold of consultancy services (ii) above, the first two procurement actions 
of consultancy services, irrespective of the selection methods, in a Project year, will also subject to IFAD 
prior review. 
17 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
IFAD Prior Review Portal – NOTUS 
IFAD has introduced a new system to manage ‘No Objections’ for project procurement and non-
procurement related activities requiring prior review. The system, known as NOTUS (No Objection 
Tracking Utility System), has been rolled out across IFAD-financed projects/Projects. 
NOTUS is a user-friendly tool that will systematize the submission, monitoring, review, commenting, and 
archiving of documents sent by projects to IFAD for ‘No Objection’. It will significantly mitigate risks (e.g. 
data loss) from use of different and often manual methods of document naming, versioning, submission 
and archiving, as well as streamline the no objection process. Ultimately, NOTUS will ensure better 
organization and efficiency in these processes, and in turn help project implementing agencies and IFAD 
realize important productivity gains. 
All actions, which require IFAD prior review, will only be uploaded in NOTUS portal by the project team. 
PCU will nominate 3-4 staff members to IFAD for providing access to the portal. This access requires a two 
factor authentication. Only the staff members who have been granted access will be able to upload the 
documents/comments/replies. PCU will inform IFAD about the changes in the nominations forthwith 
during implementation. 
Contract Management 
Good contract management is necessary for all contracts therefore the guidelines below applies equally 
to goods, consulting and non-consulting services. Effective contract administration is critical to successful 
contract implementation and meeting the objectives of the procurement requirement. Contract 
administration procedures are designed to ensure that: 
 
 
 
the supplier performs the contract in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the 
contract; 
the procuring entity fulfils its obligations and duties under the contract; and 
swift remedial or preventative action is taken when problems arise or are foreseen. 
The procuring entity has the overall responsibility for contract management, but will draw on other 
resources, such as technical expertise, payment services, legal services and supply management systems, 
as required. Where such other services and systems are used, the procuring entity will remain responsible 
for monitoring their performance and ensuring that their activities, in relation to the contract, are 
completed on time and in accordance with procurement rules. Day-to-day contract 
management/administration will often be assigned to an end user or technical expert. 
Contract management responsibility 
The procuring entity will always retain overall responsibility for contract management but not necessarily 
the day-to-day functional activity which can often be undertaken from outside the procuring entity if 
deemed to be appropriate. For example, the procuring entity will normally retain control of contract 
amendments, payments and dispute resolution, but may allocate day-to-day liaison with the supplier, 
contractor or consultant to the end user. 
When considering the most appropriate person or team to manage/administer the contract the procuring 
entity should take into account: 
  whether supervision needs to be conducted by a person with appropriate technical skills, such as 
for construction contracts or the installation of complex plant and machinery. If so, contract 
administration is best allocated to the end user or an external consultant;  
  where contract administration is likely to be time-consuming or require skills not available within 
the procuring entity, an external contract administrator should be appointed, such as a project 
manager for a major construction contract;  
18 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  where goods are to be delivered directly to the end user, contract administration is best allocated 
to either the end user or procurement staff;  
  where a consultant is required to work with the end user in conducting a study, providing advice 
or building capacity, contract administration is best allocated to the end user and particular 
counterpart staff may need to be designated to work with the consultant. 
  Where services are provided in support of the general management or administration of the 
procuring entity, contract administration is best allocated to the member of staff responsible for 
that function.  
The nominated Contracts Manager or Contracts Management Team should: 
 
carry out a review of the contract to assimilate the details of the requirements and the program 
for fulfilling them;  
  ensure that a signed copy of the contract is received from the supplier, contractor or consultant;  
  ensure that any required performance security or advance payment security is received from the 
supplier, contractor or consultant;  
  ensure that the procuring entity meets any immediate obligations, such as advance payment;  
 
for larger contracts, prepare a contract implementation plan, showing key milestones, such as 
dates for mobilisation, deliveries or completion of certain deliverables or sections of work, and 
the procuring entity’s obligations, such as providing access to a works site, payment or approval 
of reports. 
The contract implementation plan is a key management tool to ensuring that the contract is performed as 
intended and within the obligations undertaken in the contract by both parties. It enables the Contract 
Manager to formulate an expediting plan for the contract to proactively ensure that deliverables are 
received on time. 
Monitor implementation of contracts 
The task of contract monitoring is to ensure that both parties to the contract perform in accordance with 
that contract and to take action as required to address any problems or delays, whether actual or 
anticipated. 
For goods contracts ensuring that goods are delivered on time, that the goods are acceptable to the 
procuring entity, in terms of quantity, quality and supporting documentation, and that the procuring 
entity meets its obligations to pay for the goods delivered. 
When managing services contracts, the focus is on ensuring that services are delivered on time and to an 
acceptable quality. This can be difficult, as the quality of services, particularly consultancy services, can be 
subjective and difficult to measure. A good working relationship with the consultant and ongoing 
monitoring of services is therefore important, to ensure successful contract performance. The procuring 
entity must also ensure that it meets its obligations, particularly where the performance of consultancy 
services is dependent on certain inputs or information from the procuring entity or where staff must be 
made available to benefit from capacity building initiatives. 
Register of Contracts: Procurement carried out under the Project will be recorded and registered against 
the Procurement Plan. In addition, all contracts, with or without prior IFAD approval, will be listed in the 
Register of Contracts maintained by the procuring entity with the dates of approval as provided by IFAD. 
When a contract is amended, the amendment will be recorded in the Register of Contracts. If a contract 
is cancelled or declared ineligible for financing by IFAD, this information will be written in the Register of 
Contracts. As this register facilitates the review and approval of payment requests on contracts, it is to be 
updated and submitted to the IFAD country Project director on a monthly basis. The sample form to be 
19 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
used and instructions are detailed in Annex 6 of IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook. It will also be 
necessary that the PCU prepare annual statistics disaggregated by type and methods of procurement, for 
the overall procurement transactions carried out for the Project. 
Documents/Records Required: 
All correspondence and documentation relating to contract administration must be kept on the 
procurement file. In particular, records are required of: 
  all invoices and other payment documents;  
  all documentation relating to contract performance, such as delivery notes, progress reports and 
other deliverables;  
  all contract variations;  
  all contract amendments;  
  all documents relating to claims under the contract, including warranty claims;  
  all documents relating to contract disputes and dispute resolution. 
The IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing require that Borrower/recipients 
retain documents and records for review by IFAD at any time within a period of ten (10) years after 
completion of the bid or contract. The following table shows what procurement files, folders or dossiers 
should contain: 
Document 
Preferred format 
(i) A copy of the published advertisement or shortlist (if applicable) * 
(ii) A copy of the published pre-qualification and invitation documents and any 
amendments, extensions or clarifications that were requested and issued* 
(iii) A record of tender opening signed by all present 
(iv) A full copy of each bid received and evaluated, plus clarifications requested 
and responses received 
(v) A copy of the evaluation report* 
(vi) Signed minutes of all meetings relating to the procurement, including pre-bid 
and negotiation meetings where these were held 
(vii) A contract award notice* 
(viii) Any letter of tender acceptance to the supplier, contractor or consultant* 
(ix) The signed contract document and contract acceptance* 
(x) Any contract amendments* 
(xi) All contractual correspondence between the procuring entity and a supplier, 
contractor or consultant 
(xii) Post-contract documents relating to the fulfilment of contract obligations, in 
particular photocopies of bank guarantees or payment guarantees 
(xiii) Signed minutes of any meetings related to contract management, including 
contract progress or review meetings 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
20 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xiv) Signed delivery documents evidencing delivery of supplies or signed 
completion certificates in relation to a contract for services or works under the 
contract, including any contract delivery records 
(xv) A copy of all invoices for works, services or supplies, including work papers 
verifying the accuracy of payments claimed and details of the actual payment 
authorized 
(xvi) A copy of cumulative payment worksheets/records evidencing management 
of all payments made 
(xvii) A copy of all submissions to and all decisions of the appropriate approval 
authority related to the procurement, including the approval of the invitation 
documents, approval of the evaluation report(s), contract award, approval of 
contract documents and contract amendments and any decision to suspend or 
cancel procurement proceedings 
(xviii) A copy of any claims made by the procuring entity with respect to any 
warranty, non-warranty, short supply, damage and other claims upon the 
provider or upon the procuring entity 
(xix) In the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and correspondence in 
relation to the seeking of IFAD’s no-objection 
(xx) any other communications relating to the procurement in questions, 
including internal entity correspondence 
*Ideally, drafts of these published documents and reports should also be retained for completeness 
and to provide a full picture of how the published document evolved. It is, however, accepted that 
where issues of space exist this may not always be possible in practice. 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Procurement Methods 
 
 
Goods and Works and Non-consulting Services 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) 
ICB is the most competitive and transparent, therefore, the preferred procurement method. Other 
methods exist only because ICB cannot always be used. ICB is used for procurements with the highest 
monetary threshold. The procedure for ICB is lengthy to ensure quality of bids and approvals at various 
stages from IFAD, about several steps shall be observed in all cases to safeguard against misuse of the 
funds.   
These are: 
Preparation of bidding documents:   
Prepare full documentation that is detailed enough for prospective bidders to make realistic and accurate 
bids.   
There will be no use of trade names for vehicles and equipment, (e.g., Toyota Land Cruiser); rather 
request bids for 4x4 LWB, station wagon with 7 to 10 seats, engine size in the range of e.g.  2.0 to 3.0 
litres etc. plus other requirements such as radio, air-condition etc.  
All bidding documents for the procurement of goods, works and services would be prepared by the 
procurement Manager with the support of the technical expert(s), who would supply specifications, 
terms of reference, Bills of Quantities and evaluation and post-qualification criteria as required. 
21 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
All bidding documents and contracts for the procurement of goods, works and services financed by IFAD 
loan and grant would include a provision requiring bidders, suppliers, contractors, sub- contractors and 
consultants to permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records or other documents relating to the bid 
submission and contract performance and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors and 
investigators, as appropriate 
Goods and equipment should be grouped into sizeable packages to cater for economies of scale, efficient 
and timely procurement. 
Submit prepared bid documents to IFAD to obtain the no objection. 
Once the no objection is obtained to the Bidding document, PCU shall publish Requests for Bids as 
specific procurement notices in at least one newspaper with national circulation in Ghana and published 
on the United Nations Development Business website and on the IFAD website. Notification shall be 
made in sufficient time to enable prospective bidders to obtain bidding documents and prepare and 
submit their responses. ICB opportunities are advertised for a period of no less than 45 days.  
The Project shall also advertise in the dedicated government portals or its own website and at least two 
local dailies of nationwide circulation following the format prescribed by IFAD. 
Bidding documents should be available for free download over the project website or other reliable 
websites, however a small fee equal to the cost of printing a bidding document may be charged for the 
bidders who are interested in getting hard copies 
All bidders will be given enough time to prepare and present their bids. For vehicles and equipment and 
related items, the bidding period shall be 42 days at least while for complex bids such as civil works where 
site inspections are necessary, 60 days will be given. 
Bid security may be required for ICB. When used, the Project shall ensure that the bid security is in the 
amount and form specified in the bidding documents and shall remain valid for a period sufficient to give 
the Project reasonable time to act if the security is to be called (generally four weeks beyond the validity 
period for the bids). Bid securities should be established in specific amounts, not percentages. Bid 
securities shall be released to unsuccessful bidders once the contract has been signed with the winning 
bidder. 
Alternatively to a bid security, the Project may require bidders to sign a declaration stating that if they 
withdraw or modify their bids during the validity period or they are awarded the contract and fail either 
to sign it or to submit a performance security before the deadline set in the bidding documents, the 
bidder will be suspended from eligibility to bid on any contract with the entity that invited the bid for the 
period specified in the bidding documents 
The bidding document should state the deadlines for the submission of clarification requests and the 
deadline for the PCU’s responses to those requests.  
The PCU may hold a prebid conference, in which it will explain the nature of the ICB and bidders ask 
questions. The PCU is free to respond to those questions during the conference or defer answering them. 
Whether or not the PCU chooses to answer these questions during the conference, it shall issue a 
question and answer (Q&A) document to all bidders who have requested and received the bidding 
document, providing the responses to all the questions asked. The Q&A document shall not indicate the 
source of the questions, only the questions and responses 
The Project should ensure that the tender box where Bids must be submitted is open and accessible and 
that the tender box has two locks, with each key to the lock kept by a different officer and that the tender 
box remains locked until the time for tender opening.   
Each Bid that is delivered shall be placed unopened in the tender box by the person delivering the tender 
or by the staff of the Project immediately upon receipt of the tender if it is delivered by post. If a tender is 
too large to be placed in the tender box, it shall be received in the manner determined by the Project if 
no other manner is set out in the tender document. 
Late bids shall not be accepted under any circumstances. Opening. 
22 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Bid opening.    
Once the deadline for receiving bids has passed bids will be opened.   All bidders shall be at liberty to 
attend the opening ceremony in person or through their appointed representatives. The bid prices shall 
be read out lot by lot as stipulated in the bidding documents. Tenders submitted later than the specified 
period shall be rejected and returned unopened. 
A bid opening committee shall be appointed by the Project Coordinator consisting of at least three 
members and not more than five members. The Project procurement Manager or his/her authorized 
designate shall be the Secretary  
The terms of the committee shall be as follows: 
Immediately after the deadline for submitting bids, the bid opening committee shall open all bids 
received before that deadline. 
Check that the bids are marked for the correct bid opening. 
Check for any withdrawals and confirm that such withdrawal is authentic. Any bid withdrawn in writing 
shall not be eligible for evaluation or consideration in the bid process.  
Check that bid packaging shows no sign of tampering. If there is damage, then this must be stated and 
included in the minutes 
Those submitting bids or their representatives may attend the opening of proposals/bids. All bidders’ 
representatives present must sign a register, detailing their name and the name and address of the 
company they represent. 
The bid opening committee shall assign an identification number to each bid and write it on each copy of 
the bid document. 
As each bid is opened, the following shall be read out loud and recorded in a document to be called the 
bid opening register— 
The name and address of the person submitting the bid; 
The currency of the bid and total price, where applicable including any modifications or discounts 
received before the deadline for submitting bids.  
The total price of the bid may not be read out where a bid consists of numerous items that are quoted 
separately 
 The total price of the bid shall not be read out where a bid is preceded by a technical evaluation and such 
bid has not met the technical evaluation criteria. Where a bidder has failed the technical evaluation, the 
entity shall return the financial proposal unopened. 
If applicable, what has been given as bid security or whether samples have been submitted where 
applicable; 
The number of pages paginated/serialized by each bidder for each bid submitted 
The number of copies submitted with the original bid 
No bidder shall be disqualified by the procuring entity during opening of bids. 
The Committee shall provide a copy of the bid opening register to each person submitting a bid; 
Each member of the bid opening committee shall — 
(i) Sign each original and copies of bid on one or more pages as determined by the bid opening 
committee; and 
(ii)   Initial, in each bid, against the quotation of the price and any modifications or discounts, where 
applicable. 
The bid opening committee shall prepare bid opening minutes which shall set out the following: -  
A record of the procedure followed in opening the bids; and 
The   particulars   of   those   persons   submitting bids, or their Representatives, who attended the 
opening of the bids. 
To acknowledge that the minutes are true reflection of the proceedings held, each member of the bid 
opening committee shall— 
23 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Initial each page of the minutes; 
Append his or her signature as well as initial to the final page of the minutes indicating their full name and 
designation. 
A person who causes the physical loss of bid documents commits an offence. 
The chairperson should close the bid opening meeting, reminding bidders that they must not seek to 
influence the evaluation process and that the successful bid will be communicated in due course. 
Where bid openings for more than one procurement process are conducted at the same time, they must 
be conducted consecutively, with one opening completed, recorded and bid removed before the next 
opening commences. 
Bid Evaluation.    
Bid evaluation shall be done by the Evaluation Committee appointed by the Project Coordinator. It is 
recommended that the committee be appointed in good time before the opening of the bids so that the 
evaluation committee members block their calendars and make sufficient time for the Bid evaluation.    
The Evaluation committee should include members with a relevant type of skills, knowledge and 
experience relevant to the procurement requirement as far as possible, which may include:  
Technical skills; 
End-user representatives; 
Procurement and contracting skills; 
Financial management or analysis skills; 
Legal expertise. 
The PROSPER procurement manager shall be the secretary. 
The terms of reference for the evaluation committee shall be as follows: - 
Examine all bids received if they conform to all the eligibility and other mandatory requirements in the 
bid documents.  
Evaluate and compare all the responsive bids other than bids rejected as non-responsive. 
Assess the technical and financial aspects of the bids as per criteria in the documents as well as undertake 
the negotiation of the process 
Carry out the evaluation with due diligence if needed. 
No member of the committee shall communicate with the bidder who has submitted a bid that is under 
consideration of the evaluation. 
Each member of the evaluation committee and those providing support to the committee shall sign a 
statement of impartiality and non-disclosure as well as conflict of interest before the commencement of 
bid evaluations. 
Bid evaluation is important and any delay at this stage may involve requesting bidders to extend validities 
or lead to price increases.  The evaluation committee should carry out the evaluation and quality of goods 
should be evaluated against costs. The lowest bidders should not necessarily be selected but the best 
value for money bid considering Project needs. Special considerations such as standardizing on model of 
goods/equipment should be considered at this stage.  The evaluation team must use only the criteria 
provided for in the bid documents and no other criteria should be introduced. 
Bid Evaluation consists of the following stages: 
Review and list the requirements, instructions and evaluation criteria. The Evaluation Committee should 
review and list the requirements, instructions and evaluation criteria specified in the bidding document 
and ensure that they are clearly understood, seeking clarification from the person(s) responsible for 
writing the document, whenever necessary. The evaluation must apply the criteria specified in the 
bidding document, and no new or altered criteria may be introduced. 
24 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
A preliminary evaluation. The preliminary examination is conducted to determine whether tenders have 
complied with the basic instructions and requirements of the bidding document. It enables evaluators to 
eliminate the weakest tenders without spending time and effort on a detailed evaluation. If no pre-
qualification has been conducted, the preliminary examination can also be used to assess whether 
bidders meet the mandatory requirements.  
The preliminary examination is conducted on a pass/fail basis, with tenders that are not substantially 
compliant being rejected. The criteria to be used in the preliminary examination depend on the 
requirements and instructions of the bidding document, so the preliminary examination must always 
begin with a review of the bidding document to list the requirements to be met. As guidance, the 
preliminary examination might typically examine whether:  
– the tender has been submitted in the proper format;  
– any required tender security has been submitted in the proper form and amount and is valid for at least 
the period required 
– the tender has been submitted without material reservations or deviations from the terms and 
conditions of the bidding document;  
– the tender has been duly signed and authorized;  
– the right number of copies of the tender have been submitted;  
– the tender is valid for at least the period required;  
– all required key documents and information have been submitted;  
– any required samples have been submitted;  
– the tender meets any other key requirements of the bidding document;  
– there have been no alterations or changes to the tender documents, except those that are part of the 
tender requirement;  
– tenders that do not pass this review have been eliminated.  
In every evaluation process, the Evaluation Committee shall require bidders to self-certify their eligibility 
and declare any criminal convictions, administrative sanctions (including debarments under the 
Agreement for Mutual Enforcement of Debarment Decisions or the “Cross-Debarment Agreement” 
and/or temporary suspensions that have been imposed on the contractor and/or any of its directors, 
partners, proprietors, key personnel, agents, subconsultants, subcontractors, consortium and joint 
venture partners. As part of this exercise, Bidders shall search the World Bank List of Ineligible Firms and 
Individuals, available at http://worldbank. org/debarr, for the names of their companies and directors and 
provide a print-out of the search result. If any sanction is declared, the procuring entity will need to 
undertake prior consultation with and seek clearance by IFAD who will examine whether this case of 
cross-debarment meets IFAD’s own standards for debarment regardless of the estimated value of the 
proposed contract. 
Assessment of responsiveness. When evaluating tenders, the evaluation committee must decide whether 
a tender is “responsive” (i.e. meets the procuring entity’s requirements) or “non-responsive” (i.e. does 
not meet the procuring entity’s requirements). 
In practice, few tenders are perfect, and the key test is therefore for the evaluation committee whether a 
tender is “substantially responsive” or not. A substantially responsive tender is defined as a tender that 
conforms to all the instructions, requirements, terms and conditions of the bidding document without 
material deviation, reservation, or omission. In other words, minor (or “non-material”) errors or problems 
can be accepted by the evaluator(s) or corrected by the bidder, while tenders with major (or “material”) 
errors or problems must be rejected.  
As a general rule, a material deviation, reservation, or omission is one that:  
– substantially affects the scope, quality or performance of the goods, works or services; – would 
substantially limit the procuring entity’s rights or the bidder’s obligations under the contract; or  
25 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
– would unfairly affect the competitive position of other bidders if corrected.  
Determining whether a deviation is material or non-material is a decision for the evaluation committee 
and one that must be based on the tender contents only. The identification of material and non-material 
deviations will vary with the tendering procedure, depending on the particular requirements of each. 
However, decisions on what constitutes material and nonmaterial deviations must be applied consistently 
to all tenders subject to the same evaluation process. In deciding whether deviations are material or non-
material, the evaluator(s) should consider the impact on key factors, such as cost, risk, time and quality of 
the procurement.  
As guidance only, material deviations, reservations or omissions are likely to include:  
– unacceptable delivery or completion schedules;  
– unacceptable technical details, such as design, materials, workmanship, specifications, standards or 
methodologies;  
– unacceptable counterproposals on key contract terms and conditions, such as payment terms, price 
adjustments, liquidated damages, subcontracting or warranty. 
Technical and commercial evaluation. Only tenders that pass the responsiveness test proceed to the 
technical evaluation. It is usually conducted on a pass/fail basis; only tenders that are responsive, or 
substantially responsive, to the requirements of the bidding document are included in the subsequent 
financial evaluation. Non-responsive tenders are eliminated.  
The commercial evaluation is conducted by assessing whether the tender conforms, or substantially 
conforms, to all the terms, conditions and requirements of the bidding document. The criteria will 
therefore depend on the bidding document but might include: – acceptance of key contract conditions, 
such as payment, warranty and liquidated damages for delay;  
– delivery schedule for goods within the specified time period;  
– completion schedule for incidental services within the specified time period, where installation and 
commissioning or user training is required;  
– availability of spare parts and consumables;  
– service arrangements, such as a requirement for local agents. 
As with the technical evaluation, the commercial standard must be set by the terms and conditions of the 
bidding document, and tenders should be evaluated as responsive or non-responsive against this 
standard. No extra benefit should be given to tenders that exceed the standard required, except when 
the evaluation method (e.g. merit-point-based) or dedicated non-price criteria. 
Any procurement in lots for which the bidding document has been written and issued shall be evaluated 
and awarded as lots. 
– Any evaluation procedure in which bids above or below a predetermined cost estimate are 
automatically disqualified is unacceptable. If the Project intend to use predetermined costs as the basis 
for evaluating or assessing bids, the project cost and applicable percentages must be clearly expressed in 
the bidding document.  
– If the lowest tender evaluated is seriously unbalanced or front-loaded in the opinion of the 
borrower/recipient, the bidder(s) may be required to produce detailed price analyses for any and all 
items in the bill of quantities to demonstrate the internal consistency of those prices with the proposed 
construction methods and schedule.  
– After evaluation of the price analyses, if the bid prices are found to be balanced, the Project may award 
the contract to the bidder with the lowest tender evaluated. If the bid prices are found to be 
unreasonably low, the Project may require the performance security to be increased, at the bidder’s 
expense, to a level sufficient to protect the borrower/recipient against financial loss in the event of 
default by the successful bidder under the contract.  
– If, after evaluation of the price analyses, bid prices are still found to be unreasonably high, the Project 
shall reject all bids and recommence the procurement. 
26 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Correcting tenders and seeking clarification from bidders. If the information provided in a tender is 
unclear, the Evaluation Committee may seek clarification from the bidder. Clarifications cannot be used 
to amend the price of the tender (save for the correction of arithmetical errors), correct material 
deviations or make other significant changes to any aspect of the tender.  
Requests for clarification must be addressed to the bidder in writing and must state that a written 
response is required by a specified date. The request must also state that the bidder’s failure to respond 
to the request may result in the rejection of its tender.  
If a tender includes non-material deviations, errors or omissions, the evaluator(s) may choose to accept 
or to correct them. To ensure that the evaluation is fair to all bidders, the non-conformity should be 
quantified and expressed in monetary terms whenever possible. This amount should then be added to 
the tender price, for the purpose of the financial evaluation only, to reflect the price or cost of the 
missing or non-conforming item.  
For example, where a tender for goods does not include the price of a spare part or consumable item, the 
price of the missing item should be added to the tender price, using the highest price for the same item 
from the other tenders. As a further example, if a tender includes a slightly later delivery date than 
required by the bidding document and this delay is acceptable to the procuring entity, the later delivery 
could be quantified and expressed in monetary terms, using the monetary penalties for liquidated 
damages contained in the draft contract. 
Financial evaluation. Only tenders that have passed the technical evaluation are financially assessed to 
determine the lowest tender evaluated. Unless otherwise required by the instructions in the bidding 
document, the Evaluation Committee shall use the below procedure to determine the evaluated price of 
each tender: 
– Take the total tender price as read out at the tender opening, including or excluding particular costs, as 
indicated in the bidding document (e.g. the bidding document may give particular instructions concerning 
the inclusion of all taxes and duties in the tender price or the exclusion of provisional sums and 
contingencies but the inclusion of competitively priced dayworks in tenders for works); 
– Correct any arithmetical errors. The procedure for correcting arithmetical errors is normally stated in 
the bidding document and must be used. If no specific procedure is stated in the bidding document, or 
there is a discrepancy between the unit price and the total price obtained by multiplying the unit price 
and quantity, the unit price shall prevail and the total price shall be corrected. Bidders should be notified 
in writing of any arithmetical corrections made and requested to agree to the corrections in writing; 
– Apply any non-conditional discounts offered by bidders. Discounts, or any other change in price, are not 
permitted after the tender closing date and only nonconditional discounts should be considered in the 
evaluated price of the tenders. Conditional discounts, such as discounts for prompt payment by the 
procuring entity, must not be considered in the financial evaluation but should be included (as a contract 
term) if the tender is accepted.  
If so stated in the bidding document, bidders may be permitted to offer conditional (or cross) discounts 
(i.e. discounts that are conditional to the simultaneous award of contracts for more than one lot). 
Conditional discounts should also be excluded from the main financial evaluation.  
On completion of the financial evaluation and determination of the successful tender(s), a further 
financial comparison should be conducted to consider any conditional discounts. This comparison must 
identify the best overall value for money for the procuring entity (i.e. the combination of contract awards 
that offers the lowest total price);  
– Convert all tenders to a single evaluation currency for comparison purposes, using the currency and the 
source and date of the exchange rate specified in the bidding document; 
– Determine the total evaluated price of each tender. 
 The Evaluation Committee will then rank the Tenders, and 
conduct a post-qualification on the lowest tender evaluated.  
27 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
The evaluation of bids shall be carried out within a maximum of 30 days. 
Reporting 
The evaluation committee shall prepare an evaluation report containing a summary of the evaluation and 
comparison of bids and shall submit the report to the person responsible for procurement for his or her 
review and recommendation and submission to the accounting officer for approval. 
The report prepared under paragraph shall include: 
A summary of all bids received and opened; 
The results of the preliminary evaluation, with reasons why any bid was rejected; 
details of any minor deviations accepted and the way in which such deviations were quantified and taken 
into account in the evaluation and comparison of the bids;  
The   evaluated   price   of   each   bid, showing   any discounts, corrections or adjustments to the bid price 
and any conversion to a common currency 
the ranking of the bids each according to its total evaluated price  
the results of any confirmation of qualification conducted and 
A recommendation to award the bid to the lowest evaluated bidder.  
The evaluation report shall be signed by each member of the evaluation committee. 
The evaluation committee may, after bid evaluation, but prior to the award of the bid, conducts due 
diligence and present the report in writing to confirm and verify the qualifications of the bidder who 
submitted the lowest evaluated responsive bid to be awarded the contract in accordance with this Act. 
The conduct of due diligence may include obtaining confidential references from persons with whom the 
bidder has had prior engagement. 
To acknowledge that the due diligence report is a true reflection of the proceedings held, each member 
who was part of the due diligence by the evaluation committee shall: 
Initial each page of the report; and 
Append his or her signature as well as their full name and designation. 
Notice of Intention to Award 
Bidders shall be notified of the outcome of the procurement after the evaluation report is internally 
approved after securing IFAD’s NO in the case of contracts subject to prior review. The notification to the 
bidders shall be through a notice of intent to award (NOITA). A bidder may request a debrief and/or 
submit a protest upon receipt of the NOITA. An award is then made to the lowest evaluated responsive 
bidder once all protests and/or appeals have been resolved.  
The evaluation team will make a report and a recommendation for award to the lowest evaluated bidder 
to the Project Coordinator who will award the bid based on the evaluation report. The PCU will then seek 
for a no objection from IFAD before awarding the bid. 
If the Project finds it necessary to reject all bids, the Project Coordinator must seek IFAD no objection 
(NO) 
Notification of Award 
The Project Coordinator shall award the contract, within the bid validity period, to the bidder that meets 
the appropriate standards of capability and resources and whose bid has been accepted in accordance 
with the bidding documents. A bidder shall not be required, as a condition of award, to assume 
responsibility for work not stipulated in the bidding documents or to otherwise modify the bid as 
originally submitted. The NOA is issued by the procuring entity once the pertinent approvals have been 
obtained. 
28 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
In preparing the NOA, the procuring entity should:  
Ensure that the approval of the decision to award the contract has been received in writing. The 
recommendation for a contract award is made in the evaluation report, so the written approval of that 
report must be received.  
Ensure that the number of days to allow for bid challenges/protests have passed  
Obtain any other necessary approvals, including financial approval for commitment of the required funds.  
Ensure that the successful bidder’s tender is still valid and that any modifications to the tender have been 
confirmed in writing by the bidder.  
Prepare the NOA – see below for guidance on contents.  
Ensure that the NOA is signed by the authorized signatory of the procuring entity.  
Dispatch the NOA to the successful bidder, retaining evidence of dispatch, such as proof of posting. 
Sending the NOA as an e-mail attachment is a valid means of notification. The contract has now entered 
into force. (Unless otherwise stated in the bidding document, the tender is no longer valid if the notice of 
tender acceptance contains any provisions that are contrary to the tender – i.e. a counteroffer.)  
Ensure that the bidder’s confirmation of receipt of the NOA is received. 
Performance Security 
If the person submitting the successful bid refuses to enter into a written contract in writing as required, 
he or she shall forfeit his or her bid security and the procurement process shall proceed with the next 
lowest evaluated bidder 
A successful bidder shall submit a performance security equivalent to not more than ten per cent of the 
contract amount before signing of the contract if provided in the bid document. In case the contract is 
not fully or well executed, the performance security shall unconditionally be fully liquidated by the Project 
as compensation without prejudice to other penalties provided for.  
The performance security shall be determined in accordance with the form provided for in the biding 
document and may be paid in form of a bank guarantee, issued by an authorized financial institution. The 
bid document shall provide for, if necessary, other forms of performance security that may be requested 
from the successful bidder. The bank or authorized financial institution shall be obliged to give to the 
Project all the amount of the performance security upon claim by the Project. 
If the contractor is foreign, the guarantee shall be issued by a local bank or authorized financial institution 
issued by a corresponding bank in Ghana recognized the Bank of Ghana. 
Once the performance security is provided by the successful bidder, the contract is signed between the 
Project Coordinator and the successful bidder. 
Delivery and payments  
Under no circumstances, will payments for goods and services be realised before receipt of the goods or 
the services have been delivered and physical verification of the receipt of vouchers and the actual goods 
undertaken. 
The inspection and acceptance shall be done by the Inspection and Acceptance Committee appointed by 
the Project Coordinator to ensure that the correct quantity is received and the technical standards have 
been met. 
Notwithstanding the appointment of a Contract Manager who will manage the procurement subject on a 
day to day basis, it is the Inspection and Acceptance Committee who issue Interim / Progress / 
Completion / Final Certificates as required and who confirm that payment may be made.   
The appointment letter for the Inspection and Acceptance Committee members should make clear the 
duties of those members and insist that they satisfy themselves personally that work has been done in 
accordance with the contract before authorizing payments. 
29 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  The inspection and acceptance committee shall be comprise a chairman and at least two other 
members, including the head of the user component appointed on the recommendation of the 
Procurement officer. 
  The inspection and acceptance committee shall immediately after the delivery of the goods, 
 
 
works or services— 
inspect and where necessary, test the goods received; 
inspect and review the goods, works or services in order to ensure compliance with the terms 
and specifications of the contract;  
  Accept or reject, on behalf of the Project, the delivered goods, works or services. 
  Ensure that the correct quantity of the goods is received; 
  Ensure that the goods, works or services meet the technical standards defined in the contract 
  Ensure that the goods, works or services have been delivered or completed on time, or that any 
delay has been noted; 
  Ensure that all required manuals or documentation has been received; and 
 
Issue interim or completion certificates or goods received notes, as appropriate and in 
accordance with the contract. 
  For complex and specialized procurement contract, a contract implementation team shall be 
appointed, which shall include members from the procurement function, and the head of the 
component, the relevant technical department and a consultant where applicable. 
  For the purpose of managing complex and specialized procurement contracts the contract 
implementation team shall be responsible for: 
  Monitoring the performance of the contractor, to ensure that all delivery or performance 
obligations are met or appropriate action taken by the procuring entity in the event of obligations 
not being met; 
  ensuring that the contractor submits all required documentation as specified in the biding 
documents, the contract and as required by law; 
  ensuring that the Project meets all its payment and other obligations on time and in accordance 
with the contract. 
  ensuring that the contractor delivers the right quality, at the right price and within the specified 
 
timeframe in the contract; 
reviewing any contract variation requests and making recommendations to the Project 
Coordinator for consideration and such reviews for variation shall be clearly justified by the 
technical department in writing backed by supporting evidence and submitted to the head of the 
procurement manager for processing; 
  manage handover or acceptance procedures as prescribed; 
  make recommendations for contract termination, where appropriate; 
  ensure that the contract is complete, prior to closing the contract file including all handover 
procedures, transfers of title if need be and that the final retention payment has been made; 
  ensure that all contract administration records are complete, up to date, filed and archived as 
required;  
  ensure that the contractor acts in accordance with the provisions of the contract; 
  Ensure discharge of performance guarantee where required; 
The Project may co-opt a member of the contract implementation team from another procuring entity or 
outsource; 
30 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Where a supplier/contractor furnished the Project with a performance security, the Security shall be 
returned to the supplier/contractor within thirty (30) days following the final acceptance by the Project. 
The thirty (30) days referred to shall include the retention period except in cases of procurement for 
works where the period shall commence from the date of practical completion or handover, whichever is 
earlier. 
No works, goods or services contract shall be paid for before they are executed or delivered and accepted 
by the Project except where so specified in the bid documents and contract agreement. Such an advance 
payment shall not be paid before the contract is signed. Under exceptional circumstances advance 
payment may be granted and shall not exceed twenty per cent (20 %) of the price of the bid and shall be 
paid upon submission by the supplier/contractor to the Project of an advance payment security 
equivalent to the advance itself and that security shall be given by a reputable bank or any authorized 
financial institution issued by a corresponding bank in Ghana recognized by the Bank of Ghana, in case 
the supplier/contractor is a foreigner. 
Specific Evaluation Procedures for Works procurement 
There are 3 methods of evaluating bids for works: 
Lowest-Price or Lowest Evaluated Cost method 
 
  Merit-point Bid Evaluation Method 
 
Life Cycle Costing Method for Works contracts 
Depending on the nature of the Works, the Project could decide to use any of the 3 methods. For the 
purpose of this PIM, the Lowest-Price or Lowest Evaluated Cost method is explained. 
a. Preliminary examination 
The first stage of Preliminary Examination is common to all the three methods (Goods, Works and Non-
consulting Services) and consists of verification of bidder’s eligibility, completeness of submitted tender, 
bid validity period, compliant bid security or bid-securing declaration, legal capacity for signature, 
absence of a court conviction for offences related to taxation laws, labour or environmental laws, 
administrative conditions stipulated in the bidding documents. Only bids who pass the Preliminary 
Examination stage are admitted to detailed technical, commercial and financial evaluation by the 
Evaluation Committee. 
Technical Evaluation 
The detailed technical evaluation is conducted by assessing whether the tender conforms, or substantially 
conforms, to all the technical conditions and requirements of the bidding document. It is done on a 
pass/fail basis. The criteria will be based on those stipulated in the bidding document, and may include: 
program of execution/completion schedule (work-plan) for the works within the specified time period 
and/or meeting key milestones of the construction programme; 
plant/equipment and materials to be incorporated into the works along-with workmanship meet the 
standards or codes specified in the bidding document or equivalent; 
use of construction methods specified in the bidding document or acceptable alternatives including 
observance of Health and Safety requirements and Environmental and Social safeguards (i.e. an 
acceptable Environmental and Social Management Plan submitted by the bidder as per applicable IFAD-
SECAP requirements stipulated in the bidding documents;  
tender based on the design specified in the bidding document or an acceptable alternative design, if 
alternatives are permitted in the bidding document;  
compliance with applicable regulations, such as those concerning labour; and/or  
31 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
acceptance of key contract conditions, such as the prescribed maintenance period (Defects Notification 
Period), dispute resolution, liability and performance security; any deviations concerning such key 
contract terms will lead to rejection of the bid as nonresponsive technically;  
Presence in the bid of deviations that are considered as “minor deviations” by the Evaluation Committee 
like minor deviations in the terms of required insurance policies, minor deviations in liquidated damages, 
minor deviations in payment terms which are acceptable under the project’s and the government’s 
financial rules; such minor deviations can be accepted by the Evaluation Committee provided that these 
are quantifiable in monetary terms and are taken into consideration in the financial evaluation stage;  
subcontracting within the amounts and in the manner permitted by the bidding document, with 
subcontractors meeting requirements specified in the bidding document. 
The standard for responsiveness must be set by the terms, conditions and requirements of the bidding 
document, and tenders should be evaluated as responsive or non-responsive against this standard. 
Tenders that are substantially responsive may be accepted, despite of minor deviations, errors or 
omissions which must be quantified and taken into account in the financial evaluation. No extra credit 
should be given to tenders that exceed the stipulated standard. 
The technical evaluation of tenders for works will require technical input from staff qualified in the 
relevant field as well as staff representing the end-user. 
Financial Evaluation 
The aim of the Financial Evaluation is to determine the Lowest Priced among technically responsive 
tenders or the Lowest Evaluated Cost in case some tenders have acceptable minor deviations that have 
financial impact on the price of deviating tenders and must be added to the respective bid prices of 
deviating tenders for fairness in the competition. If the tender is subdivided into lots; then the financial 
evaluation shall be processed by the Evaluation Committee on lot by lot basis.  
The Lowest-Priced tender per each Lot or the Lowest Cost in case of the presence of acceptable minor 
deviations shall be awarded subject to post-qualification of the winning bidder. The Financial Evaluation 
process shall adhere to the following rules:  
Arithmetic corrections of the bidders’ calculations of the tender price shall be conveyed by the Evaluation 
Committee in writing to the respective bidder who must correspondingly accept such arithmetic 
corrections in writing (it is not uncommon that bidders may have arithmetic errors in the calculation of 
the offered prices (unit rate x quantity and totals) in the Bill of Quantities).  
Conditional Discounts by bidders are not acceptable. A conditional discount is one that is linked to the 
prices of other bidders (like 5 % less than the cheapest price) or that are linked to certain actions by the 
procuring entity (like if the award is granted within 30 days from the date of Bid Opening than the bidder 
will offer 5 % discount). If the lowest priced or lowest cost evaluated tender is seriously unbalanced or 
front-loaded in the opinion of the Evaluation Committee, the bidder(s) may be required to produce 
detailed price analysis for any and all items in the bill of quantities to demonstrate the internal 
consistency of these prices with the proposed construction methods and schedule. After evaluation of 
the submitted cost breakdown, if the bid prices are found to be balanced, the Evaluation Committee may 
recommend to award the contract to the bidder with the lowest evaluated tender. If bid prices are found 
to be front-loaded then the Evaluation Committee may require the performance security of this bid to be 
increased as a pre-condition for award, at the respective bidder’s expense, to a level sufficient to protect 
the borrower/recipient against financial loss in the event of default by the successful bidder during 
performance of the contract. 
If bid prices of all bidders are still found to be unreasonably high compared to the cost estimate prepared 
by the design Engineer as well as through a survey of prevailing market prices, then the Evaluation 
Committee must recommend to the borrower/ recipient to reject all bids and recommence the 
procurement based on a revised bidding document that revisits/re-adjust the factors that caused the bid 
32 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
prices to come higher than expected (potentially over-specification of the quality of works or 
unreasonably short period for completion of the works or other conditions of contract that are onerous 
and drove bidders’ prices upwards).  
Abnormally Low Bids (ALB) shall be investigated in order to determine the reasons thereof as per the 
process explained in Module 9. If the bidder fails to convince the TEC in writing of the substantiation of 
the advantageous situation it enjoys on this particular tender which allows this bidder to bid low, then 
this bid shall be rejected due to the risks it poses towards the ability of this bidder to successfully 
complete the contract at this abnormally low price. 
If pre-qualification did precede the tendering, then post-qualification will have to be carried out to 
determine whether the bidder, to be recommended for award, is qualified as per the criteria in the 
postqualification requirements. 
Limited International Bidding (LIB) 
LIB is essentially ICB by direct invitation without open advertisement. It may be an appropriate 
procurement method when:  
when the number of suppliers is limited, or  
other exceptional circumstances justify departure from full ICB procedures.  
Under LIB, Project shall solicit bids from a list of potential suppliers broad enough to ensure competitive 
prices; this list shall include all suppliers when there is only a limited number. Domestic preference is not 
applicable in the evaluation of bids under LIB. In all respects other than advertisement and preferences, 
ICB procedures shall apply, including publication of the award of contract. 
National Competitive Bidding 
NCB is a scaled-down version of ICB designed for national use with procurements that are unlikely to 
attract foreign competition due to their nature or scope. NCB may be the most appropriate procurement 
method when foreign bidders are not expected to be interested because: 
of the size and value of the contract,  
the works are spread out geographically or over time,  
the works are labour-intensive, or  
the goods, works and non-consulting services are available locally at prices below the international 
market price. NCB procedures may also be used in cases where the advantages of ICB are clearly 
outweighed by the administrative or financial burden involved. NCB shall be advertised in at least one 
newspaper with wide national circulation. 
NCB opportunities are advertised for a period of no less than 30 days. Under NCB, all bids shall be valid 
for a period of no less than 90 days. The currency of the procurement can be limited to the national 
currency of Ghana; however, if foreign firms wish to participate in NCB, they shall be allowed to do so 
under the prevailing NCB terms and conditions applicable to national bidders. 
Shopping 
Shopping is a procurement method based on a comparison of price quotations from several suppliers (in 
the case of goods), several contractors (in the case of civil works) or service providers (in the case of non-
consulting services) to ensure competitive prices and is an appropriate method for procuring limited 
quantities of readily available off-the-shelf goods, low-value standard specification commodities or simple 
low-value civil works, when cost and efficiency considerations do not justify more competitive methods. 
Under shopping, the Project is free to invite as many bidders as is practical but shall receive no less than 
three quotations by the submission deadline. The Project must seek IFAD’s NO to proceed to evaluation 
where fewer than three quotations are received. 
33 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Requests for quotations shall include a description of the goods or works, as well as the quantity or 
specifications, as appropriate, and the desired delivery (or completion) date and place. Quotations may 
be submitted by mail, fax, or electronic means. The evaluation of quotations shall follow the same 
principles as open bidding. The terms of the accepted offer shall be included in a purchase order or brief 
contract. 
Direct contracting 
Direct contracting is contracting without a competition (single-source) and may be used in exceptional 
circumstances such as those listed below. A sufficiently detailed justification shall be submitted to IFAD to 
obtain its NO and shall include the rationale for the choice of direct contracting instead of competitive 
procurement and the basis for recommending a particular firm in all such cases. Direct contracting could 
be justified under any of the following circumstances: 
An existing contract for goods, works or non-consulting services awarded through procedures acceptable 
to the Fund may be extended for additional goods, works or non-consulting services of a similar nature. 
IFAD shall confirm that no advantage could be obtained from further competition, that the prices on the 
extended contract are reasonable and that the monetary addition to the contract does not exceed 10 per 
cent of the original contract value. Provisions for such an extension, if deemed likely in advance, shall be 
included in the original contract; 
The need to standardize equipment or obtain spare parts compatible with existing equipment may justify 
additional purchases from the original supplier. For these purchases to be justified, the original 
equipment must be suitable, the number of new items shall be less than the existing number and the 
price must be reasonable; 
The required equipment is proprietary and obtainable from only one source; 
The contractor responsible for the process design requires the purchase of critical items from a particular 
supplier as a condition of a performance guarantee; 
Procurements of low value as agreed with IFAD and as defined in the letter to the borrower; 
In other exceptional cases, such as the response to natural disasters. 
Lack of time to conduct a competitive procurement is not an acceptable justification for direct 
contracting. 
Force Account 
Force account work (such as construction, equipment installation and non-consulting services) is work 
performed by a government department in the borrower/recipient country using its own personnel and 
equipment. In certain circumstances, this may be the only practical procurement method. The force 
account method requires the borrower/ recipient to set maximum aggregate amounts for use of the 
method, for which IFAD shall give its NO, and apply the same rigorous quality checks and inspection as for 
contracts awarded to third parties. Use of the force account method shall be justified and may be used, 
subject to IFAD’s NO, only under any of the following circumstances: 
the quantities of construction and installation works involved cannot be determined in advance; 
the construction and installation works are small and scattered or located in remote areas where 
qualified construction firms are unlikely to bid at reasonable prices;  
the construction and installation works must be undertaken without disrupting ongoing operations; 
specialized non-consulting services, such as aerial surveys and mapping, can be provided only by 
specialized branches of the government as a matter of law or official regulations in Ghana for 
considerations such as national security; or  
 urgent repairs requiring prompt attention to prevent further damage, or works to be undertaken in 
conflict zones where private firms may not be interested. 
34 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Procurement of commodities 
The market prices of commodities such as grain, animal feed, cooking oil, fuel, fertilizer and metals 
fluctuate according to supply and demand at any given moment. Many are quoted in established 
commodity markets. Procurement often involves multiple awards for partial quantities to guarantee a 
secure supply. Multiple purchases over a period of time take advantage of favourable market conditions 
and allow inventories to be kept low.  
A list of prequalified bidders may be drawn up, with periodic invitations extended to its members. Bidders 
may be invited to quote prices linked to the market price at the time of or prior to shipment. Bid validities 
shall be as short as possible.  
A single currency in which the commodity is usually priced in the market may be used for bidding and 
payment. The currency shall be specified in the bidding document.  
Bidding documents may permit faxed or electronically submitted bids, and in such cases, either no bid 
security is required or standing bid securities have been submitted by pre-qualified bidders. Standard 
contract conditions and forms consistent with market practices shall be used. 
Procurement from United Nations agencies 
There may be situations in which specific goods, works and services may be directly procured from United 
Nations agencies. In this case, their own procurement procedures are to be followed. Likely cases include 
the procurement of: 
(a) small quantities of off-the-shelf goods, primarily in the fields of education and health;  
(b) health-related goods for the treatment of humans and animals, including vaccines, drugs and 
pharmaceuticals, preventive health and contraceptive devices, and biomedical equipment, when:  
(i) the number of suppliers is limited;  
(ii) the United Nations agency is uniquely or exceptionally qualified to procure such goods and related 
incidental non-consulting services (if applicable); and  
(iii) the Project uses the standard form for an agreement between the Project and a United Nations 
agency for the procurement of supplies and the provision of certain services agreed to by IFAD;  
(c) low-value contracts for simple works when the United Nations agencies act as contractors or directly 
hire small contractors and skilled or unskilled labour; or  
(d) goods, services or works in exceptional cases, such as natural disasters and emergencies declared by 
the borrower/recipient and recognized by IFAD. 
Procurement of Consulting Services 
Principles 
The procurement of consulting services under the IFAD will be guided by the following principles: 
  The need for high quality services; 
  The need for economy and efficiency; 
  The aim to give qualified consultants from Ghana and all other eligible IFAD member countries an 
opportunity to compete in providing services; 
  The need to encourage the development and use of local consultants; and 
  The importance of transparency in the selection process. 
  Definition of Consultants 
The term “consultants” includes a wide variety of consulting firms, engineering firms, management firms, 
architectural firms, legal practices, university and research institutions, auditors, banks, UN agencies and 
other multinational agencies, as well as individuals. 
Consultants may associate with each other to complement their respective areas of expertise, or for 
other reasons.  Such an association may be for the long term (independent of any particular assignment) 
35 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
or for a specific assignment.  If “association” takes the form of a joint venture or of a sub-consultancy, all 
members of the joint venture shall sign the contract and shall be jointly and severally liable for the entire 
assignment. 
Selection Methods 
Contracts for the procurement of consultancy services may be awarded on the basis of:  
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS),  
Quality Based Selection (QBS),  
Fixed Budget Selection (FBS),  
Least Cost Selection (LCS),  
Consultants' Qualification (CQS), 
Individual Consultants' Selection (ICS), and 
Single Source Selection (SSS). 
Quality- and Cost-based Selection (QCBS) Method 
This is considered the standard (or “default”) method of selection for most consulting services and should 
be used when:  
– a compromise between quality and cost is favoured;  
– the scope of work of the assignment can be precisely defined and the terms of reference (ToR) are well-
specified and clear;  
– the client and the consulting firm can estimate with reasonable accuracy the needed level of effort (key 
staff working time), as well as other associated inputs and costs to the consultancy.  
The technical and financial aspects of each proposal received are assessed and scored on a scale of 100 
points. During final evaluation14 however, the respective technical and financial scores are adjusted by 
applying the weighted percentage stated in the request for proposals (RFP) before being combined into a 
total score.  
The best compromise between the technical quality and cost of the services is often achieved by 
allocating 70–80 per cent of the total points to the technical features of the proposal and 20–30 per cent 
to the financial score. Whatever ratio is decided, it is imperative that it be clearly declared in the RFP so 
that bidders are aware of the weighting to be applied and can factor it into the preparation of their 
proposal. 
The main technical evaluation criteria (or “primary criteria”) must also be specified in the RFP. These 
should include: 
– relevant experience in similar assignments; 
– the quality of the methodology proposed; 
– the minimum expected qualifications and experience of the key staff proposed. 
Subject to the nature of the assignment, they may also include:  
– provisions for training/capacity-building of local staff;  
– the extent of participation by nationals among key staff in the assignment 
Once the criteria have been selected, 100 points are divided among the above-mentioned technical 
criteria relative to their importance to the assignment. These points must also be declared in the RFP. 
The following table provides an example of a typical point distribution. 
Consultant’s specific experience: 
Methodology, approach and workplan: 
Key personnel: 
5 to 10 points 
20 to 50 points 
30 to 60 points 
36 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Transfer of knowledge: 
Participation by nationals  
Total: 
0 to 10 points 
0 to 10 points 
100 points 
As these primary criteria are rather wide-ranging, they should be divided into sub-criteria to (i) emphasize 
the important components of the criteria, and (ii) increase accuracy and comparability among different 
evaluators and constraining their subjective judgements. 
Each sub-criterion has its own maximum score. The sub-scores are combined into the total score for the 
primary criteria. The number of sub-criteria should be kept to the basic minimum (usually not more than 
3) and may not need to be disclosed in the RFP depending on the procuring entity’s policy. Beware, 
however, of having too many subcriteria, since this may render the evaluation process more of a 
mechanical exercise rather than a substantive evaluation. 
Some examples of the primary criteria shown in the table above are: – Responsiveness to ToR and 
adequacy of the proposed implementation methodology: if 40 points were awarded in total, they could 
be divided into:  
– Degree of innovation = 25 points  
– Level of detail = 10 points  
– Proposed workplan = 5 points  
thus placing greater emphasis on an innovative technical proposal and less on the workplan. 
– Key personnel: it is normal to use sub-criteria for key staff to evaluate their qualifications, technical 
experience, national/regional knowledge or experience and, if relevant, language proficiency.  
If 40 points were also awarded to this primary criterion, they could be divided as follows:  
– General qualifications20 = 10 points  
– Suitability for the assignment21 = 15 points  
– Experience in the country/region = 15 points  
thus yielding a fairly balanced point spread among the sub-criteria 
However, that these are the total points available for these sub-criteria. The points then need to be 
apportioned across the key personnel to show the maximum amount of points available for each person.  
In a scenario where three key personnel may be required for the assignment, the apportioning of points 
may be as follows:  
– Team leader = 50%  
– Specialist 1 = 30%  
– Specialist 2 = 20%  
This informs bidders that the “team leader” is considered a highly important position for this work and 
that “specialist 1” is considered slightly more important than “specialist 2”. It also clarifies the maximum 
number of points available for allocation to each individual position as follows:  
The RFP must also specify the minimum qualifying technical score for a technical proposal to proceed to 
the financial evaluation. The minimum qualifying score is usually 70 per cent. 
Finally, in addition to specifying the weighting for technical and financial scores, the RFP must indicate the 
formula for awarding points for each proposal price. The lowest-priced proposal commonly receives 100 
points, while the points for the other proposals are inversely proportional to the price of the lowest 
proposal i.e. obtained the following formula: 
Sf = 100 x Fm/ F, in which “Sf” is the financial score,  
“Fm” is the lowest price, and  
“F” the price of the proposal under consideration. 
SECTIONS OF A REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
37 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
The template to be used will define the structure and overall content of the RFP document. However, 
there are some generic requirements that any competition/bidding document for consulting services 
should include. These are as follows: 
References, contact points and contractual arrangements  
This identifies the overall procuring entity (i.e. the Ministry of Food and Agriculture), the end-user (if 
different), contact points for the competition/bidding process and the project for which the assignment is 
being undertaken. For identification purposes, each procurement activity must have its own unique 
reference number, which is to be stated on the document. 
The description and scope of the services required 
This is critically important. Without a clear statement of requirements and specifications, the 
procurement is likely to fail. 
Relevant information on proposal submission 
There are generally sections in the RFP entitled “information to consultants” or “instructions to 
consultants” and a section entitled “bid data”, with information to assist the consultant in preparing its 
proposal. These sections include issues such as: 
– consultant eligibility;  
– the last date for consultants to request clarifications;  
– the currency of the proposal;  
– the proposal submission deadline;  
– the date when proposals will be opened;  
– how long proposals will be valid;  
– the address and any specific instructions for submitting a proposal (i.e. two-envelope proposal, number 
of copies, in hard or soft copy, references). 
Rules governing the procurement process 
Rules governing the procurement process are: 
 – The IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines; 
– The IFAD Procurement Handbook and ancillary documents;  
– National procurement system regulations and ancillary documents. 
The evaluation criteria and methodology that will be applied 
There are a number of reasons why the evaluation criteria must be included in the bidding documents: 
 – to be able to determine the proposal that best meets the requirements;  
– to ensure that all proposals are evaluated against the same parameters;  
– to provide prospective consultants with details of these criteria and inform them about the basis for the 
contract award decision. 
The evaluation criteria will be specific to each individual procurement activity. However, some criteria are 
common to all procurement processes. For example:  
– technical competence/expertise;  
– experience/track record;  
– cost;  
– methodology, key experts, etc.; 
 – compliance with RFP requirements 
The prime selection criterion for consulting services is unlikely to be the lowest cost. The overall 
competence of consulting firms, their relevant experience and the quality of the technical proposal 
submitted are usually far more important than the simple cost of the services, and the evaluation is 
therefore more of a compromise between the professional quality of the services supplied and the cost of 
those services. 
This compromise is achieved through the use of a merit-point scoring system, in which points are 
awarded for technical capability and cost, based on criteria specified in the RFP, with the consultant 
38 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
scoring the highest points in the combined quality and cost evaluation being recommended for the 
contract award. 
Budget 
If the selection method is fixed budget selection (FBS), disclosure of the budget is mandatory. For 
selection methods other than quality-based selection (QBS) and FBS, the RFP should show either: – the 
estimated number of key staff and input time (estimated level of effort by the consultant in person-
months); or – the estimated budget. For other methods the RFP shall provide either the estimated budget 
or the estimated number of key experts and input time, underscoring that this information is indicative 
only and that consulting firms shall be free to provide their own estimates based on their proposals.  
Qualifications criteria to be applied 
If no assignment-specific shortlisting has been conducted and the Project has relied on a recent prior list, 
consultants must include documentary evidence of their qualifications to be considered for a contract. 
These generally include:  
– experience and past performance on similar contracts;  
– ability to complete the services;  
– financial position (i.e. audited accounts or statements of financial solvency from a bank);  
– legal and/or tax status (i.e. copies of valid trading licences or tax clearance documents);  
– the minimum requirements to be met for evaluation purposes. 
Type and conditions of the proposed contract 
It is considered good practice for the Project to provide consultants with a template of the proposed 
contract and the contractual conditions (including payment arrangements and timing) to which they will 
be subject in the event they are awarded a contract. This early disclosure of contractual requirements has 
a number of benefits such as:  
– It gives consultants an opportunity to make a bid/no bid decision based on a complete picture of the 
procurement process;  
– By disclosing the contract template and contractual conditions at the outset, there can be no argument 
later in the process that consultants were not aware of contractual provisions or obligations (this is 
particularly relevant with respect to payment terms);  
– It speeds up the process from contract award to contract signing, since the consultant has already seen 
and agreed to the format and general conditions of the contract by virtue of submitting the proposal. 
THE SELECTION PROCESS 
The selection process involves the following steps: 
Preparation of Terms of Reference (TOR); 
Preparation of cost estimate and budget; 
Advertising for Expression of Interest (EOI) or Statement of Capability; 
Preparation of the short list of consultants based on evaluation of EOIs; 
Preparation and issuance of the Request for Proposals (RFP) to the short-listed consultants.   
Receipt of proposals; 
Opening and Evaluation of technical proposal (i.e., evaluation of quality); 
Invitation of firms that qualified from on the technical evaluation to opening of their financial proposals. 
Evaluation of financial proposal (i.e., evaluation of cost of services); 
Combined quality and cost evaluation; 
Negotiations and award of the contract to the firm with the highest combined quality and cost score. 
The above steps are elaborated below: 
The Terms of Reference (TOR) shall define the objectives of the assignment, scope of assignment 
outlining services necessary to carry out the assignment, clearly state the expected outputs, and shall 
39 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
include background information which would facilitate the preparation of the proposals.  In general, the 
TOR should clearly state WHAT the Project wants done, while it is the responsibility of the consultants to 
show HOW that will be done. 
Advertising:  To obtain expressions of interest (EOI) or statement of capability, the assignment shall be 
advertised in at least one newspaper with national circulation in Ghana and published on the United 
Nations Development Business website and on the IFAD website.  Sufficient time (at least 14 days) should 
be allowed for the preparation and submission of EOI.  To enable submission of comparable EOIs from 
prospective consultants, the advertisement should specify minimum information to be submitted and the 
shortlisting criteria. This should include: 
Eligibility criteria  
Company profile, including name of the country in which the firm is registered; 
Experience of consultant in similar assignments, including brief descriptions of most recent relevant 
assignments (location, client, cost, staff involved); 
Financial capabilities (for large and complex assignments). 
This will be assessed on a pass/fail method. 
Short List of Consultants:  The shortlist is obtained from evaluation of EOIs submitted in response to the 
advertisement.  Based on the results of the assessment, create a shortlist of the three to six highest-
ranked consultants. If there are fewer than three shortlisted consultants, seek an NO from IFAD even if 
the procurement is post-review. 
Preparation and Issuance of the Request for Proposals (RFP):  the RFP will consist of (i) Letter of Invitation 
(LOI) Requesting Proposals, (ii) Instructions to Consultants (ITC), (iii) Proposal Data Sheet (PDS), (iv) 
Qualification and Evaluation Criteria, (v) Proposal Forms (Technical/Financial), (vi) Terms of 
Reference(TOR), (vii) Conditions of Contract and (viii) Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and 
Corruption in its Activities and Operations.  
Receipt of Proposals: Sufficient time shall be allowed for preparation and submission of proposals. 
Depending on the complexity of the assignment, 6 weeks shall be allowed. The technical and financial 
proposals shall be submitted at the same time but in separately marked envelopes.   
Opening of the proposals shall take place immediately after the closing time for submission of proposals.  
The technical proposal shall be opened but the financial proposals shall remain sealed and deposited in a 
safe place until the technical proposals have been evaluated.  
EVALUATION OF PROPOSALS USING THE QUALITY AND COST-BASED SELECTION (QCBS) METHOD 
The following are the steps for evaluating proposals using the Quality and Cost-based Selection method: 
Review requirements 
The Evaluation Committee should review the list of requirements, instructions, terms of reference and 
evaluation criteria specified in the RFP and the maximum number of points allocated to each criterion. It 
should ensure that these are clearly understood and seek clarification from the person responsible for 
writing the RFP, where necessary.  
The evaluation must apply the criteria and scores specified in the RFP, and no new or altered criteria may 
be introduced. The selection of sub-criteria to the main criteria and their respective scores will need to be 
set by the Evaluation Committee if not already set and disclosed in the RFP document. 
Conduct a preliminary examination 
The preliminary examination is conducted to determine whether proposals comply with the basic 
instructions and requirements of the RFP. It enables the evaluators to eliminate the weakest proposals 
without spending time and effort on a detailed merit-point evaluation. The preliminary examination can 
also be used to determine whether consulting firms meet the mandatory eligibility requirements. 
The preliminary examination is conducted on a pass/fail basis in which proposals that are not substantially 
compliant are rejected. The criteria to be applied in the preliminary examination depend on the 
40 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
requirements and instructions in the RFP, so the preliminary examination must always begin with a 
review of the RFP to list the requirements to be met. As guidance only, the preliminary examination might 
typically include checks to ensure that: 
the proposal has been submitted properly (all forms and documents required, including, in particular, the 
proposal submission form);  
the proposal has been submitted without material reservations or deviations from the terms and 
conditions of the RFP;  
the proposal has been duly signed and authorized (including any power of attorney required in the RFP);  
an original copy of the proposal has been submitted; 
letter(s) of incorporation (or other documents indicating legal status) are included;  
a joint venture agreement (or, if applicable, a letter of intent to enter into a joint venture agreement, if 
awarded the contract) is submitted;  
a separate sealed financial proposal has been submitted (this depends on the procurement method 
used), and no financial details are contained in the technical proposal;  
the proposal is valid for at least the period required;  
the language required by the procurement document has been used; 
CV signed by the proposed key experts have been submitted; 
audited financial statements (or documents demonstrating financial capacity) have been submitted, as 
applicable; 
the Declaration of Eligibility Form has been submitted. In every evaluation process, the 
borrower/recipient shall require bidders to self-certify their eligibility and declare any criminal 
convictions, administrative sanctions (including debarments under the Agreement for Mutual 
Enforcement of Debarment Decisions or the “Cross-Debarment Agreement”)51 and/or temporary 
suspensions that have been imposed on the consultant and/or any of its directors, partners, proprietors, 
key personnel, agents, subconsultants, subcontractors, consortium and joint venture partners. As part of 
this exercise, consultants shall search the World Bank List of Ineligible Firms and Individuals, available at 
http://worldbank.org/debarr, for the names of their companies and directors and provide a print-out of 
the search result. If any sanction is declared, the procuring entity will need to consult with IFAD as to the 
applicability of the MBD cross-debarment agreement regardless of the estimated value of the proposed 
contract and shall not take a decision with respect to rejection of the proposal until the procuring entity 
receives IFAD’s final determination on the issue;  
any additional documentation required by the RFP has been submitted 
Proposals that do not pass the preliminary examination shall be eliminated. However, the Evaluation 
Committee may consider omission of submission of an administrative document (like company 
registration or audited statement) as minor and ask the consultant to submit such missing document 
through a clarification. 
Conduct a detailed technical evaluation 
The detailed evaluation must be conducted only for proposals that have been determined to be 
substantially responsive during the preliminary examination. The actual evaluation criteria, together with 
the maximum points for each criterion, are determined and described in the RFP.  
Where a detailed technical evaluation uses a merit-point system, the following procedure should apply: 
the full TEC shall discuss the criteria and any sub-criteria to ensure that all members have a common 
understanding of the criteria and their relative importance. This should include a discussion of:  
– the rating system to be used for the technical evaluation;  
– the scores to be used with the rating system;  
– the definitions of the scores 
the TEC shall prepare the scorecards and tables which the TEC members will use during the evaluation to 
ensure uniformity of the information and scoring data collected;  
41 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
each member of the TEC shall independently evaluate the proposals, considering each proposal and 
awarding scores against each criterion; the evaluator shall record his/ her evaluation using a score and 
shall sign the respective scoresheet indicating his/her overall observations as to the strengths and 
weaknesses of each proposal;  
the TEC facilitator or the Evaluation Committee chairperson shall call a meeting to compare notes about 
strengths and weaknesses of each proposal and then collect, collate and compare scores;  
the scores from each evaluator shall be compiled during the meeting to produce a scoresheet for each 
proposal, and the average score for each proposal shall be calculated; 
the full Evaluation Committee shall compare the scores of each evaluator for each proposal to verify that 
there has been a consistent approach to the evaluation and a common understanding of the criteria in 
each proposal by all Evaluation Committee members 
the Evaluation Committee shall note any significant deviation from the average score or inconsistencies in 
scoring and discuss them, and each evaluator shall explain and justify their scores when required;  
when the Evaluation Committee agrees that the approach has been inconsistent or discussions reveal a 
misunderstanding of a criterion or the contents of a proposal, one or more evaluators may be permitted 
to adjust their individual scores;  
no evaluator shall be obliged to make adjustments to their scores. 
The TEC shall agree on which committee member may adjust their score and for which proposals or 
criteria the scores may be adjusted.  
An adjustment shall be permitted only to the extent necessary to correct any inconsistency in the 
approach or genuine misunderstanding of a criterion or contents of a proposal.  
When any score is adjusted, the original scoresheet shall be retained as part of the evaluation record, and 
the adjusted score shall be recorded on a new scoresheet.  
A score adjustment shall be completed as soon as possible after the original meeting, and an additional 
meeting shall be called; until such time as an additional meeting is called, the TEC facilitator shall keep all 
copies of individual and consolidated scoresheets in a secure location.  
Once all individual TEC members scores have been finalized, the full TEC will calculate the final average 
technical score for each proposal and conduct all other aspects of the evaluation.  
The average scores for each proposal is compared against the minimum qualifying score provided in the 
RFP. Proposals not obtaining this minimum score are eliminated from further consideration 
Individual evaluation 
Each TEC member must individually evaluate the technical proposals on the basis of the evaluation and 
qualifications criteria specified in the procurement document (RFP, RCQ, REOI) and adhere to the 
stipulated evaluation methodology. The technical proposals must be evaluated against the established 
criteria based on their individual merits, not compared and ranked against each other.  
Individual evaluation worksheets are provided to TEC members to facilitate the evaluation process. On 
each spreadsheet, each TEC member must: 
assess the contents of each proposal with respect to each criterion  
score the proposal for each criterion;  
take detailed notes of specific strengths and weaknesses that will substantiate the individual ratings for 
each evaluation criterion 
Each technical proposal shall be rated and scored for all criteria one after the other, rather than rating 
and scoring all technical proposals for one criterion and then moving on to the next.  
TEC members may not discuss their individual ratings or scoring of the technical proposals outside the 
scheduled TEC meetings. If any TEC member attempts to force a change of the score of another member, 
inside or outside the proceedings room, they may be disqualified from the panel.  
42 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
The individual evaluation worksheets, duly signed by each TEC member, shall be retained by the 
procurement department. The TEC shall prepare the technical evaluation report (TER) based on averaging 
of the score of all the individual evaluators.  
TEC members have the right to hold a dissenting opinion, and the justification for such an opinion, if 
applicable, shall be documented in the TER.  
In the case of shortlisting or during the proceedings of proposal evaluation, the results of the reference-
checking process may be incomplete due to time constraints, failure of the references to respond or 
other factors beyond the facilitator’s control. 
If the reference-checking process raises concerns, causes the TEC to question its initial rating and scoring 
and/or if insufficient information is collected within the allotted time frame, the TEC may decide to allow 
additional time for the process to continue and reconvene as soon as possible once the missing 
information has been obtained or the conclusion has been reached that the missing information will not 
be available within a reasonable time frame.  
The Project will make its best effort to verify references; however, if they are not received for a particular 
consulting firm, the TEC should not penalize the consulting firm for lack of responses from their previous 
references (clients). 
Conduct interviews, if required  
Interviews may be conducted as part of a merit-point evaluation for complex assignments, provided that 
this was clearly stated in the RFP. Consulting firms must be given reasonable notice of the arrangements 
for any interview and, within reason, the TEC should be flexible as to the precise date and time of the 
interview to give the consulting firm’s representative a reasonable opportunity to attend. This is 
particularly important when foreign consultants are invited for an interview.  
Interviews may be conducted as part of the technical evaluation process, in accordance with the 
evaluation criteria established in the RFP.  
Interviews are typically held only with key staff or consultants, such as the team leader and one or more 
key experts.  
Interviews must be managed by the TEC chairperson but involve the committee members responsible for 
the merit-point evaluation. The questions to be addressed during the interview must, to the extent 
possible, be planned and agreed on in advance by all members involved in the merit-point evaluation.  
Detailed minutes must be kept of the interview and the subsequent discussion and decision on the 
number of points to be awarded. These minutes should be included in the TER 
Prepare a TER for submission and approval 
The TER should include the following information:  
 the proposal opening record for the technical proposals (and any minutes produced);  
the results of the preliminary examination, indicating the rejection of any proposals as non-responsive to 
important aspects of the RFP and the TOR during the detailed technical evaluation and the reasons for 
their rejection;  
the technical scores awarded by each evaluator to each proposal;  
a summary of the relative strengths and weaknesses of each proposal;  
an analysis of any significant scoring discrepancies or inconsistencies and an explanation of any 
adjustments made to scores; 
the total technical score for each proposal; 
a list of the proposals that reached the minimum technical qualifying mark and a recommendation to 
open the financial proposals of these bidders;  
a recommendation to reject all other proposals.  
The TER must be signed by all TEC members and submitted for review and approval by the Project 
Coordinator, who shall then forward it to IFAD for its no objection (NO), if applicable.  
43 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Once the Project Coordinator (and IFAD, if applicable) approves the TER, the consultants/firms shall be 
informed about their scores.  
If no consulting firms obtain the minimum qualifying technical score, the TEC, subject to IFAD no-
objection, reserves the right to reject all proposals and to invite a new competition. The new competition 
shall be based on a new shortlist of consultants to be established through a “request for expression of 
interest” and may include adjustments to the TOR of the assignment and/or relevant contract 
parameters, as appropriate. The new TOR, shortlist and RFP shall be subject to IFAD’s no-objection. 
Inform consulting firms 
Once the TER has been signed and IFAD’s NO has been obtained (if applicable), the Project can proceed 
to the next stage of the process. It should:  
  notify the consulting firms whose financial proposals are to be opened of the date, time and 
location for the financial proposal opening and conduct the proposal opening;  
  notify consulting firms whose proposals have been rejected, stating that their financial proposals 
will be returned unopened on completion of the evaluation process; 
  not provide any debriefs or information at this stage on why a proposal was rejected. Debriefs 
can only be requested once the notice of intent to award has been issued. 
Conduct the financial evaluation 
The financial evaluation is conducted to determine the evaluated price of proposals, to compare the 
proposals and to determine the successful proposal (i.e. the proposal that should be recommended for a 
contract award). The financial evaluation and determination of the successful proposal depends on the 
evaluation methodology.  
Notwithstanding the content of this section, there are general good practices that should be followed, 
unless otherwise required by a national procurement system adopted for the project. They are: 
 
  determine whether the financial proposals are complete and include all corresponding inputs in 
the technical proposal, costing any missing items and adding them to the proposal price (e.g. the 
RFP may state that all taxes and duties are to be included in the evaluation);  
correct any arithmetical errors using the procedure stated in the RFP. If no specific procedure is 
stated in the RFP and there is a discrepancy between the unit price and the total price obtained 
by multiplying the unit price by the quantity, the unit price shall prevail and the total price shall 
be corrected. Consulting firms should be notified in writing of any arithmetical corrections made 
and asked to agree to the corrections in writing;  
  determine whether all items are included in the proposal price and add the cost of any missing 
 
items; 
convert all proposals to a single evaluation currency for comparison purposes, using the currency 
and the date and source of the exchange rate specified in the RFP;  
  determine the total evaluated price of each proposal;  
  assign the financial score of each proposal. 
Prepare a combined evaluation report to submit for approval 
A combined evaluation report includes details of both the technical and financial evaluation. Since the 
TER has already been issued, it is usually appropriate to prepare a specific financial report and add the 
technical report as an annex.  
The financial evaluation report should include the following information: 
 
the bid opening record for the financial proposals (and any minutes if produced), including the 
total proposal prices and technical scores read out at the financial proposal opening; 
44 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
 
the evaluated price of each proposal, following any corrections or adjustments to the price and 
the conversion to a single currency;  
the financial scores of each proposal and the methodology for assigning financial scores;  
the weighting of technical and financial scores;  
the total score for each proposal;  
 
 
 
  a recommendation to award the contract to the consultant with the highest total score, subject 
to any negotiations required;  
the currency and price of the proposed contract, subject to any changes following negotiations;  
 
It is good practice to include the areas or issues that require negotiations in the financial evaluation 
report. 
All evaluation reports must be signed by all staff involved in the evaluation. 
Conduct Contract Negotiation 
The purpose of negotiations is to discuss and finalize certain details of a contract with the successful 
consultant prior to contract signature. Negotiations should lead to a contract acceptable to both parties 
and therefore reduce the likelihood of disputes or the need for contract amendments.  
Negotiations are not held with the intention of making substantial changes to a contract or obtaining 
price reductions from the successful consultant. The only exceptions are:  
– when the single sourcing/direct contracting method of procurement has been used; or  
– when price has not been a factor in the bid evaluation process (i.e. quality-based selection) 
Areas that may be subject to negotiations 
Negotiations cannot include the price or the substance of proposals except under the conditions outlined 
in section 1 (consultants qualification selection and sole-source selection, as applicable). Rather, 
negotiations should focus on minor technical, contractual or logistical details.  
As guidance only, negotiations may normally deal with the following areas:  
  minor alterations to technical details, such as the terms of reference, proposal assignment 
methodology or staffing;  
  minor amendments to the special conditions of contract;  
  mobilization arrangements;  
 
 
  agreement on the final completion schedules to accommodate any changes required by the 
inputs required from the procuring entity;  
finalization of payment arrangements;  
procuring entity;  
clarification of details that were not apparent or could not be finalized at the time of tendering; 
the consultant’s tax liability.  
 
 
Negotiations must not be used to:  
 
substantially change the technical quality or details of the proposal, including the consultant’s 
tasks or responsibilities;  
  materially alter the contract terms and conditions stated in the RFP document;  
 
reduce fee rates (see above) or reimbursable costs, except where changes are required to reflect 
any agreed changes to the technical proposal; or  
substantially alter anything that was a critical or deciding factor in the evaluation of the tenders 
or proposals.  
 
45 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
The consultant must not be allowed to substitute key staff, unless the procuring entity and the consultant 
agree that delays in the procurement process, changes in the terms of reference or other circumstances 
reasonably beyond its control make it necessary and unavoidable. 
The negotiation process 
The technical evaluation committee will have made recommendations in the evaluation report about 
whether negotiations are required and the issues that need to be addressed. The recommendation to 
negotiate should be approved by the appropriate approval authority before any preparations are made.  
Once approval is obtained, the following steps should be taken to prepare for and conduct the 
negotiations: 
  The procuring entity must name a negotiating team to handle the negotiations (see notes for 
assistance in selecting staff);  
  The successful consultant must be invited for negotiations. The letter of invitation should propose 
the time, date and location of the negotiations and may state that the consultant’s proposal has 
been evaluated as the successful proposal; it is important, however, that no contractual 
commitment be made to the consultant at this stage (i.e. the letter must not make any reference 
to acceptance of the proposal or the award of the contract);  
  The negotiators should prepare by reviewing the RFP document, the proposal from the successful 
consultant and the evaluation report to identify areas in need of negotiation. For each area, the 
procuring entity should identify and quantify the objectives it wishes to achieve from the 
negotiations, and where possible, set maximum and minimum negotiating parameters;  
  When negotiating with the successful consultant, it is important for the negotiators not to 
commit the procuring entity to any arrangements or agreements during the negotiations;  
  A record of the negotiations must be prepared and recommendations issued on how to proceed;  
 
It is important that the record of what has been agreed to in the negotiations be signed by the 
consultant at the conclusion of the negotiation; 
  Approval of the recommendations should be sought, proceeding as appropriate. If the 
recommendation is to further negotiate with the successful consultant or to negotiate with the 
next ranked consultant, repeat this process from step 2 onwards. 
Following negotiations, the recommendations made to the appropriate approval authority may include:  
  Proceed with contract award to the successful consultant, making the changes agreed on during 
the negotiations;  
  Revise the objectives of the negotiations and negotiate further on specific areas;  
  Terminate the negotiations if they have failed to result in an acceptable contract, and seek 
internal approvals and IFAD’s NO, where relevant, to hold negotiations with the next best-ranked 
consultant;  
  Cancel the procurement proceedings if it is believed that the original RFP document was flawed, 
the need has changed or the budget is insufficient for the requirements. The results of any 
negotiations and resulting recommendations must be approved at the appropriate level in the 
procuring entity before any contract award or other commitment is made to any consultant. 
Records 
A record of any negotiation must be made and kept in the procurement file at the procuring entity. At a 
minimum, this record should include:  
 
the name of the consultant with whom negotiations were held and the names of the bidder’s 
representatives;  
46 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
the names of all procuring entity staff involved in the negotiations;  
the time, date and location of the negotiations;  
the areas subject to negotiation and the main points or requests made on each side;  
the final agreement reached on each area of negotiation;  
 
 
 
 
  any points where agreement was not reached or further discussion is required.  
The record of the negotiations must be signed by all participating staff of the procuring entity and the 
consultant’s representative. Any other correspondence or information related to the negotiations must 
also be kept in the procurement file, including the letters inviting the consultant to negotiate and the 
procuring entity’s preparation of its negotiating position. 
Notice of Intent to Award (NOITA) 
This notice is sent to the successful bidder or consultant (prior to the award), as well as the unsuccessful 
bidders. It informs the bidder that they have been successful without constituting any contract between 
the procuring entity and the bidder or establishing any legal rights or obligations for the procuring entity 
or bidder. 
The NOITA is a document that provides important information to the successful bidder/consultant. An 
unsuccessful bidder may – upon receipt of the NOITA – request a debrief or file a protest. 
If there are no protests within 10 working days of a NOITA’s issue, a notification of award is issued to the 
successful bidder/consultant. If there is a national system for lodging protests, the number of days 
stipulated in that system takes precedence. 
IFAD recommends use of the NOITA template, which can be found on its website: www.ifad.org/ project-
procurement. 
Notification of Award (NOA) 
The Project shall award the contract, within the bid validity period, to the bidder/ consultant that meets 
the appropriate standards of capability and resources and whose bid has been accepted in accordance 
with the bidding documents. A bidder shall not be required, as a condition of award, to assume 
responsibility for work not stipulated in the bidding documents or to otherwise modify the bid as 
originally submitted.  
The NOA is issued by the Project once the pertinent approvals have been obtained. In preparing the NOA, 
the procuring entity should: 
  Ensure that the approval of the decision to award the contract has been received in writing. The 
recommendation for a contract award is made in the evaluation report, so the written approval 
of that report must be received.  
  Ensure that the number of days to allow for bid challenges/protests have passed  
  Obtain any other necessary approvals, including financial approval for commitment of the 
required funds.  
  Ensure that the successful bidder’s tender is still valid and that any modifications to the tender 
have been confirmed in writing by the bidder.  
  Prepare the NOA – see below for guidance on contents.  
  Ensure that the NOA is signed by the authorized signatory of the procuring entity.  
  Dispatch the NOA to the successful bidder, retaining evidence of dispatch, such as proof of 
posting. Sending the NOA as an e-mail attachment is a valid means of notification. The contract 
has now entered into force. (Unless otherwise stated in the bidding document, the tender is no 
longer valid if the notice of tender acceptance contains any provisions that are contrary to the 
tender – i.e. a counteroffer.)  
47 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Ensure that the bidder’s confirmation of receipt of the NOA is received. 
Once the contract is signed, the Project shall post the results, identifying the procurement, the name of 
the winning bidder and the price, duration, and summary of the scope of the contract in a newspaper 
with national circulation and send them to IFAD for posting on its website. This contract award notice is 
mandatory for all contracts. In case the procurement activity necessitated an advertisement at the 
beginning of the bidding process, the publication of contract award should follow the same 
advertisement method used for the announcement of the Project. 
QUALITY-BASED SELECTION (QBS) 
QBS is appropriate for the following types of consulting assignments: 
  Complex or highly specialized assignments with need for demonstrable innovation by the 
consultants, e.g., country economic studies, urban master plan, financial sector reforms; 
  assignments with high downstream impact, e.g., policy studies, management studies, engineering 
design of complex infrastructure;  
  assignments which could be carried out in different ways, such that it is difficult to compare 
proposals (examples include management advice, policy studies) 
For these types of assignments, short-listed consultants shall be asked to submit technical proposals and 
the firm with the highest technical proposal invited to submit a financial proposal and negotiate a 
contract. 
SELECTION UNDER FIXED BUDGET (FBS) 
FBS is used when:  
– the assignment is simple;  
– it can be clearly defined;  
– the budget for the services is strictly limited.  
It is often used for clearly defined and simple assignments when available budget is fixed and with no 
room for financial flexibility.  
Bidders are invited to submit their best technical proposal within the fixed budget price, and the contract 
will be awarded to the highest-scoring technical proposal within that budget.  
When using FBS, most of the steps in preparing the evaluation criteria are the same as for QCBS, the 
primary difference being that there is no requirement to provide weighting for financial and technical 
scores, as the award is based purely on the highest technical score within budget.   
Other specific aspects of FBS are:  
The RFP must indicate the available budget and request consulting firms to provide their best technical 
and financial proposals within the stated budget in separate sealed envelopes.  
 Because the budget is fixed, the ToR must be carefully prepared to ensure that it and the budget are 
consistent and realistic so that the consulting firm can perform all the expected tasks.   
Technical proposals will be evaluated, and consultants who achieve the minimum technical score will be 
invited to a public opening of their financial envelopes.  
Consultants whose technical proposals fail to obtain the minimum technical score will have their financial 
envelopes returned unopened. 
Any financial proposals that exceed the indicated budget shall be rejected.  
The consulting firm that has submitted the highest-ranked technical proposal within the indicated budget 
will be selected for contract award. 
LEAST-COST SELECTION (LCS) 
48 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
LCS is appropriate when selecting consulting firms for routine low-value services such as simple 
engineering design or supervision, where wellestablished practices and professional standards exist. 
There may also be budgetary constraints or pressures that necessitate having cost as the main driver for 
procuring certain services.  
Technical proposals are examined to ensure that they obtain a specified minimum technical score, and 
the bidder with the lowest-priced tender of those achieving that minimum technical score will be selected 
for contract award.  
The advantage of this selection method is that the procuring entity acquires competent services at the 
lowest price. The disadvantage, however, is that because the award is based on the lowestpriced 
proposal that achieves a minimum technical threshold score, the process will generally not result in 
acquiring the highest degree of technical qualifications, experience or expertise available. Although this 
disadvantage can be offset by the price, if more of a balance between financial and technical aspects is 
desired, and if financial resources are available, then consideration should be given to using QCBS.  
When using LCS, most of the steps in preparing the evaluation criteria are the same as for QCBS, the 
primary difference being that there is no requirement to provide weighting for financial and technical 
scores, as the award is based purely on the lowest-priced proposal meeting the stated minimum technical 
threshold. 
CONSULTANTS’ QUALIFICATIONS-BASED SELECTION (CQS) 
Selection based on consultants’ qualifications may be appropriate for very small assignments for which 
the issuing of a detailed RFP as well as preparing and evaluating competitive proposals are not justified.  
Following the advertisement of a request for expressions of interest (REOI), firms submit their expressions 
of interest (EOIs) or profiles, which are then evaluated. Only the highest-ranked firm will be invited to 
submit a combined technical and financial proposal. If such proposal is responsive and acceptable, the 
firm will be invited for negotiation. Both technical and financial aspects of the proposal may be 
negotiated. If negotiations with the selected firm fail, the procuring entity may terminate the negotiations 
after obtaining IFAD’s no objection (NO) and invite the second-ranked consultant to submit a combined 
technical and financial proposal. 
SOLE-SOURCE SELECTION (SSS) 
As with single sourcing (direct contracting) for any other type of procurement, SSS of the consulting firm 
lacks the benefits of competition in terms of quality and cost. It is not transparent in selection and may 
encourage unacceptable practices. Therefore, SSS should be used only in exceptional circumstances and 
only after securing IFAD’s NO. 
Any request for SSS by a borrower/recipient must be accompanied by a detailed justification, which will 
be carefully examined by IFAD to ensure that no alternative selection methods can be used.  
  To receive IFAD’s NO, it must be demonstrated that there is a clear advantage to SSS over 
competitive selection. Examples of such circumstances are: tasks that are a natural continuation 
of previous work done by the consulting firm;  
situations in which rapid selection is essential, such as an emergency;  
selections of low-value as agreed with IFAD and as defined in the letter to the borrower;  
 
 
  only one firm is qualified or has the necessary experience for the assignment.  
Lack of time to conduct competitive procurement is not an acceptable justification for the use of SSS. 
INDIVIDUAL CONSULTANTS SELECTION (ICS).  
Individual consultants shall be hired for assignments in which (i) teams of personnel are not required, (ii) 
additional professional support (e.g. by the home office of a consulting firm) is not required, and (iii) the 
49 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
experience and qualifications of the individual are the paramount requirement. When coordination, 
administration or collective responsibility could become difficult because of the number of individuals, it 
would be advisable to hire a firm.  
The process is implemented through an EOI procedure. Individuals submit their CVs in response to an 
openly advertised REOI which are subsequently evaluated. Only the highest-ranked individual consultant 
will be invited to submit a combined technical and financial offer, which is then negotiated with the client.  
If negotiations with the selected individual fail, the procuring entity may invite the second-ranked 
individual for negotiations, subject to IFAD’s NO for prior review procurements.  
Individual consultants may be selected on a solesource basis with due justification in exceptional cases, 
such as for:  
 
tasks that are a continuation of previous work that the consultant has done and for which the 
consultant was competitively selected;  
certain assignments expected to last less than three months;  
 
  emergencies arising from natural disasters; and  
  when the individual is the only consultant qualified for the assignment. 
ABNORMALLY LOW BIDS (ALB) 
An ALB is one in which the bid price appears so unreasonably low that it raises material concerns with the 
borrower/recipient in relation to the capability of the bidder to successfully deliver the contract at the 
price offered. This poses a potential problem when the most responsive or highestranking bidder appears 
to offer a price that is abnormally low, compared with the Projects’s estimate, prevailing market 
conditions and/ or other responsive bids. 
An ALB is not in and of itself negative, but requires additional investigation and examination because it 
could be indicative of risks such as:  
• lack of technical or commercial competence;  
• an intent to apply variations to, or not follow the design standards or specifications;  
• an intent to not comply with environmental or labour laws.  
ALBs may represent risk flags for any, all, or combinations of the risks identified above, across all 
procurement categories. Examples of how these potential risks could apply in the different procurement 
categories are presented below. 
Examples of potential risks of ALBs by procurement categories  
  Goods: under-priced goods with intent to deliver products of suboptimal quality, ultimately 
compromising effectiveness, durability and value for money.  
  Works: under-priced works, with intent to introduce variations to design specifications, cut 
corners on quality inputs, and/or employ workers under unlawful conditions.  
  Consulting Services: under-priced consulting services, with intent to substitute the experts whose 
resumes are used in the technical proposal with freelance experts recruited for lower fees.  
  Non-consulting services: under-priced non-consulting services, with intent to use inputs of 
 
suboptimal quality, employ workers under unlawful conditions, and/or make claims later to raise 
the price 
Inversely, there may be valid reasons for a very low bid price, such as: human error; quotation 
without profit to gain market entry; economy of manufacturing process; technical solutions 
chosen; or favourable conditions available to the bidder for the supply of products or services, or 
for the execution of the work. 
The potential problems associated with ALBs only appear during the contract implementation stage, 
which is why ALBs need to be addressed at the evaluation stage. The process for dealing with an ALB, 
50 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
from identification through clarification and decision, is only applied to highly ranked bids that are 
substantially responsive based on the technical evaluation as non-responsive bids are rejected for 
consideration in any event. 
Process for dealing with ALBs  
The process for addressing ALBs should be applied and executed carefully to ensure that bidders with 
valid reasons for a low price are not excluded. The ALB process is triggered during the evaluation stage, 
when the most responsive or highest ranked and potential winning bid according to the evaluation 
criteria appears to have an abnormally or unreasonably low price. This process comprises three steps:  
(i) identification;  
(ii) clarification and analysis; and  
(iii) decision and reporting.  
The entire process must be carried out and/or supported by qualified subject matter experts. 
1 Identification  
Determining that a bid price is abnormally low may not be easy. A combination of approaches is 
recommended in order to minimize the scope for subjectivity. With some variations in approaches and 
methodologies across organizations, the basic process for identification mainly entails comparing the bid 
price with:  
  The cost estimate provided by the Project’s engineer or subject matter experts on the related 
procurement;  
  The price offered by other bidders with substantially responsive bids;  
  Prices paid in similar contracts in the recent past. 
Comparing the bid price with the engineer or subject matter experts should be accompanied by due 
diligence and analysis to ensure that the cost estimates are accurate and reliable. To the extent possible, 
updating must be undertaken prior to the start of the evaluation process. Cost estimates may be high for 
various reasons; for example, they may have been based on outdated information, methodologies 
irrelevant to the bidder’s proposal or assumptions that subsequently became invalid; or they may have 
been made too early in the design process to accurately cost project components. 
Comparing the bid price with prices offered by other substantially responsive bids. This approach applies 
a mathematical formula to calculate a threshold under which a price may be identified as risky. Given that 
the reliability of such methods reduces with the number of responsive bids, it is recommended that this 
approach be used with a minimum of five responsive bids. However, the approach should be applied with 
caution due to the inherent statistical bias attached to such an approach and the false sense of objectivity 
that it may convey. Therefore, the mathematical approach is recommended only in combination with 
other methods to confirm the abnormally low characteristic of a bid price. 
Example formula (World Bank, 2019) The formula below uses the value that is one standard deviation 
below the mean/average price as a threshold or to determine a “risk zone”.  
Step 1: Calculate the average price of submitted responsive bids/tenders.  
Excel formula: AVERAGE([Range of Prices])  
Step 2: Calculate the standard deviation.  
Excel formula: STDEV([Range of Prices])  
Step 3: Calculate the risk threshold.  
Excel formula: AVERAGE([Range of Prices])-STDEV([Range of Prices])  
Prices below the result obtained in step 3 fall within the risk zone.  
51 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Comparing the bid price with prices paid in similar contracts in the recent past. This approach is quite 
effective, although it may prove difficult to find one or more projects similar enough to serve as reliable 
benchmarks. 
2. Clarification and analysis  
Once an ALB is identified, further investigation is needed during which the borrower/recipient will seek to 
determine:  
  The scope and type of error, i.e. if some items are priced abnormally lower or if certain items/ 
types of items are consistently underpriced;  
  Whether the low price is a mistake or miscalculation, or whether it is indeed as intended, 
therefore requiring more detailed explanation and justification from the bidder. Significantly 
lower prices than the estimates or other comparisons may be the result of an arithmetical error 
or misunderstanding of the requirements. 
In the event that an ALB cannot be explained by mistakes or miscalculations, a more detailed analysis is 
required, in which the bidder is requested to provide explanations and clarifications on the proposed 
cost, with supporting data and documentation. To the extent possible, explanations provided by the 
bidder should be corroborated or supported by information already provided by the bid, without making 
any material changes to the substance of the bid, technically or financially.  
The Project seeks clarification based on analysis of the scope of under-pricing and/or the nature of the 
price elements that are abnormally low. The clarification requested should focus on the rates of costs 
that have been determined to be abnormally low, stating the rationale/benchmarks that were utilized for 
the analysis. 
The Project should also specify in which form the information should be provided, to enable the bidder to 
respond accurately. Specific templates may be used for this purpose. 
Examples of clarifications that may be sought from bidders to justify ALBs  
  Sources, quantities, rates or prices for services, materials and supplies. Note: where prices for 
input resources are identified as abnormally low, the bidder should submit appropriate 
justification to support its pricing of the respective input;  
Information regarding the economy of the manufacturing process, services provided, or 
construction methods to be adopted;  
 
  Technical solutions chosen or any exceptionally favourable conditions available to the bidder for 
supply or execution;  
Labour rates or cost;  
 
  Whether the bidder is quoting for the first time, or whether they have a record of delivering 
similar goods/works/services at a similar price;  
  Transportation distances;  
  Overheads, contingency and profit margins (this might include organizational and project 
management arrangements, contingency margin for risks in the price calculation or profit margin 
used for the bid price calculation);  
  Source and mode of acquisition of the proposed construction equipment (e.g. hire, lease, 
purchase agreement);  
  Compliance with applicable standards and regulations, e.g. labour laws, social and environmental 
laws and regulations.  
The clarification and analysis stage is an iterative process in which further clarification may be requested 
if needed upon analysis of the initial documentation provided. Bidders should be given sufficient time to 
provide any requested clarifications and/or detailed price analyses. A period of no less than 5-10 business 
52 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
days is recommended. A longer period should be allowed if validation by the bidder’s external auditor is 
required. As with the identification step, analysis must be carried out by fully qualified personnel and/or 
subject matter experts. 
Furthermore, with regard to providing the information, any act or omission, including a 
misrepresentation, that knowingly or recklessly misleads or attempts to mislead a party in order to obtain 
a financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation, constitutes a fraudulent practice, which may trigger 
IFAD’s investigation process under the Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its 
Activities and Operations. 
3. Decision and reporting 
On examination of the explanation, price analyses and required documentation provided by the bidder, 
the borrower/recipient may make one of the following three decisions:  
Accept the bid, if the evidence supplied is satisfactory and accounts for the low level of prices and costs 
(in which case the bid is not considered abnormally low);  
Reject the bid, if the evidence provided does not satisfactorily account for the low price or costs offered. 
 If a bid is rejected or if the bidder fails to provide increased performance security, the borrower/ 
recipient may award the contract to the next highest-ranked bidder, provided that this bid is not 
determined to be abnormally low. Should the second-ranking bid also appear to be abnormally low, the 
same process shall be applied, with the same possible outcomes described above.  
Reporting and review. The decisions and outcomes of the ALB process must be detailed within or 
annexed to the evaluation report, including all documentation and information upon which the decision 
was made and the methodology used to identify the ALB. The application of and subsequent decisions 
regarding the ALB process will only be subject to IFAD’s prior review and no objection for procurements 
that fall above the established prior review threshold, unless otherwise required in the Letter to the 
Borrower/Recipient. ALBs for procurements below the threshold will be reviewed as part of IFAD’s post-
review/supervision process. 
Reports for bid evaluations that have applied the ALB process should include the following information:  
  The bidder’s unit rates or costs of items that are determined to be abnormally or unrealistically 
low; 
  The borrower/recipient’s own cost estimates, together with the assumptions on which they are 
based;  
  The total value of the gap between the two elements above;  
  Details of the clarifications and explanations sought and provided by the bidder;  
  Details of any price analyses requested and evaluated; (vi) The recommended decision; 
  Copies of all exchanges between the bidder and the borrower/recipient during the clarification 
process.  
As with all other processes designed and required to uphold the procurement principles in IFAD’s Project 
Procurement Guidelines, IFAD may, during the post-review, declare misprocurement or ineligible 
expenditures for procurements that reveal a lack of due diligence in the ALB process, or misuse/abuse of 
the process to influence the outcome of the evaluation. 
Unbalanced or front-loaded bids 
During the process of identifying ALBs, unbalanced or front-loaded bids may be uncovered in which some 
items may be priced at an artificially low rate (and thus detected as potential ALBs) to offset artificially 
high pricing on others:  
53 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
• Unbalanced bids. A bidder places a high unit price on some items and offsets them with a low unit price 
on other items. A bidder may unbalance its prices for a number of reasons, including:  
 
 
 
to conceal its pricing strategy from competitors;  
to benefit from inaccurate quantity estimates (where the bidder knows or anticipates that it will 
be necessary to increase the quantity of goods/works required); or  
to quote significantly lower prices on items that the bidder knows or anticipates will not be called 
for after contract award. 
Front-loaded bids. This consists of deliberately submitting bids with artificially high prices or unit rates for 
early stages of works/services, offset by artificially low prices for later stages, in the hope of receiving 
large sums at the beginning of a contract and/or to improve the contractor’s cash flow. 
Although these types of bids are not ALBs, the process for dealing with ALBs described above may be 
used, with the exception that if a front-loaded bid is uncovered, it will not be rejected, but the bidder will 
be requested to increase the performance security to protect the interests of the borrower/ recipient and 
IFAD. In these cases, failure to comply with the increase in performance security will lead to rejection of 
the bid, while the bid security will not be forfeited.  
As performance security is not part of a contract for consulting services, a bank guarantee must be 
requested for the advance payment at the beginning of the contract. 
ALBs in the procurement of lots  
In cases where (an) ALB(s) is/are identified in a bidding procedure for multiple lots, the process will apply 
only to that/those lot(s) and the process will not be delayed for the award of other lots with no ALB. This 
ensures that each potential case is reviewed on its own merits. 
Procurement with community participation 
Sometimes, it is highly desirable for communities affected by projects to participate in their design and 
implementation. Under PROSPER, there will be the need for community participation in procurement. 
This involves providing voluntary labour or NGO assistance in initial capacity-building to playing a more 
direct and active role that can range from determining the nature of subprojects to acting as the 
implementing agency.  
Note that procurement with community participation is not a distinct procurement method per se but 
rather, the simplification and adoption of normally accepted procurement methods (primarily national 
competitive bidding, national shopping and direct contracting) and their implementation through 
participation by the project’s beneficiary community or community institutions, either as procurement 
agents, implementing agencies, or contractors and suppliers of goods, works and related services. 
Under the community participation approach, the role of the PCU or other project parties will be to 
review, supervise and guide the procurement, disbursement and physical implementation of the relevant 
activities carried out by the community, thereby ensuring that the principles and standards stipulated in 
the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines are upheld. 
Procurement with community participation is not to be included in a project at the expense of 
competitive bidding methods, particularly national competitive bidding. The basic principles of 
competition, transparency and fairness need to be balanced with the advantages of community 
participation.  
Like any other procurement method used in IFAD funded projects, procurement with community 
participation is to be spelled out in the project documents and provided for in the respective financing 
agreement between IFAD and the Project. 
Benefits of community participation 
54 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Consistent with IFAD’s mandate of achieving economy, efficiency and social equity in the relatively poor 
rural communities served by IFAD-funded projects, the following benefits have been noted in projects 
that include community participation in procurement:  
  greater relevance of project assistance in the beneficiary community and demand-driven project 
activities;  
  enhanced community ownership and empowerment, leading to the sustainability of the project; 
  enhanced contribution to poverty reduction;  
  greater economy and efficiency in procurement through lower transport costs and timely 
availability of materials at the point of use;  
  enhanced capacity and skills within the community; 
  generation of employment and economic opportunities in the community;  
 
reduction in the burden of project implementation on the central project coordination unit (PCU) 
through decentralization and delegation;  
  greater chance of meeting the desired project goals and objectives. 
The Project must consider the following when using this procurement method: 
The project environment and collective institutional capacity of the targeted community are elements 
critical to involving the community in procurement. Given the fact that both the economic and the 
sociocultural contexts surrounding communities have a significant bearing on project success, community 
leaders, institutions, grass-roots organizations and, when available, local NGOs operating in the area, 
should be consulted during project appraisal. The Project will consider the following issues to determine 
prima facie whether and how the community will play a constructive and beneficial role in procurement 
under the project: 
Ghana’s regulatory framework. As part of the assessment of the national procurement system, the legal, 
governmental and other regulatory frameworks in which development projects operate must be 
assessed, with special attention to the extent of decentralization permitted and prevailing in the country 
for community groups, grass-roots organizations and NGOs to operate effectively at the project level. 
Organizational capacity. Using the results of the procurement assessment, it is necessary to ascertain: 
(a) the existence or lack of formal or informal community organizations;  
(b) whether these organizations are representative of the community’s interests;  
(c) the institutional capacity of community organizations to shoulder resource management 
responsibilities;  
(d) homogeneity in the beneficiary community group and the possibility of smooth interaction within the 
group and with the PCU;  
(e) the existence of mechanisms for ensuring accountability in the community, or – if such mechanisms 
are lacking, the possibility of designing and introducing them. 
Capacity and technical skills. Examine the prevailing:  
(a) primary occupation(s) of community members and the crops or other outputs they produce vis-à-vis 
the proposed project activities, with an eye to opportunities for integration;  
(b) means and methods used to procure goods and works for the community’s needs;  
(c) availability and timing of surplus labour within the community. 
Administrative and accounting skills. Assess the community’s ability to receive, secure, use and account 
for group funds in a reliable manner, and identify training and capacity-building needs, if any. 
55 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Intermediaries. Ascertain the presence and function of intermediaries (such as community centres, 
cooperatives, NGOs, branches of rural development banks, etc.) operating in the community. 
Cost-benefit analysis. Work out the incremental costs of involving the community, including training 
costs, quantifiable risks and benefits, such as increased sustainability of project activities, more effective 
operation and maintenance of project facilities and cost-sharing. 
Beneficiary community’s contribution Determine the possibility of a contribution from the community 
and identify the physical and financial parts of that contribution for appropriate inclusion in cost and 
financing tables during project design. 
Procurement arrangements  
Once the preliminary determination has been made that including community groups in project 
procurement is both feasible and desirable, the next step is to identify the following as clearly as possible 
for the project component in which community participation is desired:  
the goods, works and related services to be procured;  
the procurement schedule, based on implementation timing and targets;  
the role to be played by the community and/or its representatives.  
 
 
 
This information will help to determine the most suitable procurement methods and the community’s 
role and responsibility in the procurement process. In determining procurement needs, it is normal to 
separate goods, works and services. The nature, quantity and source for each procurement category 
should then be identified.  
The community procurement plan may be part of a microplan prepared by the community to implement 
the project locally. In such cases, the procurement plan would be reviewed and approved by the PCU 
along with the community microplans and this will be included in the Project procurement plan. 
Quantity and value of procurement 
 Estimating the quantities of goods and the nature and amount of works and services required under the 
project’s community component is critical for procurement planning and preparation. If procurement 
contracts are expected to be large, it may be neither economical, efficient nor possible to meet the 
general consideration of broader and open competition, as required under the IFAD Project Procurement 
Guidelines. Community participation will be planned only when contract values are appropriate, 
depending on the assessed administrative and financial capacity of the targeted project community. 
Source of procurement. 
Identifying the source of procurement is an important step. Communities can be involved in procurement 
as suppliers or contractors only when the goods, works or services are of the type commonly produced or 
provided by the communities. Similarly, communities can be procurement agents only when the goods 
are of a type readily available in local markets, works are of a type provided by contractors in the project 
areas or the services are of a type provided by persons or groups within their reach. 
Community groups as implementing agencies 
 The Project envisages that some community groups will act as implementing agencies that will undertake 
procurement, their institutional capacity needs to be examined and evaluated. The following questions 
should be addressed during project design, or by project start-up at the latest, to assess the capacity-
building investment required by the community groups: 
  Organizational capacity of the group. Can it obtain formal recognition as a legal entity? If so, are 
there regulatory procedures to do so?  
  Rules of operation. Does the group have membership rules, by-laws for its operation and 
transparent information for its members?  
56 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Accountability of group leaders. Are they elected? To whom do they report? Do officers have the 
skills to administer procedures and account for funds? 
  Ability to receive public funds. Are there any borrower/recipient regulations that impede the 
receipt of funds? What are the audit arrangements, if any? Is there a commercial banking facility 
and, if so, what are the procedures for the group to access funds?  
  Ability to contract. Does the group have the legal status to enter into contracts? If not, can the 
project provide or build this capacity?  
  Dispute resolution. What are the existing formal dispute resolution processes? How will disputes 
be resolved within the group, with outsiders and with the PCU? Are there any faster, simpler local 
disputeresolution methods that the community would respect and accept?  
  Financial status of the community. What is the community’s capacity to contribute, either in cash 
or in kind? How will an equitable contribution from members be ensured? Does the community 
have the capacity to provide collateral or security for any advances received from the project? 
Intermediaries as implementing agents  
If the project beneficiary community does not have adequate institutional capacity to receive and account 
for funds or administer procurement reliably, it may be necessary to introduce intermediaries to act on 
the community’s behalf. Such intermediaries could be civil society organizations (CSOs), cooperative 
societies, private entities or other groups. Project management will ensure that such intermediaries have 
the necessary capacity to perform such duties. When CSOs or other entities are included as executing 
agencies for weak community groups, the following aspects should be addressed during the PROSPER 
design: 
Legal status of the intermediary. Regulations governing registration (with the government or local 
authority), operation in specific sectors, the authority to receive and account for public funds and the 
ability to participate in the project. 
Role of the intermediary (contractor or consultant). If acting purely in a training or supervisory capacity 
vis-à-vis the community groups, the intermediary may be hired as a consultant under the consultant 
guidelines. If the intermediary needs to act as the implementing agent, actively assisting in building 
infrastructure using community labour, it may be more appropriate to hire them as a contractor, either 
through a transparent competition (if more than one intermediary is available) under IFAD’s Project 
Procurement Guidelines, or via sole-source direct contracting (if only one functioning intermediary exists 
in the project area).  
Financial viability and administrative capacity. The intermediary’s primary source of funding, staffing, 
management, administrative capacity and accountability via independent audits, etc. should be examined 
to ensure safety and security for handling public funds on behalf of project management and the 
community. 
Procedures and documentation  
PROSPER shall ensure that the project includes simple, yet reliable, arrangements to implement the 
various stages of the procurement procedures, such as transparent bid advertising, open competition 
(even within the community), public bid opening, award of contract to the bidder with the lowest tender, 
etc. to preserve the integrity of the process insofar as possible. Bidding documents, contracts, etc. may 
have to be simplified and/or standardized to facilitate easy understanding and use by community 
participants.  Appropriate procedures should be in place for regular monitoring and audits of community 
procurement activities and the relevant records by project management. 
57 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
58 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Annex 1: Terms of reference of key staff [Appendix to Chapter 4] 
TORs Project Coordinator 
Position Title:  Project Coordinator 
Reports to: 
Chief Director of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) 
The Project Coordinator coordinates all activities and ensures that PROSPER is implemented according to the 
conditions of the loan financing agreement, the Programme Design Report (PDR) and the Programme 
Implementation Manual (PIM).  
A.  Duties and Responsibilities shall include: 
  Overseeing the effective and efficient implementation of the programme at the national and zonal offices.  
  Directing and supervising the day-to-day operations of the programme, guided by the PDR, PIM and the 
AWPB, providing any necessary amendments to ensure smooth performance 
Identifying and engaging relevant Implementation and Technical Partners.  
 
  Overseeing the preparation of AWPBs of the Programme with the participation and inputs of all key 
stakeholders. 
  Supervising the design and implementation of a participatory results-based Monitoring and Evaluation 
framework. 
  Ensuring that all contractual obligations are adhered to. 
  Regularly appraising staff and providing feedback and support to enable them perform their respective 
duties. 
  Establishing and maintaining good working relationships with all programme participants and stakeholders 
– including MoFA and other Government agencies, development partners, the private sector and NGOs 
  Promoting collaboration among Development Partners (DPs) and the private sector on value chain 
development. 
  Take full responsibility for procurement of goods and services and approve contracts for all transactions 
after obtaining the necessary “no objections”. 
  Ensuring timely preparation and submission of mandatory reports e.g. M&E data and reports and their 
wide access and distribution.  
  Promoting knowledge sharing and learning within the programme and with other partners.  
  Support external missions to foster joint learning process that improves programme implementation to 
achieve impact.  
  Undertake any other responsibility that will ensure smooth and effective implementation of the 
Programme. 
  Follow up progress on meeting the triggers for the expansion phase and take necessary actions that they 
are met on time without any delay. 
  Ensure adequate follow up and recording of Government, Beneficiary and private sector contributions. 
  Ensure the compliance with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual regarding green investments for Business 
Plans supported by the grants and loans from the Matching Grant Facility and BFF.   
  Ensure nutritional activities are implemented and results achieved. 
B: Qualifications and Experience 
Essential 
0 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  At least a Masters’ degree in Business Administration, Agriculture, Project Management, Agricultural 
Economics or other related academic field of study; 
  At least 15 years of relevant work experience in agricultural research and development issues including 
policy, design and implementation of agricultural value chain programmes (at least 5 of which should have 
been in a senior management position).  
  Experience in working for International Financial Institutions or development partner-funded programmes 
or similar market-oriented rural development interventions;  
  Knowledge of Government of Ghana and IFAD or development partner-funded policies and procedures on 
gender, environment and general programme finance and administration management. 
Desirable 
  Ability to inspire confidence and develop good working relationships with project implementation 
partners; 
  Staff management experience including recruitment, appraisals and managing performance; 
  Demonstrated ability to train and build capacity of others; 
  Experience working with the private sector; 
  Experienced in electronic data processing and analysis; 
  Strong analytical and market-oriented skills. 
1 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Procurement Manager 
The Procurement Manager reports to the Project Coordinator and is responsible for managing procurement 
processes and contract administration aspects. As head of the procurement unit, the incumbent will be tasked to: 
  Ensure compliance with Government of Ghana Public Procurement Regulations and ensure due diligence 
 
to comply with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and handbook. 
Installation of appropriate procurement systems and procedures for effective planning and monitoring of 
procurements under the project;   
  Oversee preparation and consolidation of inputs to the Annual Procurement Plan;  
  Finalize, within three months after start of duty, a draft manual on procurement; 
  Continuously coordinate and train (on the job if necessary) PCU staff or consultants in the preparation of 
terms of reference, specifications and proactive follow-up of these inputs in the bidding processes;  
  Prepare bidding documents based on acceptable bidding standards;  
  Ensure all prior review requirements such as obtaining of the No Objections from IFAD are complied with 
in a timely manner;  
  Ensure that all the due bidding processes are adhered to: sufficient publications, strict adherence to 
deadlines, transparency in communications with bidders, publication of bid results, etc.;  
  Ensure acceptable record keeping in procurement with at least a complete procurement file for each 
procurement from start to contract finalization. Maintain all procurement records in a form appropriate 
for regular auditing and spot checks by supervision missions;  
  Communicate to all implementing entities and service provider their responsibilities and requirements 
with respect to procurement in keeping with prevailing government practices which are acceptable to 
IFAD;  
  Oversee the contracting process, including ensuring that Evaluation Committees have people with 
appropriate expertise;  
  Monitor implementation of contracts: report status and challenges to the Project Coordinator on a 
monthly basis; and intervene to address problem upon request by the Coordinator;  
  Ensure that goods, works and services financed have been procured in accordance with the loan 
agreement and the Government of Ghana procurement regulations;  
  Work with the Finance Manager to ensure that tax exemptions for the procurement of goods, works and 
services for the project are secured at the appropriate time;   
  Prepare quarterly reports of progress with implementation of the Procurement Plan, and regularly inform 
the Project Coordinator of challenges and make proposals to overcome bottlenecks;  
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Coordinator.  
Minimum Qualifications  
The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in procurement and supply and must be a member of the 
Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply or equivalent.  
Skills and Experience  
  At least seven years of relevant work experience, preferably including experience in procurement in 
government/donor projects or large institutions;  
  Appreciation of the evolution of the public sector procurement reforms in Ghana;  
  Ability to work well in teams and to interact with a wide range of private sector partners and government 
representatives;  
  Knowledge and experience of matching grant schemes and processes;  
  Knowledge of work planning and reporting;  
2 
  Excellent quantitative and analytical skills;  
  Computer-literate and well-versed in the use of Microsoft Office Suite. 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
3 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Procurement Assistant 
Reporting to the Procurement Manager: 
The Procurement Assistant will handle a variety of tasks that include: assisting in procurement, preparation of 
procurement plans, market surveys and research in accordance with laid down regulations and procedures; and 
preparation of periodic and annual Procurement Management Reports and any other related duties as may be 
assigned from time to time.   
Academic and Professional Qualifications  
The Project Procurement Assistant MUST:   
  Possess a minimum of a Higher National Diploma (HND) Certificate in  Business, Accounting, Mathematics 
or its equivalent qualification from a recognized institution;  
  Have a Diploma in Purchasing and Supply Management from the Chartered Institute of Procurement & 
Supply or its approved equivalent from a recognized  institution;   
  Have a Valid Membership to the Ghana Chapter of the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply 
(CIPS) or its approved equivalent from a recognized  Institution;  
  A bachelor’s degree in any of the following field:  Procurement, Logistics, Finance, Business Administration, 
Economics, Project Planning and Management, Commerce or any other relevant discipline will be an 
advantage;    
  Have a minimum of five (5) years of experience in public procurement of Goods, Works and Services, three 
(3) of which must be in a donor-funded project;  
  Be Computer literate with practical working knowledge of e-procurement (Microsoft Dynamics ERP, SAP, 
etc). 
4 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs KM/M&E Manager 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Organisation:  
Duty station: 
Background: 
Job Description 
KM/M&E Manager  
Project Coordinator 
All M&E and KM activities 
PCU within MOFA 
TBC, Ghana 
MOFA has established a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to coordinate the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Programmes in Ghana. The 
PCU is currently managing the IFAD-funded GASIP project and will be responsible 
for implementing PROSPER. 
The Programmes M&E and KM Unit  
The Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation Manager has the 
overall responsibility for guiding and leading the overall M&E and KM strategy. 
The Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation Manager will lead the 
enhancement and operations of the existing PCU’s M&E system, building up and 
maintaining the database necessary for the PCU to do its work efficiently and 
effectively and providing timely and relevant information to programmes 
stakeholders. S/he will also work closely with the two MKS in the field as well as 
working closely with other PCU and management and technical staff.  
M&E and GIS 
  Build up an enhanced system of monitoring and reporting with adequate 
indicators to allow the programmes staff to effectively monitor the 
progress, performance and impact of programmes components. 
  Develop/strengthen the overall framework for programmes M&E and 
KM - annual programmes reviews, participatory impact assessments, 
process monitoring, operations monitoring, annual data collection, 
lessons-learned workshops, and Knowledge products generation. 
  Ensure that programmes M&E and KM is carried out in accordance with 
the programmes’ guidelines and procedures. 
  Help revise the programmes Log frame matrix, particularly indicators 
and monitoring mechanisms. 
  Oversee the development of, and manage the M&E system (database 
and e-library repository). 
  With the MKS, develop an M&E service pack (reporting formats for data 
and narrative) for the regional and province staff supervising and 
managing implementation. Based on that assess and develop trainings in 
data collection tools as needed, to ensure that appropriate measures 
are established and implemented to provide sufficient basis for review 
of programmes progress and for monitoring changes seen on ground. 
  Support the field coordinators’ targeting and mainstreaming activities in 
programmes implementation, including providing technical assistance 
on mainstreaming priorities issues and programmes targets with respect 
to inclusion of women and youth, environment and climate, nutrition, 
etc. and ensure adequate awareness and activities in this respect, 
including during reporting. 
5 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Support the PCU and provinces prepare AWPBs, including arranging 
regional level and programmes stakeholder review workshops.  
  Review the quality of existing social and economic data in the 
programmes area, the methods of collecting it and the degree to which 
it will provide good baseline statistics for impact evaluation. 
  Set up a participatory system of data collection from all programmes’ 
 
partnership to feed into the programmes M&E system. 
Liaise with the MKS in the field and other technical staff and set up a 
system of periodic monitoring reports to be submitted to PCU.  
  Based on the AWPB and in particular the programmes budgets, design 
the framework for the physical and process monitoring of programmes 
activities. 
  Monitor, record and report physical progress of the indicators against 
AWPBs. 
  As per the Green Climate Fund investment in the project, support the 
National Designated Authorities (NDAs) and Great Green Wall (GGW) 
Focal Point with the implementation of the Regional Support 
Programme’s activities.  
  Overseeing the planning and coordination of GIS activities to meet the 
outlined goals. 
  Overseeing data flow, management, and distribution activities that are 
aimed at supporting GIS. 
  Developing and managing control quality standards for system 
application. 
  Maintaining up-to-date and accurate geospatial documentation for 
reference purposes. 
  Guide staff and implementing partners in preparing their progress 
reports. Together, analyse these reports in terms of problems and 
actions needed.  
KM and COMMUNICATION 
  Prepare consolidated progress reports for programmes management to 
submit to the Government, IFAD and other relevant bodies, in 
accordance with approved reporting formats and timing.  
  Organize programmes annual review and planning workshops involving 
programmes stakeholders to gather programmes results as well as 
lessons learnt and successful cases. These should be reflected in 
programmes reports and widely disseminated.  
  Define the need for specific M&E and impact studies, design them and 
supervise their execution. 
  Undertake regular visits to the field to support implementation of M&E 
and to identify where adaptations might be needed. 
  Document and collect information on lessons learned, including case 
studies and special research.  
  Organize (and provide) refresher training in M&E for programmes and 
implementing partner staff, local organizations and primary 
stakeholders. 
6 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Assist, as required, the IFAD supervision and other monitoring, review 
and evaluation missions of projects. 
  Undertake any other assignments relevant to the M&E system as 
assigned by the Programme coordinator. 
  Work proactively with programmes and Programmes teams to identify 
opportunities for capturing and sharing knowledge, and disseminating 
information about major progress and results. 
  Develop and maintain knowledge dissemination events calendar, 
ensuring that major events are identified early.  
  Support senior management and relevant programmes teams to 
develop and manage messages and information material to ensure the 
success of major events. 
  Advise the programmes on branding and publications policy and also 
assist in their dissemination. 
  Develop and maintain contacts with key print and electronic media 
(including radio, TV, news websites and blogs) to supply them with 
newsworthy material about the programmes work in the country. 
  Ensure that all outreach information material to be used by the media is 
written in a way that concepts and issues can be readily understood by 
the public. 
  Research and identify success stories, writes and edits media releases, 
and feature stories within tight timeframes which consistently meet 
agreed programmes standards. 
  Produce video documentaries for capturing programmes results. 
  Prepare Factsheet/Case Studies to promote national programmes 
results and activities. 
  Ensure that the programmes web pages are updated. 
  Follow up progress on meeting the triggers for the for the expansion 
phase and take necessary actions that they are met on time without any 
delay. 
  Ensure adequate follow up and recording of Government, Beneficiary 
and private sector contributions. 
  Folloe up the compliance with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual 
regarding green investments for Business Plans supported by the grants 
and loans from the Matching Grant Facility and BFF.   
  Follow up the progress of achievement of the nutrition project targets. 
  At least eight years of work experience, including at least four working 
with knowledge management, planning, M&E and/or MIS in 
government/donor programmes or large institutions, with knowledge of 
logical framework programmes and participatory systems. 
  Ability to set up and follow through on a monitoring system in a complex 
environment, and capacity to design and carry out relevant field level 
verification with data validation tools. 
  Knowledge of participatory programme implementation methodologies 
  Proficiency with GIS desktop software and data management.  
  Detail-oriented and analytical thinker. 
  Ability to process and analyze data. 
7 
Qualifications and 
Experience 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Strong managerial skills and demonstrated capacity to manage people 
and interact with aide range of private sector partners, public sector 
representatives, and development partners. 
  Self-motivated, with demonstrated ability to take initiatives and work 
under a minimum of supervision, but also to work effectively as a 
member of a team. 
  Experience with performance based contract monitoring and output 
based work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  A clear understanding of aspects of technical writing to different 
categories of audiences. 
  Experience working with the media and different stakeholders, as well 
as events management. 
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Fluent written and spoken English.  
  Excellent quantitative and analytical skills. 
  Excellent IT skills in particular Excel and knowledge of other M&E 
applications/statistical software packages (MS Access, SPSS or STATA) 
would be an asset. 
  Proven communication and organization skills. 
  Knowledge of gender and youth, environment and climate, nutrition, 
etc. issues, targeting of interventions. 
  Expected to have a creative and pragmatic approach to problem-solving 
and the ability to think in terms of socio-economic and administrative 
systems. 
  Excellent analytical, report writing, and presentation skills. 
8 
TORs KM/M&E Officer 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Organisation:  
Duty station: 
Background: 
Job Description 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
KM/M&E Officer 
KM/M&E Manager 
Assigned M&E and KM activities by the KM/M&E Manager 
PCU within MOFA 
TBC, Ghana 
MOFA has established a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to coordinate the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Programmes in Ghana. The 
PCU is currently managing the IFAD-funded GASIP project and will be responsible 
for implementing PROSPER. 
The Programmes M&E and KM Unit  
The KM/M&E Officer has the overall responsibility for implementing the overall 
M&E and KM strategy. The KM/M&E Officer will co-lead the enhancement and 
operations of the existing PCU’s M&E system, building up and maintaining the 
database necessary for the PCU to do its work efficiently and effectively and 
providing timely and relevant information to programmes stakeholders. S/he will 
also work under the KM/M&E Officer in the field as well as working closely with 
other PCU and technical staff.  
M&E and GIS 
  Ensure that programmes M&E and KM activities are carried out in 
accordance with the programmes’ guidelines and procedures. 
  Document and collect information on lessons learned, including case 
studies and special research.  
  Conduct M&E trainings for extension services staff and facilitation of 
M&E activities 
  Participate in the preparation of the AWPB. 
  Provide guidance and inputs to organizing and managing programmes 
information and experience sharing events so that the events are 
viewed as learning experiences, not gatherings for the sake of it. 
  With the MKM, design and, after they are constructed supervise 
implementation of: (i) a database of all community facilitators and 
training providers to monitor their activities and outputs and (ii) a 
database of all participating villages (clusters) and the activities of the 
common interest groups and grants provided to each village. 
  As per the Green Climate Fund investment in the project, support the 
National Designated Authorities (NDAs) and Great Green Wall (GGW) 
Focal Point with the implementation of the Regional Support 
Programme’s activities.  
  Build, update and maintain databases and GIS software and hardware. 
  Assist with data collection with GPS and field collection with ArcGIS 
Collector. 
  Digitize, create, maintain, display and update GIS databases, coverages, 
and linkages to various GIS databases. 
  Performing data capture and analysis for GIS product. 
9 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Supporting and participating in the designing and development of the 
geospatial database. 
  Produce accurate maps and other representations of data for public use 
and field work activity. 
KM and COMMUNICATION 
  Help organize stakeholder workshops for feedback to and input from all 
stakeholders. 
  Systematically compile lessons learned from programme 
implementation into formats suitable for dissemination, as well as take 
lead in branding and production of programme communications 
materials. 
  Assess field reports to identify possible implications for implementation 
and agree on corrective action to be taken with the decision makers. 
  Work proactively with other IFAD’s PCUs to identify opportunities for 
capturing and sharing knowledge, and disseminating information about 
major progress and results. 
  Research and identify success stories, writes and edits media releases, 
and feature stories within tight timeframes which consistently meet 
agreed programmes standards. 
  Actively seek to understand problems and unexpected positive/negative 
impacts, discussing these with primary stakeholders and senior 
management. 
  Prepare Factsheet/Case Studies to promote national programmes 
results and activities. 
  Ensure that the programmes web pages are updated.  
  Regularly report to the MKM on programmes operations including 
activities, processes, and outputs on monthly basis. Work proactively 
with programmes teams to identify opportunities for capturing and 
sharing knowledge, and disseminating information about major progress 
and results. 
  Follow up progress on meeting the triggers for the expansion phase and 
take necessary actions that they are met on time without any delay. 
  Ensure adequate follow up and recording of Government, Beneficiary 
and private sector contributions. 
  Follow up  the compliance with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual 
regarding green investments for Business Plans supported by the grants 
and loans from the Matching Grant Facility and BFF.   
  Follow up the achievement of the project nutrition targets. 
  Minimum 3 years working experience in M&E preferably with rural 
development programmes and/ or funded by international 
organizations. 
  Knowledge of participatory programme implementation methodologies. 
  Proficiency in Computer Skills including experience of using Internet 
based applications, Network Monitoring applications, MS Word, MS 
Excel and MS Power Point etc. 
  Proficiency with GIS desktop software and data management.  
  Detail-oriented and analytical thinker. 
10 
Qualifications and 
Experience 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Ability to process and analyze data. 
  Ability to organize and train staff. 
  Good contextual knowledge of local issues, community priorities, 
organizational relationships, social and cultural constraints and realities, 
and environmental conditions. 
  Strong oral and written communication skills in English.  
  Strong social skills and open-minded. 
  Ability to work independently and with limited supervision. 
11 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs M&E/MIS assistant 
Position: 
Reports to: 
Supervises: 
Organisation:  
Duty station: 
Background: 
M&E/MIS assistant 
KM/M&E Manager 
Assigned KM and ICT activities by the KM/M&E Manager 
PCU within MOFA 
TBC, Ghana 
MOFA has established a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to coordinate the 
management and implementation of IFAD-funded Programmes in Ghana. The 
PCU is currently managing the IFAD-funded GASIP project and will be responsible 
for implementing PROSPER. 
The Programmes M&E and KM Unit  
The M&E/MIS assistant has the overall responsibility for implementing the 
overall KM and MIS strategy. The KIS will co-lead the enhancement and 
operations of the existing PCU’s KM and MIS systems, building up and 
maintaining the database necessary for the PCU to do its work efficiently and 
effectively and providing timely and relevant information to programmes 
stakeholders. S/he will also work under KM/M&E Manager in the field as well as 
working closely with other PCUs management and technical staff.  
Job Description 
  Develop a detailed ICT and MIS needs-assessment and requirements for 
PCU and all programmes. 
  Spearhead the development of the PCU MIS strategy.     
  Develop detailed Technical Specifications to procure goods and develop 
ToRs for services/ consultancies related to procurement of ICT/MIS 
equipment and connectivity (e.g. M&E software and ArcGIS); assist the 
procurement unit of the PCU in vendor/contractor/consultant selection 
process and manage and monitor the performance of the selected 
agencies/consultants responsible for detailed design and 
implementation of all infrastructure leveraging and strengthening 
activities. 
In consultation with other Lead Specialists hired by PCU, the M&E/MIS 
assistant will provide overall support in MIS assessment, planning, 
budgeting and technical evaluation of bids during IT procurement. 
  Work closely with all the members of the PCU team, concerned GoG 
 
departments, other partners, consultants, service providers and provide 
support for smooth implementation of the programmes objectives.  
Lead design and implementation of related capacity building activities. 
 
  Manage and direct contractual vendors/consulting resources. 
  Monitor progress of infrastructure related activities through well-
defined indicators embedded in the monitoring framework under the 
overall principle of results based management. 
  Help organize stakeholder workshops for feedback to and input from all 
stakeholders. 
  Systematically compile lessons learned from programme 
implementation into formats suitable for dissemination, as well as take 
lead in branding and production of programme communications 
materials. 
12 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Assess field reports to identify possible implications for implementation 
and agree on corrective action to be taken with the decision makers. 
  Work proactively with programmes and Programmes teams to identify 
opportunities for capturing and sharing knowledge, and disseminating 
information about major progress and results. 
  Research and identify success stories, writes and edits media releases, 
and feature stories within tight timeframes which consistently meet 
agreed programmes standards. 
  Actively seek to understand problems and unexpected positive/negative 
impacts, discussing these with primary stakeholders and senior 
management. 
  Prepare governorate and national Factsheet/Case Studies to promote 
national programmes results and activities 
  Ensure that the programmes web pages are updated  
  Regularly report to the KM/M&E Manager on programmes operations 
including activities, processes, and outputs on monthly basis. Work 
proactively with programmes teams to identify opportunities for 
capturing and sharing knowledge, and disseminating information about 
major progress and results. 
  Degree in Electronics/Computer Science/IT/Information Systems/ICT 
Infrastructure or any related field.  
  At least 2 years of experience in managing ICT infrastructure in 
public/reputed private sector agency (ies). 
  Demonstrable knowledge and experience in managing and overhauling 
ICT Infrastructure and MISs. 
  Proficiency in Computer Skills including experience of using Internet 
based applications, Network Monitoring applications, MS Word, MS 
Excel and MS Power Point etc. 
  Ability to organize and train staff. 
  Good contextual knowledge of local issues, community priorities, 
organizational relationships, social and cultural constraints and realities, 
and environmental conditions. 
  Strong oral and written communication skills in English.  
  Strong social skills and open-minded. 
  Ability to work independently and with limited supervision. 
Qualifications and 
Experience 
13 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Gender, Vulnerability & Social Inclusion Specialist 
Roles and responsibilities 
Under the general supervision of the PCU Project Coordinator, the Gender, Vulnerability & Social Inclusion 
Specialist will organize and supervise activities in the following areas (themes): a) targeting; b) promoting gender 
equality and women's empowerment; d) empowering youth; and e) promoting the inclusion of PWD. 
Project implementation 
  Based on a gender and youth analysis, develop gender and youth action plans. 
  Assist in the preparation and organization of community mobilization and sensitization, including the 
conduct of various analyses (situational analysis, sociological and institutional mapping). 
  Supervise the project's beneficiary selection activities (definition of precise criteria for the selection of 
communities and beneficiaries, supervision of participatory identification exercises, evaluation of pre-
selected household profiles, etc.). 
  Support the KM/M&E Officer in: verifying the effectiveness of the targeting of youth, women heads of 
households and PWD; monitoring and evaluating the effects and impact of the project on the economic 
integration of youth and women and on the economic empowerment of beneficiaries.  
  Review basic project implementation processes to provide feedback and suggestions on how to achieve 
the best possible project outcomes with respect to targeting, gender equality, women’s and youth 
empowerment, and social inclusion. 
  Strengthen gender and age equality by using the Household Methodology (here: GALS) approach 
  Ensure that adequate attention is paid to youth and gender dimensions of the project in the AWP/B, 
annual progress reports and other M&E requirements. 
  Ensure adequate data collection and reporting on gender, youth, and social inclusion indicators (sex and 
age disaggregated).  
  Build and develop capacities in gender, youth, and social inclusion aspects. 
  With the support of the KM/M&E Manager, organize or supervise regular qualitative and quantitative 
studies to assess the project's impact on women's and youth economic empowerment. 
  Maintain working relationships with government ministries/departments and programmes in charge of 
agriculture, nutrition, health, gender/women, youth, social inclusion, and community development. 
  Ensure the compliance with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual regarding green investments for Business 
Plans supported by the grants and loans from the Matching Grant Facility and BFF.   
Communication 
  Develop a communication strategy on gender, youth and social inclusion and collaborate with the TA staff 
dedicated to the implementation of nutrition activities and Climate and Safeguard Specialists on this. 
  Develop adequate messages on gender, youth, and social inclusion as part of the nutrition focused SBCC 
 
strategy. 
Liaise with PCU, IFAD country office and the IFAD gender and youth teams in headquarters on questions 
regarding gender and youth in implementation, knowledge-sharing and other aspects. 
  Serve as a channel of communication between the Region and Federal level and others working on gender 
and youth issues in government, implementing agencies, other development projects, IFAD and other 
International Finance Institutions. 
  Assist colleagues working on the project at regional level in accessing information they may need on 
gender and youth issues and share good practices. 
Advocacy 
14 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Be familiar with the gender, youth, and social inclusion policies of IFAD and institutions linked to the 
project, including national policies and policies of ministries, implementing institutions and financing 
agencies, etc. 
  Sensitize project staff and partners to the necessity of ensuring that project outcomes should be achieved 
in line with the objectives of IFAD’s policy to promote gender equality and women’s and youth 
empowerment, social inclusion and targeting policy and updated guidelines. 
Minimum qualifications and experience required 
  Advanced University degree in social sciences, rural development, or related fields. 
  At least 7 years of demonstrated work experience and understanding of gender, youth, and social inclusion 
aspects in the context of rural development projects. Contextual experience and country knowledge is 
preferred. 
  Experience in poverty reduction, gender equality issues and youth targeting within rural development 
programs.  
  Experience in training and capacity building required. Knowledge of the synergies between gender, youth, 
nutrition, and climate change is highly desirable. Experience with multi-sectoral programming. 
  Knowledge of Gender Action and Learning System approaches. 
  Experience interacting with diverse internal and external stakeholders is desirable.   
  Strong project management and coordination skills and basic M&E knowledge is desirable. 
  Strong analytical skills. 
  Proven ability to work in a team environment. 
  Good computer skills. 
  Good interpersonal and social skills; open-minded individual. 
  Self-motivated and creative thinker.  
  Ability to work independently with limited supervision and work effectively under pressure.  
15 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Nutrition TA 
Main responsibility  
  Under the general supervision of the PCU Project Coordinator and in close cooperation with the PCU 
Gender, Vulnerability & Social Inclusion Specialist, (and the Climate and Safeguard Specialist if relevant), 
the nutrition TA will coordinate and facilitate the implementation of the project’s nutrition-sensitive 
interventions. 
  TA will ensure the operationalization of nutrition mainstreaming in the project investments and integrate 
social inclusion and IFAD's mainstreaming priority areas (gender, youth, indigenous peoples, and climate 
change).  
Specific duties 
  Develop the project´s nutrition strategy that includes a detailed action plan with associated costs in line 
with the National Nutrition strategy and Plan of Action and IFAD’s mainstreaming approach. 
  Conduct basic nutrition causal and food gap analysis in the targeted communities. Develop a nutrition 
communication strategy (SBCC), including development of campaign messages, training events/forum, 
materials. 
  Ensure nutrition gardens demonstrate what is needed for a healthy diet throughout the year. 
  Develop TORs for the KAP survey and facilitate the execution of the survey 
  Develop a communication plan for nutrition-related campaigns. 
  Ensure that IGAs are accompanied by healthy diet campaigns  
  Develop nutrition relevant content of Financial Literacy Classes especially household economy and 
household budget allocation for healthy diets 
  Develop and coordinate capacity building and training sessions on nutrition-sensitive interventions for 
project staff, extension workers, and service providers. 
 
  Promote better understanding of the nexus nutrition-gender-youth-climate in training activities 
 
In close liaison with other PCU staff, particularly the gender and social inclusion specialist, ensure nutrition 
is adequately integrated in project documents, in the M&E system, in the AWP/Bs and Progress reports. 
In collaboration with the project KM/M&E officer, ensure adequate data collection on nutrition-sensitive 
indicators and entry in the Project’s M&E database (this may include developing the terms of reference for 
baseline/end-line studies, design additional studies including food and nutrition survey or food Knowledge 
Attitudes and Practice surveys); ensure that nutrition-sensitive indicators are tracked and reported on a 
regular basis (along with other project reporting schedules). 
  Track and document substantive data and information on food security and nutrition-sensitive indicators 
and maintain regular progress reporting especially at supervision, midterm reviews and completion; 
ensure implementation of the supervision missions' recommendations related to nutrition. 
  Establish local partnerships on nutrition (e.g. with development partner organizations, UN agencies, the 
private sector, civil society organizations, etc.) to support implementation and the provision of technical 
assistance. Assess ongoing initiatives, explore synergies and complementarities with other partners (e.g. 
USAID). 
  Support the documentation of best practices and lessons learned for in-country and global dissemination. 
16 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Minimum qualifications and experience required 
  Advanced University Degree (Master or equivalent) in human nutrition and/or food security.  
  A minimum of 7 years of progressively responsible experience at international level in nutrition 
programming especially programming of nutrition-sensitive interventions. 
  Experience in nutrition causal analysis, nutrition/nutrient gap analysis, behaviour change communication in 
nutrition. 
  Experience in developing a SBCCstrategy.  
  Experience in training and capacity building required. Knowledge of the synergies between nutrition, 
youth, gender equality and climate change is highly desirable. 
  Field experience in multi-sectoral programming for food security and nutrition.  
  Experience in poverty reduction, gender equality issues and youth targeting within rural development 
programs. 
  Strong project management and coordination skills and basic M&E knowledge is desirable. 
17 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Value Chain Manager 
Title: 
       Value Chain Manager 
Reports to: 
       Project Coordinator 
The Value Chain Manager will serve as the key technical lead for the programme. He/she will supervise 
Role: 
technical and field-based activities including value chain development, market linkages, private sector engagement 
and local partner capacity building support. 
Duties and Responsibilities shall include: 
  Develop support programmes to strengthen chosen value chains and oversee the execution of support to 
value chains from technical service providers; 
  Provide technical guidance in the process for selecting value chain cluster drivers, evaluation of business 
proposals and finalization of cluster formation agreements among cluster actors; 
 
  Facilitate the promotion of commercially viable linkages among smallholder farmers, larger businesses, 
service providers, private financiers and development partners through contracted service providers;  
Liaise with other development partners and projects to create leverage for PROSPER and a coordinated 
approach; 
Identify technical assistance needs for the development of market and value chain tools, training materials 
and facilitating the conduct of pro-poor market and value chain studies; 
 
  Promote access to credit by value chain operators and ensure that public and private infrastructure 
facilities provided under the programme is appropriately integrated to support value chain development; 
  Provide oversight and direction for the work of the Value Chain Officers. Responsibilities include technical 
supervision of annual work planning process and development of programme activities; 
  Supervise value chain assessments and oversee the value chain selection process. This includes developing 
scopes of work for any consultants who may be required to help carry out these assessments. Provide 
leadership and mentoring to the local technical team on analysing data from the assessments; 
  Design activities to increase smallholder agricultural production and market linkages that lead to increased 
profitability of on-farm enterprises. This includes the development and implementation of upgrading plans 
in targeted value chains with a focus on improving smallholder productivity and net revenues; 
  Provide specific Technical inputs in reviewing business proposals submitted to PROSPER and make 
recommendations that will enhance the quality and sustainability of the PROSPER funded businesses, both 
existing and new. 
Qualifications and Skills  
Essential 
  At least a Masters’ degree in Agriculture, Agribusiness or any other related academic field; 
  At least 10 years of relevant work experience in dealing with issues related to agribusiness and with 
smallholder farmers in a rural setting. 
  Experience in marketing and value chain research and/promotion in agricultural commodities in Ghana; 
  Considerable experience and involvement in development partner funded-projects that provide support to 
smallholder farmer groups; 
18 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Demonstrated ability to develop contractual arrangements between and among value chain actors. 
Desirable  
  Experience in research or other activities aimed at influencing policy to support agribusiness development 
  Demonstrable knowledge in pro-poor value chain development and participatory methods. 
  Ability to achieve pro-poor, gender sensitive and socially inclusive working results  
  Demonstrated ability to train and build capacity of others. 
19 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Value Chain Officer 
Position Title:  Value Chain Officer 
Line Management: 
Reports to the Value Chain Manager  
Role: The Value Chain Officer will assist the Value Chain Manager and will have the responsibility to develop 
support programmes and strengthen chosen value chains and to oversee the execution of support to value chains 
from technical service providers. Furthermore, s/he will assist in coordinating and supervising consultants engaged 
within the Programme to support PROSPER partners. 
A. Duties and Responsibilities 
  Work closely with the Value Chain Manager in identifying candidate value chains, refining value chain 
development concepts, developing support programmes to strengthen chosen value chains, and oversee 
the execution of support to value chains from technical service providers. 
  Conduct analyses and surveys that may include experiences and success stories, projects and documents 
on VC promotion as well as the identification and listing of local key actors with the objective of 
systematizing local experience and support the establishment of a knowledge information network. 
  Facilitate viable linkages among smallholder farmers, larger businesses, service providers, private 
financiers and implementing partners aiming at achieving a networking attitude towards the 
harmonisation of approaches, tools and methodology of VC development. 
  Proactively contribute to the identification of candidate value chains and the preparation and launching of 
call for Expressions of Interest, which represent the core of PROSPER business at the zonal level. 
  Support the development of Terms of Reference and Tender Specifications for technical consultants for 
studies on VC impact potentials. 
  Coordinate and oversee the implementation of ordered studies, ensuring that sound financial analyses are 
developed and other PROSPER tools and strategies are effectively applied into proposed activities (eg FBO 
development, contracts, financial plans, matching grants, high potential technologies, appropriate 
infrastructures etc) and are compliant with PROSPER’s broader principles (gender, climate change, youth 
development, etc.). 
  Contribute to the preparation of programme reports, Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPBs) as planned 
by the PCU. 
  Undertake any other responsibility that will ensure smooth and effective implementation of the 
programme. 
B. Qualifications and Experience 
Essential 
  At least a Masters’ degree in Agribusiness, Agriculture, Agricultural Economics, Business Administration or 
other academic field relevant to the tasks to be carried out. 
  At least 7 years practical experience in developing and analysing value chain related business plans, and 
work experience in value chain management, preferably within the agriculture sector in Ghana. 
  Familiarity with funding related issues facing the development of the agricultural sector in Ghana; 
20 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Strong value chain analysis and risk management skills. 
  Experience in working for donor-funded programmes or similar market-oriented rural development 
interventions. 
  Experience in developing and fostering partnerships among agriculture commodity chains actors including 
experience as a trainer. 
Desirable 
  Practical experience in facilitating value chain development in the agricultural sector. 
  Work experience in agricultural development issues and implementation of agricultural value chain 
programmes. 
  Demonstrated ability to train and build capacity of others. 
  Strong analytical and market-oriented skills. 
21 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Financial Controller 
Line Management: 
Project Coordinator, 
The Financial Manager shall be: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
xvi. 
Responsible for managing the accounting/reporting systems to ensure that the Programme 
Management is informed of on-going financial transactions / activities, as well as the Implementation 
Partners have a clear view of their financial responsibilities, the funds available and the requirements 
of reporting and record keeping in accordance with prevailing Government of Ghana practices which 
are acceptable to IFAD and/or Cooperating Institutions (CIs).  
Overseeing the setting up the chart of accounts and customization of the financial reports in 
collaboration of the GIFMIS Secretariat of the Controller and Accountant Generals’ Department 
(CAGD). 
Preparing and submitting withdrawal applications direct payments and quarterly IFRs to IFAD in 
accordance with the established procedures and within the agreed deadlines, and follow up to ensure 
that the Programme does not encounter liquidity challenges. 
Preparing financial statements using acceptable accounting principles, concepts and conventions with 
due consideration to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), IFAD Financial Administration 
requirements, and the Public Financial Management Act 2016 (Act 921).  
Preparing quarterly, half-yearly and annual statements of Programme accounts as an integral part of 
the Management Information system for submission to the Project Steering Committee, MoF, IFAD, 
and other Cooperating Institutions. 
Supporting IFAD and GoG supervision missions and ensuring the implementation of all 
recommendations stemming from these missions 
Maintaining all accounting records in an appropriate form, and facilitating the external audit missions 
for the yearly submission of the audited financial statements of AAFORD and for the bi-annual 
submission of the audited IFRs, taking into consideration the required submission dates for the 
Programme to meet IFAD’s deadlines. 
Ensuring the effectiveness of PROSPER internal control system and procedures. 
Facilitating the fast and effective flow of funds between IFAD and PROSPER and between PROSPER and 
its suppliers and implementing partners within GIFMIS and Project procedures.  
A counter-signatory to programme fund releases as required for Programme financial transactions and 
also sign as witness to all contracts as much as possible; 
Ensuring that the overall project accounts are updated and accurate at any point in time. 
Supporting the Project Coordinator and technical staff in conceiving and enforcing the financial and 
fiduciary aspects of all MoUs and agreements signed with implementing partners. 
Providing support and training to implementing partners in financial management procedures, 
reporting and justification of expenditures.  
Preparing monthly Statement of Expenditure and quarterly reports regarding aspects of Programme 
Financial Monitoring bringing out variances and advising component heads as to the limits of 
expenditure. 
Preparing annually: (i) balance sheets, which should disclose bank and cash balances (that should 
agree with the statement of sources and application of funds), fixed assets and liabilities; (ii) yearly and 
cumulative Statement of Expenditures (SOEs) by withdrawal application and category of expenditures; 
and (iii) reconciliation of the Designated Accounts. 
Supervising the preparation of monthly reports that include Bank Reconciliation Statements, Summary 
of cash balances, Cash budget, Statement of Expenditure, Petty Cash Reconciliation, etc. 
22 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Maintaining an asset register for all assets purchased by the Programme and prepare monthly report 
on equipment.  
Ensuring that fixed assets are well accounted for and annual verification is done indicating conditions 
of assets and their location appropriately. 
Ensuring that Designated Accounts and Operational Accounts have been maintained in accordance 
with the provisions of the loan agreement. 
Ensuring that funds for programme (including counterpart funds) have been provided for 
implementation and are used in accordance with the conditions of the loan agreement, with due 
attention to economy, efficiency, and effectiveness, and solely for the purpose for which the funds 
were provided (eligibility of project expenditures), with verifiable and acceptable quality of all 
supporting documentation. 
Ensuring that funds for programme implementation are disbursed in a timely manner to enable 
programme interventions be carried out on time; and follow up on all Programme funds released to 
implementing entities and technical partners for timely retirement and proper utilization. 
Ensuring that all necessary supporting documents, records and accounts have been kept in respect of 
all programme activities with clear linkages existing between the books of account, the financial 
statements, procurement, disbursement and physical completion levels. 
Compiling the initial consolidated AWPB, incorporating the inputs of other PCU officers and uploading 
same to the GIFMIS platform. 
Responsibly following-up on issues arising from the AWP/B process, documentation and 
disbursements from IFAD, GoG and other Cooperating Institutions to ensure that releases are not 
unduly delayed.  
Monitoring expenditure on a monthly basis against the approved AWPB and reviewing expenditure 
projections to ensure that expenditure stays within budget. Significant actual or anticipated 
expenditure variances against the budget should be included in the monthly report to line 
management together with any recommendations for changes to the budget. 
Ensuring that goods and services have been procured in accordance with the loan agreement and in 
accordance with the IFAD and GoG rules and procedures. 
Ensuring that SOEs expenditures are carefully compared for eligibility with relevant financial 
agreements, and the disbursement letter, and with reference to the Programme Design Report for 
guidance when necessary. 
Overseeing tax matters of the Programme, by ensuring that tax exemptions for the procurement of 
goods for the Programme are secured at the appropriate time. 
Follow up progress on meeting the triggers for the expansion phase and take necessary actions that 
they are met on time without any delay. 
Ensure adequate follow up and recording of Government, Beneficiary and private sector contributions. 
Assisting the PC with the general management of the Programme finances and all other assignments 
as and when required. 
Undertaking any other responsibility that will ensure smooth and effective implementation of the 
Programme. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
xix. 
xx. 
xxi. 
xxii. 
xxiii. 
xxiv. 
xxv. 
xxvi. 
xxvii. 
xxviii. 
xxix. 
xxx. 
xxxi. 
xxxii. 
B.  Qualifications and Experience 
  Qualified Accountant with ACCA, CIMA, CA (Ghana), CA (England and Wales), CPA or related financial 
management qualification (essential). 
  Advance degree in finance, accounting, or related subject (essential). 
  Experienced in setting up and maintaining a computerized accounting system (essential). 
  Experienced in using the GIFMIS software with user rights now (essential). 
  Significant financial management experience at senior level (essential). 
23 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  Significant post-qualification experience of at least seven years duration (essential). 
  Staff management experience including recruitment, selection, objective setting, appraisals and 
managing performance (essential). 
  Presentation of highly complex financial and non-financial information  
 
Inspiring confidence and developing highly working relationships with finance and non-finance 
colleagues within Programme, Cooperating Institutions and implementing partners. 
  Practical working experience with Government of Ghana, International Financial Institutions such as 
IFAD and World Bank funded projects, and auditing experience (essential). 
C.  Competencies: The post holder will require an excellent level of competency in the following: 
 
Information, Communication and Technology: - Proficient in Microsoft Word, Excel and Outlook (essential), 
and computerised accounting, e.g. SUN Systems, iScala, ACCPAC, etc. (essential); and GIFMIS (essential). 
  People Skills: - Ability to work independently and as a team player who demonstrates leadership and is able 
to support and mentor staff and is able to work with rural communities in a sensitive and participatory 
manner; 
  Teamwork: - Ability and inclination to work co-operatively with others and recognition of the value of 
sharing ideas, knowledge and information while taking personal responsibility for doing so. 
  Drive for results: Competence demonstrated by the level of responsibility and accountability demonstrated 
by the individual in meeting or beating commitments and objectives, whatever the organisational level of 
the role. Illustrated by evidence of seeking better ways of doing things, looking to improve on status quo 
and willingness to deal with difficult situations that effect output of their role. 
Self-motivation: Competence demonstrated by the level of timeliness and accuracy the individual displays 
in carrying out their role, by their personal energy and enthusiasm and by their willingness to learn to 
exceed expectations in their role. 
 
  Attention to detail: ability to pay attention to details. 
24 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Project Accountant 
Line Management: Under the direct supervision of the Financial Controller, 
Under the direct supervision of the Financial Manager; specific duties include: 
  Assist the Financial Manager in the implementation of a sound financial management system. 
  Ensuring the accuracy of the accounting entries in GIFMIS for the expenditures engaged locally 
  Preparing the monthly budget forecast for the Sunyani Office and all the relevant supporting 
documentation needed to submit the replenishment request for the Operational Account 
  Preparing quarterly, half-yearly and annual consolidated statements of Programme accounts as an integral 
part of the Management Information System for submission to the Financial Manager; 
  Preparing monthly bank reconciliations of all Bank accounts; 
  Assisting the Financial Manager in the preparation of withdrawal applications; 
  Supporting the Project Coordinator in all the tasks related to financial management at the level of the 
project Office 
  Archiving all supporting documentation linked to project expenditures and proceed to the regular scan of 
all documentation to be sent in soft copy to the Projects Accounting Unit of MoF 
  Preparing and submitting SOEs to the Financial Manager and follow up to ensure that the Programme does 
not encounter liquidity challenges at the level of the project office; 
  Monitoring financial returns from Implementing Partners, including periodic visits to their offices; 
  Supporting the conduct of internal audit missions by the MoF Internal Audit unit on the basis of agreed 
Annual Work Plan and Budget; 
  Maintaining all accounting records in an appropriate form; 
  Providing assistance to the external auditors as required; 
  Supporting in the smooth implementation of the annual external audit and bi-annual audit IFRs; 
  Supporting IFAD and GoG supervision missions and ensuring the implementation of all recommendations 
stemming from these missions 
  Preparing monthly reports that include Bank Reconciliation Statements, Summary of cash balances, Cash 
budget, Statement of Expenditure, Petty Cash Reconciliation, etc. 
  Maintaining an asset register for all assets purchased by the Programme and preparing monthly report on 
equipment.  
  Ensuring that fixed assets are well accounted for and annual verification is done indicating conditions of 
assets and their location appropriately. 
  Ensuring that funds for programme are used in accordance with the conditions of the loan agreement, 
with due attention to economy, efficiency and effectiveness.  
  Ensuring the eligibility of project expenditures, and the quality of all supporting documentation. 
  Undertake any other duties that shall be assigned by the Financial controller to ensure smooth and 
effective implementation of the Programme. 
D.  Qualifications and Experience 
Essential 
  Strong computer skills especially in Microsoft office application software and use of computerized 
accounting systems, in particular, GIFMIS, with current user rights. 
  A recognized degree in accounting or in a related field and pursuing a professional accounting 
qualification (part Qualified); 
  Experience in setting up and maintaining a computerized accounting system; 
25 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
  At least 5 years of practical working experience in financial management and accounting of 
development partner funded projects; 
  Practical working experience with Government of Ghana, IFAD-financed projects or development 
partner-funded projects, and auditing experience; 
  Fluency in written and oral English. 
Desirable 
  Advanced degree in finance, accounting or a related field; 
  Committed to meeting deadlines, and willingness to work extra hours and sometimes on weekends as 
and when required; 
  Experience in interpreting financial management reports, analyzing variations to plans and 
determining remedial actions required; 
  Excellent technical and conceptual knowledge about financial management and grasp of financial 
principles and practices; 
  Strong computer skills especially in Microsoft office application software and use of computerized 
accounting systems, such as Sun system, Pastel or SCALA software would constitute added advantage; 
  Report writing and presentation skills; 
  Confidence and good working relationships with finance and non-finance colleagues within 
Programme and implementing partners. 
E.  Competencies: The post holder will require a very good level of competency in the following: 
 
Information, Communication and Technology: - Proficient in Microsoft Word, Excel and Outlook (essential), 
and computerised accounting, e.g. SUN Systems, iScala, ACCPAC, etc. (essential); and GIFMIS (essential). 
  Highly-Organized: - Ability to keep the booking records updated and ensuring easy access to financial 
records whenever needed. 
  Teamwork: - Ability and inclination to work co-operatively with others and recognition of the value of 
sharing ideas, knowledge and information while taking personal responsibility for doing so. 
  Communication: Ability to communicate effectively to customers and very good at explaining the terms, 
 
conditions, procedures and processes of project accounting. 
Self-motivation: Competence demonstrated by the level of timeliness and accuracy the individual displays 
in carrying out their role, by their personal energy and enthusiasm and by their willingness to learn to 
exceed expectations in their role. 
  Attention to detail: ability to pay attention to details. 
26 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Accountant Assistant 
Line Management: Under the direct supervision of the Financial Controller. 
Specific duties include:  
  Master IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, procurement guidelines and handbook, 
IFAD guidelines for project audits, the Financing Agreement (FA) and the Letter to the Borrower (LTB).  
  Assist the Financial Controller in the implementation of a sound financial management system as described 
in the Financial Management Manual.  
  Prepare transaction vouchers, input all transactions into the PCU accounting system before submission to 
the Financial Controller for approval and make sure all necessary supporting documentation in made 
available and filed in a systematic way;  
  Process all payments, ensuring that PCU procedures are strictly adhered to;  
  Process monthly payroll, payment of salaries to staff and project contributions;  
  Manage and report on the use of Petty Cash in accordance with the approved procedures; 
  Assist the Financial Manager in the preparation of withdrawal applications;  
  Prepare cash flow forecasts as required;  
  Monitor financial returns from Implementing Partners, including periodic visits to their offices;  
  Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets;  
  Prepare quarterly and annual financial reports in agreed format including: i) sources and uses of funds 
statement, including incurred expenditures by component, expenditure category and financier, ii) variance 
report (actual vs budgeted expenditures), iii) designated account reconciliation statement, iv) Withdrawal 
application-statement of expenditure, v) fixed asset register, vi) contract register for submission to the 
Programme steering committee, Lead Project Agency and IFAD; 
  Maintenance of a well-organized and up-to-date filing system for accounting and financial records as well 
as a fixed asset tagging system; 
  Perform physical inventory of project assets each year;  
  Assist the Financial Manager in the preparation of the accounting manual of the PCU;  
  Provide assistance to the external auditors as required;  
  Undertake any other activities assigned by PCU management.  
  Make sure all expenditure items: i) meet the eligibility criteria as defined in the IFAD financing agreement, 
ii) are supported by adequate documentation (invoice, contracts, evidence of payments etc.); 
  Ensure all project records are properly filed all project records in a systematic way and maintain proper 
back up; 
  Ensure the timely preparation of quarterly and annual financial reports in agreed format including: i) 
sources and uses of funds statement, including incurred expenditures by component, expenditure 
category and financier, ii) variance report (actual vs budgeted expenditures), iii) designated account 
reconciliation statement, iv) Withdrawal 24 application-statement of expenditure, v) fixed asset register, 
vi) contract register for submission to the Programme steering committee, Lead Project Agency and IFAD; 
  Prepare monthly bank account reconciliations are prepared in a timely manner and reconciliation items 
are promptly followed up on; 
  Assist in the annual audit process and facilitate that the project auditors have access to all necessary files;  
 
Liaise with the implementing partners including i) justification of advances, reporting of expenditures, 
financial reporting, audit process and audit findings; 
  Undertake any other activities assigned by the Programme Coordinator and the Financial Controller.  
27 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
TORs Rural Finance Specialist 
Duties and Responsibilities 
 
Lead and manage all efforts and activities under Component 2, with the aim of meeting all Programme 
targets relating to this component. These responsibilities include:  
  Working closely with the Value Chain Manager in designing, overseeing the roll-out and evaluating the 
impact of financial institution incentive grants to buy down transaction costs and risks associated with 
agricultural finance;  
  Facilitating and/or designing training and technical assistance activities for financial institutions to improve 
their ability to expand lending to agribusiness, including overseeing the work of financial sector training 
subcontractors;  
  Working with the Value Chain Manager to design financial models to increase access to finance for 
agribusinesses; 
  Facilitating, together with the Value Chain Manager the activities of selected agricultural finance 
consultants to provide financial services to agribusinesses to finance their operations; 
  Working with PFIs to access cheaper funds to support agricultural enterprises; 
  Assessing the performance of PFIs in the value chains of PROSPER; 
  Managing and monitoring the project investment cycle to ensure appropriate performance by investees, 
and provide continuing strategic input and technical support; 
  Supporting linkages with similar Government of Ghana and development partner projects to leverage 
these for additional impact;  
  Build and maintain strategic linkages with a wide range of stakeholders including: government ministries, 
departments and agencies; banks, microfinance and other private sector financial service providers; 
businesses providing services to these; and NGOs and other organisations contributing to agricultural and 
rural financial sector development; 
  Ensuring that appropriate monitoring, evaluation and communication activities are being conducted on all 
aspects of the rural finance services work plan.  
  Collaborate with the rest of the team to ensure the compliance with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual 
regarding green investments for Business Plans supported by the grants and loans from the Matching 
Grant Facility and BFF.   
Qualifications and Skills  
Essential 
  Master’s degree in either business administration, international finance, international development, 
agricultural economics, or related field;  
  At least eight years of progressively responsible work experience in finance, preferably within the 
agricultural sector in Ghana;  
  Familiarity with funding related issues facing the development of the agricultural sector in Ghana; 
  Have a good understanding of financing rural enterprises under donor funded projects; 
  Strong financial analysis and risk management skills; 
Desirable 
  Capacity to operate effectively with Farmer-Based organisations; 
  Familiarity with the similar projects in Ghana with “matching grant” components; 
28 
  Familiarity with local Business Advisory Groups. 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
29 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Annex 2. Logical framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
1.b  Estimated corresponding total number of households 
members 
Household members 
- Number of people 
0 
210000 
420000 
1.a  Corresponding number of households reached 
Households - 
Households 
0 
35000 
70000 
1  Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the 
project 
Males - Males 
30000 
60000 
0 
Outreach 
Total number of persons 
receiving services promoted 
or supported by PROSPER 
Females - Females 
Young - Young 
people 
Total number of 
persons receiving 
services - Number of 
people 
0 
0 
0 
20000 
15000 
40000 
30000 
50000 
100000 
Project 
reports 
Project 
reports 
Project 
reports 
Semi-annual 
PROSPER PCU 
Semi-annual 
PROSPER PCU 
Semi-annual 
PROSPER PCU 
Effective stakeholder 
identification, needs 
assessment and 
gender/youth 
targeting is carried 
out at the 
community level  
PWD receiving services promoted or supported by the project  
Females - Number 
Males - Number 
Young - Number 
Total number of PwD 
receiving services - 
Number of people 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1000 
1500 
750 
2000 
3000 
1500 
2500 
5000 
Ghana 
Statistical 
Services/ 
PROSPER 
surveys 
Mid-term 
Review and 
completion 
PROSPER PCU 
Project Goal 
Contribute to reduced 
poverty, improved natural 
HH living below the poverty line in the districts targeted  
Households - 
Percentage (%) 
0 
8 
1 
Ghana 
Statistical 
Services/ 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
PROSPER PCU 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
Results Hierarchy 
resources management and 
healthy, sustainable and 
climate resilient rural 
livelihoods. 
Development Objective 
Strengthen the integration, 
climate resilience and 
environmental sustainability 
of smallholders and 
businesses in priority VCs in 
the Northern and Middle 
Ecological Belts taking 
advantage of the increased 
demand created by the 
national agro-processing 
strategy. 
Indicators 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region 
PROSPER 
surveys 
survey using COI 
methodology 
Ghana 
Statistical 
Services/ 
PROSPER 
surveys using 
COI 
methodology 
Baseline 
survey, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
PROSPER PCU 
Baseline 
survey, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Baseline 
survey, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
Mid-term Review 
and completion 
Households reporting reduction in production losses due to 
adverse climate events  
Households - 
Percentage (%) 
0 
70 
Percentage of target households in the project supported 
communities reporting an increase in income contributed to by 
the services provided by the Project 
Targeted households 
- Percentage (%) 
0 
60 
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities 
Males - Males 
Females - Females 
Young - Young 
people 
Total number of 
persons with new 
jobs/employment 
opportunities - 
Number of people 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3338 
2225 
5000 
6675 
4450 
10000 
5563 
11125 
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making 
of local authorities and project-supported service providers 
Household members 
- Number of people 
Households (%) - 
Percentage (%) 
Households (number) 
- Households 
0 
0 
0 
315000 
75 
52500 
2 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services 
Household members 
- Number of people 
Households (%) - 
Percentage (%) 
Households (number) 
- Households 
0 
0 
0 
315000 
75 
52500 
Baseline 
survey, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
Mid-term Review 
and completion 
Rural Institutions with improved capacity 
Rural Institutions - 
Number 
0 
1687 
3375 
3.2.2  Households reporting adoption of environmentally 
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices 
Outcome 
Outcome 1. Financially and 
environmentally sustainable 
livelihoods developed and 
nutrition security enhanced 
in project areas 
Total number of 
household members 
- Number of people 
Households - 
Percentage (%) 
Households - 
Number 
0 
0 
0 
252000 
30 
60 
21000 
42000 
3.2.1 Number of tons of greenhouse gas emissions (CO2) avoided 
and/or sequestered 
Hectares of land - 
Area (ha) 
tCO2e/20 years - 
Number 
tCO2e/ha - Number 
 0 
0 
0 
 39 217 
-1 945 462 
-49.60 
3 
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey  
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU 
PROSPER PCU  
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU  
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
tCO2e/ha/year - 
Number 
0 
-2.50 
1.2.9  Households with improved nutrition Knowledge Attitudes 
and Practices  (KAP) 
Women-headed 
households - 
Households 
Households (number) 
- Households 
Households (%) - 
Percentage (%) 
Household members 
- Number of people 
0 
0 
0 
0 
672 
8400 
70 
50400 
Persons in rural areas accessing public socio-economic 
infrastructures to build environmental resilience 
Persons - Percentage 
(%) 
0 
40 
2.2.6  Households reporting improved physical access to 
markets, processing and storage facilities 
Households reporting 
improved physical 
access to markets - 
Percentage (%) 
0 
Rural Institutions and MSMEs trained 
10 
Output 
Output 1.1 Strengthening of 
rural institutions and 
enterprises  
Rural Institutions - 
Number 
MSMEs - Number 
0 
0 
2250 
4500 
400 
800 
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU  
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey  
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU 
PROSPER PCU 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU  
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Climate smart demonstrations installed 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
4 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Name 
Demonstrations  - 
Number 
0 
100 
320 
3.1.1  Groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources 
and climate-related risks  
Total size of groups - 
Number of people 
Groups supported - 
Groups 
Males - Males 
0 
0 
0 
50000 
100000 
2560 
5300 
30000 
60000 
0 
Females - Females 
Young - Young 
people 
3.1.2  Persons provided with climate information services  
20000 
15000 
0 
30000 
40000 
Output 
Output 1.2 Climate proofing 
smallholder production 
technologies 
Males - Males 
Females - Females 
Young - Young 
people 
Persons provided 
with climate 
information services - 
Number of people 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9000 
6000 
4500 
18000 
12000 
9000 
15000 
30000 
1.1.8  Households provided with targeted support to improve 
their nutrition 
Output 
Output 1.3 Promotion of 
nutrition-sensitive farming 
and healthy-diets 
Total persons 
participating - 
Number of people 
Males - Males 
Females - Females 
Households - 
Households 
0 
0 
0 
0 
15000 
72000 
7500 
7500 
2500 
36000 
36000 
12000 
5 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU  
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
0 
Young - Young 
people 
1.1.7  Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy and/or 
use of financial products and services  
Males - Males 
60000 
30000 
7500 
7500 
0 
Females - Females 
Young - Young 
people 
Persons in rural areas 
trained in FL and/or 
use of FProd and 
Services (total) - 
Number of people 
0 
0 
0 
20000 
15000 
40000 
30000 
50000 
100000 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
Output 
Output 1.4 Development of 
socioeconomic 
infrastructures 
Outcome 
Outcome 2. Smallholders and 
small businesses are 
empowered to take 
advantage of the increasing 
market demand for 
agricultural produce 
Clusters benefitting from infrastructures for enhancing 
environmental management and climate resilience (off-
farm/watershed and communal social infrastructures) 
0 
Clusters  - Number 
60 
320 
2.1.5  Roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded 
Length of roads - Km 
0 
90 
90 
2.2.3  Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal 
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private 
entities 
Number of POs - 
Organizations 
0 
1013 
2025 
1.2.4  Households reporting an increase in production 
Total number of 
household members 
- Number of people 
Households - 
Percentage (%) 
0 
0 
175000 
350000 
25 
50 
6 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
Baseline survey 
using COI 
methodology, 
Project reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU 
PROSPER PCU 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Name 
Households - 
Households 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
0 
25000 
50000 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
1.2.5  Households reporting using rural financial services 
Total number of 
household members 
- Number of people 
Households - 
Percentage (%) 
Households - 
Households 
0 
0 
0 
175000 
350000 
25 
50 
25000 
50000 
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Project 
reports 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU 
Output 
Output 2.1 Creation of 
sustainable marketing 
linkages and business 
development  
2.1.3  Rural producers’ organizations supported 
Total size of POs - 
Organizations 
Rural POs supported 
- Organizations 
Males - Males 
0 
0 
0 
45000 
90000 
2250 
4500 
27000 
54000 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
0 
Females - Females 
Young - Young 
people 
1.1.5  Persons in rural areas accessing financial services 
13500 
18000 
0 
36000 
27000 
Output 
Output 2.2 Access to rural 
financial services 
Women in rural areas 
accessing financial 
services - savings - 
Females 
Young people in rural 
areas accessing 
financial services - 
savings - Young 
people 
0 
0 
12000 
12000 
9000 
9000 
7 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Name 
Men in rural areas 
accessing financial 
services -  savings - 
Males 
Men in rural areas 
accessing financial 
services - credit - 
Males 
Women in rural areas 
accessing financial 
services - credit - 
Females 
Young people in rural 
areas accessing 
financial services - 
credit - Young people 
Total persons 
accessing financial 
services - savings - 
Number of people 
Total persons 
accessing financial 
services - credit - 
Number of people 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
18000 
18000 
7200 
14400 
4800 
9600 
3600 
7200 
30000 
30000 
12000 
24000 
Outcome 
Outcome 3. Development of 
an enabling policy 
environment that will help 
Policy 3 Number of existing/new laws, regulations, policies or 
strategies proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or  
amendment 
Baseline 
survey using 
COI 
methodology, 
Baseline, Mid-
term Review and 
completion 
survey using COI 
methodology 
PROSPER PCU 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
8 
PROSPER-DDA Implementation Agreement  
Results Hierarchy 
achieve the project’s goals 
and objectives 
Indicators 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
Project 
reports 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
Number 
 0 
 0 
 2 
Output 
Output 3.1 Financial policies 
to enhance smallholders’ 
access to financial services 
and formalize MSMEs 
Policy 1 Number of policy-relevant knowledge products 
completed 
Knowledge Products 
- Number 
 0 
 5 
 10 
M&E Data/ 
Component 
reports 
Annually 
PROSPER PCU 
Political stability. 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remain 
stable or improve. 
No major political 
shocks in the region. 
9 
Annex 3. Theory of Change Diagram 
10 
Annex 4a: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Component 1 
11 
Component 1Subcomponent 1.1. Capacity Building of Rural Institutions Enterprises [1.1]Detailed CostsCumulative expenditure (000' USD)(US$)UnitQuantity 2022Quantity 2023 (half)Total (2022 + half 2023)TOT GCFTOT GOGTOT PFIsTOT BenTOT PS I. Investment CostsA. CapaCity Building of Rural Institutions, Enterprises and Households1. Community mobilisation, cluster identification and planninga. Community mobilisationWorkshop/consultation with stakeholders at regional levelworkshop21331 78730 19801 589000Workshop/consultation with stakeholders at district levelworkshop10102042 55940 43102 128000b. Cluster identificationMeetings at community level for identification of clustersmeetings505010021 27920 21501 064000Training of trainers for extension staff /atraining20103047 68145 29702 384000c. Cluster planningCluster consultation and synthesisation meetingscluster807515582 42478 30304 121000d. Support by RDAs/DDAs to Field ActivitiesRegional/national depts of MoFA and other line ministriesdays30025055029 22627 76501 461000DDA support for community mobilization and cluster  planningdays1200900210022 30418 95803 346000Subtotal0051 53046 72304 8070002. Community nutrition and healthy diet campaigna. NutritionParticipatory Needs AssessmentLS30315 76213 39802 364000Nutrition Knowledge, attitude, and practice study (KAP)LS00.50.54 0393 4330606000Training on HH nutrition and household methodologyHH025255 3865 1160269000Nutrition education for communities /bHH025252 6932 5580135000Training on Financial literacy - HH economicscluster025252 6932 5580135000Climate smart HH nutrition gardens; demos and training /cHH025256 7326 3950337000Dedicated training on post-harvest managementcluster025256 7326 3950337000DDA Extension Field Support /ddays2001003003 1793 0200159000Regional / National of MOFA and Other Line Ministries for nutritiondays100501507 9477 5490397000b. capacitation of rural institutionsAwareness raising for Youth Farmership DevelopmentWorkshop105159 5369 0590477000Training on organisational capacitygroup30306051 07048 51702 554000Training on NRM Sustainability trainingTraining30457563 99660 79603 200000Training on Sustainable Use of Pesticides and Fertilizers (ESMP)Training1522.537.531 99830 39801 600000Climate adaptation and mitigation demonstrations (ESMP) /edemo1522.537.579 99575 99504 000000Training on farming as a business including climate/NRMcluster1522.537.559 99656 99603 000000Training on enterprise Dev't including climate/NRM aspectscluster1522.537.531 99830 39801 600000Training of trainers for extension staff including climate/NRMdistrict1051547 68145 29702 384000Training of trainers for extension staff on IFAD SECAP and EPA Proceduresdistrict0.200.221 01619 96501 051000DDA Extension Field Support for nutritiondays1200600180019 07216 21202 861000Support by Regional/national depts of MoFA and other line ministries /fdays120601809 5369 05904770003. TA (national)months87.515.557 69749 04308 6550004. Gender, Vulnerability & Social Inclusion Specialistperson/year0.50.5143 282036 7906 4920005. Climate and Safeguard Specialist /gperson/year0.50.5153 624045 5808 0440006. Institutional support to Extension Servicesmotorcycles for AEAs at district levelmotorcycle50050110 33493 784016 550000Laptopsunit5005027 58423 44604 138000Assessment, categorization and creation of database of FBOs (including performance) /hunit101105 08089 318015 762000Protective gearlumpsum0.20.050.2527 72223 56404 1580007. Mini-Weather Stations (ESMP) /ilumpsum00.150.1567 85957 680010 179000II. Recurrent CostsA. GoG staff pro rata time on PROSPER activities1. Chief Directorperson/year10.51.5954009540002. Director Project Planning  M&Eperson/year10.51.5922009220003. Director of MOFA Extension Servicesperson/year10.51.51 526001 5260004. Regional Director of Agricultureperson/year31.54.54 577004 5770005. Senior Agric Officer (Regional Rep for PROSPER)person/year31.54.51 287001 2870006. District Director of Agricultureperson/year8122016 4260016 4260007. District Planning Officerperson/year812207 253007 2530008. District Works Engineerperson/year8122014 6120014 6120009. Management Information Officers (MISOs)person/year812207 253007 25300010. Accountantsperson/year812204 480004 48000011. Crop Officersperson/year8122018 1320018 13200012. WIAD Officersperson/year8122018 1320018 13200013. Agriculture Extension Officersperson/year24366069 1160069 116000Total01 416 1691 051 11982 370282 680000PFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorFinancier rule (2022 and half 2023, USD)Plan (18 months)GCF GrantGOGTOT IFAD 
12 
Subcomponent 1.2. Development of Socioeconomic Infrastructure [1.2] I. Investment CostsA. Development of socio-economic infrastructure1. Off-farm/watershed workscluster01010277 091235 527041 5640002. Feeder roads and farm trackskm01010554 181471 054083 1270003. Communal social infrastructurecluster01010254 471216 300038 1710004. Site Monitoring of Environmental, Climate and Social Conditions [ESMP)lumpsum00.50.547 12440 05607 0690005. Infrastructure Engineerperson/year0.50.5153 62445 58008 0440006. District Staff Field Supportdays06060646614032000Total1 187 1381 009 1320178 006000Total Component 12 603 3062 060 25082 370460 686000 
Component 2 
13 
Detailed CostsCumulative expenditure (000' USD)(US$)UnitQuantity 2022Quantity 2023 (half)Total (2022 + half 2023)TOT GCFTOT GOGTOT PFIsTOT BenTOT PSComponent 2Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development I. Investment CostsA. Sustainable marketing linkages and business development.1. Value chain analysisa. Value chain studies and integration of climate risks /alumpsum0.30.350.6588 26088 260015 575000b. Scoping and mapping of operational VC actors in target areas /blumpsum0.300.395 96280 387014 186000Subtotal00182 832168 647029 7610002. Establish and maintain value chain bodiesLumpsum10.51.563 53533 77405 9600003. Promotion of linkages between producers and VC actorsa. Engagement with VC actorsSupport by DDAs to collect information /cfield days2001003003 0203 0200159000District-level meetingsmeeting107.517.544 30244 14302 323000Discussions with interested VC actorslumpsum0.10.10.232 64630 32301 596000Subtotal0079 08277 48604 078000b. Creation of and support for partnershipsDDA support for the trainings and demonstrations /dfield days5003758752 6492 64955 030465000Training of RIs and MSMEs on climate risks and integration into BPs /ecluster40256579 07923 584100 8894 138000Training of RIs and MSMEs on VC linkages and green bankable BPscluster402565148 26543 23882 5457 586000Demonstrations on climate risks and green BPscluster402565125 50835 37768 7886 206000BRCs/BACs support for Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /fcluster402565104 47529 48168 7885 172000Demonstrations dedicated for women and youth on climate risks/green BPscluster402565103 44029 48105 172000Partnerships creation between RIs, MSMEs and VC actors /gcluster402565201 709196 537382 22110 344000Subtotal00752 910360 346382 22139 082000Subtotal00859 134437 831043 1610004. Development of Business Plans.a. Preparation of business plans for RIs & MSMEs - MG windowCall for preparation  BPs at cluster levelcluster4025653 2763 2760172000BRCs/BACs for Preparation of BPs under Matching Grant Windowcluster40256565 68565 51203 448000DDAs Support for BPs Preparationdays3002005008 4895 0410265000MoFA regional and central departmentsdays80601407 3287 0630372000Subtotal0081 26480 89204 257000b. Evaluation of business plans at RIs/MSMEs level - MG windowLS0.10.10.213 3019 04401 596000c. Preparation of business plans for RIs linked to VC Actors (BFF) /hCall for preparation of ABPs for RIscluster01515767767040000BRCs/BACs for Preparation of ABPs for RIs (BFF)cluster0151530 73830 69801 616000Subtotal0033 08131 46601 656000d. Preparation of business plans for SMEs (standalone) - (BFF)001 656000000Call for preparation of ABPs for MSMEscluster01515767767040000BRCs/BACs for Preparation of ABPs for MSMEs (BFF)cluster0151515 38915 3490808000Subtotal0016 92416 1160848000Subtotal00138 366137 51808 358000PFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorFinancier rule (2022 and half 2023, USD)Plan (18 months)GCF GrantGOGTOT IFAD 
14 
(US$)UnitQuantity 2022Quantity 2023 (half)Total (2022 + half 2023)TOT GCFTOT GOGTOT PFIsTOT BenTOT PSComponent 2Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development5. Technical Assistance to Support to the BRCs/ BACs008 358000000Design of assessment processNat consultant00.50.522 88922 88904 039000TA for support for partnership creation and preparation of BPsmonth241842136 747132 708023 419000Subtotal00179 015155 596027 4580006. Value Chain Specialists0027 458000000a. Senior Value Chain Development Specialistperson/year00.50.523 07223 07204 072000b. Value Chain Development Specialistperson/year01141 31637 24506 573000Subtotal0066 89060 317010 6440007. Institutional support to Value ChainsSupport to veternary services in MoFA and at dstrictsLumpsum0.10.050.1521 27821 27803 755000Support for the cocoa board for shea tree domestication programLumpsum0.10.050.1525 03321 27803 755000Subtotal0046 31042 555382 2217 510000Total Investment Costs001 425 9691 036 2380132 852000II. Recurrent Costs00132 852000000A. GoG staff pro rata time on PROSPER activities1. District Director of Agricultureperson/year10152500010 2810002. District Planning Officerperson/year10152510 2810022 8360003. Crop Officersperson/year10152522 8360045 6720004. WIAD Officersperson/year10152545 6720045 6720005. Agriculture Extension Officersperson/year30457545 6720043 301000Total Recurrent Costs043 3010382 221167 761000Total01 586 2201 036 2380300 613000PFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorPlan (18 months)GCF GrantGOGTOT IFAD 
15 
Detailed CostsCumulative expenditure (000' USD)(US$)UnitQuantity 2022Quantity 2023 (half)Total (2022 + half 2023)TOT GCFTOT GOGTOT PFIsTOT BenTOT PSComponent 2Subcomponent 2.2. Access to Financial Services I. Investment CostsA. Access to Rural Financial Services.1. Savings mobilisationa. Promotion of Savings and Credit Group MethodologyTraining of trainers and mentors /aTraining20.52.53 1683 0100158000VSLA training and mentoring /bGroups8504251275337 741320 853016 887000RCB training on VSLA and savings promotion /cRCB01.51.51 6161 535081000Subtotal00342 524325 398017 1260002. Activities Supported by Matching Grantsa. Business Plans with Matching Grants for Groups of RIsBP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - RiceGroup033149 700149 700000149 7000BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - MaizeGroup033117 000117 000000117 0000BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - SoyGroup03328 87528 87500028 8750BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - CashewGroup00.250.2524 06324 06300024 0630BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - sheaGroup03381 67581 6750009 0750BP with Matching grants for poorer groups of RIs - PoultryGroup03363 88563 88500011 2740Subtotal00465 198465 198000339 9860b. BP with Matching Grants with MSME (Standalone)BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer)- RiceGroup02240 39040 39000010 0980BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - MaizeGroup02229 72529 7250007 4310BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - SoyGroup02235 16035 1600008 7900BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - CashewGroup02234 98734 9870008 7470BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - SheaGroup02223 60023 6000005 9000BP with matching grant support for MSMEs (9 employees and fewer) - PoultryGroup02234 40034 4000008 6000Subtotal00198 262198 26200049 5660c. Investment with Matching Grants for Nutrition and Other Poverty Initiatives000000000Investment with matching grants support for off-season vegetable productiongroup05522 50022 5000002 5000Investment with matching grants support for post-harvest management (preservation/conservation)group0000000000Investment with matching grants support for small ruminants (goats)group02.52.527 00027 0000003 0000Investment with matching grants support for poultry - egg productiongroup02.52.511 25011 2500001 2500Investment with matching grants support for MSME along the food systemgroup02.52.511 25011 2500001 2500Subtotal0072 00072 0000008 0000d. Agricultural risk guarantee - GIRSAL (50% of Premium Cost) /dlumpsum00.050.056 2506 25000000e. Agricultural Insurance /elumpsum00.050.0517 50017 50000000f. Site specific monitoring of the environmental, climate and social conditions (ESMP)lumpsum00.50.58 0786 86701 212000Subtotal00767 288766 07701 2120397 55203. Blended Finance Facilitya. Development of the BFFTA to APEX Bank to develop the BFFlumpsum0.500.552 540044 6597 881000Selection of the PFIs: TA to APEX Banklumpsum0.20.10.371 522060 79310 728000Subtotal00124 0620105 45218 609000b. PFI Capacity BuildingAwareness raising and training on climate agriculturelumpsum0.170.0850.25520 264019 2511 013000TA for PFIs to develop  financial products  (Green Lending) /flumpsum0.20.050.2531 1878 41616 8315 9408 41600Tools and instruments to assess BPs (safeguards, mitigation, adaptation)lumpsum0.150.050.221 148017 9763 172000TA to enhance governance and management of loan productslumpsum0.20.10.331 787027 0194 768000Subtotal00104 3868 41681 07714 8948 41600PFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorFinancier rule (2022 and half 2023, USD)Plan (18 months)GCF GrantGOGTOT IFAD 
16 
Republic of GhanaPROSPERDetailed CostsCumulative expenditure (000' USD)(US$)UnitQuantity 2022Quantity 2023 (half)Total (2022 + half 2023)TOT GCFTOT GOGTOT PFIsTOT BenTOT PSComponent 2Subcomponent 2.2. Access to Financial Servicesc. Management of the BFF at the APEX BankBFF managerper annum0.50.5153 62445 58008 044000Two officers for north and middle beltsper annum0.250.50.7532 59527 70604 889000Adaptation and Climate Coordinatorper annum00.50.521 909018 6223 286000Environment and Safeguard Specialistper annum00.50.521 909018 6223 286000Vehicle pickupNumber00.50.516 96514 42002 545000Subtotal00147 00187 70637 24522 050000d. BP with  BFF loans to RIs (Groups) with Value Chain ActorsBP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - RiceNumber011333 29893 765160 74078 79417 860138 41535 720BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - MaizeNumber011279 18978 542134 64466 00214 960115 94429 921BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - SoyNumber011108 12030 41752 14325 5605 79444 90111 587BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - CashewNumber0111 326 602485 442596 400244 76183 219221 9160BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - sheaNumber011223 02176 352104 98441 6859 54435 7909 544BP from groups of RIs financed by BFF loans - PoultryNumber011340 671101 818166 98171 87216 29173 30948 873Subtotal002 610 901866 3361 215 892528 673147 668630 274135 645e. BP with BFF Loans for standalone MSMEs BPs (up to 20 employees)BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - RiceNumber01190 01126 90244 11918 9904 30432 2820BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - MaizeNumber011104 23031 15251 08921 9904 98437 3820BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - SoyNumber011104 23031 15251 08921 9904 98437 3820BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - CashewNumber01130 68511 16213 0236 5001 48811 1620BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs) - SheaNumber01142 12115 10718 1288 8862 01415 1070BP supported by BFF Loans (standlone MSMEs)- PoultryNumber011145 32642 83271 95730 5376 85351 3980Subtotal00516 604158 306249 405108 89224 629184 7140f. GIRSAL Guarantee (50% of the premium cost) /gLumpsum00.0250.0259 4258 01101 414000g. Agricultural InsuranceLumpsum00.0250.02513 46411 44402 020000Subtotal003 525 8431 140 2201 689 072696 552180 712814 988135 6454. Rural Financial Services Specialistperson/year0.50.5143 28236 79006 492000Total Investment Costs04 678 9382 268 4841 689 072721 382180 7121 212 540135 645II. Recurrent Costs00000000Total04 678 9382 268 4841 689 072721 382180 7121 212 540135 645Total Component 24 678 9382 268 4841 689 0721 021 995180 7121 212 540135 645PFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorFinancier rule (2022 and half 2023, USD)Plan (18 months)GCF GrantGOGTOT IFAD 
Component 3 
17 
(US$)UnitQuantity 2022Quantity 2023 (half)Total (2022 + half 2023)TOT GCFTOT GOGTOT PFIsTOT BenTOT PSComponent 300696 552Subcomponent 3.1. Project Management006 492 I. Investment Costs00721 382A. Project Management0001. Infrastructure, vehicles and equipment00721 382a. Office Building and Equipment000Office building0124 126105 507018 619000Computer sets05 517005 517000Computer sets-200000000Multifunction Laser Printer011 0330011 033000Multifunction Laser Printer-200000000Office furniture04 4133 7510662000Air Conditioners022 06718 75703 310000Office equipment, various041 3750041 375000Subtotal0208 532128 016080 517000b. Vehicles000000004WD pickup000000004WD pickup0397 20400397 2040004WD station wagon000000004WD station wagon099 3010099 301000Subtotal0496 50500496 505000Subtotal0705 037128 0160577 0210002. Project management and coordinationa. Support for IFAD Desks in MoFA and MoFVehicle066 20156 27109 930000Trainings for Desk Officers07 9477 5490397000Trainings for Desk Officers07 9477 5490397000Equipment for IFAD Desks in MoFA and MoF011 0339 37801 655000Subtotal093 12880 748012 380000b. Support for GIFMIS ImplementationEquipment for Internet Connectivity055 44447 12708 317000c. Project supportSupervision missions08 0787 6750404000Implementation support missions05 3865 1160269000Unspecified studies and contract supervision031 78730 19801 589000Subtotal045 25142 98902 263000Subtotal0193 823170 864022 9590003. Audita. Internal audit02 6932 5580135000b. External audit08 0787 6750404000c. Meetings and workshopsProject steering committee meetings015 89415 0990795000Consultative stakeholder workshops015 89415 0990795000Consultative AWPB workshop023 84122 64801 192000Subtotal055 62852 84602 781000d. Staff developmentTraining014 38313 6640719000Subtotal080 78276 74304 039000PFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorPlan (18 months)GCF GrantGOGTOT IFAD 
18 
(US$)UnitQuantity 2022Quantity 2023 (half)Total (2022 + half 2023)TOT GCFTOT GOGTOT PFIsTOT BenTOT PSComponent 300696 552Subcomponent 3.1. Project Management006 4924. Knowledge management and learninga. KM strategy formulation.010 5089 9830525000b. Studies and learning products including climate016 1577 6757 675808000c. Learning events and communications materials incl climate016 1577 6757 675808000d. Communications and publications015 894015 099795000e. South-South and triangular cooperation - tours00000000f. Annual Sahel Award00000000g. Sahel Award replenishment00000000h. Develop Sahel Award protocols00000000i. Enrol women and Youth to compete for Sahel Award00000000Subtotal058 71525 33230 4482 9360005. M&E/MIS systemM&E software (PLAMES)022 06718 75703 310000ArcGIS047 44440 32707 117000ArcGIS licence00000000Specialist services066 00462 70403 300000Subtotal0135 515121 788013 7270006. M&E studies and reviewsa. Baseline Study0157 621149 74007 881000b. Mid-Term Review00000000c. Completion Study00000000d. Outcome and Impact thematic studies00000000e. Environmental, Climate and Social Monitoring (ESMP)039 73433 77405 960000f. Conflict Resolution and Land Governance Dialogue (ESMP) /a00000000g. Other Social Monitoring (GBV, SEAH Vulnerability) - ESMP /b019 86716 88702 980000h. Health Insurance and Outreach Monitoring [ESMP] /c019 86716 88702 980000i. Environmental, Climate and Social Audit /d026 92825 58201 346000Subtotal0264 017242 869021 148000Total Investment Costs01 437 890765 61230 448641 830000II. Recurrent Costs00000000A. Salaries1. Project Coordinator082 75282 752000002. KM/M&E Manager069 51269 512000003. KM/M&E Officer056 106056 10600004. M&E/MIS assistant019 56119 561000005. Financial Controller069 51269 512000006. Project Accountant056 10656 106000007. Project Accountant - GCF056 106056 10600008. Accountant Assistant010 85210 852000009. Procurement Manager069 51269 5120000010. Procurement Assistant010 85210 8520000011. Admin. Assistant014 06814 0680000012. Office Assistant013 80813 8080000013. Drivers013 80813 8080000014. PROSPER Liaison Officer056 13456 1340000015. LO Assistant014 06814 06800000Subtotal0612 758500 546112 2120000B. Operating costs (Proj Mgt + Policy)1. Staff Monitoring Activities047 68140 52907 1520002. Stationary and Sanitary Supplies019 86716 88702 9800003. Vehicle Running, Repairs, & Maintenance0135 096114 832020 2640004. Utilities063 57554 03809 5360005. Computer & Equipment Maintenance, miscellaneous.011 92010 13201 788000Subtotal0278 139236 418041 721000Total Recurrent Costs0890 897736 964112 21241 721000Total142 660683 551000PFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorPlan (18 months)GCF GrantGOGTOT IFAD 
19 
(US$)UnitQuantity 2022Quantity 2023 (half)Total (2022 + half 2023)TOT GCFTOT GOGTOT PFIsTOT BenTOT PSComponent 300696 552Subcomponent 3.2. Policy Engagement02 328 7871 502 576142 660683 551000 I. Investment CostsA. Policy Engagement1. Sectoral policy support to GoGShort Studies Related to ASWG03 9733 3770596000TA Support to Green Finance and Green Agriculture019 86716 88702 980000Studies on Different Policy Topics05 3865 1160269000Dialogue and advocacy on policy Topics /a011 92010 13201 788000Support to BoG on climate risk and green finance018 850016 0222 827000Total Investment Costs059 99635 51316 0228 461000II. Recurrent Costs00000000Total059 99635 51316 0228 461000Total Component 359 99635 513158 683692 011000Grand Total PROSPER5 926 0723 313 1291 847 7541 591 399180 7121 212 540135 645PFIsBeneficiariesPrivate SectorPlan (18 months)GCF GrantGOGTOT IFAD 
Annex 4b. Exit strategy and sustainability 
The design of PROSPER is driven by the imperative to achieve both environmental and financial sustainability in the smallholder agriculture sector in the 
context of rapid climate change. The project concentrates on investing in the skills, productive assets and institutional development needed to remediate the 
natural resource base, transition to more appropriate agricultural practices that reduce emissions, and engage in enduring business relationships within the 
major value chains. 
The exit strategy designed for the project comes as a natural and sequential phasing out from supported activities. A high level of participation from the host 
agency, beneficiaries and partner institutions is planned from the onset of implementation, to ensure effectiveness and progressive leadership from local 
stakeholders who will be able to continue, scale-up and/or guide and monitor planned activities after project completion. The exit strategy as formulated is to 
sustain the impact of all activities after closure even if the scope of the project is curtailed in Year 3. 
Important aspects designed to guarantee PROSPER’s success and sustainability and the continuation of its benefits after completion, include institutional 
arrangements such as embedding the PCU in the host Government agency, to build capacity on project scope matters, favour collaborative problem-solving 
and contribute to project ownership throughout PROSPER’s entire lifecycle. 
The PROSPER design took  a consultative and collaborative approach with a high level of participation from all relevant stakeholders, aiming for tailored 
planning of activities, flexibility and continued sustainability. Capacity building is a key aspect in all planned activities under the three PROSPER components, 
including project management and policy engagement. 
First stages of implementation will rely on  situation analysis, a strong targeting strategy and beneficiaries’ differentiation according to their level of 
capitalization and professionalization. This gradual and differentiated approach to be adopted from the beginning of implementation gives strength to the 
design by providing PROSPER with the capacity to address the developmental challenges of diverse groups in the target areas. The project will cater for 
distinct levels of competence and ability and build interventions accordingly, thereby allowing beneficiaries classified in the lower tiers in terms of capital and 
professionalization to access more complex services and support tools as they progress. 
Finally, PROSPER has the benefit of the experiences and important lessons from previous and ongoing IFAD-funded operations in Ghana, which encourages 
increased and faster maturity. 
The table below presents PROSPER’s Exit Strategy, indicating the activities that are expected to continue after closure by being taken over gradually by 
relevant organizations and stakeholders or through scaling-up. This information is organized by project component as a reference. Details on the expected 
timeline, mechanism for handover, national-level commitment, justifications and necessary evaluation processes are shown. 
20 
During project implementation, this Exit Strategy will be revisited regularly to test the underlying assumptions and continuing validity in the light of progress. 
If major restructuring is required, such as reduced size of the replication phase, changing implementation arrangements, reducing and/or increase of scope of 
components, cancellation, the Exit Strategy will be redesigned in line of the changing context. 
21 
Appendix 1. PROSPER Exit Strategy and Sustainability 
Reference to 
PROSPER activity 
or outcome 
Activity to continue 
post- project 
IFAD 
Support end 
date 
Who will 
take up the 
activity 
Mechanisms 
for handover 
Commitments 
from national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, trainings, 
seeds, etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Component 1:  Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
Can this activity reach greater 
scale? How? 
Comments 
1.1 
Strengthening of 
rural institutions 
and enterprises 
& Climate 
proofing 
smallholder 
production 
technologies. 
After MTR  Beneficiary 
RIs. 
After MTR  Beneficiary 
Economic 
Interest 
Groups and 
MSMEs. 
RIs can increase their 
own capacity by training 
new members on 
agronomical practices 
and farming as a 
business on their own, 
including efforts to 
adopt climate-friendly 
practices and natural 
resource remediation. 
RIs  take  ownership to 
scale-up the capacity 
building experience to 
non-beneficiaries. 
Beneficiary Economic 
interest groups and 
MSMEs can share their 
increased capacity 
learning curve on 
enterprise development 
(e.g. Value addition and 
support services), 
including efforts to adopt 
climate-friendly 
practices and natural 
resource remediation, 
with new members and 
non beneficiary groups. 
After MTR/towards project completion 
beneficiary RIs can organize knowledge 
and experience sharing events with 
other groups working on similar value 
chains in former project areas. This will 
be evaluated/ planned together with 
the PCU during PROSPER last years of 
implementation. Cluster-level surveys 
will serve as an asset to identify 
scaling-up potential. These  knowledge 
sharing events will also include a specific 
module on promotion of nutrition-
sensitive farming  and  vegetable 
cultivation. 
After MTR/towards project completion 
beneficiary economic groups will be 
incentivized to share knowledge and 
experience gained through PROSPER 
with other groups working on similar 
value chains in former project areas. 
This will be evaluated and planned 
together with the PCU during PROSPER 
last years of implementation. Cluster-
level surveys will serve as an asset to 
identify potential for scaling-up. 
Scaling-up. Requirements: 
Identification of 
"champions"/most 
successful cases - 
Resources to be provided 
by PROSPER, MoFA/DAs. 
These arrangements and 
partners will be updated 
regularly. If restructuring 
is needed, new Exit 
Strategy will be developed. 
Scaling-up. Requirements: 
Identification of 
"champions"/most 
successful cases - 
Resources to be provided 
by PROSPER, MoFA/DAs. 
These arrangements and 
partners will be updated 
regularly. If restructuring 
is needed, new Exit 
Strategy will be developed. 
phasing over  MoFA, DAs, 
Cluster 
Committees. 
phasing over  MoFA, BRCs, 
BACs, DAs, 
Cluster 
Committees 
Beneficiary RIs will count 
with the material and 
capacity received from 
PROSPER to continue the 
task when new members 
decide to join, and  to share 
their experience with other 
groups. MoFA and DAs 
remain as links with IFAD 
for any necessary updates. 
Beneficiary economic groups 
will use the material and 
capacity received from 
PROSPER to continue the 
task when new members 
decide to join, and to share 
their experience with other 
non-beneficiary groups. 
MoFA and DAs remain as 
links with IFAD for any 
necessary updates and 
support. 
22 
Reference to 
PROSPER activity 
or outcome 
Activity to continue 
post- project 
IFAD 
Support end 
date 
Who will 
take up the 
activity 
Mechanisms 
for handover 
Commitments 
from national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, trainings, 
seeds, etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Can this activity reach greater 
scale? How? 
Comments 
After 
Completion 
DAs, MoFA  phasing over  MoFA, DAs/local 
communities 
1.2 
Development of 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure. 
PROSPER's  Natural 
Resources (NR) 
remediation 
infrastructures will be 
sustained by local 
authorities. These also 
will continue to identify 
the need for new 
infrastructure 
developments. 
Towards project completion, local 
capacity to sustain  the socioeconomic 
infrastructures will be assessed by the 
project, along with their capacity to 
identify the need  for further 
infrastructure developments. In case 
support is needed in this area, specific 
sensitization activities will be organized 
by the PCU during PROSPER last 2 
years of implementation. 
Each capital investment plan 
will include appropriate 
management, operation, 
maintenance and ongoing 
financing arrangements, 
with overall responsibility 
resting with the community. 
Agreements will be reached 
between the DAs and the 
cluster leadership for the 
post- construction 
management of 
infrastructure by various 
community gender-balanced 
committees. 
Resources for infrastructure 
maintenance and  new 
developments might be 
needed. Possible sources 
include: GoG, local 
communities, development 
partners, and IFAD 
additional financing. 
Maintenance and scaling-
up. NR remediation 
infrastructures may 
comprise soil and water 
conservation structures, as 
well as climate change 
mitigation measures in line 
with local conditions. The 
District Assembly will 
undertake all procedures to 
acquire/lease any land 
needed for construction. 
PROSPER envisages 
expanding and 
rehabilitating strategic road 
networks (feeder roads 
and farm tracks, culverts 
and small bridges), as well 
as shared domestic water 
supply structures 
(boreholes with hand or 
solar pumps), sanitation 
facilities and waste 
management systems, and 
alternative/green energy 
schemes (including 
resource and energy 
recovery from waste). 
These arrangements and 
partners will be updated 
regularly. If restructuring 
is needed, new Exit 
Strategy will be developed. 
23 
Reference to 
PROSPER activity 
or outcome 
Activity to continue 
post- project 
IFAD 
Support end 
date 
Who will 
take up the 
activity 
Mechanisms 
for handover 
Commitments 
from national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, trainings, 
seeds, etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Can this activity reach greater 
scale? How? 
Comments 
Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators around selected agricultural value chains. 
2.1 
Creation of 
sustainable 
marketing 
linkages and 
business 
development 
After 
Completion 
RIs remain engaged in 
formal partnerships and 
agreements with 
public/private entities 
after PROSPER's 
comprehensive 
financial, capacity and 
marketing support. 
Target 
communities
/ project 
beneficiaries
. 
Phasing down  MOFA, DAs, 
Partner entities 
& institutions, 
Private Sector 
To be evaluated after MTR and regular 
updates. 
The deep analysis to be 
commissioned by PROSPER 
of each VC at the beginning 
of implementation, together 
with the interventions on 
financial literacy, capacity 
and marketing support to 
target groups, and the follow 
up activities, are designed 
to ensure mutually 
beneficial and enduring 
partnerships. 
The  Promotion of linkages 
between producers and VC 
actors aims for lasting 
partnerships between 
producers engaged in 
climate-resilient farming 
and larger-scale 
agribusinesses. This will 
concentrate on those RIs 
and MSMEs that 
demonstrated interest and 
potential in the Component 
1 capacity building 
interventions. PROSPER will 
not enter business relations 
with the parties at any 
stage. With the support of 
the Business Advisory 
Centres/Business Resource 
Centres and District 
Directorates of Agriculture, 
the project  will engage with 
VC actors in each 
participating district with 
an information- 
gathering and analysis 
exercise. 
These arrangements and 
partners will be updated 
regularly. If restructuring 
is needed, new Exit 
Strategy will be developed. 
24 
Reference to 
PROSPER activity 
or outcome 
Activity to continue 
post- project 
IFAD 
Support end 
date 
Who will 
take up the 
activity 
Mechanisms 
for handover 
SMEs and Rural 
enterprises continue to 
access business 
development services. 
Marketing linkages 
remain active and 
profitable. 
After 
Completion 
Phasing down 
& phasing out 
Target 
communities
/ project 
beneficiaries 
Commitments 
from national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
MOFA, DAs, 
Partner Financial 
Institutions, 
Private Sector 
Capital and capacity 
conditions are required to 
access each type of 
supported service, to cater 
to various levels of 
capacities and 
professionalization, ensuring 
each type of enterprise is 
catered for accordingly. 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, trainings, 
seeds, etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Can this activity reach greater 
scale? How? 
Comments 
To be evaluated after MTR and regular 
updates. 
PROSPER design includes 
key elements that will 
contribute to the 
sustainability of project 
interventions: a sequencing 
approach, high level of 
involvement  of partner 
institutions from  the onset, 
a consultative and 
participatory process and a 
tailored targeting strategy, 
allowing a gradual and 
differentiated access to 
financial services depending 
on the capacity and 
maturity level of beneficiary 
groups. Development of 
Business Plans are also 
differentiated according to 
beneficiary maturity and 
capitalization. 
These arrangements and 
partners will be updated 
regularly. If restructuring 
is needed, new Exit 
Strategy will be developed. 
25 
Reference to 
PROSPER activity 
or outcome 
Activity to continue 
post- project 
IFAD 
Support end 
date 
Who will 
take up the 
activity 
Mechanisms 
for handover 
Commitments 
from national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, trainings, 
seeds, etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Can this activity reach greater 
scale? How? 
Comments 
After 
Completion 
Phasing down 
& phasing out 
Target 
communities
/ project 
beneficiaries 
2.2 
Access to rural 
financial 
services. 
Rural households 
continue using rural 
financial services 
(savings and credit 
facilities). After 
PROSPER's capacity and 
financial support, a 
portion of the MG 
beneficiaries will have 
graduated to be eligible 
for more complex 
instruments. 
MoFA, DAs, 
Partner Financial 
Institutions, 
Private Sector 
PROSPER will support the 
creation and strengthening 
of savings and credit groups 
(based on the proven 
successful VSLA model). 
The revolving nature of the 
BFF guarantees 
sustainability in the access 
to its financial services after 
project completion. 
PROSPER PCU can evaluate the 
possibility of scaling up during the last 
years of implementation, using success 
stories and knowledge sharing within 
the project areas. 
An initial assessment of the 
maturity of the targeted 
groups will be conducted 
from  inception: Groups  will 
be evaluated against their 
level of capitalization, skills 
in financial management 
and ability to establish 
business agreements with 
VC actors such as traders 
and processors. They will be 
categorized  into three tiers 
depending on their maturity 
level for proper targeting 
and sequencing to access 
the different financial 
services (being able to be 
re-assessed and graduated 
to be eligible for  more 
demanding/complex 
financial tools). 
These arrangements and 
partners will be updated 
regularly. If restructuring 
is needed, new Exit 
Strategy will be developed. 
26 
Reference to 
PROSPER activity 
or outcome 
Activity to continue 
post- project 
IFAD 
Support end 
date 
Who will 
take up the 
activity 
Mechanisms 
for handover 
Commitments 
from national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, trainings, 
seeds, etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Component 3. Project management and Policy  engagement 
Can this activity reach greater 
scale? How? 
Comments 
3.2 
Policy 
Engagement 
After 
Completion 
A conducive policy 
environment to address 
the developmental 
challenges targeted by 
PROSPER will ideally be 
maintained after project 
completion, increasing 
project interventions' 
sustainability and 
allowing scaling up of 
certain activities. 
MoFA, 
leading 
agency, in 
permanent 
dialogue with 
IFAD and 
partner 
organization
s. 
Phasing down  MoFA, Partner 
Institutions, ICO 
Financial partner institutions 
and the Government will 
provide necessary resources 
in case further 
developments in 
Green/Climate finance are 
deemed  to be planned  for 
after PROSPER ends. 
There is potential for scaling-up through 
policy ramifications of the new financial 
sector product “climate/green finance” 
as a development instrument in Ghana 
in coping with climate change. 
PROSPER identifies from Design 
potential policy alternatives for public-
private partnerships to invest in an 
ambitious Natural Resources recovery 
and reconstruction programme, which 
could provide employment for large 
numbers of people. Climate/ green 
finance could leverage massive public 
investment in adaptation and mitigation 
if a conducive policy framework were 
devised. This will start to be evaluated 
together with the PCU and MoFA from 
the beginning of implementation of 
Component 2. 
- After project completion 
Ghana ICO will continue to 
participate in policy dialogue 
activities, as previewed in 
the COSOP, where 
contributions to and 
advocacy for the 
harmonisation of the 
sectoral policy will always be 
salient aspects of the 
agenda. - PROSPER 
implementation support 
structure embedded in the 
host Government agency 
aims for permanent 
involvement in sectoral 
policy issues identified 
during implementation, 
increased  capacity to 
address project scope 
matters, ownership and 
solutions finding in 
collaboration with the PCU. 
This is continuation of ICO 
activities. 
In any case, these 
arrangements and partners 
will be updated regularly. 
If restructuring is needed, 
new Exit Strategy will be 
developed. 
27 
Annex 5. Institutional analysis  
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture will be the lead implementation Agency and will chair the 
steering Committee of the Project, providing leadership and strategic and policy direction. The 
Ministry is the lead agency for the responsible for the development of Agriculture in Ghana and 
provides the overall policy and strategic priorities of the sector for planning. Under the decentralized 
system of Government however, implementation of agriculture activities are ceded to the 
departments of agriculture which are the Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs).  
The MMDAs work through the District coordination Councils (DCCs) through the Regional 
Coordinating Councils (RCCs) to the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development in terms of 
political administration. In relation to technical services, the DCCs and RCCs work up to the Local 
Government Service.  
The Ministry has seven technical Directorates, four line directorates and three Government 
Subvented Organizations (see organogram attached).  The mandate of the National Directorates is 
limited to policy formulation, technical backstopping of the Regions and Districts and monitoring and 
evaluation. All the technical services of the Ministry are decentralized except two – the Veterinary 
services and Plant Protection and Regulatory Services.    
Several directorates of MoFA will be involved in the implementation of the project.  These include the 
Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services to provide oversight on dissemination of technology by 
Agricultural Extension Agents at the district levels; the Crops Services Directorate to provide support 
and oversight on natural resource management activities, the Animal Production Directorate, the 
Veterinary Services Directorate, the Women In Agricultural Development Directorate with oversight 
for gender and nutrition issues and the Policy Planning Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate overall 
monitoring of the project as an integral part of sector monitoring activities. Among all While many of 
these directorates will play supporting role, the Dbe collaborating with the project  
Role of the Directorate of Agriculture Extension Services (DAES)  
The Directorate of Agriculture Extension Services plays the following functions:  
  Extension Policy Formulation, Planning and guidance  
  Co-ordination of National Pluralistic Extension and Rural Advisory Services 
  Technical backstopping of Extension Activities at the Regional and District levels 
  Monitoring and Supervision of all Extension Service activities in the Regions and Districts 
The Directorate of Extension Services will have a greater role to play in the implementation of 
PROSPER. This is because the key activities of project involve training of clients who are largely 
smallholder farmers in natural resource management and supporting them through farmer-based 
organizations to access good and services under the project. The mobilization and training of famer 
Based Organizations is done by Agricultural Extension Agents. PROSPER will support DAES to provide 
policy guidance and supervision for the delivery of extension services at the Regional and district 
levels. To ensure this is done effectively, the Project will establish a liaison office at the DAES to 
provide the constant link between the policy level operations and the project coordination office 
which will be located in the project area. 
Role of Regional Department of Agriculture: The Regional Departments of Agriculture (RDAs), under 
the Regional Coordinating Councils are responsible for (i) supervision of extension activities in the 
Districts (ii) monitoring of extension activities in Districts and training of District staff. The RDAs report 
to the Council, the Local Government Service, the Ministry of Local Government and Rural 
28 
Development as well as the Minister for Food and Agriculture.  Each region is staffed with 
Development officers in the technical areas of expertise that reflect national technical directorates in 
most cases. For example, there are Extension development officers, Crops development officer, 
Agriculture Engineering Development Officer, monitoring and Evaluation Officer, Animal Production 
officer and WIAD Officer. The Veterinary and Plant protection development officers are also part of 
the team at the regional offices even though they are not decentralized. PROSPER will support the 
Regional Departments of Agriculture to provide oversight and monitoring of activities of the District 
Departments of Agriculture, 
Role of the District Department of Agriculture: Delivery of Extension Services is ceded to the District 
Assemblies and implemented by the District Departments of Agriculture.  All decentralized 
departments are under the supervisory authority of the Local Government Service.  The District 
Departments of Agriculture are staffed with Agricultural Extension Agents of varying degree of 
qualifications.  The DDA are responsible for day-to-day implementation of field extension services, 
provision of market and rural advisory information to farmers, conduct of demonstrations and 
training of farmers and other producers. 
PROSPER will use the Government Extension services to mobilise Farmer Based Organizations under 
the Project and provide them with training, agricultural services and conduct demonstrations as 
required to develop and transform the FBOs into profitable rural institutions.  
Extension Services at the district level received a boost in the last four years in terms of the numbers 
of Agricultural Extension Agents (AEAs), which increased from 1586 officers in 2016 to 4,286 in 2020. 
This improved Extension officer to farmer ratio from 1:1,900 to 1:709.  Under the support of the 
Modernising Agriculture of Ghana funded by Global Affairs Canada, over 3,367 motorcycles were 
supplied to AEAs to enhance their mobility and delivery of services.  The MAG programme also 
retrained and reoriented AEAs on market-oriented agriculture to broaden their skills beyond 
agronomic and production techniques to include post production agricultural activities.  
Under Prosper, AEAs will be further strengthened during the project to be effective in mobilization 
and development of farmer based organizations and training them to be able to access services of the 
project.  
The Veterinary Services Directorate 
The Veterinary Services would play a very critical role in the implementation of PROSPER by 
supporting the districts to provide disease control and prevention services to clients in the poultry 
value chain. The following services will be provided. 
The Value Chain starts with Day Old Chicks and veterinary Services would carry out microbial load 
determination in all active hatcheries to enable quality day old production,  
Procurement of Vaccines and biologicals and veterinary medicinal products to support and motivate 
poultry farmers (especially dewormers and disinfectants) 
Stepwise Laboratory improvement pathway for veterinary laboratories in the project regions in Wa, 
Bolgatanga, Dormaa Ahenkro, Sunyani and the National Food Safety Laboratory in Accra which serves 
as Reference Laboratory. The procurement of reagents, consumables, and basic equipment (fridges, 
deep freezers other cold chain containers or vaccine carriers). 
Antimicrobial stewardship to farmer base organizations 
Training of farmers and MoFA staff on veterinary disease recognition and early reporting, the 
importance and benefits of vaccination against vaccine preventable diseases and biosecurity. 
Strengthening of veterinary clinics to become adequately equipped and functional in the project 
regions and districts. 
29 
Provision of means of transport (motor bikes and vehicles) to the project areas to enable veterinary 
officers reach out to farms/farmers for monitoring and surveillance activities. 
Business Advisory Centers (BACs)  
The Business Advisory Centres (BACs) are institutional structures established by the Rural Enterprises 
Programme (REP).  Since the inception of REP in 1995, three generations of BACs have been reshaping 
and upscaling the district support system for MSEs in Ghana:  
1995 - 2002: REP-I: 13 district BACs established in the Ashanti and Brong Ahafo regions  
2003 - 2011: REP-II: 53 additional district BACs established in all then 10 regions of Ghana bringing the 
accumulative total to 66 (incl. the 13 REP-I districts) 
2012 - up to now: REP III: 95 more district BACs established nationwide (16 regions)  
There are currently 180 BAC s spread all over the country.  The BACs have been established under a 
tripartite arrangement between REP, NBSSI (now GEA) and the participating District Assemblies. BACs 
play the role of district-based facilitators and delivery mechanisms of business development services 
(BDS).  
Still supported by the Rural Enterprises Programme, main activities are of the BACs are:  
  organising business orientation seminars;  
  offering community-based skills training;  
  offering small business management training;  
  providing information and referral services and business counselling services;  
 
  promoting the establishment and strengthening of local business associations (LBAs);  
 
leveraging resources from other stakeholders for SME support. 
facilitating access to finance and technology;  
The BACs work closely with the Metropolitan, Municipal and district Assemblies.  During district 
planning process the BACs identify the district needs and weekly activities in relation to the needs are 
planned.  The plans are submitted to the Regional Secretariat for endorsement after which they are 
submitted to the GEA.  The weekly plans help in monitoring by making the regional and headquarter 
know the activities the BACs are involved in at any point in time.   
The BACs are staffed with by a Head and a driver provided by GEA and a Business development officer 
provided by the Assembly.  The office is however able to leverage on expertise from other 
departments of the Assembly such as the Community Development, Department of Agriculture, NCCE 
and Social Welfare to support their work.  
With anticipated increase in demand for services by the BACs under PROSPER, there will be need for 
more experts, especially in the area of identification and mobilization of FBOs and training to enable 
them access products and services.  These capacity gaps will be mitigated by recruiting Technical 
Assistants to support where and when necessary. It is also recommended that GEA have standing 
arrangements with a pool of experts that can be called upon to support the BACs in carrying out their 
activities.  
In terms of revenue mobilization, BACs are given regional and district quotas for Internal Revenue 
Generation. They also develop proposals and concepts notes and seek for funding for their trainings. 
Since the BACs plans are integrated into the Assemblies MTDPs and Annual plans, the Assemblies 
support the BACs activities 
30 
PROSPER will provide support to the BACs to carry out the training and business development services 
on a cost sharing basis.  Where clients are unable to pay for certain services upfront, they will be 
factored into the Grants or loans they will be receiving.  
Business Resource Centres (BRCs) 
The Business Resource Centres (BRCs) are district-based one-stop-shop business support units 
established under the Rural Enterprises Programme to provide a wide range of Business Development 
Services (BDS) to potential and existing entrepreneurs and enterprises. It also operates as financial 
and investment facilitation hubs and business information repositories for Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs). There are currently 37 BRCs in operation out of estimated 67 planned for the 
country. A BRCs operates within a zone or catchment area that is supposed to cover at least 3 
districts.  
The BRCs are housed in specially designed office complexes and well equipped with human resources 
and facilities that will ensure effective delivery of quality BDS in the districts.  The offices are currently 
managed by highly qualified consultants hired under the REP. The operations and management of the 
BRCs are in line with Government policy direction of providing a supportive and sustainable 
environment for businesses across the country. Accordingly, private sector participation in the 
management and operation of the BRCs is considered necessary for providing services of the level 
and quality that will be attractive and valued by the target market. The operations and management 
of the BRCs will therefore be under a public-private-partnership in the nature of a franchise 
arrangement under the supervision and regulation of the Ghana Enterprises Agency (GEA). Having 
piloted the operations for one year, a study is being conducted to inform franchising arrangements 
for the management Centers.  
Each BRC is has eight (8) core staff made up of four (4) management members, 3 officers and a driver. 
They include: (i)General Manager (GM), (ii)Business Development and Marketing Manager (BDMM) 
(iii) Finance and Administration Manager (FAM), (iv)Information Communication and Knowledge 
Manager (ICKM), (v) Accounts Officer (A/O), (vi) Human Resource and Admin Officer (HR/ADMIN), (vii) 
Front Desk and Client Service Executive (FD/CSE) and (viii) Driver 
Activities undertaken by BRCs include:  
  Business opportunity identification 
  Value chain development 
  Business consultancy and technical assistance for Public and Private sector institutions, 
Projects and NGOs. 
  Facilitation of access to finance/credit 
  Facilitation of access to market 
  Business health check (Business diagnostics) 
  Business start-up protocols e.g. preparation of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and 
other Manuals 
  Training in Management and Entrepreneurship 
  Productivity improvement 
  Capacity building for Public and Private sector institutions. 
Under Prosper the BRCs will identify qualified beneficiaries (priority will be given to existing FBOs and 
Enterprises) and after screening their needs, provide then with training and skill development to 
enable potential clients access the products of the project.  Other activities will include financial 
education business planning, preparation of a basic business plan and supporting with business 
31 
development advisory services.  This will be done in collaboration with the District Departments of 
Agriculture and the Business Advisory Centers.  
Under PROSPER it is envisaged there will be increased demand of services by the BRCs. This was 
anticipated designing the BRCs. As a result, a roster of about 200 consultants and other professionals 
such as accountants, Business Development Specialists, Lawyers, Engineers and other experts from 
varied fields and background are available for the BRCs to rely on to handle assignments they might 
not have the capacity for.  
In addition, the BRCs also mitigates its capacity gap through institutional partnerships with various 
departments at the district level depending on the type of expertise it wants to leverage on. For 
instance, the BRC has an institutional partnership with the District Agric Department and MOFA 
Offices to handle Agric related assignments and projects. 
The BRCs collaborate strongly with business regulatory and financial institutions such as the Registrar 
Generals’ Department (RGD), Ghana Standards Authority, Food and Drugs Board, Ghana Export 
Promotion Authority (GEPA) to serve as their representatives at the district level.  PROSPER will 
partner with the BACs and the BRCs to provide skill training, business development services as well 
avail the services of other agencies under their umbrella to prospective clients. 
The services provided by the BRCs and related costs are indicated in the table below Is the PROSPER 
going to pay for these services on behalf of the clients?  
Training and BDS services and their related costs. 
 NO  BRC SERVICE SUITE 
1 
2 
Business Plan Preparation 
Credit Facilitation 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Business Health Check and Diagnosis 
Consultancy and Advisory Services 
Regulatory Services Facilitation: RGD, GEPA, 
GIPC, GSA, FDA, EPA, PPRSD 
Training Services: 
Entrepreneurship Training 
Skills Training 
Functional Management Training 
Customized In-Plant Training  
COST ESTAMATES (GHS) 
500.00 – 2,500.00 
10 -25% of Interest Earned by PFI. 
50.00 – 100.00 facilitation fee by client. 
200.00 – 500.00 
200.00 – 5,000.00 (SMEs) 
5,000.00 – 15,000.00 (Large Companies) 
Facilitation Fee of 100.00 – 250.00 
100.00 – 200.00/participant 
250.00 – 1,000.00/head 
3,000 – 10,000/session 
5,000 – 15,000/institution 
Village Savings and Loan Schemes: Credit is one of the key constraints often cited by smallholder 
farmers to be a limiting factor in their agribusinesses be it for production, harvesting, marketing and 
processing.  Lack of access to loans is often attributed to lack of information, high interest rate, lack of 
collateral and high cost of informal loans.  
The Village Savings and Loan Schemes (VLSC) was introduced by CARE International in 1991. It is a 
model that uses the ancient practice of group savings. It only requires a lock box with three keys and 
basic financial training. The groups are established and trained to develop a savings culture in the 
community that allows them to save and also access small loans to invest in income generating 
activities. The groups thrive on mutual thrust, accountability and transparency in all their 
transactions.  The regular meetings of these groups for several years lead eventually to building thrust 
and strong bonding among community members that can be used to their benefit. A study by Bill and 
32 
Belinda Gates of 331 groups in six countries show that 98% of the groups continued to actively meet 
after 18 months and 90% continued to operate after five years.  
The regular meetings of these groups for savings and loans purposes could be leveraged for training 
and transfer of technologies on farming practices, post-harvest management and nutrition.   
In Ghana, many projects and NGOs have used the Village Saving and Loan Groups to bring about 
financial inclusion of poor farmers and to help access formal loans as the they develop.  PROSPER will 
leverage on the lessons of the experience of these projects in the project districts to scale up the 
financial inclusion and access to the Blended Financial Facility.  The Greater Rural Opportunities for 
Women (GROW) project is an example as narrated below.  
Greater Rural Opportunities for Women (GROW) Project funded by the Global Affairs Canada and 
implemented by Mennonite Economic Development Associates (MEDA) in 8 districts in the Upper 
West Region used the VSLA model to empower women farmers to create opportunities through 
cultivation, utilization and sale of soybeans, accessing extension services and markets to increase 
their household’s economic well-being.  
Under the project, women were linked to appropriate financial services, including Village Savings and 
Loan Association (VSLA) groups, financial institutions and insurance providers.  
In total, GROW helped to establish 1,016 Village Saving and Loan Groups (comprised of 21,000 
women in total) reaching all corners of the region in which the project was operational. The Village 
Saving and Loan Groups in the GROW project were established by MEDA’s key facilitating partners 
(KFPs) and are community-based and member-owned groups. MEDA KFPs, CAPECS, TUDRIDEP, CARD, 
ProNet and PRUDA, provided regular support and guidance for female farmers to establish and run 
their Village Saving and Loan Groups throughout the life of the project. Village Saving and Loan 
Groups provided a venue for the female farmers to save and borrow for both their personal and 
business needs, and also enabled female farmers to create credit history if their groups save with 
FSPs.  
GROW Village Saving and Loan Groups had between 15 and 30 female members. This number varied 
in the project depending on the size of the community where the VSLA was established, as well as the 
number of groups in each community. Each member made a required weekly deposit of between GHS 
5-10, and the pooled funds served as loan capital for any members wanting to borrow. In addition to 
the compulsory savings, there was a weekly collection of GHS 1 per member for the VSLA’s 
emergency fund. Members paid into an informal ‘insurance’ plan and could claim support from this 
fund for unexpected costs, including funerals or other unforeseen circumstances.  
The governance of the GROW Village Saving and Loan Groups was consistent across the project 
region. The group elected a group management committee consisting of three members: a 
chairperson, a secretary, and a treasurer. The committee organized the operations of the VSLA which 
included facilitating group meetings, collecting regular savings, approving and issuing internal loans to 
the group members based on any requests and monitoring repayments.  
MEDA KFPs facilitated the formation of Village Saving and Loan Groups in each of the GROW 
supported communities. KFPs provided the blueprint for group formation, election of the 
management committee, development of internal bylaws and other required initial support. KFPs 
then supported the groups through regular monitoring,and coaching on an as-needed basis. 
Membership was voluntary and required committing to the group by-laws, which were explained and 
clarified by the chairperson. All groups were retained written constitutions, but rules were announced 
orally, as were all balances discussed at the meetings, to accommodate the low level of literacy and 
numeracy in Ghana’s remote rural areas.  
The VSLA loans were much cheaper than members could receive from external lenders, easy to 
access, and repayment terms were more flexible and determined collectively. For these reasons, a 
VSLA loan was preferable for women with lower incomes who were just beginning to grow their 
businesses. A loan from an external microfinance institution (MFI), for example, costs a minimum of 
33 
3% per month in the areas where GROW groups were established. A VSLA loan, on the other hand, 
cost only GHS 1 for each GHS 100 borrowed, which makes interest 1% per month, a third of the cost 
of a commercial loan.  
GROW’s VSLA members saved mainly for three purposes: to cover education costs, housing 
maintenance, and for agricultural investment. Loans were used in a similar way, depending on the 
farmer’s income levels.  
The loan size was determined based on the amount of individual savings a member had in the group: 
for most groups, the maximum amount of funds lent to an individual was three times the amount that 
that member had saved. A further benefit to the borrower in the VSLA is that the interest is paid into 
the pool of funds and equally divided amongst members at the end of each year or cycle. During the 
life of the GROW project, the Village Saving and Loan Groups completed 6 cycles.  
Farmer Based Organizations (FBOs) 
Farmer Based Organizations is a common name given to self-help organizations formed in 
communities for various purposes.  The principal objectives for establishing FBOs is to make it 
possible and cost effective to reach many farmers and other agricultural actors with information and 
services without having to meet them individually.  They are organized to enable them access 
information, inputs, markets, credit and to have a strong voice and representation to participate in 
policy advocacy.  
FBOs are often organized by projects and used as entry points to provide project services to 
communities.  They are also organized by the Government’s Extension Services at the community 
level to enhance technology dissemination. Several NGOs, often funded by projects, are involved in 
community mobilization and formation of Groups.  
Ghana has witnessed many governmental and nongovernmental projects seeking to promote FBO 
development. For example, between 2000 and 2007, the World Bank alone invested more than US$9 
million for the development of FBOs under the Agricultural Services Sub-sector Investment Project 
(AgSSIP).   Similarly, the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) also approved a five-year US$547 
million anti-poverty compact with the Government of Ghana and a significant proportion of this 
amount was used for the development of FBOs. More recently, under the Northern Rural Growth 
Programme (NRGP) (2008-2016), A total of 8,127 FBOs were reached compared to a  target of 2,000 
at mid-term. Over attainment owed to new implementing partners in 2015, bringing with them other 
FBOs with whom they already worked. This was made up a total of 201,746 members (41 per cent 
men to 59 per cent women), evident that the project succeeded in targeting women as was required. 
At completion 1,625 FBOs were functional, representing 20 per cent of the FBOs reached. The low 
numbers were attributed to the large number of FBOs brought by implementing partners 
FBOs are involved in an increasingly diverse range of collective activities. There are production, 
processing, marketing and multipurpose FBOs. Some FBOs have also attracted interest as vehicles for 
providing an array of collective services including common property management, technology 
development and testing, design, financing and management of rural infrastructure, and marketing of 
key production inputs or farm outputs. The rationale for many projects supporting the development 
of FBOs is to facilitate access to credit, farm inputs, extension services and markets for their produce, 
given the smallholder nature of agriculture.  
Farmers use FBOs to engage in collective action on a daily basis such as: a) planting and harvesting 
together on the farm land; b) pooling labor on fields; c) using a common facility for marketing their 
products; d) supporting each other financially through saving and credit schemes as well as to acquire 
credit from organizations; and e) procuring agricultural inputs.  
The FBO landscape in Ghana is still not formailised.  A study by IFPRI in 2012 reported that 
approximately 79% of the FBOs were registered with at least one of the following: the Department of 
Cooperative, the District Assembly, MoFA, Registrar Generals Department, and Farmer Union. About 
85% of the FBOs in the Southern Ghana were registered, as compared with only 60% in the North. 
About 57% of the FBOs that were registered are smallholder- dominated.  
34 
FBOs are set up by government agencies, NGOs, and private organizations and individuals. In Ghana, 
agricultural extension agents (AEAs) play a very important role in the establishment of FBOs, 
especially when FBOs are set up through government projects. From the IFPRI study, a variety of 
people initiate FBOs including individual famers, officials from government ministries and agencies 
(usually AEAs), NGOs, chiefs and opinion leaders. Opinion leaders include teachers, assembly men and 
women, members of parliament, retired public officers, and some elders of the communities. 
The study showed that 42% of the FBOs were self-started and (58%) externally started. Farmers who 
initiate the establishment of FBOs often live within the community where the FBO is set up; however, 
in the majority of these cases, the initiators reported that they established the FBO because they 
observed that other FBOs were receiving benefits, usually from government and NGOs. We observed 
that farmers who led the formation of FBOs typically became leaders of the groups after they were 
established. More of the largeholder-dominated FBOs are externally started, as compared with 
smallholder-dominated FBOs. Although the initiators of FBOs often select the groups’ members, in 
about one third of the cases, people are asked to join freely.  
FBOs engage in more than one activity. The four most common collective activities among FBOs are 
mutual labor support, production, welfare services and input procurement. However, mutual labor 
support and welfare services are traditional collective activities that have been observed since pre-
colonial times and are mainly geared towards food security and social welfare. While production and 
input procurement are recent initiatives in FBOs, they are done on very small scale. FBOs that engage 
in production tend to also engage in input procurement. FBOs that are self-started engage in more 
collective activities than externally started ones.  
The most common form of support FBOs receive is technical training since they serve as platforms 
through which AEAs and other agencies transmit technical training. Whether FBOs are self-started or 
externally started, they seem guaranteed some technical training from AEAs. Regardless of the type of 
support, externally started FBOs receive more support than self-started ones.  
Many of the FBOs that are externally started especially due to project benefits easily disintegrate at 
the end of the project. 
Weak farmers organisations have resulted in the limited presence of collaborative and remunerative 
models for access to inputs and markets through Farmer-based Organisations (FBO)s. FBOs’ presence 
in rural communities is variable from a few to many. Less than 50 per cent of them are considered 
active, and relatively larger farmers usually dominate the functional FBOs. Often FBOs with successful 
linkages to offtakers have limited outreach and typically exclude the smallholders. Gaps in access to 
market infrastructure have led to the inability of the smallholders to store their commodities and wait 
for prices to improve. Consequently, they are compelled to sell their produce to traders even when 
the offered prices are much lower than those in the previous seasons. Limited post-harvest assistance 
has created gaps in processing and value addition capabilities at the local level and sometimes high 
incidence of post-harvest losses. 
In the implementation of PROSPER the Government Extension Agents should be guided by criteria to 
select existing groups that have out-lasted projects and continue to meet their objectives for forming 
the group.  The FBOs to be involved should have also been registered with any of the recognized 
agencies at the district level.  PROSPER should focus on building on existing FBOs to improve on their 
capacity to demonstrate good results for replication than trying to reach out to many FBOs as a 
project target.  
Cooperatives: A cooperative is made up of people who are united with the purpose of mutual self-
help and are organized for other economic and social objectives with the intent to be based on 
equality and equity. They must provide the people with necessary goods and services or make joint 
use of their available resources top increase their income.  
There are many types of cooperatives in Ghana and include:  
Agricultural cooperatives are engaged in food production, processing and marketing. 
35 
Industrial cooperatives are involved in rural cottage industries such as local alcohol distillation, 
handicrafts, Kente weaving, cloth dying and manufacturing, etc.  
Financial cooperatives are engaged in savings mobilization in both rural and suburban areas. For 
example: micro-loan banks, credit unions and “susu‟ collectors.  
Service cooperatives are involved in the service industry such as transport, consumer societies, etc.  
Some FBOs are registered as cooperatives if they are meet all the requirements included registration 
with the Department of cooperatives.  
In Ghana, cooperatives were first introduced in 1928 in an attempt to improve the quality of cocoa for 
export. They were so successful that, by 1960, the cooperatives were marketing almost 40% of the 
entire cocoa crop.  
Cooperatives play a unique socio-economic role because of four distinctive features: they are 
organized for mutual self-help; they apply democratic practices to business; they are organized to 
solve social and economic problems; and respect human values and the rights of individuals. 
Cooperatives in Ghana are brought together at the national level under the Ghana Cooperatives 
Council. 
PROSPER will work with the Department of Cooperatives in the development of FBOs to a status that 
qualifies them for registration under the Cooperative Act…  
The Ministry of Environment Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI) 
The Ministry of Environment Science, Technology and Innovation is one of the sector Ministries.  It 
exists to promote sustainable environmental management and the adoption and application of 
science and technological innovations through the formulation of policies, monitoring and evaluation 
of the implementation of sector plans, Programmes, and projects for national development. The main 
objective of MESTI is to ensure accelerated socio-economic development of the nation through the 
formulation of sound policies and a regulatory framework to promote the use of appropriate 
environmentally and friendly, scientific and technological practices and techniques. It has no regional 
offices. MESTI will be a member of the Steering Committee of the Project, providing strategic insights. 
It has six agencies. They are - the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) which has about 
14 research institutions, seven of which are agriculture related; the Ghana Atomic Energy 
Commission, The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); the Land Use and Spatial Planning 
Authority; the National Biosafety Authority and the Nuclear-Regulations Authority, Ghana.  The CSIR 
and EPA will be involved directly or indirectly in the project implementation.  
The CSIR will be involved through the Research Extension Linkage Committees (RELCs). The RELCs are 
multistakeholder structures established at the regional level and driven by researchers from the 
agricultural Institutes of CSIR and Agricultural Extension Officers to identify and discuss farmers’ 
challenges with the view of bringing researchable solutions to to stakeholders. Since Extension will be 
involved in the implementation of the project, the RELCs will be a useful platform for presenting 
challenges of farmers in production technologies and natural resource management issues.  
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
The Environmental Protection Agency is the leading Government organization for protecting and 
improving the environment in Ghana.  They are mandated to ensure that air, land and water are 
looked after by everyone in today's society, so that tomorrow's generations inherit a cleaner, 
healthier world. They are existed for more than 40 years and have offices across Ghana working on 
and carrying out Government policy, inspecting and regulating businesses and reacting when there is 
an emergency such as a pollution incident.  
The EPA will be involved directly in the implementation of the project at the regional and district 
levels through the Stakeholder platform meetings and providing technical guidance in the 
implementation of the natural resources management activities.  
36 
The Ministry of Trade and Industry 
The Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI) introduced its economic and industrial transformation 
agenda aimed at catalysing the Government’s industrial policy initiatives. The Ministry has several 
agencies supporting trade promotion. They are the Ghana Export Promotion Authority, Ghana 
Standards Authority, the Ghana Enterprise Agency (a recent recreation of the National Board for 
SmallScale Industries to support the development micro, small and medium scale enterprises) and the 
GRATIS Foundation of Ghana which does fabrication and machine tools.  The MoTI will be involved in 
the project at the strategic level on the Steering Committee and through the BACs and Business 
Resource Centres (BRCs) who are under the GEA.  
The Ghana Commodity Exchange 
The Ghana Commodity Exchange (GCX) is an electronic marketplace or a platform for buying and 
selling listed commodities. The commodities currently traded are maize, soyabean, sorghum, sesame 
and milled rice.  They will later expand to includ cashew, coffee and paddy rice.   Starting with spot 
contracts for physical products, GCX will later trade in futures and options contracts for the listed 
commodities. PROSPER will collaborate with GCX for market access to FBOs and Value Chain Drivers. 
The Ghana Commodity Exchange (GCX) provides farmers with access to certified warehouse services.  
The strict quality requirements to avail the facility renders beyond the immediate capacity of most 
smallholders. 
World Bank: The World Bank is funding the West Africa Food Systems Resilience Programme 
beginning in 2021.  The project is aimed at strengthening regional food systems risk management, 
improve sustainability of productive based of targeted areas and develop regional agriculture 
markets.  The project will focus on three areas at the national level (i) Strengthen creation and 
provision of digital advisory services for farmers (ii) strengthen food security through sustainable 
practices in targeted area and (iii) support to development of strategic value chains. PROSPER has 
many areas of collaboration with the World Bank project and during the design mission the Mission 
Team engaged with the World Bank Management to identify specific areas of collaboration during 
implementation and commitment from both sides to agree on a workable mechanism for the 
collaboration.  
Partnership with other Development Partner Projects: During its implementation PROSPER will also 
explore partnerships with projects of other development partners such as the Ghana Financial Sector 
Development Programme of the World Bank about the development of Village Saving and Loans 
Associations (Village Saving and Loan Groups) and their linkage to formal financial services. It will also 
explore linkages to the KFW supported OVCF and the DANIDA supported Rural Development Fund 
(RDF) for developing value chain financing linkages in the project areas. The Project will identify the 
presence of other donor and government supported projects in the clusters, mainly the ones which 
are focused on strengthening extension services and capacity building of FBOs. PROSPER will partner 
with these initiatives to ensure synergies and complementarities in delivery of services to the target 
groups. 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
PROSPER is expected to be co-financed by the GCF through the IGREENFIN project. The GCF approved 
IFAD’s IGREENFIN concept note and project preparation facility (PPF) request on 5 February, 2021. 
The PPF funds for the design of the full-funding proposal for IGREENFIN-1 (covering Burkina Faso, 
Ivory Coast, Ghana, Mali and Senegal) have reached IFAD. According to the GCF website, the relevant 
full-funding proposal is tentatively scheduled for the GCF Board presentation in November 2021 
(together with the full-funding proposal of the Great Green Wall Umbrella Programme).  
The GCF will support PROSPER to i) carry out climate risks analysis and to develop the capacity of CIs 
to respond to these risks ii) support the outreach of climate adapted credit products to the target 
households and iii) enhance the outreach of microinsurance services in the project areas. IFAD has 
developed a simplified accelerated process (SAP) on inclusive green finance. The first SAP proposal, 
37 
for Niger, has been approved by the GCF board. The business model of the SAP for Niger is going to 
be replicated in the region under a regional program in which Ghana will be included. With this 
proven model, the design process will be shorter than that of Niger which took seven months. The 
mechanism on how GCF will be disbursed, accessed and implemented will be drawn from the Niger 
model.  
GIRSAL 
The Bank of Ghana (BoG) and the AfDB have supported GIRSAL’s credit guarantee services by 
contributing to the GIRSAL guarantee fund (US$72 million). Investment income from this fund enables 
cross-subsidization of the cost charged for portfolio guarantees. GIRSAL guarantee fund will serve as 
60-80 per cent collateral supporting BFF credit disbursement from PROSPER Participating Financial 
Institutions (PROSPER PFIs) to offtakers and FBOs. The implementation arrangements for GIRSAL 
credit guarantee support will involve partnership agreements between GIRSAL and the PROSPER PFIs. 
These agreements will define mainly the eligibility criteria of PROSPER PFIs, expected volume of 
guarantee required, terms and conditions for GIRSAL support, capacity building needs of the PROSPER 
partners to be effective partners, the implementation steps for obtaining GIRSAL guarantee and the 
settlement procedure in case of default faced by PFIs. PROSPER will participate in these agreements 
as a partnership facilitator by i) assisting the PFIs to meet the GIRSAL terms and conditions and ii) 
supporting the smooth and timely implementation of guarantee cover before BFF disbursement and 
settlement (where relevant) after disbursement. Based on these agreements, the GIRSAL investments 
(collateral guarantee) will be made directly at the product level connected to the volume of BFF funds 
disbursed by the PROSPER PFIs. The PROSPER PFIs and GIRSAL will report to PROSPER about the 
volume of credit guarantee funds used to support the disbursement of the BFF.  
ARB Apex Bank:  PROSPER, in coordination with the BoG will partner with the ARB Apex Bank in the 
development and management of the BFF. ARB APEX Bank has signed a commitment to contribute 
$2,5 million of its own resources in providing funds to beneficiaries of the programme. PROSPER will 
also leverage on partnerships already developed by other IFAD projects such the REP, GASIP and 
AFFORD with the Rural Banks. ARB Apex Bank will provide oversight and supervision to the Rural and 
Community Banks (RCBs) participating in the Project, disbursing the Blended Finance facilities through 
the RCBs to the beneficiaries and ensuring recovery and reporting.  
African Development Bank (AfDB) 
IFAD and AfDB have long standing history of collaboration and partnerships through the cofinancinfg 
of IFAD funded projects, such as NRGP, REP and AFFORD – the latter through the de-risking 
instrument Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing Agricultural Lending Scheme. AfDB is currently 
implementing the Savannah Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAPIP) and the Savannah 
Investment Project (SIP) in the Savannah region. SAPIP began in 2018 to support the PFJ programme 
and aims to transform agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job and wealth 
creation. SIP began in 2019 to support the RFJ programme and aims at improving production, develop 
agribusiness and value chain and facilitate access to finance. PROSPER will leverage on SAPIP’s work of 
strengthening linkages between value chain actors and productivity enhancing interventions using 
climate resilient technologies, as well as the introduction of nutrition sensitization activities into 
communities through cultivation of vegetables and dietary education. PROSPER will explore 
partnerships with SIP through the district stakeholder value chain meetings, to promote the 
development of maize, soya and poultry VCs, as well as learn from SIP’s financing instruments 
developed during implementation. Opportunities for collaboration and co-financing with the AfDB 
pipeline project titled the Savana Agriculture Value Chain Development Project will be pursued. The 
project will focus on integrating maize, soya and poultry value chain and building on the strengths of 
SAPIP and SIP.  The project timeline will be confirmed soon. 
38 
Annex 6: Institutional Aspects and Implementation Arrangements 
Organization of PROSPER  
Overall Responsibility and Orientation 
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA), in its capacity as Lead Project, will have overall 
oversight responsibility for the implementation of PROSPER. It will ensure linkages to other related 
Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). 
The Lead Programme Agency will establish a National Programme Steering Committee (NPSC) that 
will steer Programme implementation strategy, oversee planning, review progress and impact, and 
ensure linkages with related projects, government services and relevant value chain stakeholders. The 
NPSC will be meet at least twice yearly and will be chaired by the Minister of MOFA and the National 
Programme Director will act as secretary.  
Programme Coordination and Management 
The Programme Coordination Unit (PCU) will be based in Tamale, in the Northern Region. The PCU 
will ensure (i) overall coordination of the Programme including the special arrangements of the 
management of IGREENFIN with Apex Bank; (ii) implementation of Subcomponent 3.1 (policy 
dialogue, knowledge management); (iii) support supervision and other missions, including evaluation 
missions, baseline and reference surveys and data collection and analysis; (iv) consolidation of the 
Annual Work Programme and Budget (AWPB); (v) consolidation of progress reports; (vi) fiduciary 
oversight, including consolidation of PROSPER accounts, preparation of annual financial statements, 
disbursements, organization of external audits in line with IFAD guidelines; (vii) promotion of 
transversal themes, including gender and youth; (vii) organize capacity building events of PCU & 
Project Implementation support staff at DAES and Regional Offices. (viii) elaboration and updating of 
implementation manuals. 
The staff of the PCU shall comprise a National Programme Coordinator, a Senior Policy and M&E 
Manager and Assistant, a Financial Manager, a Procurement and Contract Manager, a Senior Climate 
Change Adaptation and Mitigation Specialist, two Manager, an Infrastructure Manager, One Senior 
Value Chain/Agri-Business Expert with two others, a Rural Financial Services specialist, a 
gender/vulnerability/social inclusion specialist, a Geographic Information System specialist, other 
professional and support staff identified in the design phase of the Programme required for the 
implementation of the Programme. The responsibilities of each position shall be detailed in the 
Programme Implementation Manual.  
The PCU staff shall be hired by the Lead Programme Agency competitively and in accordance with 
criteria and procedures to be developed in agreement with the Fund. The appointment of such 
personnel shall have IFAD’s prior no objection.  
Roles of Regional and District Departments of Agriculture 
The Decentralized Departments of Agriculture at the Regional and District levels will play a major role 
in the implementation of the Project.  The Regional Departments of Agriculture will designate a senior 
officer, not below the rank of an Assistant Director as focal point for the Project, who shall coordinate 
the implementation of project activities in the selected districts in the Region.  The PCU will work 
closely with the Regional focal point to oversee and backstop the activities of the districts. The 
Regional offices will work with other implementing partners at the regional level such as the Business 
Resource Centers and other departments to ensure effective implementation of the project. They will 
be responsible for preparing the Regional Workplan and Budget, backstopping the districts in training 
and monitoring and reporting on progress of Project to the PCU.  
The District Director of Agriculture will be responsible for the implementation of the Project at the 
district level. With the guidance of experts from the PCU and other consultants, the AEAs will work 
closely with the Business Advisory Centers to identify and mobilize qualified Rural Institutions such as 
the Farmer Based Organizations, Cooperatives and faith-based organization and train them to enable 
them access project facilities.  The AEAS will also provide extension services to the clients. The PCU 
and business development facilitators will assist the Department of Agriculture in their work. 
39 
The Business Resource Center will be responsible for providing business development advisory 
services to clients of the project that have graduated from matching grants to quality for Blended 
Finance Facility.  They shall also identify and assist small and medium scale enterprises in the project 
areas who qualify for the BFF to prepare business plans with integration of climate change and 
adaptation and mitigation measures.  
The Programme will sign MoUs with the RDAs, DDAs, BACs and BRCs that stipulate key responsibilities 
and deliverables by all parties in the district and the region. If required, performance-based contracts 
with specialized consultants, trainers and service providers will be signed.  
B. Implementation of Components 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure. The expected 
outcome is: Improved and sustainable livelihoods in target areas supported by strengthened rural 
institutions and improved socioeconomic infrastructures. This component is concentrated on 
investing in “public goods” within and for the benefit of the targeted 90,000 beneficiaries in the 
project areas. 
Subcomponent 1.1 Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households  
The District Department of Agriculture with the support of a service provider will identify the rural 
institutions comprising farmer-based organizations, cooperatives and faith-based organizations that 
included the targeted clients such as women, youth and PWDs. The targeted vulnerable people could 
also be individuals identified who qualify for the project services.  
Through regional and district level consultations facilitated by the PCU, project target districts will be 
selected starting with three regions in the first phase.  This will be followed by identification of 
targeted groups and clusters taking into consideration the value chains promoted, food security status, 
climate risk related to land degradation and unstainable farming practices, proximity of existing 
financial institutions.  
Three types of groups will be identified in each district and cluster: (i) rural institutions including 
farmer-based organizations, cooperatives, village loans and savings Associations, faith-based 
organizations (the project with start with existing institutions (ii) Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) of characterized by the number of people employed57 (iii) Vulnerable groups comprising 
poor people and PWDs.  
In each selected district, the project will identify and form beneficiary clusters through a screening of 
NRM and socioeconomic conditions and mobilisation meetings at village level. Where interest is 
strong and the community leadership decides to commit to PROSPER, a cluster committee will be 
established to manage implementation. 
The Departments of Agriculture with the support of service providers will facilitate the interactive 
development of a community-driven Cluster Plan (CP). which will set out local priorities for communal 
socioeconomic investments and identify potential production and related business opportunities that 
may be realized by groups and enterprises under Component 2 and/or with community resources. 
The CP will inform the agenda for PROSPER action in each location.  
Training, skills development and related demonstrations will be delivered by district extension 
services backed up by MoFA technical departments and other line ministries as well as technical 
assistance. In preparation for the work, the project will refresh the technical skills of public service 
frontline field staff, reorientated to a modern business approach to farming.  
Cluster-level surveys will identify groups, both pre-existing and potential, interested in and likely to 
benefit from the capacity building efforts. Group training on organisational capacity will be gender 
sensitive with a special focus on women, youth and PWD. Financial literacy, orderly record keeping 
and the basics of business conduct will be addressed to complement instruction on the technical 
aspects of agronomy. 
57 Micro (3 employees), Small (10employees), Medium (not exceed 20 employees)  
40 
The District Directorates of Agriculture will lead an extension campaign organised around climate-
smart demonstrations and practical training sessions on topics such as conservation agriculture, 
agronomical practices and “farming as a business” tailored to the local agroecological conditions and 
main value chains in the cluster. Emphasis will be placed on the need for a marketing plan for every 
planting: ‘production with a purpose’. An estimated 4,000 RIs and enterprises will be trained over the 
life of PROSPER. 
The District Departments of Agriculture together with other relevant decentralized departments at 
the district and regional levels will deliver an inclusive community-wide nutrition and healthy diet 
initiative to benefit all households, in sync with the promotion of nutrition-sensitive farming and 
vegetable cultivation. The action will start with a Participatory Needs Assessment in each target 
community and entail training on household (HH) methodologies and financial literacy for up to 
2,400 HH. The Gender Action Learning System (GALS) will be introduced to enhance Gender Equality 
and Women’s Empowerment (GEWE) in PROSPER. At the centre of the activity will be a nutrition 
education programme at the HH level delivered through care groups by peers which will entail 
demonstration of backyard kitchen gardens for healthy diversified diets, dedicated training on post-
harvest management, nutrition education and SBCC for communities. 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure  
Identification of potential investments will be part of the cluster plan and will be the responsibility of 
the Cluster level committee in collaboration with the District Assembly. The Committee will follow an 
eligibility criterion to identify the potential investments that will serve agribusiness interests. The 
selection proposed by the DA and validated by the Committee should be included in the DA 
Consolidated Plan and Budget.  
The public goods identified through the cluster planning process shall comprise three types 
complementary types of climate-resilient socioeconomic infrastructure: Off-farm/watershed works 
and hazard mitigation measures; Feeder roads and farm tracks; and Communal social infrastructure 
For off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation measures, the DA will apply eligibility criteria of 
PROSPER. Selection criteria must include but not limited to the following: (i) investments that are 
required to develop Programme intervention sites; (ii) environmental impacts that can be mitigated at 
an affordable cost. The Project will procure consultancy services for the design and supervision of 
works, and a contractor for works. The communal infrastructures may comprise soil and water 
conservation structures, such as contour bunds, reforestation and shelterbelts, bench terraces, tied 
ridges, water harvesting and storage ponds, as well as climate change mitigation measures. The 
District Assembly will undertake all procedures as appropriate to acquire/lease any land needed for 
construction. 
The feeder roads and farm tracks will also be identified and included in the cluster plan. PROSPER 
envisages expanding and rehabilitating strategic road networks (feeder roads and farm tracks, 
culverts and small bridges). 
The PCU will procure consultancy services for design and supervision of the water management 
schemes and a contractor for works. After recruitment, training of contractors will be ensured by PCU 
and its implementing partners (GIDA, etc..). The environmental management plan will be produced by 
the PCU, EPA and GHS. 
Agreements will be reached between the District Assemblies and the cluster leadership for the 
management of infrastructure interventions by various community gender balanced committees, 
building on previous local norms and the organisation training in Subcomponent 1.1. The 
infrastructure for natural resources remediation and environmental management will be managed by 
Natural Resources Committees, to be established under the project. Water harvesting, water supply 
and waste systems will be managed by Water and Sanitation Management Teams, a statutorily 
recognised committee operating under the auspices of each District Assembly Works Department. 
The Department of Feeder Roads is the statutory body responsible for the maintenance of feeder 
roads and farm tracks. 
41 
Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development.  
This subcomponent comprises three activities. Value chain analysis, Promotion of linkages between 
producers and value chain actors and the development of business plans.  
The District Department of Agriculture supported by consultants recruited by the Project will conduct 
chains analysis within each cluster to assess the status and characteristics and map the VC actors 
close to the target communities,  
It is estimated that 50% of the rural institutions who undergo the capacity building process in 
component 1 will graduate to component 2.  These groups will be handed over to the Business 
Resource Centers who with the support of the Business Advisory Centers and the District 
Departments of Agriculture will engage with VC actors in each participating district with an 
information-gathering and analysis exercise to promote linkages between producers and value chain 
actors. is aimed at generating enduring partnerships between producers engaged in climate-resilient 
farming and larger-scale agribusinesses within locally appropriate forms of robust and equitable 
contract relationships in the private sector.  
The marginalized poorer and most vulnerable rural institutions and MSMEs progressing from 
Component 1will be exposed to training sessions backed up by demonstrations and events at the 
cluster level on climate risk mitigation, resilience and integration into business plans and on VC 
linkages and green bankable propositions, with particular attention to potential enterprises dedicated 
to women, youth and PWDs. Meetings will raise awareness, share information, bring together 
potential partners, and conclude RI and MSME agreements with VC actors. These beneficiaries will be 
assisted by the BACs in the preparation of Basic Business Plans to be considered for financing by the 
project’s Matching Grant scheme. 
The stronger and better-established RIs and MSMEs associated with local VC actors/potential partners 
will be offered a more advanced version of the trainings and demonstrations by the BRCs and District 
Departments of Agriculture, leading to the establishment of cluster-level business partnerships in 
each target district. At the same time, information will be shared with standalone MSMEs not seeking 
partners. These beneficiaries will be assisted by the BRCs in the preparation of Advanced Business 
Plans (ABPs) to be submitted to the Blended Finance Facility. Development of business plans, is the 
generation of a sound, achievable and fully costed plan appropriate to the resources and prospects of 
each concerned entity. 
For the less developed emergent groups and enterprises, a realistic BBP will be prepared with the 
support of BRCs, BACs, DDAs and PFIs as available. Each BBP should include inputs, simple tools and 
equipment, and whatever other cost items required, set against a realistic estimate of returns. It 
should be green in design and address effectively climate and NRM degradation risks and impacts. 
BBPs could be developed by individual or multiple RIs with the prerequisites of the presence of formal 
market linkages (supported by the project or pre-existing) and an adequate level of savings. A special 
BBP window will be available for MSMEs, (up to nine employees). The BBPs will be evaluated by an 
independent agent/service provider and, if acceptable, used to support a request for a Matching 
Grant. 
With each private enterprise and mature RI, the project will provide professional support through 
technical assistance and the BACs/BRCs in preparing and realising an ABP, including the facilitation of 
access to commercial finance through the Blended Finance Facility, (see Subcomponent 2.2). An ABP 
may include working capital as well as capital items such as inputs, mills, machinery, vehicles, tools, 
equipment and minor infrastructure. Groups of RIs in association with an agribusiness/VC actor as 
well as standalone RIs and MSMEs (up to 20 employees) are eligible for submission of an ABP. As for 
the BBPs, each ABP should be green in design and address effectively the climate change challenges 
and NRM degradation risks. 
For PROSPER, the imperative is to promote and expand businesses operating an aggregator-primary 
producer model that is prepared to engage with the IFAD target producer groups and related 
enterprises to become their interface with the market. Such businesses are likely to comprise a 
42 
substantial VC actor led by an entrepreneur “driver” and multiple producer groups under contract, all 
active in the private sector. The project is also geared to preparing and facilitating the ABPs of larger 
standalone MSMEs. 
Subcomponent 2.2 Access to rural financial services.  
PROSPER financial services are structured around three instruments appropriate to the various 
situations prevailing in rural areas as regard capacities and professionalization: (1) Saving and Loan 
Groups (VSLA model) for sparking the saving habit within communities; (2) a Matching Grant (MG) 
fund for capitalizing RIs that engage in commercial agriculture; and (3) a Blended Finance Facility 
(BFF) operated as a refinancing facility (RF) by PFIs to ensure sustainable access to financial services.  
Access to the financial instruments under PROPER will be based on the financial and managerial 
capacities of the targeted clients.  Based on an initial assessment of the maturity of the targeted 
groups at project inception, (Component 1.1), Groups will be evaluated against their level of 
capitalization, skills in financial management and ability to establish business agreements with VC 
actors such as traders and processors. The groups will be categorized into three tiers depending on 
their maturity level (tier 1 for the weakest to tier 3 for the most advanced). This evaluation will be 
instrumental in proper targeting and sequencing to access the different financial services. 
Savings mobilization: The DDAs, supported by BACs and with TA services will support the creation and 
strengthening of Savings and Credit Groups, based on the VSLA model that different IFAD and other 
projects have been using with success.58 Groups will be identified through the initial profiling process. 
PROSPER will favour groups with members carrying out the same activities, such as production, 
trading and processing. 
VSLA members will be trained in financial literacy and banking activity management. Savings 
deposited will constitute an initial capital that will be leveraged as counterpart contribution in 
subsequent investment in equipment on credit with the support of the project. Participating PFIs will 
be trained in product development to incentivise groups to keep saving. PROSPER will help to 
create/strengthen 4,000 Village Saving and Loan Groups in the targeted regions. After the period of 
one year, groups will be assessed on their level of savings, member participation and commitment to 
developing business activities. The best rated groups will graduate to preparing a Basic Business Plan 
(BBP, under Subcomponent 2.1) and benefiting from the Matching Grant fund. 
Matching Grants: The matching grant will be administered by the Project. Three MG windows are 
proposed: RIs; MSMEs; and Nutrition and other poverty initiatives. The level of grant/contribution 
required will vary according to the VC and the beneficiaries targeted. For women groups, youth 
groups and PWD targeted under the “Nutrition Window”, no BBP will be required for small income-
generating schemes focused on promoting diversification towards nutrition and food security, (for 
example, kitchen gardens). The BACs and BRCs will support the RIs in preparing their BBPs which will 
be evaluated by independent agent or service providers and successful passed onto the project for 
disbursement into the Group members Accounts. RIs will be assessed against the realization of their 
BBPs and capacity to expand business with their offtaker partner. The best rated RIs will qualify to 
graduate with the project towards preparing an ABP (under Subcomponent 2.1) and access to an 
affordable loan from PFIs through the BFF. It is expected that 30% of the MG recipients will graduate 
to BFF financing during the project timeline.   
Criteria for selecting Beneficiaries for matching grant (i) FBO has 20-25 members (ii) 50% should have 
one hectare (iii) 50% women (iv) 40% youth (v) 10% PWD (vi) poverty? 
Individual MSMEs, as startups or existing ones also qualify for MG. These could be an 
aggregator/offtaker or any agricultural enterprise supporting vulnerable groups already trained in 
component 1 and having benefited from the MG. 
58 CARE has also had successful experience in developing the concept for women in Ghana. 
43 
Blended Finance Facility (BFF). The BFF will develop, test and rollout green financial products to 
finance ABPs by the tier 3 groups (RIs and MSMEs) that have the potential to develop further 
commercial agriculture with climate mitigation and adaptation. The BFF credit at a concessional rate 
financing will be directed only to qualified PROSPER RIs and MSMEs who present ABPs with climate 
mitigation and adaptation interventions. The BRCs with the involvement of the Participating Financial 
Institutions will be responsible for supporting the selected RIs and MSMEs within the same cluster 
and along the same VC to develop and finance an ABP, which could include support to the VC actor as 
needed. The first group of beneficiaries RIs will benefit from mitigation measures. A cash contribution 
of minimum 25% of the cost of the BP will be required from the RIs, including a contribution from the 
partner offtaker, the loan being limited to the remaining 75%. The 2nd group of beneficiaries will get 
concessional loan of 50%, 10% cash and 40% in kind.  Targeting of project vulnerable groups will be 
less strict in this case.   
The 3rd group of beneficiaries for BFF window will be for ABPs developed by small enterprises, (up to 
20 employees). Lending to such enterprises must have evidence the job opportunities will be created 
for project targeted constituents i,e 40% women, 50% youth and 5% PWDs .  The ABPs will be 
submitted to the Bank and will be evaluated based on the collateral of the value chain driver’s credit.  
The BFF will operate as a refinancing facility (RF) that will continue beyond PROSPER closure to 
provide sustainable access to affordable finance for groups to maintain and develop their business 
activities with focus on climate mitigation and adaptation in the future. 
The BFF will be developed and established at and managed by the ARB Apex Bank (The Investment 
Fund Manager) by an external expert sourced by PROSPER The Apex Bank will provide wholesale 
liquidity on concessional terms to its RBC members and other interested retail financial institutions 
operating with reasonable outreach in the PROSPER project area, for on-lending for smallholder 
agricultural production and MSMEs development. The Apex Bank rely on its due diligence processes 
to select its partner retail RCBs and other qualified FIs. This concessional financing arrangement will 
leverage existing derisking tools, including GIRSAL’s partial credit guarantee, GAIP’s smallholder 
insurance and GCX market access and warehouse receipt systems. 
To contribute to mitigating the risk averseness of participating RCBs and other FIs, PROSPER will 
contribute 50% of the premium to be paid by these FIs to the GIRSAL partial credit guarantee fund for 
a coverage of up to 75% loss.59 In addition, to encourage beneficiaries to take up high value but risky 
climate mitigation and adaptation interventions, PROSPER will contribute 50% of the insurance 
premium paid to GAIP.60 Among the multiple uses of the TA associated with the BFF, part will be used 
to address key bottlenecks, including the risk averse nature of FIs in Ghana to finance smallholder 
agriculture, lack of affordable liquidity in the banks and unaffordable interest rates for smallholder 
producers.. At inception, BFF PROSPER will be linked with BFF AAFORD. 
Partner RCBs and other interested retail FIs selected to channel BFF financing to beneficiaries will 
have to commit to offering an affordable single digit interest rate. This single digit rate will be 
determined and negotiated with the project, while ensuring a reasonable return and sustainability to 
the participating RCBs and other interested participating retail FIs. IGREENFIN technical assistance to 
RCB staff will be deployed by PROSPER towards climate change capacity building and financial product 
development. 
Subcomponent 3.1 Project management. PROSPER will be facilitated by an implementation support 
structure embedded at the Directorate of Extension Services of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
providing liaison and oversight to the PCU located at the project implementation area.  
The PCU will be responsible for the day-to-day implementation of the Project, providing financial 
project management, reporting and accounting, proactive knowledge management and learning 
59 The premium is current estimated at 1% of loan portfolio to PROSPER clients. 
60 Details of the premium determination will be worked out in time for the beneficiaries to access 
interest-bearing resources. 
44 
activities, and monitoring and evaluation functions. Details are set out in section Ka below and in the 
PIM. 
Project Financing. PROSPER will have significant involvement of Government staff in the 
implementation, from national through the DAES, the regional level through the Regional 
Departments of Agriculture and the district level, through the District Departments of Agriculture.  
The BACs at the District Assemblies and other related decentralized MDAs will also be involved.  
PROSPER will also be co-financed by in-kind contribution by beneficiaries and their own contribution 
through the matching grants.   
Subcomponent 3.2 Policy engagement. IFAD will participate in the Agriculture Sector Working Group 
(ASWG) and other working groups, Joint Sector Reviews and Government-led processes with 
Development Partners and the UN system to contribute to the harmonisation of the sectoral policy 
agenda. Salient sectoral policy issues identified during implementation will be brought to the 
attention of GoG. The project will provide policy advice to MoFA if and when requested and 
commission ad hoc studies on policy issues related to the IFAD Ghana COSOP and the scope of 
PROSPER. 
Top of the agenda for policy engagement is likely to be the policy ramifications of the large-scale trial 
of the new financial sector product “climate/green finance” as a possible development instrument in 
Ghana in coping with climate change. There are potential policy alternatives for public-private 
partnerships to invest in an ambitious NR recovery and reconstruction programme of the natural 
resource base. Climate/ green finance could leverage massive public investment in adaptation and 
mitigation if a conducive policy framework were devised. 
Relationship between the GCF/IGREENFIN and Apex Bank 
GCF/IGREENFIN, the climate finance instrument being implemented under PROSPER is being 
implemented in 5 countries. Through selective processes, ARB Apex Bank has been selected as a Fund 
Manager to manage the pool resources under the BFF.  ARB Apex is acceptable to IFAD because they 
have been involved in previous IFAD project.  
Funds flow: The GCF/IGREENFIN funds will flow to IFAD and then to PROSPER PCU.  From there, it will 
flow to the ARB APEX Bank as a wholesale bank which will then flow to PFIs to be disbursed to project 
beneficiaries including the smallholder farmers, cooperatives, Farmer Based Organizations and 
MSMEs.   
The Project will however disburse directly the MG component of the GCF to RIs and the BFF 
component directly to MSMES.  
Reporting: The RFIs will report to ARB Apex Bank, who will consolidate and report to PROPER PCU and 
the PCU will report to IFAD with copies to the GCF Regional Steering Committee and the Regional 
Coordinating Committee. 
ARB Apex Bank will establish a PIU. The PIU shall comprise a Financial Controller to oversee funds 
flows, budgeting, internal control and reporting, an Accountant for Bookkeeping and preparing 
financial reports and one Financial Technical Expert (FTE) for consolidation of other accounting and 
financial management tasks performed elsewhere at the bank in service of IGREENFIN.*Depending on 
each Bank’s internal ressources, these staff can be financed by the project in part or in full. 
FM Duties and Responsibilities - Bank PIU 
Staff: Capacity building of RFIs in credit management with special reference to credit appraisal, 
preparation of projected cashflow, loan scheduling and group loan management; annual performance 
evaluation of bank PIU staff. 
Budget: Prepare bank PIU’s annual budget in line with the AWPB process cascaded by Baseline PIU;  
Funds Flow: Mobilising funds from Baseline PCU through funds replenishment process. Disbursement, 
performance evaluation and reporting on IGREENFIN proceeds received; 
Internal Control: Monitor operations of RFIs and beneficiaries to ensure prudent management of 
disbursed funds; Ensure compliance with the terms of the MOU between the Banks and Baseline 
PCUs and between the bank and its retailers.  
45 
Accounting Systems: Ensure that Bank PIU accounting software, processes and procedures are 
adequate to support the accounting and reporting disclosure requirements; 
Reporting: Collection, review and consolidation of performance reports from beneficiaries and 
retailers; preparation of financial reports in line with the provisions on reporting in the IFAD FA; 
External Audit: Ensure that a standalone external audit of the financial statements of the Bank PCU is 
carried out and a report submitted to the Baseline PCU.  
Financial Management Duties and Responsibilities – PROSPER PCU 
Staffing: Capacity building of Bank PIU staff in IFAD procedures, policies and ways of working; 
Budgeting: Support Bank PIUs in the preparation of their annual budget, budget control; Submission 
of a consolidated annual work plan and budget that will be approved by IFAD and the National 
Steering Committee.  
Funds Flow: Submission of request for replenishment of IGREENFIN proceeds via the WA process; 
review and approval of the bank PIU requests for funds and replenishment of IGREENFIN loan and 
grant proceeds to dedicated bank accounts at the Bank PIUs; 
Internal Control: Monitoring and evaluation of the compliance, application and performance of the 
loan and grant proceeds; 
Accounting Systems: Performance of routine end-to-end back office accounting and financial 
management activities for IGREENFIN; 
Reporting: Review of Bank PIU financial reports for compliance with quality and disclosure 
requirements, ensuring timeliness in submission and completeness; Preparation of country financial 
reports for submission to the IFAD RCU and steering committee; 
External Audit: Reviewing and support in the implementation of recommendations from various 
IGREENFIN assurance review recommendations agreed at the level of the bank and Baseline PCU; 
46 
Annex 7. Marketing and selected commodities value chains 
SUB COMPONENT 2.1 
SECTION 1: MAIZE VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
Maize is regarded as the most important cereal crop on the domestic market in Ghana and it is one of 
the largest agricultural commodities in terms of production volume. It accounts for 3.3% of total 
agricultural production volume and about 65% of cereal output in Ghana, howbeit, with a reported 
post-harvest loss between 5% and 70%. Current yield rate stands at about 2.73 tons per hectare, an 
increase from 2.42 tons per hectare in 2019, and has been increasing for the last three years. In terms 
of its uses, maize is an important and major raw material in the production of poultry feed as well as a 
substitute for the brewing industry. 
Status of the crop/produce 
Maize production recorded a 4-year CAGR of about 8.05% from the year 2015 to 2018, the highest 
among the major crops cultivated in Ghana. Trend analysis of maize production in Ghana reveals a 
general upward trend, however the period between 2013 and 2017 saw a flattening of the curve, 
indicating little or no growth in maize production within this period. However, the period between 
2015 and 2018 saw a clear increasing trend, perhaps due to the government flagship program of PFJ 
and RFJ, which basically subsidized critical imports for the cultivation of maize and other crops. 
Interestingly, even the fall army worm (FAW) infestation could not curtail the growth of maize 
production within this period. From the trend, 2019 saw a decrease in maize production by about 9% 
compared to production level in 2018. 
c
i
r
t
e
M
f
o
s
n
o
i
l
l
i
M
n
I
s
n
o
T
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Crop systems and characterization of producers 
In Ghana, maize is mainly cultivated under traditional production methods and rain-fed conditions. 
Average yield of maize for the year 2019 was about 2.42 MT/ha of a potential yield of 5.5 MT/ha, 
rising to about 2.73 MT/ha in 2020. Maize is grown throughout Ghana; however, the leading 
producing areas are mainly in the middle- (Bono East, Bono, Ahafo, Eastern, and Ashanti regions) 
where about 84% of maize is grown, with the remaining 16% being grown in the northern regions of 
Ghana (Northern, Northeast, Savannahh, Upper East, and Upper West). While the middle belt does 
two cycles of maize per year, the northern belt does only one cycle in a year. Field report reveals that 
maize from the latter destination is normally free from aflatoxins because of extensive dry season to 
allow for natural sun drying. As a result, maize grains from these areas are desired for the breweries 
and food processing entities. Maize from the middle belt (especially in the major season), however, 
needs mechanical drying to be at the highest quality desired by both industrial and domestic users. 
Production 
Maize production is predominantly under rainfed cultivation with no irrigation. 
Location: Upper East – Tumu 
47 
The agro-ecological zones for maize cultivation in Ghana can be grouped into four main zones with 
differing system of maize cultivation. However, the major zones for maize cultivation are those 
located in the middle belt, (forest zone, and transition zone) and the northern belt (Guinea 
Savannahh). 
• Coastal Savannahh zone: 
The coastal Savannahh zone comprises a narrow belt of Savannahh that runs along the coast and 
widens towards the east side of Ghana. Maize mostly intercropped with cassava are grown by 
farmers. This zone experiences bimodally distributed annual rainfall totaling around 800 mm, and 
maize planting normally begins at onset of the major rainy season (March or April). Low productivity 
has been reported due to the light soil texture and low fertility. Areas include, Central, Accra, Volta, 
Oti. 
• Forest zone: 
The forest zone lies down just inland the coastal Savannahh. Most of Ghana’s forest is semi-
deciduous, with a small area of high rain forest in the South-Western part of the country close to the 
border with Côte d’Ivoire. The cultivated maize is mostly intercropped with cassava, plantain, and 
cocoyam. The annual rainfall averaging about 1,500 mm is observed, and maize is planted both in the 
major and minor rainy seasons (March and September respectively). Areas typically include, Bono, 
Ahafo, Eastern, and Volta. 
• Transition zone: 
The forest zone gradually gives way to the transition zone towards the Northern part of Ghana. This 
zone is an important area for commercial grain production, and is characterized by deep, friable soils, 
and the relatively sparse tree cover allowing for progressive cultivation. Annual rainfall averaging 
about 1,300 mm is bimodally distributed. Maize cultivation is done both in the major and minor rainy 
seasons mostly as a monocrop or intercrop. Areas under this zone include, North of Ashanti, Bono 
East, and Oti. 
• Guinea Savannahh zone: 
Most of the lands in the Northern part of Ghana are in this zone. There is a single season of rain per 
year averaging 1,100 mm. Although sorghum and millet are the predominant cereals, maize is equally 
grown. Maize can be intercropped with legumes and other crops. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
Small holder farmers: The total maize production in Ghana is done by about 70% of small holder 
framers. These are made up of both peasant and commercial farmers who cultivate maize in small 
quantities. The difference here is that the peasants concentrate on cultivating maize mainly for 
personal and domestic uses, while commercial farmers cultivate for sale to other actors along the 
value chain. They are also cases where farmers cultivate maize for both reasons. They are commercial 
farmers because they farm with the objective of making profit at the end of the season and that 
informs the approach to farming. The approach to ensuring farmer welfare is the formation of Farmer 
Based Organizations (FBOs) to give small holder farmers one voice and strength in negotiations as 
well as accessing market and finance. However, there are very few properly registered and 
administered FBOs in the middle and northern belts. The MoFA websites has record of only ten maize 
(FBOs) in the middle and norther belts, excluding Eastern region, which has about twenty-seven (27) 
maize based FBOs. 
Women are also landowners and do production as well. Women do more of the planting, harvesting, 
and threshing, sometimes pest control (spraying). 
Nucleus farmers: these include large scale farmers who cultivate maize. Most of them may typically 
have small-holder farmers that they work with to help them meet grain orders. 
48 
Input Providers: Inputs form most of the cost component in maize cultivation. Inputs come in the 
form of seeds, fertilizers, agro-chemicals, among others. With respect to seed, farmers use both 
hybrid and OPV seeds. Hybrid seeds are provided through Government sources and some nucleus 
farmers, while different OPV seeds are obtained from local seed sources. The situation on the ground 
is that hybrid seeds are not regularly obtained since they are imported. Again, hybrid seeds sold in per 
acre packages; and are calibrated based on using planters. However, farmers use manual planting, 
hence are not able to achieve the recommended plant density Some actors such as Agromite source 
for hybrid seed from outside Ghana with permission of the government while others make use of 
available seed companies in Ghana. Field report revealed that farmers, especially those in the middle 
belt worry of the incidence of armyworm against ineffective pest control chemicals. According to 
them, the preferred insecticide (Attack) is not readily available. 
Mechanization Providers: Current demand of mechanization services by small holder farmers is 
primarily focused on land preparation services, especially plowing. The services are provided by two 
main groups, nucleus farmers and agriculture mechanization service businesses. Players such as 
Agromite Limited, provides other mechanization services such as harvesting, and post-harvest 
services to small holder farmers and some other nucleus farmers and recover their monies through 
in-kind produce at the end of harvest. Major constraint in this segment of the value chain is low 
operational scale due to machinery being idle for long periods within the year and being needed at 
specific times in the crop calendar within specific locations. This affects profitability of investment. 
With such a low operational scale, it is essential to consider various options for introducing low-cost, 
small tractors suited to the current farming scale in the country. Also, a used tractor model is one of 
the options available for industry players to consider. Tractor-hire services can play an important role 
in transforming smallholder maize production. Another solution is to move machinery between the 
northern and middle belt because of differing crop calendars of the two zones, howbeit, it may be 
only viable in large scale. 
Other challenges include inadequate tractor services for land preparation (ploughing, harrowing) 
against a growing demand for tractors for land preparation services during peak times in the season. 
Again, high competition for tractors, especially, in the middle belt. For instance, tractors from the 
northern belt comes to augment what is in the middle belt, but they come late in the season, delaying 
planting. 
Aggregation 
Maize aggregators come in the form of small, medium, and large aggregators. Large and medium 
aggregators are usually private entities such as Onuado farms, who typically also engage in 
cultivation. The following situations typically exist with such aggregators. 
Use own resources with limited bank loan or other financing facilities. 
Have sub-aggregators at the community level who do the initial bulking from the farmers. 
Provide inputs and land preparation services to small holder farmers who are associated with them 
Sometimes also provide loans to small holder farmers for their livelihood needs, and recovered in-
kind (maize produce) 
Aggregator supplies maize to larger buyers in Kumasi, Accra, Sunyani 
Operates warehouse for storage 
Require several equipment to be able to service farmers adequately. These include tractors and 
implements, planters, threshers, among others. 
Market Opportunities 
The maize value chain has strong market linkages right from the upstream to the downstream. At the 
upstream of the value chain, maize cultivation creates ready market for the input industry such as 
fertilizer producers and marketers, agro-chemicals, and seeds. Inputs alone form about 42% of maize 
49 
production. This is followed by harvesting activities, and post harvesting activities with forming about 
17% each of the production of maize. 
Figure 1: Production cost analysis of maize 
Cost Analysis of Maize Cultivation per Acre
17%
10%
9%
17%
6%
42%
Land preparation
Inputs
Other labour
Harvesting
Planting
Post harvest
Furthermore, there are series of opportunities created at the downstream segment of the maize 
value chain. These opportunities are in aggregation, animal feed processing, processing of maize grits 
for the brewery industry. 
Main challenges of the maize value chain are inadequate mechanization to improve efficiency in 
cultivation, Low quality input such as fertilizer, inadequate storage space at appropriate areas and 
changing rainfall patterns 
1. Aggregation- The maize market is made of the formal and informal markets. The formal markets 
include formal maize aggregating companies who source for maize, clean and dry for onward sales to 
the industrial process in the beverage, poultry, and other food industries. These aggregators often 
engage in production themselves while also organizing small holder farmers. The informal market 
includes the middlemen and women who source for maize in the major maize markets. 
2. Processing and utilization of maize represents up to 20% to 25% of the total maize marketed in 
Ghana, as follows.  
1. Breweries are important players in the Ghana maize market. Usually, sorghum is preferred to maize 
in brewing, but breweries substitute maize if attainable at a competitive price. The general rule of 
thumb is that maize grits price of US$0.80/kg is the highest amount at which brewers consider 
substituting grits for sorghum.  
2. The poultry industry is another important player in the maize market in Ghana. According to the 
latest records about 250,000 metric tons of maize is used for poultry feed annually in Ghana (FAO 
2012). The poultry industry therefore provides a great opportunity for maize production in Ghana. 
Potential for Value Creation 
The post-harvest economy in the maize value chain is large and has a huge potential. There are 
opportunities for investment in warehousing infrastructure at relevant locations, drying facilities, 
cleaning facilities, haulage, haulage insurance, semi-processing of maize into maize grits, processing 
of maize into animal feed, and domestic use forming a core part of the cuisine of northern Ghana. 
SMEs and Job Creation 
Small and medium scale enterprises are into input provision, cultivation, the provision of IT services, 
aggregation, transportation, warehousing, insurance, semi-processing, and processing of maize. This 
50 
does create a good number of jobs for the youth and has the potential to further create a great 
number of both direct and indirect jobs for the youth. 
Main constraints and challenge 
1. Inadequate mechanization to improve efficiency in cultivation: For instance, Agromite Limited is 
one of the most resourceful Agro-SMEs in the Sisala East and West zones, however, it is only able to 
provide only 15% mechanization coverage for its 6000 acres production  
2. Low quality input such as fertilizer: Farmers indicated that they received low quality fertilizers 
which led to bad yield for many of them. In the same vein, others testified that they bought quality 
fertilizer brands and saw about a 100% increase in their yield. 
3. Inadequate storage space at appropriate areas. 
4. Changing rainfall patterns 
5. Farmers in the middle belt revealed that transportation of produce from farm to market is a 
challenge due to competing demands on KIA trucks and of the bad farm roads. 
Women/youths/PWD 
Potential for inclusion and job creation 
Participation of women in maize cultivation is relatively lower compared to men, and women 
participation in other related crops such as soya. Field reports reveal about 20% women participation 
in maize cultivation in the northern belt. However, maize cultivation among women in the middle belt 
is slightly higher, about 25%, compared to the northern belt. One of the reasons boils down to land 
tenure system, which is more flexible in the middle belt as against the northern belt. 
Aggregation especially within the informal markets serves as an opportunity for women to participate 
in and out of the zone under consideration. A typical example of such opportunity is the largely 
untapped potential of the maize traders at Ejura, who are predominantly women. Currently, the 
following situations persist for these women. 
No benefit from any Government intervention and yet their working environment is in deplorable 
state.   
No proper place of storage of grain at the market. 
No credit for them to procure maize and store and expand their business. Sometimes when there is a 
glut, a lot of maize is wasted on the market due to lack of proper storage and inability to mob it and 
store. 
Absence of weights and measures is affecting their activities because they are unable to communicate 
standard prices across the markets they trade with.  
Consequently, what is needed is collaboration with these traders and others else where to have an 
arrangement where they are supported to handle grain trade in a more harmonized and coordinated 
manner including management of strategic stocks. 
Institutional Analysis and VC Management 
Farmers that work with Agromite are organized on community basis with leaders for each community 
level, who respond to field officers responsible for monitoring and supervising farmers. 
Climate and Potential Impact of Climate Change on Production Capacities 
Climate change has affected the rainfall pattern in Tumu and its surroundings. Farmers reported that 
the rains start later than the usual month of June and ends around the month of October. This has 
dire consequences on the yield and important post-harvest activities such as drying. 
Farmers in the middle belt equally reported of having observed changes in weather conditions that 
affect their production activities (inadequate and erratic rainfall pattern, high incidence of armyworm) 
51 
Nutrition and Food Security 
Maize remains an important part of Ghanaian cuisine, featuring in a range of delicacies by different 
groups of people in Ghana. Popular foods include porridge, banku, kenkey, among others. Increase in 
maize yield has positive impact on food security while decrease in maize yield could have dire 
consequence Quantitative Analysis 
on food security. 
Figure shows a typical  
Figure 2: Maize Crop Calendar in the Northern Belt of Ghana 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August  Sept  Oct 
Nov 
Northern belt (1st Cycle) 
Hiring of land 
Ploughing 
Planting 
Weed Control 1 
Fertilizer application 
Top dressing 
Weed control 2 
Harvesting 
Threshing 
Sales 
Table 2: Maize Crop Budget in the Northern Belt 
Crop Budget (Maize) 
unit 
qty per acre 
Land Rent 
Land preparation: 
  Harrowing 
Planting: 
Seeding and basal application 
Seed 
Weed control 1: 
 Broad spectrum Weedicide 
 Selective weedicide 
Spraying of broad spectrum weedicide 
Spraying selective weedicide 
Fertilizer application: 
fertilizer  (basal application) 
Fertilizer top dressing 
Harvesting cost 
Threshing 
Total production cost 
Revenue 
Gross margin 
Gross margin percentage 
acre 
acre 
acre 
1kg bag 
lts 
lts 
acre 
acre 
50kg bag 
acre 
acre 
acre 
1 
1 
1 
10 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
100 kg bags 
20 
52 
Unit price 
GH ȼ 
50 
Amount 
GH ȼ 
50 
120 
150 
30 
17 
30 
50 
50 
130 
135 
300 
300 
130 
120 
150 
300 
17 
30 
50 
50 
260 
135 
300 
300 
1,762 
2,600 
838 
32.23% 
Gross ROI 
47.56% 
SECTION 2: SOYA VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
Soybean was first introduced to the Gold Coast in 1910, one hundred and ten years ago. Since its first 
foray into Ghana, soy has gone through several development phases. Soy as a crop has comparative 
advantage over other crops in Ghana due to the following. 
Highly reliable and ready market for soybeans when compared with other crops  
Soybeans has a higher market price value than other traditional farm crops  
Due to its limited usage of fertilizer, its production cost is lower than other farm crops  
It is environmentally friendly due to its nitrogen fixing properties which replenishes the fertility of the 
soil  
There is no waste product with soybeans in the sense that most of its bi products are used for several 
things such as poultry feed, animal feed, composting etc.  
Status of the Crop/Produce 
Soybean production is driven by Ghanaian poultry industry. The size of Ghanaian commercial poultry 
production is pivotal to accurately assessing the volumes of imported soybean meal (and feed 
concentrates). Currently, soy production is increasing with more assured markets in Ghana. As shown 
in Figure 4, soy production dipped from 2011 to 2013 after a peak within the period of 2009 to 2011. 
In the period between 2013 and 2016, the soy production curve flattened with little or no movement. 
However, the period between 2016 and 2018 recovered significant increase in soy production, hitting 
a 10 year high in the year 2018.  
Figure 3: Trend of Soy Production in Ghana from 2008 to 2018 
t
M
'
0
0
0
200
150
100
50
0
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
This has been partly spurred by the activities of importers from Turkey, India, Denmark, Cote D’Ivoire, 
Burkina Faso, who buy in large quantities for exports to Europe and for their local industries. 
Aggregators in the soy value chain explain that this is due to the fact that very little chemicals and 
fertilizer are used in the cultivation of soy as such it makes Ghana’s soy near organic when test against 
the various chemical contents.  Local soybean production does have a slight advantage over imported 
beans, as smaller processors are practically unable to import beans to run through their facilities. The 
smaller quantities required by these processors must come as container trade, which comes at a 
higher logistical price than bulk shipments. Only Ghana Nuts, the largest processor, can utilize a larger 
bulk shipment. 
Production 
Location 
The agro-ecological zones for soya cultivation in Ghana can be grouped into two main zones with 
differing system of maize cultivation, namely the transition zone and the northern belt (Guinea 
Savannahh). 
53 
• Transition zone: 
The forest zone gradually gives way to the transition zone towards the Northern part of Ghana. This 
zone is an important area for commercial grain production, and is characterized by deep, friable soils, 
and the relatively sparse tree cover allowing for progressive cultivation. Annual rainfall averaging 
about 1,300 mm is bimodally distributed. Maize cultivation is done both in the major and minor rainy 
seasons mostly as a monocrop or intercrop. Areas under this zone include, North of Ashanti, Bono 
East, and Oti. 
• Guinea Savannahh zone: 
Most of the lands in the Northern part of Ghana are in this zone. There is a single season of rain per 
year averaging 1,100 mm. Although sorghum and millet are the predominant cereals, maize is equally 
grown. Maize can be intercropped with legumes and other crops. 
Tumu and its environs in the Sisala East and West have a single maximus rainfall regime which starts 
from June and ends in October. This is normally followed by a dry spell from November to May. The 
Sisala East and West districts are in the Guinea Savannahh vegetation zone where large portions of 
land are categorized as fairly and fairly to marginally suitable for the cultivation of crops including 
soya. The area present land highly suitable for extensive mechanized cultivation of export and food 
crops. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
Input Providers: There are currently two broad categories of input providers in the zone, namely, the 
providers under the government subsidy support and private input providers without government 
subsidy support. Some actors source for their seed from outside Ghana with permission of the 
government while others make use of available seed companies in Ghana. The most important inputs 
include fertilizers, herbicides, certified seeds, among others. 
Mechanization Providers: These players such as Agromite Limited, provides land preparation, 
harvesting, and post-harvest services to mostly small holder farmers and some other nucleus farmers. 
Such players recover their monies through in-kind produce at the end of harvest. 
Small holder farmers: these are commercial farmers who cultivate maize in small quantities. They are 
commercial farmers because they farm with the objective of making profit at the end of the season 
and that informs the approach to farming. 
Nucleus farmers: these include large scale farmers who cultivate maize. Most of them may typically 
have small-holder farmers that they work with to help them meet grain orders. 
Market opportunities 
Description 
The soya market is made of the formal and informal markets. The formal markets include formal soya 
aggregating companies who source for soya, clean and dry for onward sales to the industrial process 
in the poultry, and other food industries. These aggregators often engage in production themselves 
while also organizing small holder farmers. The informal market includes the middlemen and women 
who source for soya in the major maize markets. 
Potential for Value Creation 
The post-harvest economy in the soya value chain is large and has a huge potential. There are 
opportunities for investment in warehousing infrastructure at relevant locations, drying facilities, 
cleaning facilities, haulage, haulage insurance, processing of soya into animal feed. 
SMEs and job creation 
54 
Small and medium scale enterprises are into input provision, cultivation, the provision of IT services, 
aggregation, transportation, warehousing, insurance, semi-processing, and processing of soya. This 
does create a good number of jobs for the youth and has the potential to further create a great 
number of both direct and indirect jobs for the youth. 
Main Constraints and Challenge 
1. Inadequate mechanization to improve efficiency in cultivation. For instance, Agromite Limited is 
one of the most resourceful Agro-SMEs in the Sisala East and West zones, however, it is only able to 
provide only 15% mechanization coverage for its 6000 acres production  
2. Low quality input such as fertilizer. Farmers indicated that they received low quality fertilizers 
which led to bad yield for many of them. In the same vein, others testified that they bought quality 
fertilizer brands and saw about a 100% increase in their yield. 
3. Inadequate storage space at appropriate areas. 
4. Changing rainfall patterns 
Women/youths/PWD 
Women in the production areas, especially in the northern belt favor the cultivation of soya 
compared to maize as the latter is seen as a more masculine crop and the former a feminine crop. 
They explain that the agronomic practices in soya are seen to be less difficult compared to maize. In 
effect, at the small-holder level, as women dominate in soya cultivation, men dominate in maize 
cultivation. 
Climate and Potential Impact of CC on Production Capacities 
Farmers in the Tumu area report that the rainfall pattern has altered, shifting from the usual June to 
July ending, therefore affects planting times and by extension the yield and post-harvest activities. 
Quantitative analysis 
Figure 4: Soya Crop Calendar in the Northern Belt 
Soy Crop Calendar 
Crop Calendar (Soy) 
Northern belt (1st Cycle) 
Hiring of land 
ploughing 
Planting 
Pre-emergence weed control 
Fertilizer application 
Ammonia application 
Post - emergence weed control 
Harvesting 
Gathering 
Drying 
Bagging 
Sales 
Table 3: Soya Crop Budget 
Activity description 
Land preparation: 
  harrowing 
Certified Seed 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August  Sept  Oct 
Unit measure 
Qty 
Unit Price 
GH ȼ 
Amount 
GH ȼ 
acre 
kg 
1 
18 
120 
10 
120.00 
180.00 
55 
Seeding and basal application 
 Broad spectrum Weedicide 
 Selective weedicide 
Spraying of broad spectrum weedicide 
Spraying selective weedicide 
fertilizer  (basal application) 
Fertilizer top dressing 
Harvesting cost 
Threshing 
Production Cost 
Crop Insurance 
acre 
lts 
lts 
acre 
acre 
50kg bag 
acre 
acre 
acre 
% of prd 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
Total Production Cost 
Revenue 
Yield 
Price 
Total Revenue 
Gross Margin 
Gross Margin percent 
Proxy IRR 
100 kg bag 
100 kg bag 
100 kg bag 
15 
150 
15 
150 
17 
30 
50 
50 
130 
135 
300 
300 
5% 
180 
150.00 
17.00 
30.00 
50.00 
50.00 
260.00 
135.00 
300.00 
300.00 
1,592.00 
79.60 
1,671.60 
2,700 
1,028 
38% 
62% 
SECTION 3: CASHEW VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
The cashew nut industry offers tremendous developmental opportunity for Ghana as the industry is 
becoming a major avenue for job creation in the rural areas and a good source of foreign exchange 
for Ghana in general. Over the past decade, Ghana has seen increased interest in its cashew sector 
particularly by buyers from India, Vietnam, and Brazil. These companies buy in large quantities, export 
to their home countries for processing and onward export to the USA or EU and for their own home 
consumption. Currently the USA consumes about 55% of the world’s cashew exports, with India also 
being a major consumer. With declining raw cashew nut production in India and Vietnam, increasing 
attention is turned to West Africa where current production does not meet the total requirement of 
the Asian market. The conducive business environment provided by Ghana has seen entities from 
these countries setting up purchasing outlets in the country. 
The cashew value chain offers an important potential for employment and wealth creation, climate 
change mitigation through climate smart agriculture and the economic empowerment of women and 
youth, especially in vulnerable rural areas. 
Status of Crop 
Production of RCN has been on the rise in the last five years chiefly because of increase in cultivation 
and farm establishments. Cashew productivity in terms of kilogram per hectare has not seen same 
increase as production volume. Table 1 shows volumes of RCN and cashew productivity in Ghana 
from 2015 to 2020. 
Table 4:Cashew Production and Productivity in Ghana 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Production of RCN (MT) 
70,000 
75,000 
75,000 
110,000 
85,962* 
Productivity (kg/ha) 
Source: Comcashew 
958 
606 
600 
750 
- 
56 
Production 
Cashew is grown as a smallholder crop in Ghana and the commercial plantation sector is small. It is 
estimated that about 88-90% of cashew farms are owned by smallholders, with farms ranging in size 
from a minimum of 0.8 ha to 3.0 ha. Large plantations account for 12% of cashew farms and are 
between 4 ha and 40 ha. Most of small producers rely on family labor or hired labor, especially for 
weeding and harvesting activities. 
Farmers’ interest in cashew production relates to the availability of ready market due to the high 
import demand for raw cashew nuts by Asian processors. Cashew production generally forms the 
main source of income of producers in top producer regions (Ahafo, Bono, Bono East). The ongoing 
climatic condition changes have reportedly worsened other sources of income such as cocoa and food 
crop sales. 
The effective production acreage was estimated at 280,000 hectares in 2018, against 325,000 that 
are planted (86%). Some 125,000 producers would have been involved in cashew production in 2019. 
Cashew is invariably established among short-term intercrops and intercropping is pursued if space 
and soil fertility allow. The most common intercrops in both the Forest-Savannah Transition and 
Interior Savannah zones are yam, groundnut, soybean, and maize. Pineapples, pepper, and maize are 
the most important intercrops for cashew farming in the Coastal Savannah agroecological zone. 
Remarkably cashew is harvested during the lean season for all major staples (e.g., maize, yam, 
plantain, and millet). 
In Ghana, trees are relatively young. In 2018, national yield was recorded at 400 kg/hectare, down 
from 600 in 2016 and 2017 (yield was at 950 kg/hectare in 2015 according to GIZ). The regional yield 
ranges from 350 kg/ha to a top of 650kg/ha in the Forest-Savannah Transition zone. 
Location: 
The cashew tree grows with a minimum of attention and is easily cultivated. It is usually found up in 
regions where the annual rainfall is as low as 500 mm and as high as 3,750 mm. For maximum 
productivity, good soil and adequate moisture are essential. The tree has an extensive root system, 
which helps it to tolerate a wide range of moisture levels and soil types, but commercial production is 
only advisable in well-drained, sandy loam or red soils. 
Cashew is grown as a cash crop in four agro-ecological zones, namely the Interior Savannah (Guinea 
and Sudan Savannahs), Forest-Savannah Transition and Coastal Savannah. All regions of Ghana except 
for the Western/Western North Regions would be suitable for cashew production. Among these 
agroecological zones, Forest-Savannah Transition is regarded as the most suitable for cashew 
cultivation, while Coastal Savannah is considered only marginally suitable. 
Agro-
ecological 
zones 
Forest-
Savannah 
transition 
Regions 
Rainfall (mm) 
North of Ashanti, 
Bono, Bono East, 
Ahafo, Eastern, 
Volta, Oti 
Rainfall is 
characteristically 
bimodal and ranges 
from 1,200-1,400 mm 
per year. The major 
season starts at the 
end of March and the 
minor season at the 
57 
Soil types 
Temperatures 
(°C) 
Max  Min 
29/33  19/22  Soil types are 
suitable for 
cashew. These 
are highly deep 
soils and mostly 
of a medium 
texture. Soil 
moisture and 
Interior Guinea 
Savannah 
Northern, Upper 
East 
Interior Sudan 
Savannah 
Upper East 
Coastal 
Savannah 
Central, Accra, 
Volta, Oti 
nutrient 
retention is low 
to moderate. 
32/34  20/22  Soils of good 
physical 
characteristics, 
well 
to moderately 
well 
drained, and 
feature low 
levels of organic 
matter and 
nitrogen. 
32/34  20/22  Soils are 
heterogeneous, 
deep to 
moderately 
deep, and 
medium 
textured. 
Moisture and 
nutrient 
retention is low 
to 
moderate. 
29/33  20/24  Organic matter 
levels are 
generally very 
low. 
beginning of 
September. 5 dry 
months. 
Rainfall ranges from 
1,000-1,200 mm. This 
zone has unimodal 
rainfall which starts at 
the end of April and 
runs until end 
August/September. 6-
7 dry months. 
Rainfall ranges from 
1,000-1,200 mm. This 
zone has unimodal 
rainfall which starts at 
the end of April and 
runs until end 
August/September. 7-
8 dry months. 
This zone features a 
bimodal rainfall 
pattern. Rainfall ranges 
from 750- 1,000 mm 
per year, and is very 
low along the coast 
but increases towards 
inland areas. The 
major season starts at 
the end of March. 4 
dry months. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
The cashew production sub-segment in Ghana is largely a small-holder activity with majority of 
farmers having an average farm size of between 0.8 ha and 2.5 ha and over 60,000 small-holder 
farmers are engaged in the cultivation of the crop in Ghana. The production sub-segment also has 
players such as seedling producers, who may double up as commercial farmers, research institutions, 
donor agencies and projects in cashew production, among other players. Production entails farm 
establishment and annual maintenance. 
Primary producers predominantly relate to aggregators and sub-aggregators who are close to their 
communities. Farmers typically receive financial and technical assistance from aggregators during off-
season to increase productivity and sell to aggregators providing these forms of assistance. However, 
some farmers engage in side-selling leading to defaults after harvest. Farmers also seldom relate to 
the big exporting firms and processors. 
58 
Aggregation 
Aggregators buy raw cashew nuts (RCN) from farmers and store them in their warehouses and in turn 
sell to exporters and processors at the appropriate time. In other words, they serve as the link 
between the primary producers (smallholder farmers and commercial farmers) and the processors 
and exporters. Some aggregators have sub-aggregators stationed in the producing communities, who 
would typically aggregate in much smaller quantities and transfer to the larger aggregators in due 
course. Aggregators deal with both smallholder farmers and commercial farmers. Again, they deal 
with bigger trading partners typically from India, and other cashew processing countries. Aggregators 
typically provide some assistance to farmers during the off-season in the form of inputs, extension 
services, pruning services, among others. In other cases, aggregators offer direct financial assistance 
to help with the maintenance to the fields. Aggregators also have relationships with other commercial 
farmers.  
Processing 
In the cashew processing sub-sector in Ghana, there is processing of cashew fruit and that of the raw 
cashew nut. Raw cashew nut processing has the primary processing and secondary processing. The 
primary processors process raw cashew nuts into kernels for exports and for domestic sales to the 
secondary processors, who are predominantly roasters. The secondary processors buy the kernels 
from the primary processors and roast them for sales domestically. There are currently 14 processors 
in Ghana with 6 active and 8 firms closed because of lack of sustainable supply of raw cashew nuts. 
Some processors in the value chain include, USIBRAS Ghana Limited (Prampram operates 15000 to 
20,000 Mt out of installed capacity of 30,000 MT), Mim Cashews and Agricultural Products Ltd., Kona 
Agro processing Limited (Wenchi - shut down in 2015), Kabile Cashew Farmers’ Cooperative 
Company, Nimdee Hyren Company Limited, Nafana Agro Processing Company, Agroking Limited, 
Gensap Ventures and Innov. Organic Limited. 
The processing segment is in the middle of the value chain. It deals with producers and exporters of 
kernels. It also deals with primary and secondary processors. There are currently 3 companies 
operating in Ghana with the required food safety standards. Other processors have enrolled on the 
ACA seal, and they have had their initial audits. Firms under this segment work with producers and 
aggregators of raw cashew nuts (RCN) and work from primary processors (kernel). 
Primary Processors
Raw Cashew Nuts (RCN) to 
Kernels
Secondary Processors
Kernels to Roasted cashew
Figure 5:Raw Cashew Nut Processing in Ghana 
(own construct) 
Processors relate with the farmers/producers. Producers include both large farmers and smallholder 
farmer groups. Currently, processors relate more with smallholder farmers and aggregators. The 
relation is about 60-70% with aggregators, and 30% with famers directly.  
59 
The primary processors, who process raw cashew nuts to kernels sell to the secondary processors, the 
roasters in the domestic market.  The roasters/secondary processors, sell to supermarkets and shops 
domestically. Currently, exportation of roasted cashew is limited, and this segment would need some 
capital injection to enable them produce more efficiently to export. In addition, roasters do not 
currently have the food safety standards required by international markets, hence they are feeding 
the local market. 
Export and International Buyers 
Specific Activity within the Cashew Value Chain 
The exporters/international buyers, work with producer cooperatives. Currently, there is one 
processor with the required food standards/certification, that these exporters buy from. The main 
business partners include the following. 
1. Farmers, farmer-based organizations, freight forwarders,  
2. Customers in Vietnam and India.  
3. Processors side, these firms work with processors, depending on the relationship in the past they 
can toll process, buying the RCN and giving it to the processor to process.  
Market Opportunities 
Global demand for cashew nuts has been growing at a rate of 7% per annum over the last decade, 
and demand for cashew kernels is expected to grow by 85% in the years ahead. Consumption rates 
are predicted to remain high due to the growing awareness of the health and nutritional benefits of 
cashew nuts. 
Ghana would have 14 significant processors (2019), yet half was closed at that time for lack of raw 
material. They employ some 4,700 workers. Ghana processed some 10,000 MT of nuts locally in 2018 
(8% of production) for an installed capacity of 50,000 (20% used), down from 65,000 in 2015. The 
average processing level over the last 5 years was 7,250 MT.  
Around 90% of Ghana’s cashew nuts are exported in their raw form to India and Vietnam. Here the 
nuts are processed and re-exported to the US, Europe, the Middle East, China and Australia. On the 
Vietnamese market, the price of the kernel is at minimum 4 times higher than the RCN. The 
competition between Vietnam and India for sourcing raw nuts in Africa is intensified by demand from 
local cashew processors, a process that drives the farm gate price of cashew nuts higher, thereby 
incentivizing farmers to shift from food production to cashew nuts in African countries. Producers 
usually capture between 60 and 70% of the FOB price of RCN. According to GIZ, job creation in the 
cashew VC is 75% in production, 20% in trade and 5% in processing. 
Toll processing- in this, exporters finance acquisition of raw cashew nuts and then processor would 
charge a tolling fee for the processing, so that these buyers could ultimately have the kernels for 
export.  
There has been a lot of focus by various organizations that have been instrumental in helping farmers 
with best practices. Ghana is very advanced in relation to other countries, although production is not 
as high. 
Market availability - There is a big and ready market for kernels, but because of the operational and 
financial challenges of processing firms in Ghana, they are unable to supply the required volumes. 
Therefore, with the needed support, firms could be efficient and competitive enough to supply the 
market. There are now efforts to regulate all the value chain actors. Cashew production in Ghana 
continues to increase and farmers are showing greater interest in its cultivation. As a result of 
combined efforts of development agencies and other cashew stakeholders in Ghana, production is 
sure to increase in the foreseeable future. 
60 
Main Constraints and Challenge 
Production-related Challenges 
1. Inadequate sustainable form of financing to help in good agronomic practices. 
2. Inadequate improved seedling and cashew variety leading to uncompetitive yields. Due to the poor 
planting materials used over the last 3 decades, yields are not as high as expected. 
3.Access to quality inputs. 
4. Farmer side selling making it difficult to partner with other players in the cashew value chains 
especially aggregators.  
Aggregation-related Challenges 
1. Side selling among farmers: Farmers typically side sell RCN to higher bidding entities and 
aggregators, after benefiting from aggregators who offer them with advances/financial assistance. 
You may advance money to other buyers, and they may not bring you the RCN, they may sell to 
others. We try to find producers/buyers that are trustworthy.  
2. Most of the farmers seek assistance off season from multiple intermediaries, and at the time of 
collection, they are burdened with greater levels of debt.  
Processing-related Challenges 
Cashew processors in Ghana face several challenges, enumerated as follows 
1. Access to appropriate finance. One of the foremost challenges is not just access to finance but 
access to appropriate ones that would guarantee profitability and long-term growth. These finance 
sources must come with suitable interest rates, tenures, collateral considerations, and moratorium. 
This is because margins associated with processed kernels are thin and simply may not jive with the 
current high interest rates. Lack of access to appropriate finance leads to the following challenges. 
2. Accessing raw material – although raw cashew nuts are available, there is high competition from 
exporters. There are also other costs that processors incur in addition to procurement cost, such as 
inventory costs. These costs are secondary to the core processing cost and as such lengthens the cash 
conversion cycle, the period within which stock is converted to cash.  
a. Cost of technology. Most factories of processors run on manual operations (about 70-80%) because 
of limited financial capacity to the required machinery to automate most of the processing activities 
to increase efficiency and reduce labor cost.   
It is difficult to have the right skills/capacity for factories.  
In Ghana, the cashew industry and purchases are not regulated and as such, unregistered companies 
are able to purchase RCN at the farm gate. This situation means most unregistered companies always 
flood the local market, creating unhealthy competition to push RCN price up to the disadvantage of 
processors. 
Challenges related to Exporters and International Buyers  
1. Loyalty of farmers is a challenge, firms in this space can have a relationship with farmers during the 
maintenance stage of the cashew crop calendar by supplying them with the needed inputs and 
services, but farmers show little or no commitment during harvest, and sell to other companies who 
offer more during harvest.   
2. Typically, other international buyers, non-registered and non-tax paying show up during the harvest 
period and buy large quantities of the cashew nuts by bidding higher than the regulated firms.  
3. Tremendous amount of high costs in the infrastructure.  
4. A lot of processors not competitive with Asian competitors.  
Proffered Solutions to Challenges 
1. Industry regulation will help stabilize prices of raw cashew nuts and reduce farmer side selling to 
some extent 
2. There are two ways to ameliorate the yield challenge.  
61 
           a. First by replacing the top productive parts of the tree with a new improved variety through a 
process of grafting called top-working.  
              b. Secondly, by pruning of trees for regrowth and eliminating diseased branches. This 
encourages new shoots to form and hence better yield.  
These two processes, top-working and pruning requires skilled manpower and use of tree cutting 
devices such as motorized saws. This equipment is expensive for the ordinary smallholder farmer. The 
arrangement under a potential cashew scheme is for the aggregator or processing (technical 
operator) to recruit a gang of skilled personnel with the requisite equipment and training to organize 
and deliver the service to farmers. This will then be transferred as non-cash credit to the farmer to be 
paid in-kind during harvest. 
3.  Development of formal and organized schemes for farmers with written and enforceable contracts 
between farmers and aggregators could limit the incidence of side-selling. 
4. Toll processing- is a way to address some of the challenges already outlined. This can be beneficial 
to both secondary processors who need kernels by buying the raw cashew nuts for the primary 
processors to process for them and paying a tolling fee, and the primary processors who process raw 
cashew nuts to obtain raw cashew nuts to process and make money.  
5. One of the issues is appropriate finance that is backed by collateral. It is difficult to provide 
collateral, given that the value of the factories and assets are most often lower than the loans 
required. One of the collateral considerations would be to allow the use of raw cashew nut as 
collateral to finance activities given the high value of raw cashew nuts.  
6. Growing local artisans to strengthen the provision of support machines to support local processing. 
Processing machines can reduce the cost of processing by about 30% by reducing the cost of labor. 
Institutional analysis and VC management 
Competitive Cashew Initiative (ComCashew)/GIZ  
Comcashew is a programme of GIZ set up to enhance competitiveness in the cashew value chains in 
Ghana and elsewhere on the African continent. Comcashew provides support in areas ranging from 
research, to production, processing, marketing, capacity development and policy advice. Ultimately, 
new opportunities for employment, especially for women, along the value chain have been created, 
specifically in rural areas, thereby ensuring an increase in and diversification of income. 
Brazil Government 
The Brazil government through The Brazilian Cooperation Agency (ABC) and Embrada has invested in 
training and capacity-building for experts and farmers on research to improve genetic materials and 
cashew fruit processing technologies in Ghana and continues to do so. 
Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) 
ADRA plays important role in the cashew value chain in Ghana. Some of its activities have centred on 
improving cashew yield and farmer income through training of extension officers and farmers. 
Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) 
SECO also plays an important role in the cashew production in Ghana. This predominantly comes 
through financing training programmes for major players in the cashew value chain to increase 
competitiveness. It also co-funds the Comcashew with the EU. 
Private Sector 
Private sector organizations also remain pivotal in the cashew value chain in Ghana. The organizations 
include the African Cashew Alliance (ACA), Ghana Cashew Industry Association, and the Association of 
Cashew Processors. 
Women/youths/PWD 
62 
Women would account for 10-15% of the cashew producers. As a tree crop, cashew was regarded as 
an individual man's property to be passed on to his wife and children rather than to extended family 
members, which differed from the communal land tenure arrangements governing food crop 
cultivation. The tendency for land, cash crops and income to be controlled by men, despite women's 
and young people's significant labor contributions to family farms, and for women to rely on food 
crop production for their main source of income and for household food security, means that women 
and girls are more likely to lose out when cashew plantations are expanded to the detriment of land 
for food crops. 
The physical strength and financial commitment needed for the cashew farming activity does not 
permit most women to be actively involved in the venture but to be helping hands to their husbands. 
Women’s role in cashew production has been traditionally defined as overseeing harvesting, 
transporting, sorting, and drying the fruit. In some cashew producing communities, women make 
juice and alcohol from cashew apples, and are therefore highly involved in the processing of apples 
and nuts at the household level. Furthermore, many women participate in the selling of raw nuts at 
marketing centers. However, large traders/exporters and their agents generally tend to be men. 
Policy and Regulation 
Cashew production falls under the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) while its export falls 
under the ministry of Trade and Industry. In direct relation to cashew, there is the National tree crops 
Board. In terms of policy and regulation, there is the 10-year cashew development policy which 
outlines government strategy to develop the cashew value chain. Cashew also falls under the 
government initiative of Planting for Export and Rural Development (PERD). 
Climate and potential impact of CC on production capacities 
Climate change has affected the rainfall distribution and extended dry spells while shortening the 
rainy season. This has led to increase fires that destroy a lot of farms within the transition zones. Fire 
belts are being constructed by a lot of farmers a coping mechanism. 
Nutrition and food security 
Research found that farmers in the area previously referred to as the Brong Ahafo region of Ghana, 
which produces about 30% of national food needs and leads in the production of local staples such as 
maize, yam and cassava, have come to dedicate increasing portions of their land to cashew nut 
production, with only a small portion of land set aside for household food cropping. The conversion of 
fertile land into cash crop production presents significant challenges for ensuring long-term food 
security in Ghana. To date, national agricultural planning and policy appears to prioritize production 
of export commodities and agricultural ‘modernisation’ above local food production. While GoG can 
continue to support the development of Ghana’s export cashew industry, there is a vital need for 
programmes that increase support for local food crop farmers and domestic food provisioning. 
Despite the possible economic benefits that might be realized via cashew production, many farmers 
expressed growing concerns about the impacts of expanding cashew production for local food 
provisioning. The majority of described being worried about the impacts of changes in land use, 
alongside the concentration of land amongst elites, including the possible impacts for meeting 
national food needs. Some farmers described a reduction in the production of food as driving the cost 
of food upwards at local markets. 
Quantitative analysis 
Figure 6: Cashew Crop Maintenance Calendar 
MONTHS 
63 
JAN  FEB 
MARC
H 
MA
Y 
APRIL 
JUNE 
JULY 
AU
G 
SEP  OCT  NOV  DEC 
ACTIVITY 
1st Weeding 
Fire Belt 
2nd Weeding 
Pruning 
Fertilizer Application 
   - Inorganic Fertilizers 
   - Poultry Manure 
Pest & Disease Control 
  - Fungicides 
  - Insecticide 
Flowering  
Maturing of Fruits & 
Harvesting/Pickings 
Transport/Grading & 
Sales 
Staff Training 
Farmer Sensitisation & 
Training 
Table 5: Cashew Crop Budget of Cashew Maintenance Per Acre 
unit price 
cost /acre 
Cost Item 
1st Weeding 
Fire Belt creation 
2nd Weeding 
Pruning 
Fertilizer Application 
   - Inorganic Fertilizers 
Transportation of Fertilizer 
  Application of Inorg. Fert 
Pest & Disease Control 
Fungicides 
Spraying of Fungicide 
Insecticides 
Spraying of Insecticides  
Harvesting 
Picking and separation 
Carting cost 
Jute sacks 
Total Cost of Cashew 
maintenance 
Total annual cost of farm 
maintenance 
GH ȼ 
100 
100 
100 
130 
128 
10 
20 
135 
20 
35 
20 
15 
20 
3 
Unit 
Measure 
Acre 
Acre 
Acre 
Acre 
50kgBag 
50kgBag 
Acre 
kg 
Manday 
Lit 
Manday 
Manday 
TnT 
85kgBag 
Qty 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
6 
64 
GH ȼ 
100 
100 
100 
130 
128 
10 
20 
135 
20 
35 
20 
30 
20 
18 
866 
866 
Yield 
Cashew 
Sales 
Cashew 
Total Revenue 
Gross margin 
Gross margin % 
85kgBag yr7 
onwards 
6 
6 
434 
2604 
2604 
1,738 
66% 
SECTION 4: RICE VALUE CHAIN 
Introduction 
Rice is the second most important staple cereal in Ghana after maize and its consumption continue to 
grow over the last two decades. In the Northern Belt, rice cultivation in lowlands has emerged with 
great potential to reduce poverty levels. MoFA has increased its support to rice production in the 
northern region through the Planting for Foods and Jobs (PFJ) initiative with the goal of making Ghana 
self-sufficient in rice by 2023. Evidence shows that rice yields can increase from 15 bags to 50 bags 
per acre through timely planting, proper agronomic practices, certified seeds, and fertilizers. 
Nevertheless, the lack of appropriate agricultural machinery and inadequate linkages to markets 
paying remunerative prices, affect the wider adoption of rice production by smallholders in the 
region.  
Status of Crop 
In 2017, Ghana’s national production was able to satisfy about 47% of rice domestic demand and 
imported the remaining 53%. Importation of rice into the country costs government huge sums of 
money. In 2016, Ghana imported about 698,000 mt of rice worth 287.4 million USD. Thus, it is 
important to increase rice productivity and overall production to meet the country’s growing demand 
and to improve overall food security. Figure below shows that domestic rice production has been on 
the increase for the last 40 years.  
Figure 7:Graph showing rice production and imports from 1961 to 2016 
In 2017, almost 240,000 ha of land were cropped to rice in Ghana (189,000 in 2012, or +27% in 5 
years). Production varies between regions and ecological zones based on the production systems 
(rain-fed or irrigated), availability and suitability of soil and rice lowlands for production. Within each 
agro-ecological zone there are distinct rice ecosystems. The rain-fed systems (drylands and lowlands) 
accounts for 75 percent of the production area, the irrigated system accounts for about 10 percent 
65 
and the inland swamps and valley bottoms for 15 percent. In terms of total growing area under rice 
production, the irrigated ecology is less important than other ecologies but in terms of output per 
unit area the irrigated ecology is far superior to the remaining three ecologies. 
In terms of yields, there is a wide gap between the potential yield and the actuals. The average 
achievable yield is 3.01 mt/ha compared to a potential yield of 6 mt/ha. However, yields are higher on 
irrigated lands as compared to rain-fed. Average yields have increased over the years from 2.36 in 
2011 to 2.69 in 2014 and 3.01 in 2017.  
Production 
Location 
Rice is produced across the three main agro-ecological zones (Guinea Savannahh, Forest and Coastal 
Savannahh) of Ghana. 
The Guinea Savannahh zone covers the five Northern regions (Savannahh, Northern, Upper East, 
North East and Upper West). There are many irrigation schemes (Tono, Vea, Bontanga, Golinga, Libga) 
and rice valleys (such as Fumbisi, Nabogu-Nasia, Zakoli) developed in the Guinea Savannahh zone. The 
main seeding method is broadcasting, which is easier and less expensive, even on irrigated fields. 
Direct sowing or dibbling and nursing of seedlings are done on irrigated fields. Improved rice varieties 
grown include Jasmine 85, Togo Marshall, and AGRA. One of the prominent indigenous varieties 
include, mandi and several others although grown in smaller scale. 
The Forest zone covers the Ashanti, Ahafo, Bono, Bono East, Oti, Eastern, Western North, and 
Western regions. There are rice valleys in Ahafo Ano North Municipal, Ejura and New Edubiase 
Districts. The main seeding method is direct seeding and nursing. The major varieties include Jasmine 
85, AGRA and Togo Marshal. Other varieties are Gomba (brown rice), Lapex, Aflao, Amankwatia, etc. 
The Coastal Savannahh covers Volta, Greater Accra, and Central region. Rice production in this zone is 
concentrated in Volta and Greater Accra. There are well developed irrigation schemes (Aveyime, 
Wetta/Affife) and valleys across the Volta region. The Kpong irrigation scheme located in the Greater 
Accra serves rice valleys in Asutuare, Akuse and other areas. The main seeding methods are 
broadcasting and nursing of seeds (transplanting). There is an important indigenous rice variety called 
Viwonor which is known for its nutritional characteristics. The improved rice varieties include Jasmine 
85, AGRA, and Togo Marshal. Other varieties include Amankwatia, Kawumo, Saudi Arabia and Akwa 
Blue. 
The rainfall pattern in the Savannahh ecological zone is unimodal. The rains start from the month of 
May and may last up to October. Rice is usually grown during this period. Farmers on valleys usually 
plant early to avoid flooding. In the Savannahh zone, farmers on irrigated plots start land preparations 
after the rainy season. However, farmers in the Forest and Coastal zones experienced two rainy 
seasons (major and minor) during the year. The major rains begin in March and end in 
August/September whiles the minor rains begin in September and end in November. 
The three major rice producing regions in Ghana are Volta, Northern and Upper East and these 
regions account for 78% of domestic rice production. The region with the least volume of rice 
production is Central. Table below shows the top five rice producing regions in Ghana from 2014 to 
2016. 
Table 6:Top Five Rice Producing Regions in Ghana (Three Year Average, 2014-2016) 
Regions 
Volta  
Northern 
Upper East 
Eastern  
Ashanti 
Yearly average (mt) 
2014 – 2016 
206,910 
177,465 
118,250 
34,270 
33,670 
Share of Overall 
Total production 
32% 
27.5% 
18% 
5% 
5% 
66 
Sub Total 
Total National 
Production 
570,565 
644,400 
88.5% 
100% 
Available data from SRID indicate that domestic rice production would be in the tune of 720,000 tons 
in 2017. 
Processing 
There are many small mills sited in all parts of the country across rural areas. Locally produced rice 
marketing and pricing are poorly structured. Price is less stable in these areas, with low prices at peak 
periods immediately after harvest and high prices during lean season prior to production season. 
Medium rice processors lack the necessary investment and capital to carry out downstream activities, 
including high-quality milling, packaging, branding, and marketing. Misconceptions regarding the 
quality and nutritional value of local rice as well as post-harvest inefficiencies in storage have 
hindered their growth. Therefore, the market is mainly structured around major processing 
companies that buy paddy from local farmers for processing into quality rice meeting imported rice 
standard and distribute it through supermarkets, retailers, restaurants, and institutions across the 
country.  
One of the most renowned brands has been the AVANSH’S ROYAL FARMERS which is produced at 
Nyankpala in the Tolon District of Northern Region. AVNASH has the largest rice processing plant, not 
only in the country but across West Africa. It is a state-of-the-art facility with installed capacity of 500 
metric tons of paddy rice processed per day, sufficient for feeding the country with the highest quality 
of rice. However, AVNASH is struggling with the current domestic supply of rice paddy which is not 
able to meet the capacity of the installed mill, though the sitting of the mill offers opportunity for 
farmers, transporters, aggregators, mechanized service suppliers, inputs providers and other value 
chain actors within the rice sector. 
Other outstanding mills include the Wienco mill in Sogakope in the Volta region through Global 
Agricultural Development Company (GADCO) which produces the ADUANEHENE and COPA rice 
brands.  Another large and modern mill that process local paddy is the Worawora rice mill also in the 
Volta region which produces the EDWUMAWURA rice.  In the Greater Accra region, Richland 
Company installed in Asutuare a rice mill which produces the rice brand MR. RABBIT JASMINE rice.  
Market opportunities 
Description 
Domestic importers have increasingly turned to Asian rice, particularly Thai jasmine rice, whose 
quality image has improved substantially and is highly prized by consumers. Thailand aromatic rice is 
becoming the preferred rice of those shopping in the ‘quality’ segment of the market, chosen for its 
special taste and aroma. 
Potential for value creation 
Involvement of SMEs and job creation 
Rice demand is projected to grow at a compound annual growth of 11.8 percent in the medium term 
(MiDA 2010). 
Main constraints and challenge 
Rice farmers lack adequate finance to acquire inputs from dealers and more than 60% of them 
depend on their own capital. In this constrained environment, farmers reduce inputs usage and use 
seeds from previous crop harvest which result in low crop yields. They sometimes had to source for 
finance from informal money lenders with high interest rates. In the case where a purchasing 
agreement exists (most often verbal), farmers may be partially financed by aggregators and 
67 
processors with the hope that farmers will repay the cost of inputs through crop produce, yet for the 
buyer with the risk of side-selling. Farmers are also confronted with means of harvesting as there are 
inadequate number of combine harvesters. After harvesting comes the issue of marketing where 
aggregators and processors do not pay farmers on time after taking produce.   
Climate 
While the price of rice is projected to increase 60% by 2015 without climate change, it could go up by 
as much as 121% once climate change is considered. 
Sept 
Oct 
Quantitative Analysis 
Figure 8: Rice Crop Calendar under Rainfed Cultivation in the Northern Belt 
Month 
April  May 
June 
July 
Aug 
ACTIVITIES 
Land rent 
Land Preparation 
  - Clearing 
  - Weedicide application 
  - Ploughing & Harrowing 
Bunding Maintenance 
Planting 
  - certified seed  
  - Labour for planting  
Thining after germination 
Weedicide Application (pre-
emergence) 
1st Fertilizer Application 
Manual Weeding 
2nd Fertilizer Application 
Light hand picking 
Harvesting  
Threshing 
Sale of Paddy 
Figure 9:Rice Crop Calendar (Middle Belt) 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
 Aug  
Land hiring 
Land preparation 
  -Land clearing 
  -Ploughing 
  - Tilling 
Seeding 
Certified Seed 
Fertilizer Application 
Herbicide Application 
Light hand picking 
68 
Rodent control 
Bird control 
Harvesting 
Threshing 
Winnowing 
  - Recovery 
  - Available for sale by 
Outgrower 
Table 7:Rice Crop Budget 
Hiring of Land 
Land preparation 
   Ploughing 
   Tiling 
   Weedicide 
   Weedicide Application 
Certified seed 
Planting 
Fertilizers and Agrochemicals 
  NPK 
  Urea 
  1st weed control: Herbicide 
(superdupa) 
Labor 
  Application of NPK fert 
  Application of Urea 
  1st Weed control: Application of 
herbicide (superdupa) 
  Rodent control 
  Bird Control 
Harvesting 
Gathering 
Threshing 
Sacks 
Transport 
Extension and supervision 
Crop insurance 
Total 
Sales 
Gross Margin 
Gross Margin % 
Proxy IRR 
unit 
acre 
acre 
acre 
lts 
manday 
10 kg 
acre 
50 kg 
50 kg 
250 ml 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
pcs 
acre produce 
acre 
acre 
69 
qty per acre 
unit price 
Amount 
1 
1 
1 
3 
3 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 
1 
1 
5% 
20 
GH ȼ 
300 
GH ȼ 
300 
80 
60 
15 
20 
30 
180 
85 
80 
45 
40 
20 
60 
40 
150 
200 
120 
160 
3 
100 
50 
195 
80 
60 
45 
60 
60 
180 
170 
80 
90 
40 
20 
60 
40 
150 
200 
120 
160 
60 
100 
50 
106 
2,231 
3,900 
1,669 
43% 
75% 
SECTION 5: SHEA NUT VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
Shea is continuously touted as the cocoa of the Northern Development Zone (NDZ) with the only 
difference being that it grows on its own in the wild. Shea currently generates an average of 20061 
million dollars from export of raw shea nut and butter.  
Production 
Location 
The NDZ covers mostly the Savannah regions of Ghana even though the southern part has some 
forest. The NDZ is bounded by international borders with Burkina Faso on the north and west, as well 
as Togo on the east with direct road connectivity to the main urban centres of these countries. It has 
an urban population of about 1.085 million and a rural population of 3.143 million. The predominant 
economic activity is agriculture even though other activities such as industry, tourism, and mining 
exist in smaller scales. The zone has more than 51% of the landmass of Ghana.  
The zone is drained by the Black and White Volta and their tributaries like river Nasia, river Daka, 
among others.  The zone has potential to be the supplier of agricultural products and agro processed 
products to the country and neighbouring countries given the necessary assistance 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
Pickers 
These pickers of nut are predominantly women groups who move through the wild and pick the nuts 
when it is in season. The challenge with this side of the value chain is that these women pickers also 
try to forward integrate in the value chain to process the nut into butter because of its traditional 
underpinning and personal fulfilment to see a process start and end. However, the limited scale of 
these pickers does not make the economic sense for processing the nut themselves. There is the need 
therefore for focusing on their side of the value chain.  
Example of women shea picking, and processing group is the Kanvili Shea Butter Group. This group is 
based in Kanvili in the Tamale Metropolitan of the Northern Region with 54 female members with the 
exception of the secretary and the miller.  Kanvili women shea processing group. These women are 54 
in number and they have two men the secretary and the machine miller. The group supplies a 
secondary processor and aggregator called Sandam with Shea nuts and funds for their operation. The 
company in turn has provided the group with the processing center including sheds, water storage 
tanks, milling machine, and improved stoves with chimney.  
Aggregators 
Aggregators in the shea value chain are in the form of small to medium scale individual aggregators 
and large institutional buyers. Some of these institutional buyers are basically subsidiaries of 
multinationals in Europe and America. The crux of the issue with aggregators is the small to medium 
scale aggregators. These may be registered companies alright, but inherently controlled and 
championed by one person and have limited financial resources to fund their equipment needs and 
working capital. The role of NGOs and ESG companies (impact investors) in the aggregation phase is 
also worth noting, with the idea of procuring nuts from the women pickers as a means of giving them 
sustainable livelihoods. These agencies then link up with processors and exporters.  
Aggregators in this space include Borimakaso (Tamale Aboabo market), it has women in the following 
towns and villages in the NDZ.  
Table 8: Women shea pickers from Borimakoso Enterprise 
61 As indicated by COCOBOD 
70 
Location 
Dwankora 
Gushie 
Nalerigu 
Zabzugu Tatale (new group) 
Salaga (queen mothers of pickers) 
Chamba 
Djimle (Yendi) 
Pishowo (Karaga) 
Chedereh 
Total 
No of Pickers (women) 
47 
32 
17 
12 
39 
29 
18 
9 
6 
209 
The firm supports the pickers with the following, hand gloves, wellington boot, cutlass, buckets, 
rubber bowls, mosquito nets, torch light. The company also plans to include national health insurance 
for 50 women, and anti-snake serum. 
Processors 
Shea processing in the value chain in dominated by institutional processors and local women 
cooperatives. The latter group’s process is very much manual and traditional, taking a lot more time 
and labor. They produce chiefly, unrefined yellow and ivory butter but other cooperatives add further 
value by producing the refined ones. This group has seen a lot of NGO activities in recent times 
because of the place of women in the process as a way of boosting gender equality. Strict analysis of 
the traditional process will hardly yield meaningful economic return because of its low scale and 
manual nature. The institutional processors can be divided into two key modules of operation. The 
first module is the processors who have invested in shea processing plants and are into direct 
processing of shea nut. The second module is the processors who team up with the local women 
cooperatives by supervising production and off-taking the butter from them for onward marketing 
and exports. The operations of the free zone shea processing company may be able to boost the 
potential of the value chain. 
Regulator 
Picking
Aggregation
Processing
Marketing
Consumption
Women 
pickers 
Local 
aggregators 
Multi-national 
aggregators 
Local women 
processors 
Medium and 
large-scale 
processors 
Exporters 
Traders 
Distribution 
chains of 
processors 
Final consumers 
International mkt 
Figure 10:Shea Value Chain Chart in Northern Ghana 
Market opportunities 
71 
The industry is currently assuming a large-scale commercial status with the advent of large-scale shea 
(nut and butter) buyers and exporters who have in recent years discovered the high value of shea on 
the international market and are cashing in on it as quickly as possible. Ghana is currently collecting 
130,000 metric tons of shea nuts but has the capacity to do 200,000 tons. Ghana recorded USD 
33,572,000 in value of exported processed or industrial shea nuts. 
Shea butter has become popular in the cosmetics industries because of its medicinal features. Apart 
from the cosmetics, it has been identified as a key organic oil with fats that are easily broken down by 
the body and has had its demand boosted in the EU especially. The demand for shea is likely to 
increase in the future because of the above reasons and as such a need of substantial investment in 
the value chain to take advantage of the increased demand. An important feature of the shea from 
the NDZ is its higher content of shea butter which makes it well positioned to serve both the local and 
the foreign market. 
Main constraints and challenge 
1. Unavailability of vital processing machineries for the women primary processors. For instance, the 
Kinvili shea group indicated that they needed a kneading machine which can reduce drudgery. Other 
critical utilities needed include source of water.  
2. Marketing problem, these women groups are unable to market in bulk but only in bites apart from 
what they process for the major processors. These groups ideally prefer to collect the nuts all by 
themselves process and supply the butter.  
3. The challenge of snake bites face in the fields has been thoroughly deliberated by major value chain 
players and addressed to a larger extent by the provision of protective gears and snake serum kits. 
Institutional analysis and VC management 
The most active stakeholders in the shea industry are Civil Society Groups comprising the Shea 
Dealers Associations in all the regions of Northern Ghana, individuals as well as NGOs such as SNV, a 
Dutch Development Organization, TechnoServe, a US-oriented Food Security organization, the 
Association of Church Development Projects (ACDEP) and its subsidiary, Savannah Farmers Marketing 
Company, Ghana Nuts and PBC. 
Women/youths/PWD 
The primary production is dominated by pickers who move in the wild to pick nuts for further 
processing and sale of raw nuts. Consequently, these women pickers are subject to conditions like 
snake bites. Aggregators and other NGOs provide support in the form of snake serum and protective 
gears. These activities are found to add value to the lives of women in the zone. 
Quantitative Analysis 
Table 9: Shea Processing Budget Per Kg 
REVENUE PER KG OF SHEA NUTS 
Riped Fruits Collection (Man Hours) 
Depulping of Fruits (Man Hours) 
Boiling of Fruits 
   Water Expense 
   Firewood Expense 
Volume 
(Kg) 
Cost per 
Kg 
Total 
Amount 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0.40 
0.01 
0.23 
0.11 
0.11 
72 
0.40 
0.01 
0.23 
0.11 
0.11 
KG 
2.00 
Ton 
1,995 
Drying Cost ( Tarpulin Expense) 
De-husking and Sorting Cost  
   Mortar Expense 
   Labour Expense 
Packaging Expense 
Storage Expense 
Transportation 
Handling Expense 
TOTAL MATERIAL COST PER KG 
Consumables 
Hardware 
TOTAL SUPPLY CHAIN COST 
Gross Profit 
GM 
OVER HEADS 
Administration Cost 
CSR Activities 
Communication 
Social Security Contribution 
Council Fees 
TOTAL OVERHEADS 
PBIT 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0.03 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.70 
0.54 
0.18 
0.03 
0.01 
0.01 
- 
0.01 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.54 
0.18 
0.02 
0.01 
0.01 
0.02 
0.11 
1.42 
1,421.58 
0.57 
29% 
573.42 
29% 
17.10 
171.00 
402.42 
0.17 
0.40 
VC ANALYSIS: VEGETABLES 
Introduction 
Vegetables can make an important contribution to food and nutritional security and can enhance 
livelihood of smallholders due to their high farmgate values per unit land area. Besides their 
economic, nutritional, and medicinal importance, vegetables are considered valuable because of their 
ability to fit into year-round production systems. 
In Ghana, cultivation of vegetables is an excellent source of employment for both rural and urban 
dwellers as it takes place in many rural areas through truck farming and in the outskirts of towns and 
cities in the form of market and backyard gardening to supply fresh produce to urban markets. It thus 
plays an important socio-economic role as well as in diversifying diets for improved nutrition. Ghana 
benefits from considerable foreign exchange through the export of vegetables such as okra and 
chillies to European countries. Chilli exports for instance have ranged between 26,000 and 41,000 MT 
per annum between 2010 and 2015 with corresponding foreign exchange from US$18.2 to US$28.7 
million. 
Pepper is the fourth most harvested crop in Ghana after cassava, plantain, and yam. It contributed 
GHS 2.01 million (7%) of estimated annual sales of GHS 29.51 million of fruits, roots and vegetables in 
Ghana in 2007. With the increase in population, rising household income levels, the influx of malls 
and the establishment of hospitality centers, the consumption of pepper is on the rise. 
73 
As a commercial crop, pepper was ranked as the second valuable vegetable crop ahead of popular 
vegetables like okra and eggplant with an estimated total production of 88,000 metric tons in 2011. 
Ghana is ranked fourth in pepper production in Africa after Egypt, Nigeria, and Algeria. 
Main vegetables consumed in Northern Ghana 
Food Group 
Vitamin A rich vegetables and tubers 
Dark green leafy vegetables 
Other vegetables 
Specific vegetables 
Carrots, red pepper, sweet potato 
Amaranth, roselle, jute mallow, okra leaves, 
onion leaves 
Cabbage, garlic, okra, onion, tomato, eggplant, 
lettuce 
Production 
Location 
Around 80,000 ha are used for vegetable production in Ghana. Production of fresh vegetables takes 
place all around the country and is strongly related to the specific weather conditions and market 
windows. Irrigated agriculture is on the increase leading to new production areas around the Volta 
and Volta Lake as well as specific irrigation areas in and around Accra. 
South Ghana leads the production of pepper, as it has a competitive advantage over the North, 
because of the benefit of its two rainy seasons. It is estimated that around 1000,000 households are 
engaged in the cultivation of pepper in Ghana as a livelihood, and 20% of these households would be 
based in North Ghana. The price of pepper is low at harvest, but rises to over 200% during the dry 
season, because pepper is rarely cultivated under irrigation in Ghana. 
The major buyers of pepper are south Ghana based, with Accra, Kumasi, Techiman and Tamale being 
the key pepper markets. There are several road side and local markets within the environs of farm 
communities manned by pepper farmers or local trader. 
In Ashanti region, more than 90% of the farmers engaged in cash crops cultivate tomato, hot pepper, 
garden eggs, and okra. Exotic vegetables such as cabbage, cucumber and carrot are not popular 
among them. Also, traditional leafy vegetables are not popular either. In that region, vegetables are 
mainly grown for sale (80%), before home consumption. 
Crop systems and characterization of producers 
Vegetable cropping systems were sole cropping, relay intercropping or multiple cropping where 
different vegetables were cultivated on separate plots. 
Pepper grows relatively quick with a maturity period of 3 to 4 months. It is mostly cultivated by 
smallholder farmers with average plot sizes of between 0.8Ha and 2.4Ha. Ghana produced 117,000 t 
over 14,000 ha in 2013. Statistics account for an increase on yields of 7 percent annually and 9 
percent on production for the period 2009-2013 while acreage has remained stable. Yields has grown 
up to 8Mt/Ha, yet far below the national achievable 32.3Mt/Ha, a situation that is reflective of the 
poor access to quality seeds, bad agronomic practices, poor use of organic and inorganic fertilizer, 
pest, and disease infestation. About 70% of pepper farmers produce under rain-fed conditions. 
However, with irrigation, it is possible to grow the crop all year round, which would transform 
farmer’s incomes. 
Ghana cultivates about 46,000 ha of tomato per year, which is between 5 and 10 percent of the 
acreage dedicated to food crops. As of 2013, production was estimated at about 340,000 t. The 
average yields oscillate around 7-7.5 t/ha, which is only 50 percent of what is deemed as achievable 
by MoFA. Kenyan farmers produce 22 t/ha and neighboring Burkinabe farmers 9 t/ha. 
74 
Pepper farming is heavily resource intensive. It requires about two time the labour and financing 
resource required to cultivate grains. Improved seeds and fertilizer constitute one of the major costs 
of the pepper farmer. 
Overall farmers dedicate only a fraction of land to vegetable production. They are hardly organized in 
vegetable or horticulture groups, and neither are they trained specifically on vegetable production. 
Only in a few instances farmers work together to supply specialized suppliers and have more 
specialized knowledge on vegetable cultivation. 
In Northern Ghana, where there are no major buyers or exporters, there are virtually no out-grower 
schemes running, although linkages that result from repeated transactions between traders and 
producers prevail. Buyers from the South do provide seed to some larger farmers and nominate 
women traders to whom the farmer should sell as agents for the buyer. As these relationships are not 
formalized, the buyers change, and the new buyers introduces other varieties. With farmers retaining 
seeds, this results in many varieties being grown on the same plot of land, further depressing 
productivity. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
Local market centres are placed at the heart of the value chain and their performance make an 
impact both up and down the chain. In Ghana they are mostly operated by so-called « market queens 
» who serve as a point of sale for most buyers who run shops, hotels, and restaurants. The vegetable 
traders in Ghana are organized under these “queens”. The market queen is selected by all traders and 
is later introduced to the local traditional community leaders and the district assembly. For tomatoes, 
onions, and exotic vegetables (hot peppers, okra etc.), there are different market queens. 
Domestic bulk suppliers supply over 80 percent of the produce sold in the local market centres. Most 
of the bulk suppliers have supply contracts with the market queens, their supplies are regular and 
volumes are large. Some bulk suppliers can also supply directly to institutions or even hotels. 
Itinerant suppliers supply around 15 percent of the produce sold at local market centres. They 
operate similarly to the domestic bulk suppliers, but their volumes are small and do not have 
contracts or supply arrangements with the buyers/market queens. 
The majority of the pepper traders deal in both fresh and dry pepper products with few dealing in one 
product only. Pepper products sold include fresh, dried powdered, dry pepper, shito and fresh hot 
pepper paste. 
A few traders provide loans to some farmers they have worked with for some time, and the farmers 
sell their produce to them. This practice though helpful to farmers is very is limited in scope and size 
of assistance. 
Market power on the pepper value chain rests with buyers who have access to final markets. This is 
due partly to farmers’ need for cash, forcing them to sell immediately after harvest, but mainly since 
the farmer is remote from the market and has no alternative but to sell through several 
intermediaries who all take a share of the final value created. The uncertainty over the market, 
caused by weak and informal relationships between actors on the value chain is a great limitation to 
farmer productivity, as they are unwilling to grow new varieties for fear that they may not be in 
demand in the local markets. 
Market opportunities 
Overall vegetable consumption in Ghana is still relatively small, also in comparison with other African 
countries like Kenya, but is expanding rapidly. Apart from local vegetables the most important 
vegetables are tomatoes, peppers (both sweet and hot chillies), onions and okra. Especially the 
market for tomatoes and peppers has boomed recently. 
The national consumption of pepper is estimated to be 230,000Mt per annum, with a growth rate of 
about 8% annually. Production has however failed to keep pace with demand, increasing marginally 
from 27,000Mt in 2000 to 79,000Mt in 2008. This supply gap is primarily due to low productivity. 
75 
Most of the pepper traders deal in both fresh and dry pepper products with few dealings in one 
product only. Pepper products sold include fresh, dried powdered, dry pepper, shito and fresh hot 
pepper paste. 
The main market for vegetables for the coming years will still be dominated by open markets and 
smaller, street shops. The production systems will compete on price and less on quality. These 
markets include the large Agbobloshie, Makola and Tudu markets where specific commodity 
associations manage the market system. Price fluctuations are high following the different production 
periods. 
In terms of exports, Ghana’s vegetables show potential. While traditionally fruits were the main 
horticultural export crops, chillies and Asian vegetables (different types of gourds and okra) have 
become popular. In addition, baby corn and butternut squash production are picking up significantly 
since the arrival of the multinational VegPro. In general, exports of peppers are believed to have a 
comparative advantage over competitors like Kenya, given Ghana’s climatologic conditions and 
relatively short distance to the EU market. 
Main constraints and challenge 
The main constraints to enhancing productivity includes low soil fertility, poor use of organic and 
inorganic fertilizer, pests and diseases pressure with ineffective management practices, inadequate 
access to finance, unavailability and high cost of irrigation systems, inadequate knowledge of 
improved technologies coupled with the use of unimproved varieties.  
Lack of farmer access to high quality seeds of improved vegetable cultivars is one of the major 
constraints to the successful expansion of the vegetable industry in Ghana. The use of poor-quality 
vegetable seeds mainly obtained from informal sources by most farmers has compromised yields and 
productivity and rendered serious challenges to the success of crop productivity and improvement 
initiatives. Boosting agricultural productivity will require a more professional input supply system with 
better and more tailor-made information for farmers on the use, adaptability and effectiveness of 
seeds, fertilizers, and pesticides. The public extension system increasingly faces challenges and agro-
dealers so far have not taken up the challenge to also provide quality information and services. 
Production of the crop is also mainly under rain-fed conditions and thus forcing the crop compete 
with other staple crops for land, labour, mechanization, and other productive resources, making it 
quite difficult for most farmers to increase their average land holding for production. There are also 
high post-harvest losses (estimated at 50%) because of poor farmer knowledge and skill in 
appropriate handling methods and lack of technology like cold storage. 
Another constraint to enhancing productivity is the undersupply of public service and support. Access 
roads from many farmer communities are in a deplorable condition, creating market access 
constraints for farmers. Funding for critical activities such as knowledge and information services, 
research and irrigation services are heavily inadequate and poorly governed. There is no significant 
public investment on the pepper value chain. Privately funded research is limited to foreign seed and 
input supplying companies with representation in Ghana. 
Less endowed farmers, with limited capital to invest depend on rural banks and micro finance 
institutions to enable them to cultivate the crop. Most of these financial institutions are ill resourced 
to advance agricultural loans to assist farmers improve their productivity. 
Women/youths/PWD 
Women constitute the largest group that provides market access to pepper farmers. As “middlemen”, 
they practically control the supply of pepper to the major markets as they own majority of the trucks 
that transports the product from the farm communities to the open markets. 
VC ANALYSIS: SMALL RUMINANTS 
Introduction 
76 
Ghana produces only 30% of the national demand for meat. Northern Ghana accounts for 70% of the 
local production. Livestock keeping makes significant contribution to rural livelihoods. It provides 
employment and serves as a source of wealth creation for reducing poverty. The traditional system of 
producing small ruminants (sheep and goats) contributes significantly to the socioeconomic wellbeing 
of farm households in northern Ghana. Besides provision of meat and serving as an important source 
of income, sheep and goats also offer important non-pecuniary benefits such as the provision of 
draught power, hide, manure, savings, insurance against crop failure, farm portfolio diversification, 
and strong social relations. The traditional system of ownership is culturally complex and subsistent in 
nature. This has negatively affected expansion and commercialization of cattle production in Ghana. 
Livestock production in Ghana is low compared to demand. This is attributable to the fact that the 
potential to develop and expand the animal sector is not fully tapped. The country has a high 
potential to become self-sufficient in animal production, yet large quantities of meat are imported to 
meet demand. Small ruminant promotion should aim at improving production and productivity as a 
means of ensuring increasing meat production, consumption as well as rural family income 
diversification. 
Importation of live animals into Ghana 
Year 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Sheep 
16,738 
22,188 
15,763 
13,854 
Goats 
16,953 
32,012 
20,004 
16,900 
Production 
Location  
Northern Ghana, comprising the Upper East, Upper West, and Northern Regions, is the livestock hub 
of the country. It ranks first in the livestock production of Ghana. The region is well known to produce 
sheep (30% of the national output) and goats (35% of the national output).  
In Ghana, small ruminants play an important role in food production systems. They have been an 
integral part of most rural, urban and peri urban households for a long time and their small sizes and 
relatively low cost of production make them a unique resource particularly suited to the limited 
resource base of these households. Sheep and goats are widely distributed and adapted in all agro-
ecological zones due to the various adaptive features they possess: higher fertility, shorter generation 
interval, higher adaptation to harsh environment and ability to thrive on limited feed. 
Production systems and characterization of producers 
The dominant production system is the extensive system (free-range). Under this system, no standard 
ruminant management practices are followed. It is characterized by minimum inputs, no investments 
beyond the foundation stock with animals grazing around, scavenging on refuse dumps, and sleeping 
on verandas and in the open. Animals do not benefit from prophylactic or curative medicinal 
treatment, little or no supplementary feed is offered, no good flock management is practiced and 
there is generally poor housing. Indications that the productivity of small ruminants in this system is 
low and that there is ample opportunity for improvement. Commercial cattle production outside the 
household is common involving farmers hiring the services of herdsmen to keep and manage the 
animals outside the community. 
There are many breeds of sheep, but the dominant is the indigenous West African Dwarf (WAD) or 
the Djallonke, distributed nation-wide. The WAD is acknowledged for its hardiness, trypanotolerance, 
tick tolerance, prolificacy, and suitability for year-round breeding. Although it is a small animal with an 
adult male weight of 25- 30kg and female weight of 20-25 kg, the WAD has the potential to be 
improved genetically through selection. 
77 
In Ghana the WAD is mostly found in the south. The larger and long legged Sahelian sheep, and other 
crosses are found mostly in the north and peri-urban areas of the south. 
The non-adoption of fodder technologies can be attributed to a number of elements including: 
household labour constraint during harvesting of food crops and preparation of dry season vegetable 
production (which is a principal commercial enterprise) and inadequate attention for non-market 
institutional constraints that inhibited competitiveness of smallholder producers. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
The market structure of sheep and goat is characteristically lengthy, about 3 to 5 stages between 
producers and consumers, without significant value addition. The main actors in the cattle VC are 
farmers who are the primary producers, aggregators/ middlemen, large-scale regional livestock 
traders, transporters, feed (crop residues and conventional feeds) sellers, butchers, meat and milk 
processors, caterers, food vendors and restaurants, rural banks, veterinary medicine shops, 
international NGOs, and regulatory institutions (taxation, licensing, and warranties). The livestock VC 
in Ghana is not formally structured with the objective of creating jobs and improving local economies. 
The market channels of small ruminant farmers are through butchers and itinerant traders acting on 
behalf of abattoirs and food vendors. Some of the itinerant traders retail the animals at the weekly 
markets. They sell live animals to household for food or for breeding purposes whiles butchers and 
food vendors trade in meat to customers. 
Auction sales, sales to abattoirs, speculators, and private sales as the major modes of sales of 
livestock, with sales to abattoirs and speculators providing the most access to price information. A 
poorly functioning market of small ruminants could bring up about huge inequities in income 
distribution owing to exploitation by middlemen. 
Market opportunities 
Livestock marketing encompasses the sale, purchase or exchange of live animals and their products 
(milk, meat, wool, and hides) for income. Meat from sheep and goat are highly patronized by revelers 
of "chop bars" in all regions across the nation. Participation of small farmers in markets for small 
ruminants is relatively low in Ghana. Limitations experienced by smallholders i.e., water shortages 
during the dry season, feed-related or health-related high mortality and theft of livestock persist 
because of institutional constraints. These include structural limitations related to availability of 
arable lands, weak support systems for animal production and health services delivery, communities’ 
preference that are skewed towards crop production more than animal husbandry, ineffective 
traditional and formal structures for justice delivery, and gaps in the interaction between 
communities and district and national level organizations such as the Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture, district assemblies, rural banks, and non-governmental organizations as well as traders 
and butchers. 
Confronted with such constraints, the strategies that most smallholders have adopted to be resilient 
entail diversified sources of livelihood, low input use in small ruminant production, and maintaining 
the flock as a capital stock and insurance. Only a few smallholders engage in market or demand-
driven production and/or exhibit successful strategies in small ruminant husbandry. For most 
smallholders, market production, which requires high levels of external inputs or intensification of 
resource use, may not be a viable option. 
Women/youths/PWD 
In the traditional system of rearing cattle in Ghana, cattle can be acquired and cared for by any 
member of the household but their ownership, control, and the decision to sell or slaughter for 
consumption is often the sole responsibility of the male household head. In recent times, this system 
of ownership and control is changing as more youth and women are gaining rights to take decision on 
how to manage and dispose off their animals.  
78 
Institutional analysis and VC management 
There are currently cattle farmers’ and butchers’ associations in most cattle producing areas. Several 
interventions with a focus on smallholder small ruminant commercialization have been made to 
improve Ghanaian small ruminant production systems and markets, such as the National Livestock 
Services Project (1993 – 1999) and the Livestock Development Project (2003 – 2009). However, these 
have not changed the small ruminant production and marketing systems in any significant way. Under 
the “Rearing for Food and Jobs” policy programme of the Ghanaian Government, farmers can be 
profiled and formalized into primary farmer-based organizations to enable them benefit from training 
and credit. 
Nutrition and food security  
The meat of small ruminants is a source of protein in many local cereal-based diets and can improve 
the nutrition of children and pregnant women. The size of small ruminants, which, on average, 
generates about 20 to 35kg carcass weight, allows rural households to conveniently process them 
easily for home consumption with little or no need for preservation. 
SECTION 1: MAIZE VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
Maize is regarded as the most important cereal crop on the domestic market in Ghana and it is one of 
the largest agricultural commodities in terms of production volume. It accounts for 3.3% of total 
agricultural production volume and about 65% of cereal output in Ghana, howbeit, with a reported 
post-harvest loss between 5% and 70%. Current yield rate stands at about 2.73 tons per hectare, an 
increase from 2.42 tons per hectare in 2019, and has been increasing for the last three years. In terms 
of its uses, maize is an important and major raw material in the production of poultry feed as well as a 
substitute for the brewing industry 
Status of the crop/produce 
Maize production recorded a 4-year CAGR of about 8.05% from the year 2015 to 2018, the highest 
among the major crops cultivated in Ghana. Trend analysis of maize production in Ghana reveals a 
general upward trend, however the period between 2013 and 2017 saw a flattening of the curve, 
indicating little or no growth in maize production within this period. However, the period between 
2015 and 2018 saw a clear increasing trend, perhaps due to the government flagship program of PFJ 
and RFJ, which basically subsidized critical imports for the cultivation of maize and other crops. 
Interestingly, even the fall army worm (FAW) infestation could not curtail the growth of maize 
production within this period. From the trend, 2019 saw a decrease in maize production by about 9% 
compared to production level in 2018. 
c
i
r
t
e
M
f
o
s
n
o
i
l
l
i
M
n
I
s
n
o
T
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Crop systems and characterization of producers 
In Ghana, maize is mainly cultivated under traditional production methods and rain-fed conditions. 
Average yield of maize for the year 2019 was about 2.42 MT/ha of a potential yield of 5.5 MT/ha, 
rising to about 2.73 MT/ha in 2020. Maize is grown throughout Ghana; however, the leading 
79 
producing areas are mainly in the middle- (Bono East, Bono, Ahafo, Eastern, and Ashanti regions) 
where about 84% of maize is grown, with the remaining 16% being grown in the northern regions of 
Ghana (Northern, Northeast, Savannahh, Upper East, and Upper West). While the middle belt does 
two cycles of maize per year, the northern belt does only one cycle in a year. Field report reveals that 
maize from the latter destination is normally free from aflatoxins because of extensive dry season to 
allow for natural sun drying. As a result, maize grains from these areas are desired for the breweries 
and food processing entities. Maize from the middle belt (especially in the major season), however, 
needs mechanical drying to be at the highest quality desired by both industrial and domestic users. 
Production 
Maize production is predominantly under rainfed cultivation with no irrigation. 
Location:  
Upper East – Tumu 
The agro-ecological zones for maize cultivation in Ghana can be grouped into four main zones with 
differing system of maize cultivation. However, the major zones for maize cultivation are those 
located in the middle belt, (forest zone, and transition zone) and the northern belt (Guinea 
Savannahh). 
• Coastal Savannahh zone: 
The coastal Savannahh zone comprises a narrow belt of Savannahh that runs along the coast and 
widens towards the east side of Ghana. Maize mostly intercropped with cassava are grown by 
farmers. This zone experiences bimodally distributed annual rainfall totaling around 800 mm, and 
maize planting normally begins at onset of the major rainy season (March or April). Low productivity 
has been reported due to the light soil texture and low fertility. Areas include, Central, Accra, Volta, 
Oti. 
• Forest zone: 
The forest zone lies down just inland the coastal Savannahh. Most of Ghana’s forest is semi-
deciduous, with a small area of high rain forest in the South-Western part of the country close to the 
border with Côte d’Ivoire. The cultivated maize is mostly intercropped with cassava, plantain, and 
cocoyam. The annual rainfall averaging about 1,500 mm is observed, and maize is planted both in the 
major and minor rainy seasons (March and September respectively). Areas typically include, Bono, 
Ahafo, Eastern, and Volta. 
• Transition zone: 
The forest zone gradually gives way to the transition zone towards the Northern part of Ghana. This 
zone is an important area for commercial grain production, and is characterized by deep, friable soils, 
and the relatively sparse tree cover allowing for progressive cultivation. Annual rainfall averaging 
about 1,300 mm is bimodally distributed. Maize cultivation is done both in the major and minor rainy 
seasons mostly as a monocrop or intercrop. Areas under this zone include, North of Ashanti, Bono 
East, and Oti. 
• Guinea Savannahh zone: 
Most of the lands in the Northern part of Ghana are in this zone. There is a single season of rain per 
year averaging 1,100 mm. Although sorghum and millet are the predominant cereals, maize is equally 
grown. Maize can be intercropped with legumes and other crops. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
Small holder farmers: The total maize production in Ghana is done by about 70% of small holder 
framers. These are made up of both peasant and commercial farmers who cultivate maize in small 
quantities. The difference here is that the peasants concentrate on cultivating maize mainly for 
80 
personal and domestic uses, while commercial farmers cultivate for sale to other actors along the 
value chain. They are also cases where farmers cultivate maize for both reasons. They are commercial 
farmers because they farm with the objective of making profit at the end of the season and that 
informs the approach to farming. The approach to ensuring farmer welfare is the formation of Farmer 
Based Organizations (FBOs) to give small holder farmers one voice and strength in negotiations as 
well as accessing market and finance. However, there are very few properly registered and 
administered FBOs in the middle and northern belts. The MoFA websites has record of only ten maize 
(FBOs) in the middle and norther belts, excluding Eastern region, which has about twenty-seven (27) 
maize based FBOs. 
Women are also landowners and do production as well. Women do more of the planting, harvesting, 
and threshing, sometimes pest control (spraying). 
Nucleus farmers: these include large scale farmers who cultivate maize. Most of them may typically 
have small-holder farmers that they work with to help them meet grain orders. 
Input Providers: Inputs form most of the cost component in maize cultivation. Inputs come in the 
form of seeds, fertilizers, agro-chemicals, among others. With respect to seed, farmers use both 
hybrid and OPV seeds. Hybrid seeds are provided through Government sources and some nucleus 
farmers, while different OPV seeds are obtained from local seed sources. The situation on the ground 
is that hybrid seeds are not regularly obtained since they are imported. Again, hybrid seeds sold in per 
acre packages; and are calibrated based on using planters. However, farmers use manual planting, 
hence are not able to achieve the recommended plant density Some actors such as Agromite source 
for hybrid seed from outside Ghana with permission of the government while others make use of 
available seed companies in Ghana. Field report revealed that farmers, especially those in the middle 
belt worry of the incidence of armyworm against ineffective pest control chemicals. According to 
them, the preferred insecticide (Attack) is not readily available. 
Mechanization Providers: Current demand of mechanization services by small holder farmers is 
primarily focused on land preparation services, especially plowing. The services are provided by two 
main groups, nucleus farmers and agriculture mechanization service businesses. Players such as 
Agromite Limited, provides other mechanization services such as harvesting, and post-harvest 
services to small holder farmers and some other nucleus farmers and recover their monies through 
in-kind produce at the end of harvest. Major constraint in this segment of the value chain is low 
operational scale due to machinery being idle for long periods within the year and being needed at 
specific times in the crop calendar within specific locations. This affects profitability of investment. 
With such a low operational scale, it is essential to consider various options for introducing low-cost, 
small tractors suited to the current farming scale in the country. Also, a used tractor model is one of 
the options available for industry players to consider. Tractor-hire services can play an important role 
in transforming smallholder maize production. Another solution is to move machinery between the 
northern and middle belt because of differing crop calendars of the two zones, howbeit, it may be 
only viable in large scale. 
Other challenges include inadequate tractor services for land preparation (ploughing, harrowing) 
against a growing demand for tractors for land preparation services during peak times in the season. 
Again, high competition for tractors, especially, in the middle belt. For instance, tractors from the 
northern belt comes to augment what is in the middle belt, but they come late in the season, delaying 
planting. 
Aggregation 
Maize aggregators come in the form of small, medium, and large aggregators. Large and medium 
aggregators are usually private entities such as Onuado farms, who typically also engage in 
cultivation. The following situations typically exist with such aggregators. 
Use own resources with limited bank loan or other financing facilities. 
81 
Have sub-aggregators at the community level who do the initial bulking from the farmers. 
Provide inputs and land preparation services to small holder farmers who are associated with them 
Sometimes also provide loans to small holder farmers for their livelihood needs, and recovered in-
kind (maize produce) 
Aggregator supplies maize to larger buyers in Kumasi, Accra, Sunyani 
Operates warehouse for storage 
Require several equipment to be able to service farmers adequately. These include tractors and 
implements, planters, threshers, among others. 
Market Opportunities 
The maize value chain has strong market linkages right from the upstream to the downstream. At the 
upstream of the value chain, maize cultivation creates ready market for the input industry such as 
fertilizer producers and marketers, agro-chemicals, and seeds. Inputs alone form about 42% of maize 
production. This is followed by harvesting activities, and post harvesting activities with forming about 
17% each of the production of maize. 
Figure 11: Production cost analysis of maize 
Cost Analysis of Maize Cultivation per Acre
17%
10%
9%
17%
6%
42%
Land preparation
Inputs
Other labour
Harvesting
Planting
Post harvest
Furthermore, there are series of opportunities created at the downstream segment of the maize 
value chain. These opportunities are in aggregation, animal feed processing, processing of maize grits 
for the brewery industry. 
Main challenges of the maize value chain are inadequate mechanization to improve efficiency in 
cultivation, Low quality input such as fertilizer, inadequate storage space at appropriate areas and 
changing rainfall patterns 
1. Aggregation- The maize market is made of the formal and informal markets. The formal markets 
include formal maize aggregating companies who source for maize, clean and dry for onward sales to 
the industrial process in the beverage, poultry, and other food industries. These aggregators often 
engage in production themselves while also organizing small holder farmers. The informal market 
includes the middlemen and women who source for maize in the major maize markets. 
2. Processing and utilization of maize represents up to 20% to 25% of the total maize marketed in 
Ghana, as follows.  
1. Breweries are important players in the Ghana maize market. Usually, sorghum is preferred to maize 
in brewing, but breweries substitute maize if attainable at a competitive price. The general rule of 
thumb is that maize grits price of US$0.80/kg is the highest amount at which brewers consider 
substituting grits for sorghum.  
82 
2. The poultry industry is another important player in the maize market in Ghana. According to the 
latest records about 250,000 metric tons of maize is used for poultry feed annually in Ghana (FAO 
2012). The poultry industry therefore provides a great opportunity for maize production in Ghana. 
Potential for Value Creation 
The post-harvest economy in the maize value chain is large and has a huge potential. There are 
opportunities for investment in warehousing infrastructure at relevant locations, drying facilities, 
cleaning facilities, haulage, haulage insurance, semi-processing of maize into maize grits, processing 
of maize into animal feed, and domestic use forming a core part of the cuisine of northern Ghana. 
SMEs and Job Creation 
Small and medium scale enterprises are into input provision, cultivation, the provision of IT services, 
aggregation, transportation, warehousing, insurance, semi-processing, and processing of maize. This 
does create a good number of jobs for the youth and has the potential to further create a great 
number of both direct and indirect jobs for the youth. 
Main constraints and challenge 
1. Inadequate mechanization to improve efficiency in cultivation: For instance, Agromite Limited is 
one of the most resourceful Agro-SMEs in the Sisala East and West zones, however, it is only able to 
provide only 15% mechanization coverage for its 6000 acres production  
2. Low quality input such as fertilizer: Farmers indicated that they received low quality fertilizers 
which led to bad yield for many of them. In the same vein, others testified that they bought quality 
fertilizer brands and saw about a 100% increase in their yield. 
3. Inadequate storage space at appropriate areas. 
4. Changing rainfall patterns 
5. Farmers in the middle belt revealed that transportation of produce from farm to market is a 
challenge due to competing demands on KIA trucks and of the bad farm roads. 
Women/youths/PWD 
Potential for inclusion and job creation 
Participation of women in maize cultivation is relatively lower compared to men, and women 
participation in other related crops such as soya. Field reports reveal about 20% women participation 
in maize cultivation in the northern belt. However, maize cultivation among women in the middle belt 
is slightly higher, about 25%, compared to the northern belt. One of the reasons boils down to land 
tenure system, which is more flexible in the middle belt as against the northern belt. 
Aggregation especially within the informal markets serves as an opportunity for women to participate 
in and out of the zone under consideration. A typical example of such opportunity is the largely 
untapped potential of the maize traders at Ejura, who are predominantly women. Currently, the 
following situations persist for these women. 
No benefit from any Government intervention and yet their working environment is in deplorable 
state.   
No proper place of storage of grain at the market. 
No credit for them to procure maize and store and expand their business. Sometimes when there is a 
glut, a lot of maize is wasted on the market due to lack of proper storage and inability to mob it and 
store. 
Absence of weights and measures is affecting their activities because they are unable to communicate 
standard prices across the markets they trade with.  
Consequently, what is needed is collaboration with these traders and others else where to have an 
arrangement where they are supported to handle grain trade in a more harmonized and coordinated 
manner including management of strategic stocks. 
83 
Institutional Analysis and VC Management 
Farmers that work with Agromite are organized on community basis with leaders for each community 
level, who respond to field officers responsible for monitoring and supervising farmers. 
Climate and Potential Impact of Climate Change on Production Capacities 
Climate change has affected the rainfall pattern in Tumu and its surroundings. Farmers reported that 
the rains start later than the usual month of June and ends around the month of October. This has 
dire consequences on the yield and important post-harvest activities such as drying. 
Farmers in the middle belt equally reported of having observed changes in weather conditions that 
affect their production activities (inadequate and erratic rainfall pattern, high incidence of armyworm) 
Nutrition and Food Security 
Maize remains an important part of Ghanaian cuisine, featuring in a range of delicacies by different 
groups of people in Ghana. Popular foods include porridge, banku, kenkey, among others. Increase in 
maize yield has positive impact on food security while decrease in maize yield could have dire 
consequence on food security. 
Quantitative Analysis 
Figure shows a typical  
Figure 12: Maize Crop Calendar in the Northern Belt of Ghana 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August  Sept  Oct 
Nov 
Northern belt (1st Cycle) 
Hiring of land 
Ploughing 
Planting 
Weed Control 1 
Fertilizer application 
Top dressing 
Weed control 2 
Harvesting 
Threshing 
Sales 
Table 10: Maize Crop Budget in the Northern Belt 
Crop Budget (Maize) 
unit 
qty per acre 
Land Rent 
Land preparation: 
  Harrowing 
Planting: 
Seeding and basal application 
Seed 
Weed control 1: 
 Broad spectrum Weedicide 
 Selective weedicide 
Spraying of broad spectrum weedicide 
Spraying selective weedicide 
acre 
acre 
acre 
1kg bag 
lts 
lts 
acre 
acre 
84 
1 
1 
1 
10 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Unit price 
GH ȼ 
50 
Amount 
GH ȼ 
50 
120 
150 
30 
17 
30 
50 
50 
120 
150 
300 
17 
30 
50 
50 
Fertilizer application: 
fertilizer  (basal application) 
Fertilizer top dressing 
Harvesting cost 
Threshing 
Total production cost 
Revenue 
Gross margin 
Gross margin percentage 
Gross ROI 
50kg bag 
acre 
acre 
acre 
2 
1 
1 
1 
100 kg bags 
20 
130 
135 
300 
300 
130 
260 
135 
300 
300 
1,762 
2,600 
838 
32.23% 
47.56% 
SECTION 2: SOYA VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
Soybean was first introduced to the Gold Coast in 1910, one hundred and ten years ago. Since its first 
foray into Ghana, soy has gone through several development phases. Soy as a crop has comparative 
advantage over other crops in Ghana due to the following. 
Highly reliable and ready market for soybeans when compared with other crops  
Soybeans has a higher market price value than other traditional farm crops  
Due to its limited usage of fertilizer, its production cost is lower than other farm crops  
It is environmentally friendly due to its nitrogen fixing properties which replenishes the fertility of the 
soil  
There is no waste product with soybeans in the sense that most of its bi products are used for several 
things such as poultry feed, animal feed, composting etc.  
Status of the Crop/Produce 
Soybean production is driven by Ghanaian poultry industry. The size of Ghanaian commercial poultry 
production is pivotal to accurately assessing the volumes of imported soybean meal (and feed 
concentrates). Currently, soy production is increasing with more assured markets in Ghana. As shown 
in Figure 4, soy production dipped from 2011 to 2013 after a peak within the period of 2009 to 2011. 
In the period between 2013 and 2016, the soy production curve flattened with little or no movement. 
However, the period between 2016 and 2018 recovered significant increase in soy production, hitting 
a 10 year high in the year 2018.  
Figure 13: Trend of Soy Production in Ghana from 2008 to 2018 
t
M
'
0
0
0
200
150
100
50
0
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
This has been partly spurred by the activities of importers from Turkey, India, Denmark, Cote D’Ivoire, 
Burkina Faso, who buy in large quantities for exports to Europe and for their local industries. 
Aggregators in the soy value chain explain that this is due to the fact that very little chemicals and 
fertilizer are used in the cultivation of soy as such it makes Ghana’s soy near organic when test against 
the various chemical contents.  Local soybean production does have a slight advantage over imported 
85 
beans, as smaller processors are practically unable to import beans to run through their facilities. The 
smaller quantities required by these processors must come as container trade, which comes at a 
higher logistical price than bulk shipments. Only Ghana Nuts, the largest processor, can utilize a larger 
bulk shipment. 
Production 
Location 
The agro-ecological zones for soya cultivation in Ghana can be grouped into two main zones with 
differing system of maize cultivation, namely the transition zone and the northern belt (Guinea 
Savannahh). 
• Transition zone: 
The forest zone gradually gives way to the transition zone towards the Northern part of Ghana. This 
zone is an important area for commercial grain production, and is characterized by deep, friable soils, 
and the relatively sparse tree cover allowing for progressive cultivation. Annual rainfall averaging 
about 1,300 mm is bimodally distributed. Maize cultivation is done both in the major and minor rainy 
seasons mostly as a monocrop or intercrop. Areas under this zone include, North of Ashanti, Bono 
East, and Oti. 
• Guinea Savannahh zone: 
Most of the lands in the Northern part of Ghana are in this zone. There is a single season of rain per 
year averaging 1,100 mm. Although sorghum and millet are the predominant cereals, maize is equally 
grown. Maize can be intercropped with legumes and other crops. 
Tumu and its environs in the Sisala East and West have a single maximus rainfall regime which starts 
from June and ends in October. This is normally followed by a dry spell from November to May. The 
Sisala East and West districts are in the Guinea Savannahh vegetation zone where large portions of 
land are categorized as fairly and fairly to marginally suitable for the cultivation of crops including 
soya. The area present land highly suitable for extensive mechanized cultivation of export and food 
crops. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
Input Providers: There are currently two broad categories of input providers in the zone, namely, the 
providers under the government subsidy support and private input providers without government 
subsidy support. Some actors source for their seed from outside Ghana with permission of the 
government while others make use of available seed companies in Ghana. The most important inputs 
include fertilizers, herbicides, certified seeds, among others. 
Mechanization Providers: These players such as Agromite Limited, provides land preparation, 
harvesting, and post-harvest services to mostly small holder farmers and some other nucleus farmers. 
Such players recover their monies through in-kind produce at the end of harvest. 
Small holder farmers: these are commercial farmers who cultivate maize in small quantities. They are 
commercial farmers because they farm with the objective of making profit at the end of the season 
and that informs the approach to farming. 
Nucleus farmers: these include large scale farmers who cultivate maize. Most of them may typically 
have small-holder farmers that they work with to help them meet grain orders. 
Market opportunities 
Description 
The soya market is made of the formal and informal markets. The formal markets include formal soya 
aggregating companies who source for soya, clean and dry for onward sales to the industrial process 
86 
in the poultry, and other food industries. These aggregators often engage in production themselves 
while also organizing small holder farmers. The informal market includes the middlemen and women 
who source for soya in the major maize markets. 
Potential for Value Creation 
The post-harvest economy in the soya value chain is large and has a huge potential. There are 
opportunities for investment in warehousing infrastructure at relevant locations, drying facilities, 
cleaning facilities, haulage, haulage insurance, processing of soya into animal feed. 
SMEs and job creation 
Small and medium scale enterprises are into input provision, cultivation, the provision of IT services, 
aggregation, transportation, warehousing, insurance, semi-processing, and processing of soya. This 
does create a good number of jobs for the youth and has the potential to further create a great 
number of both direct and indirect jobs for the youth. 
Main Constraints and Challenge 
1. Inadequate mechanization to improve efficiency in cultivation. For instance, Agromite Limited is 
one of the most resourceful Agro-SMEs in the Sisala East and West zones, however, it is only able to 
provide only 15% mechanization coverage for its 6000 acres production  
2. Low quality input such as fertilizer. Farmers indicated that they received low quality fertilizers 
which led to bad yield for many of them. In the same vein, others testified that they bought quality 
fertilizer brands and saw about a 100% increase in their yield. 
3. Inadequate storage space at appropriate areas. 
4. Changing rainfall patterns 
Women/youths/PWD 
Women in the production areas, especially in the northern belt favor the cultivation of soya 
compared to maize as the latter is seen as a more masculine crop and the former a feminine crop. 
They explain that the agronomic practices in soya are seen to be less difficult compared to maize. In 
effect, at the small-holder level, as women dominate in soya cultivation, men dominate in maize 
cultivation. 
Climate and Potential Impact of CC on Production Capacities 
Farmers in the Tumu area report that the rainfall pattern has altered, shifting from the usual June to 
July ending, therefore affects planting times and by extension the yield and post-harvest activities. 
Quantitative analysis 
Figure 14: Soya Crop Calendar in the Northern Belt 
Soy Crop Calendar 
Crop Calendar (Soy) 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August  Sept  Oct 
Northern belt (1st Cycle) 
Hiring of land 
ploughing 
Planting 
Pre-emergence weed control 
Fertilizer application 
Ammonia application 
Post - emergence weed control 
Harvesting 
Gathering 
87 
Drying 
Bagging 
Sales 
Table 11: Soya Crop Budget 
Activity description 
Unit measure 
Qty 
Unit Price 
GH ȼ 
Amount 
GH ȼ 
Land preparation: 
  harrowing 
Certified Seed 
Seeding and basal application 
 Broad spectrum Weedicide 
 Selective weedicide 
Spraying of broad spectrum weedicide 
Spraying selective weedicide 
fertilizer  (basal application) 
Fertilizer top dressing 
Harvesting cost 
Threshing 
Production Cost 
Crop Insurance 
Total Production Cost 
Revenue 
Yield 
Price 
Total Revenue 
Gross Margin 
Gross Margin percent 
Proxy IRR 
1 
18 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
acre 
kg 
acre 
lts 
lts 
acre 
acre 
50kg bag 
acre 
acre 
acre 
% of prd 
100 kg bag 
100 kg bag 
100 kg bag 
15 
150 
15 
120 
10 
150 
17 
30 
50 
50 
130 
135 
300 
300 
5% 
180 
120.00 
180.00 
150.00 
17.00 
30.00 
50.00 
50.00 
260.00 
135.00 
300.00 
300.00 
1,592.00 
79.60 
1,671.60 
2,700 
1,028 
38% 
62% 
SECTION 3: CASHEW VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
The cashew nut industry offers tremendous developmental opportunity for Ghana as the industry is 
becoming a major avenue for job creation in the rural areas and a good source of foreign exchange 
for Ghana in general. Over the past decade, Ghana has seen increased interest in its cashew sector 
particularly by buyers from India, Vietnam, and Brazil. These companies buy in large quantities, export 
to their home countries for processing and onward export to the USA or EU and for their own home 
consumption. Currently the USA consumes about 55% of the world’s cashew exports, with India also 
being a major consumer. With declining raw cashew nut production in India and Vietnam, increasing 
attention is turned to West Africa where current production does not meet the total requirement of 
the Asian market. The conducive business environment provided by Ghana has seen entities from 
these countries setting up purchasing outlets in the country. 
The cashew value chain offers an important potential for employment and wealth creation, climate 
change mitigation through climate smart agriculture and the economic empowerment of women and 
youth, especially in vulnerable rural areas. 
Status of Crop 
88 
Production of RCN has been on the rise in the last five years chiefly because of increase in cultivation 
and farm establishments. Cashew productivity in terms of kilogram per hectare has not seen same 
increase as production volume. Table 1 shows volumes of RCN and cashew productivity in Ghana 
from 2015 to 2020. 
Table 12:Cashew Production and Productivity in Ghana 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Production of RCN (MT) 
70,000 
75,000 
75,000 
110,000 
85,962* 
Productivity (kg/ha) 
Source: Comcashew 
958 
606 
600 
750 
- 
Production 
Cashew is grown as a smallholder crop in Ghana and the commercial plantation sector is small. It is 
estimated that about 88-90% of cashew farms are owned by smallholders, with farms ranging in size 
from a minimum of 0.8 ha to 3.0 ha. Large plantations account for 12% of cashew farms and are 
between 4 ha and 40 ha. Most of small producers rely on family labor or hired labor, especially for 
weeding and harvesting activities. 
Farmers’ interest in cashew production relates to the availability of ready market due to the high 
import demand for raw cashew nuts by Asian processors. Cashew production generally forms the 
main source of income of producers in top producer regions (Ahafo, Bono, Bono East). The ongoing 
climatic condition changes have reportedly worsened other sources of income such as cocoa and food 
crop sales. 
The effective production acreage was estimated at 280,000 hectares in 2018, against 325,000 that 
are planted (86%). Some 125,000 producers would have been involved in cashew production in 2019. 
Cashew is invariably established among short-term intercrops and intercropping is pursued if space 
and soil fertility allow. The most common intercrops in both the Forest-Savannah Transition and 
Interior Savannah zones are yam, groundnut, soybean, and maize. Pineapples, pepper, and maize are 
the most important intercrops for cashew farming in the Coastal Savannah agroecological zone. 
Remarkably cashew is harvested during the lean season for all major staples (e.g., maize, yam, 
plantain, and millet). 
In Ghana, trees are relatively young. In 2018, national yield was recorded at 400 kg/hectare, down 
from 600 in 2016 and 2017 (yield was at 950 kg/hectare in 2015 according to GIZ). The regional yield 
ranges from 350 kg/ha to a top of 650kg/ha in the Forest-Savannah Transition zone. 
Location: 
The cashew tree grows with a minimum of attention and is easily cultivated. It is usually found up in 
regions where the annual rainfall is as low as 500 mm and as high as 3,750 mm. For maximum 
productivity, good soil and adequate moisture are essential. The tree has an extensive root system, 
which helps it to tolerate a wide range of moisture levels and soil types, but commercial production is 
only advisable in well-drained, sandy loam or red soils. 
Cashew is grown as a cash crop in four agro-ecological zones, namely the Interior Savannah (Guinea 
and Sudan Savannahs), Forest-Savannah Transition and Coastal Savannah. All regions of Ghana except 
for the Western/Western North Regions would be suitable for cashew production. Among these 
agroecological zones, Forest-Savannah Transition is regarded as the most suitable for cashew 
cultivation, while Coastal Savannah is considered only marginally suitable. 
89 
Regions 
Rainfall (mm) 
Agro-
ecological 
zones 
Forest-
Savannah 
transition 
North of Ashanti, 
Bono, Bono East, 
Ahafo, Eastern, 
Volta, Oti 
Interior Guinea 
Savannah 
Northern, Upper 
East 
Interior Sudan 
Savannah 
Upper East 
Coastal 
Savannah 
Central, Accra, 
Volta, Oti 
Soil types 
Temperatures 
(°C) 
Max  Min 
29/33  19/22  Soil types are 
suitable for 
cashew. These 
are highly deep 
soils and mostly 
of a medium 
texture. Soil 
moisture and 
nutrient 
retention is low 
to moderate. 
32/34  20/22  Soils of good 
physical 
characteristics, 
well 
to moderately 
well 
drained, and 
feature low 
levels of organic 
matter and 
nitrogen. 
32/34  20/22  Soils are 
heterogeneous, 
deep to 
moderately 
deep, and 
medium 
textured. 
Moisture and 
nutrient 
retention is low 
to 
moderate. 
29/33  20/24  Organic matter 
levels are 
generally very 
low. 
Rainfall is 
characteristically 
bimodal and ranges 
from 1,200-1,400 mm 
per year. The major 
season starts at the 
end of March and the 
minor season at the 
beginning of 
September. 5 dry 
months. 
Rainfall ranges from 
1,000-1,200 mm. This 
zone has unimodal 
rainfall which starts at 
the end of April and 
runs until end 
August/September. 6-
7 dry months. 
Rainfall ranges from 
1,000-1,200 mm. This 
zone has unimodal 
rainfall which starts at 
the end of April and 
runs until end 
August/September. 7-
8 dry months. 
This zone features a 
bimodal rainfall 
pattern. Rainfall ranges 
from 750- 1,000 mm 
per year, and is very 
low along the coast 
but increases towards 
inland areas. The 
major season starts at 
the end of March. 4 
dry months. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
90 
The cashew production sub-segment in Ghana is largely a small-holder activity with majority of 
farmers having an average farm size of between 0.8 ha and 2.5 ha and over 60,000 small-holder 
farmers are engaged in the cultivation of the crop in Ghana. The production sub-segment also has 
players such as seedling producers, who may double up as commercial farmers, research institutions, 
donor agencies and projects in cashew production, among other players. Production entails farm 
establishment and annual maintenance. 
Primary producers predominantly relate to aggregators and sub-aggregators who are close to their 
communities. Farmers typically receive financial and technical assistance from aggregators during off-
season to increase productivity and sell to aggregators providing these forms of assistance. However, 
some farmers engage in side-selling leading to defaults after harvest. Farmers also seldom relate to 
the big exporting firms and processors. 
Aggregation 
Aggregators buy raw cashew nuts (RCN) from farmers and store them in their warehouses and in turn 
sell to exporters and processors at the appropriate time. In other words, they serve as the link 
between the primary producers (smallholder farmers and commercial farmers) and the processors 
and exporters. Some aggregators have sub-aggregators stationed in the producing communities, who 
would typically aggregate in much smaller quantities and transfer to the larger aggregators in due 
course. Aggregators deal with both smallholder farmers and commercial farmers. Again, they deal 
with bigger trading partners typically from India, and other cashew processing countries. Aggregators 
typically provide some assistance to farmers during the off-season in the form of inputs, extension 
services, pruning services, among others. In other cases, aggregators offer direct financial assistance 
to help with the maintenance to the fields. Aggregators also have relationships with other commercial 
farmers.  
Processing 
In the cashew processing sub-sector in Ghana, there is processing of cashew fruit and that of the raw 
cashew nut. Raw cashew nut processing has the primary processing and secondary processing. The 
primary processors process raw cashew nuts into kernels for exports and for domestic sales to the 
secondary processors, who are predominantly roasters. The secondary processors buy the kernels 
from the primary processors and roast them for sales domestically. There are currently 14 processors 
in Ghana with 6 active and 8 firms closed because of lack of sustainable supply of raw cashew nuts. 
Some processors in the value chain include, USIBRAS Ghana Limited (Prampram operates 15000 to 
20,000 Mt out of installed capacity of 30,000 MT), Mim Cashews and Agricultural Products Ltd., Kona 
Agro processing Limited (Wenchi - shut down in 2015), Kabile Cashew Farmers’ Cooperative 
Company, Nimdee Hyren Company Limited, Nafana Agro Processing Company, Agroking Limited, 
Gensap Ventures and Innov. Organic Limited. 
The processing segment is in the middle of the value chain. It deals with producers and exporters of 
kernels. It also deals with primary and secondary processors. There are currently 3 companies 
operating in Ghana with the required food safety standards. Other processors have enrolled on the 
ACA seal, and they have had their initial audits. Firms under this segment work with producers and 
aggregators of raw cashew nuts (RCN) and work from primary processors (kernel). 
91 
Primary Processors
Raw Cashew Nuts (RCN) to 
Kernels
Secondary Processors
Kernels to Roasted cashew
Figure 15:Raw Cashew Nut Processing in Ghana 
(own construct) 
Processors relate with the farmers/producers. Producers include both large farmers and smallholder 
farmer groups. Currently, processors relate more with smallholder farmers and aggregators. The 
relation is about 60-70% with aggregators, and 30% with famers directly.  
The primary processors, who process raw cashew nuts to kernels sell to the secondary processors, the 
roasters in the domestic market.  The roasters/secondary processors, sell to supermarkets and shops 
domestically. Currently, exportation of roasted cashew is limited, and this segment would need some 
capital injection to enable them produce more efficiently to export. In addition, roasters do not 
currently have the food safety standards required by international markets, hence they are feeding 
the local market. 
Export and International Buyers 
Specific Activity within the Cashew Value Chain 
The exporters/international buyers, work with producer cooperatives. Currently, there is one 
processor with the required food standards/certification, that these exporters buy from. The main 
business partners include the following. 
1. Farmers, farmer-based organizations, freight forwarders,  
2. Customers in Vietnam and India.  
3. Processors side, these firms work with processors, depending on the relationship in the past they 
can toll process, buying the RCN and giving it to the processor to process.  
Market Opportunities 
Global demand for cashew nuts has been growing at a rate of 7% per annum over the last decade, 
and demand for cashew kernels is expected to grow by 85% in the years ahead. Consumption rates 
are predicted to remain high due to the growing awareness of the health and nutritional benefits of 
cashew nuts. 
Ghana would have 14 significant processors (2019), yet half was closed at that time for lack of raw 
material. They employ some 4,700 workers. Ghana processed some 10,000 MT of nuts locally in 2018 
(8% of production) for an installed capacity of 50,000 (20% used), down from 65,000 in 2015. The 
average processing level over the last 5 years was 7,250 MT.  
Around 90% of Ghana’s cashew nuts are exported in their raw form to India and Vietnam. Here the 
nuts are processed and re-exported to the US, Europe, the Middle East, China and Australia. On the 
Vietnamese market, the price of the kernel is at minimum 4 times higher than the RCN. The 
competition between Vietnam and India for sourcing raw nuts in Africa is intensified by demand from 
92 
local cashew processors, a process that drives the farm gate price of cashew nuts higher, thereby 
incentivizing farmers to shift from food production to cashew nuts in African countries. Producers 
usually capture between 60 and 70% of the FOB price of RCN. According to GIZ, job creation in the 
cashew VC is 75% in production, 20% in trade and 5% in processing. 
Toll processing- in this, exporters finance acquisition of raw cashew nuts and then processor would 
charge a tolling fee for the processing, so that these buyers could ultimately have the kernels for 
export.  
There has been a lot of focus by various organizations that have been instrumental in helping farmers 
with best practices. Ghana is very advanced in relation to other countries, although production is not 
as high. 
Market availability - There is a big and ready market for kernels, but because of the operational and 
financial challenges of processing firms in Ghana, they are unable to supply the required volumes. 
Therefore, with the needed support, firms could be efficient and competitive enough to supply the 
market. There are now efforts to regulate all the value chain actors. Cashew production in Ghana 
continues to increase and farmers are showing greater interest in its cultivation. As a result of 
combined efforts of development agencies and other cashew stakeholders in Ghana, production is 
sure to increase in the foreseeable future. 
Main Constraints and Challenge 
Production-related Challenges 
1. Inadequate sustainable form of financing to help in good agronomic practices. 
2. Inadequate improved seedling and cashew variety leading to uncompetitive yields. Due to the poor 
planting materials used over the last 3 decades, yields are not as high as expected. 
3.Access to quality inputs. 
4. Farmer side selling making it difficult to partner with other players in the cashew value chains 
especially aggregators.  
Aggregation-related Challenges 
1. Side selling among farmers: Farmers typically side sell RCN to higher bidding entities and 
aggregators, after benefiting from aggregators who offer them with advances/financial assistance. 
You may advance money to other buyers, and they may not bring you the RCN, they may sell to 
others. We try to find producers/buyers that are trustworthy.  
2. Most of the farmers seek assistance off season from multiple intermediaries, and at the time of 
collection, they are burdened with greater levels of debt.  
Processing-related Challenges 
Cashew processors in Ghana face several challenges, enumerated as follows 
1. Access to appropriate finance. One of the foremost challenges is not just access to finance but 
access to appropriate ones that would guarantee profitability and long-term growth. These finance 
sources must come with suitable interest rates, tenures, collateral considerations, and moratorium. 
This is because margins associated with processed kernels are thin and simply may not jive with the 
current high interest rates. Lack of access to appropriate finance leads to the following challenges. 
2. Accessing raw material – although raw cashew nuts are available, there is high competition from 
exporters. There are also other costs that processors incur in addition to procurement cost, such as 
inventory costs. These costs are secondary to the core processing cost and as such lengthens the cash 
conversion cycle, the period within which stock is converted to cash.  
a. Cost of technology. Most factories of processors run on manual operations (about 70-80%) because 
of limited financial capacity to the required machinery to automate most of the processing activities 
to increase efficiency and reduce labor cost.   
It is difficult to have the right skills/capacity for factories.  
93 
In Ghana, the cashew industry and purchases are not regulated and as such, unregistered companies 
are able to purchase RCN at the farm gate. This situation means most unregistered companies always 
flood the local market, creating unhealthy competition to push RCN price up to the disadvantage of 
processors. 
Challenges related to Exporters and International Buyers  
1. Loyalty of farmers is a challenge, firms in this space can have a relationship with farmers during the 
maintenance stage of the cashew crop calendar by supplying them with the needed inputs and 
services, but farmers show little or no commitment during harvest, and sell to other companies who 
offer more during harvest.   
2. Typically, other international buyers, non-registered and non-tax paying show up during the harvest 
period and buy large quantities of the cashew nuts by bidding higher than the regulated firms.  
3. Tremendous amount of high costs in the infrastructure.  
4. A lot of processors not competitive with Asian competitors.  
Proffered Solutions to Challenges 
1. Industry regulation will help stabilize prices of raw cashew nuts and reduce farmer side selling to 
some extent 
2. There are two ways to ameliorate the yield challenge.  
           a. First by replacing the top productive parts of the tree with a new improved variety through a 
process of grafting called top-working.  
              b. Secondly, by pruning of trees for regrowth and eliminating diseased branches. This 
encourages new shoots to form and hence better yield.  
These two processes, top-working and pruning requires skilled manpower and use of tree cutting 
devices such as motorized saws. This equipment is expensive for the ordinary smallholder farmer. The 
arrangement under a potential cashew scheme is for the aggregator or processing (technical 
operator) to recruit a gang of skilled personnel with the requisite equipment and training to organize 
and deliver the service to farmers. This will then be transferred as non-cash credit to the farmer to be 
paid in-kind during harvest. 
3.  Development of formal and organized schemes for farmers with written and enforceable contracts 
between farmers and aggregators could limit the incidence of side-selling. 
4. Toll processing- is a way to address some of the challenges already outlined. This can be beneficial 
to both secondary processors who need kernels by buying the raw cashew nuts for the primary 
processors to process for them and paying a tolling fee, and the primary processors who process raw 
cashew nuts to obtain raw cashew nuts to process and make money.  
5. One of the issues is appropriate finance that is backed by collateral. It is difficult to provide 
collateral, given that the value of the factories and assets are most often lower than the loans 
required. One of the collateral considerations would be to allow the use of raw cashew nut as 
collateral to finance activities given the high value of raw cashew nuts.  
6. Growing local artisans to strengthen the provision of support machines to support local processing. 
Processing machines can reduce the cost of processing by about 30% by reducing the cost of labor. 
Institutional analysis and VC management 
Competitive Cashew Initiative (ComCashew)/GIZ  
Comcashew is a programme of GIZ set up to enhance competitiveness in the cashew value chains in 
Ghana and elsewhere on the African continent. Comcashew provides support in areas ranging from 
research, to production, processing, marketing, capacity development and policy advice. Ultimately, 
new opportunities for employment, especially for women, along the value chain have been created, 
specifically in rural areas, thereby ensuring an increase in and diversification of income. 
Brazil Government 
94 
The Brazil government through The Brazilian Cooperation Agency (ABC) and Embrada has invested in 
training and capacity-building for experts and farmers on research to improve genetic materials and 
cashew fruit processing technologies in Ghana and continues to do so. 
Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) 
ADRA plays important role in the cashew value chain in Ghana. Some of its activities have centred on 
improving cashew yield and farmer income through training of extension officers and farmers. 
Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) 
SECO also plays an important role in the cashew production in Ghana. This predominantly comes 
through financing training programmes for major players in the cashew value chain to increase 
competitiveness. It also co-funds the Comcashew with the EU. 
Private Sector 
Private sector organizations also remain pivotal in the cashew value chain in Ghana. The organizations 
include the African Cashew Alliance (ACA), Ghana Cashew Industry Association, and the Association of 
Cashew Processors. 
Women/youths/PWD 
Women would account for 10-15% of the cashew producers. As a tree crop, cashew was regarded as 
an individual man's property to be passed on to his wife and children rather than to extended family 
members, which differed from the communal land tenure arrangements governing food crop 
cultivation. The tendency for land, cash crops and income to be controlled by men, despite women's 
and young people's significant labor contributions to family farms, and for women to rely on food 
crop production for their main source of income and for household food security, means that women 
and girls are more likely to lose out when cashew plantations are expanded to the detriment of land 
for food crops. 
The physical strength and financial commitment needed for the cashew farming activity does not 
permit most women to be actively involved in the venture but to be helping hands to their husbands. 
Women’s role in cashew production has been traditionally defined as overseeing harvesting, 
transporting, sorting, and drying the fruit. In some cashew producing communities, women make 
juice and alcohol from cashew apples, and are therefore highly involved in the processing of apples 
and nuts at the household level. Furthermore, many women participate in the selling of raw nuts at 
marketing centers. However, large traders/exporters and their agents generally tend to be men. 
Policy and Regulation 
Cashew production falls under the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) while its export falls 
under the ministry of Trade and Industry. In direct relation to cashew, there is the National tree crops 
Board. In terms of policy and regulation, there is the 10-year cashew development policy which 
outlines government strategy to develop the cashew value chain. Cashew also falls under the 
government initiative of Planting for Export and Rural Development (PERD). 
Climate and potential impact of CC on production capacities 
Climate change has affected the rainfall distribution and extended dry spells while shortening the 
rainy season. This has led to increase fires that destroy a lot of farms within the transition zones. Fire 
belts are being constructed by a lot of farmers a coping mechanism. 
Nutrition and food security 
Research found that farmers in the area previously referred to as the Brong Ahafo region of Ghana, 
which produces about 30% of national food needs and leads in the production of local staples such as 
95 
maize, yam and cassava, have come to dedicate increasing portions of their land to cashew nut 
production, with only a small portion of land set aside for household food cropping. The conversion of 
fertile land into cash crop production presents significant challenges for ensuring long-term food 
security in Ghana. To date, national agricultural planning and policy appears to prioritize production 
of export commodities and agricultural ‘modernisation’ above local food production. While GoG can 
continue to support the development of Ghana’s export cashew industry, there is a vital need for 
programmes that increase support for local food crop farmers and domestic food provisioning. 
Despite the possible economic benefits that might be realized via cashew production, many farmers 
expressed growing concerns about the impacts of expanding cashew production for local food 
provisioning. The majority of described being worried about the impacts of changes in land use, 
alongside the concentration of land amongst elites, including the possible impacts for meeting 
national food needs. Some farmers described a reduction in the production of food as driving the cost 
of food upwards at local markets. 
Quantitative analysis 
Figure 16: Cashew Crop Maintenance Calendar 
MONTHS 
JAN  FEB 
MARC
H 
MA
Y 
APRIL 
JUNE 
JULY 
AU
G 
SEP  OCT  NOV  DEC 
ACTIVITY 
1st Weeding 
Fire Belt 
2nd Weeding 
Pruning 
Fertilizer Application 
   - Inorganic Fertilizers 
   - Poultry Manure 
Pest & Disease Control 
  - Fungicides 
  - Insecticide 
Flowering  
Maturing of Fruits & 
Harvesting/Pickings 
Transport/Grading & 
Sales 
Staff Training 
Farmer Sensitisation & 
Training 
Table 13: Cashew Crop Budget of Cashew Maintenance Per Acre 
Cost Item 
1st Weeding 
Fire Belt creation 
2nd Weeding 
Pruning 
Fertilizer Application 
unit price 
cost /acre 
GH ȼ 
100 
100 
100 
130 
GH ȼ 
100 
100 
100 
130 
Unit 
Measure 
Acre 
Acre 
Acre 
Acre 
Qty 
1 
1 
1 
1 
96 
   - Inorganic Fertilizers 
Transportation of Fertilizer 
  Application of Inorg. Fert 
Pest & Disease Control 
Fungicides 
Spraying of Fungicide 
Insecticides 
Spraying of Insecticides  
Harvesting 
Picking and separation 
Carting cost 
Jute sacks 
Total Cost of Cashew 
maintenance 
Total annual cost of farm 
maintenance 
Yield 
Cashew 
Sales 
Cashew 
Total Revenue 
Gross margin 
Gross margin % 
50kgBag 
50kgBag 
Acre 
kg 
Manday 
Lit 
Manday 
Manday 
TnT 
85kgBag 
85kgBag yr7 
onwards 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
6 
6 
6 
128 
10 
20 
135 
20 
35 
20 
15 
20 
3 
434 
128 
10 
20 
135 
20 
35 
20 
30 
20 
18 
866 
866 
2604 
2604 
1,738 
66% 
SECTION 4: RICE VALUE CHAIN 
Introduction 
Rice is the second most important staple cereal in Ghana after maize and its consumption continue to 
grow over the last two decades. In the Northern Belt, rice cultivation in lowlands has emerged with 
great potential to reduce poverty levels. MoFA has increased its support to rice production in the 
northern region through the Planting for Foods and Jobs (PFJ) initiative with the goal of making Ghana 
self-sufficient in rice by 2023. Evidence shows that rice yields can increase from 15 bags to 50 bags 
per acre through timely planting, proper agronomic practices, certified seeds, and fertilizers. 
Nevertheless, the lack of appropriate agricultural machinery and inadequate linkages to markets 
paying remunerative prices, affect the wider adoption of rice production by smallholders in the 
region.  
Status of Crop 
In 2017, Ghana’s national production was able to satisfy about 47% of rice domestic demand and 
imported the remaining 53%. Importation of rice into the country costs government huge sums of 
money. In 2016, Ghana imported about 698,000 mt of rice worth 287.4 million USD. Thus, it is 
important to increase rice productivity and overall production to meet the country’s growing demand 
and to improve overall food security. Figure below shows that domestic rice production has been on 
the increase for the last 40 years.  
Figure 17:Graph showing rice production and imports from 1961 to 2016 
97 
In 2017, almost 240,000 ha of land were cropped to rice in Ghana (189,000 in 2012, or +27% in 5 
years). Production varies between regions and ecological zones based on the production systems 
(rain-fed or irrigated), availability and suitability of soil and rice lowlands for production. Within each 
agro-ecological zone there are distinct rice ecosystems. The rain-fed systems (drylands and lowlands) 
accounts for 75 percent of the production area, the irrigated system accounts for about 10 percent 
and the inland swamps and valley bottoms for 15 percent. In terms of total growing area under rice 
production, the irrigated ecology is less important than other ecologies but in terms of output per 
unit area the irrigated ecology is far superior to the remaining three ecologies. 
In terms of yields, there is a wide gap between the potential yield and the actuals. The average 
achievable yield is 3.01 mt/ha compared to a potential yield of 6 mt/ha. However, yields are higher on 
irrigated lands as compared to rain-fed. Average yields have increased over the years from 2.36 in 
2011 to 2.69 in 2014 and 3.01 in 2017.  
Production 
Location 
Rice is produced across the three main agro-ecological zones (Guinea Savannahh, Forest and Coastal 
Savannahh) of Ghana. 
The Guinea Savannahh zone covers the five Northern regions (Savannahh, Northern, Upper East, 
North East and Upper West). There are many irrigation schemes (Tono, Vea, Bontanga, Golinga, Libga) 
and rice valleys (such as Fumbisi, Nabogu-Nasia, Zakoli) developed in the Guinea Savannahh zone. The 
main seeding method is broadcasting, which is easier and less expensive, even on irrigated fields. 
Direct sowing or dibbling and nursing of seedlings are done on irrigated fields. Improved rice varieties 
grown include Jasmine 85, Togo Marshall, and AGRA. One of the prominent indigenous varieties 
include, mandi and several others although grown in smaller scale. 
The Forest zone covers the Ashanti, Ahafo, Bono, Bono East, Oti, Eastern, Western North, and 
Western regions. There are rice valleys in Ahafo Ano North Municipal, Ejura and New Edubiase 
Districts. The main seeding method is direct seeding and nursing. The major varieties include Jasmine 
85, AGRA and Togo Marshal. Other varieties are Gomba (brown rice), Lapex, Aflao, Amankwatia, etc. 
The Coastal Savannahh covers Volta, Greater Accra, and Central region. Rice production in this zone is 
concentrated in Volta and Greater Accra. There are well developed irrigation schemes (Aveyime, 
Wetta/Affife) and valleys across the Volta region. The Kpong irrigation scheme located in the Greater 
Accra serves rice valleys in Asutuare, Akuse and other areas. The main seeding methods are 
broadcasting and nursing of seeds (transplanting). There is an important indigenous rice variety called 
Viwonor which is known for its nutritional characteristics. The improved rice varieties include Jasmine 
98 
85, AGRA, and Togo Marshal. Other varieties include Amankwatia, Kawumo, Saudi Arabia and Akwa 
Blue. 
The rainfall pattern in the Savannahh ecological zone is unimodal. The rains start from the month of 
May and may last up to October. Rice is usually grown during this period. Farmers on valleys usually 
plant early to avoid flooding. In the Savannahh zone, farmers on irrigated plots start land preparations 
after the rainy season. However, farmers in the Forest and Coastal zones experienced two rainy 
seasons (major and minor) during the year. The major rains begin in March and end in 
August/September whiles the minor rains begin in September and end in November. 
The three major rice producing regions in Ghana are Volta, Northern and Upper East and these 
regions account for 78% of domestic rice production. The region with the least volume of rice 
production is Central. Table below shows the top five rice producing regions in Ghana from 2014 to 
2016. 
Table 14:Top Five Rice Producing Regions in Ghana (Three Year Average, 2014-2016) 
Regions 
Volta  
Northern 
Upper East 
Eastern  
Ashanti 
Sub Total 
Total National 
Production 
Yearly average (mt) 
2014 – 2016 
206,910 
177,465 
118,250 
34,270 
33,670 
570,565 
644,400 
Share of Overall 
Total production 
32% 
27.5% 
18% 
5% 
5% 
88.5% 
100% 
Available data from SRID indicate that domestic rice production would be in the tune of 720,000 tons 
in 2017. 
Processing 
There are many small mills sited in all parts of the country across rural areas. Locally produced rice 
marketing and pricing are poorly structured. Price is less stable in these areas, with low prices at peak 
periods immediately after harvest and high prices during lean season prior to production season. 
Medium rice processors lack the necessary investment and capital to carry out downstream activities, 
including high-quality milling, packaging, branding, and marketing. Misconceptions regarding the 
quality and nutritional value of local rice as well as post-harvest inefficiencies in storage have 
hindered their growth. Therefore, the market is mainly structured around major processing 
companies that buy paddy from local farmers for processing into quality rice meeting imported rice 
standard and distribute it through supermarkets, retailers, restaurants, and institutions across the 
country.  
One of the most renowned brands has been the AVANSH’S ROYAL FARMERS which is produced at 
Nyankpala in the Tolon District of Northern Region. AVNASH has the largest rice processing plant, not 
only in the country but across West Africa. It is a state-of-the-art facility with installed capacity of 500 
metric tons of paddy rice processed per day, sufficient for feeding the country with the highest quality 
of rice. However, AVNASH is struggling with the current domestic supply of rice paddy which is not 
able to meet the capacity of the installed mill, though the sitting of the mill offers opportunity for 
farmers, transporters, aggregators, mechanized service suppliers, inputs providers and other value 
chain actors within the rice sector. 
Other outstanding mills include the Wienco mill in Sogakope in the Volta region through Global 
Agricultural Development Company (GADCO) which produces the ADUANEHENE and COPA rice 
99 
brands.  Another large and modern mill that process local paddy is the Worawora rice mill also in the 
Volta region which produces the EDWUMAWURA rice.  In the Greater Accra region, Richland 
Company installed in Asutuare a rice mill which produces the rice brand MR. RABBIT JASMINE rice.  
Market opportunities 
Description 
Domestic importers have increasingly turned to Asian rice, particularly Thai jasmine rice, whose 
quality image has improved substantially and is highly prized by consumers. Thailand aromatic rice is 
becoming the preferred rice of those shopping in the ‘quality’ segment of the market, chosen for its 
special taste and aroma. 
Potential for value creation 
Involvement of SMEs and job creation 
Rice demand is projected to grow at a compound annual growth of 11.8 percent in the medium term 
(MiDA 2010). 
Main constraints and challenge 
Rice farmers lack adequate finance to acquire inputs from dealers and more than 60% of them 
depend on their own capital. In this constrained environment, farmers reduce inputs usage and use 
seeds from previous crop harvest which result in low crop yields. They sometimes had to source for 
finance from informal money lenders with high interest rates. In the case where a purchasing 
agreement exists (most often verbal), farmers may be partially financed by aggregators and 
processors with the hope that farmers will repay the cost of inputs through crop produce, yet for the 
buyer with the risk of side-selling. Farmers are also confronted with means of harvesting as there are 
inadequate number of combine harvesters. After harvesting comes the issue of marketing where 
aggregators and processors do not pay farmers on time after taking produce.   
Climate 
While the price of rice is projected to increase 60% by 2015 without climate change, it could go up by 
as much as 121% once climate change is considered. 
Quantitative Analysis 
Figure 18: Rice Crop Calendar under Rainfed Cultivation in the Northern Belt 
Month 
April  May 
June 
July 
Aug 
Sept 
Oct 
ACTIVITIES 
Land rent 
Land Preparation 
  - Clearing 
  - Weedicide application 
  - Ploughing & Harrowing 
Bunding Maintenance 
Planting 
  - certified seed  
  - Labour for planting  
Thining after germination 
Weedicide Application (pre-
emergence) 
1st Fertilizer Application 
100 
Manual Weeding 
2nd Fertilizer Application 
Light hand picking 
Harvesting  
Threshing 
Sale of Paddy 
Figure 19:Rice Crop Calendar (Middle Belt) 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
 Aug  
Land hiring 
Land preparation 
  -Land clearing 
  -Ploughing 
  - Tilling 
Seeding 
Certified Seed 
Fertilizer Application 
Herbicide Application 
Light hand picking 
Rodent control 
Bird control 
Harvesting 
Threshing 
Winnowing 
  - Recovery 
  - Available for sale by 
Outgrower 
Table 15:Rice Crop Budget 
Hiring of Land 
Land preparation 
   Ploughing 
   Tiling 
   Weedicide 
   Weedicide Application 
Certified seed 
Planting 
Fertilizers and Agrochemicals 
  NPK 
  Urea 
  1st weed control: Herbicide 
(superdupa) 
qty per acre 
unit price 
Amount 
1 
1 
1 
3 
3 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
GH ȼ 
300 
GH ȼ 
300 
80 
60 
15 
20 
30 
180 
85 
80 
45 
80 
60 
45 
60 
60 
180 
170 
80 
90 
unit 
acre 
acre 
acre 
lts 
manday 
10 kg 
acre 
50 kg 
50 kg 
250 ml 
101 
Labor 
  Application of NPK fert 
  Application of Urea 
  1st Weed control: Application of 
herbicide (superdupa) 
  Rodent control 
  Bird Control 
Harvesting 
Gathering 
Threshing 
Sacks 
Transport 
Extension and supervision 
Crop insurance 
Total 
Sales 
Gross Margin 
Gross Margin % 
Proxy IRR 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
acre 
pcs 
acre produce 
acre 
acre 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 
1 
1 
5% 
20 
40 
20 
60 
40 
150 
200 
120 
160 
3 
100 
50 
195 
40 
20 
60 
40 
150 
200 
120 
160 
60 
100 
50 
106 
2,231 
3,900 
1,669 
43% 
75% 
SECTION 5: SHEA NUT VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
Shea is continuously touted as the cocoa of the Northern Development Zone (NDZ) with the only 
difference being that it grows on its own in the wild. Shea currently generates an average of 20062 
million dollars from export of raw shea nut and butter.  
Production 
Location 
The NDZ covers mostly the Savannah regions of Ghana even though the southern part has some 
forest. The NDZ is bounded by international borders with Burkina Faso on the north and west, as well 
as Togo on the east with direct road connectivity to the main urban centres of these countries. It has 
an urban population of about 1.085 million and a rural population of 3.143 million. The predominant 
economic activity is agriculture even though other activities such as industry, tourism, and mining 
exist in smaller scales. The zone has more than 51% of the landmass of Ghana.  
The zone is drained by the Black and White Volta and their tributaries like river Nasia, river Daka, 
among others.  The zone has potential to be the supplier of agricultural products and agro processed 
products to the country and neighbouring countries given the necessary assistance 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
Pickers 
These pickers of nut are predominantly women groups who move through the wild and pick the nuts 
when it is in season. The challenge with this side of the value chain is that these women pickers also 
try to forward integrate in the value chain to process the nut into butter because of its traditional 
62 As indicated by COCOBOD 
102 
underpinning and personal fulfilment to see a process start and end. However, the limited scale of 
these pickers does not make the economic sense for processing the nut themselves. There is the need 
therefore for focusing on their side of the value chain.  
Example of women shea picking, and processing group is the Kanvili Shea Butter Group. This group is 
based in Kanvili in the Tamale Metropolitan of the Northern Region with 54 female members with the 
exception of the secretary and the miller.  Kanvili women shea processing group. These women are 54 
in number and they have two men the secretary and the machine miller. The group supplies a 
secondary processor and aggregator called Sandam with Shea nuts and funds for their operation. The 
company in turn has provided the group with the processing center including sheds, water storage 
tanks, milling machine, and improved stoves with chimney.  
Aggregators 
Aggregators in the shea value chain are in the form of small to medium scale individual aggregators 
and large institutional buyers. Some of these institutional buyers are basically subsidiaries of 
multinationals in Europe and America. The crux of the issue with aggregators is the small to medium 
scale aggregators. These may be registered companies alright, but inherently controlled and 
championed by one person and have limited financial resources to fund their equipment needs and 
working capital. The role of NGOs and ESG companies (impact investors) in the aggregation phase is 
also worth noting, with the idea of procuring nuts from the women pickers as a means of giving them 
sustainable livelihoods. These agencies then link up with processors and exporters.  
Aggregators in this space include Borimakaso (Tamale Aboabo market), it has women in the following 
towns and villages in the NDZ.  
Table 16: Women shea pickers from Borimakoso Enterprise 
Location 
Dwankora 
Gushie 
Nalerigu 
Zabzugu Tatale (new group) 
Salaga (queen mothers of pickers) 
Chamba 
Djimle (Yendi) 
Pishowo (Karaga) 
Chedereh 
Total 
No of Pickers (women) 
47 
32 
17 
12 
39 
29 
18 
9 
6 
209 
The firm supports the pickers with the following, hand gloves, wellington boot, cutlass, buckets, 
rubber bowls, mosquito nets, torch light. The company also plans to include national health insurance 
for 50 women, and anti-snake serum. 
Processors 
Shea processing in the value chain in dominated by institutional processors and local women 
cooperatives. The latter group’s process is very much manual and traditional, taking a lot more time 
and labor. They produce chiefly, unrefined yellow and ivory butter but other cooperatives add further 
value by producing the refined ones. This group has seen a lot of NGO activities in recent times 
because of the place of women in the process as a way of boosting gender equality. Strict analysis of 
the traditional process will hardly yield meaningful economic return because of its low scale and 
manual nature. The institutional processors can be divided into two key modules of operation. The 
first module is the processors who have invested in shea processing plants and are into direct 
processing of shea nut. The second module is the processors who team up with the local women 
cooperatives by supervising production and off-taking the butter from them for onward marketing 
103 
and exports. The operations of the free zone shea processing company may be able to boost the 
potential of the value chain. 
Regulator 
Picking
Aggregation
Processing
Marketing
Consumption
Women 
pickers 
Local 
aggregators 
Multi-national 
aggregators 
Local women 
processors 
Medium and 
large-scale 
processors 
Exporters 
Traders 
Distribution 
chains of 
processors 
Final consumers 
International mkt 
Figure 20:Shea Value Chain Chart in Northern Ghana 
Market opportunities 
The industry is currently assuming a large-scale commercial status with the advent of large-scale shea 
(nut and butter) buyers and exporters who have in recent years discovered the high value of shea on 
the international market and are cashing in on it as quickly as possible. Ghana is currently collecting 
130,000 metric tons of shea nuts but has the capacity to do 200,000 tons. Ghana recorded USD 
33,572,000 in value of exported processed or industrial shea nuts. 
Shea butter has become popular in the cosmetics industries because of its medicinal features. Apart 
from the cosmetics, it has been identified as a key organic oil with fats that are easily broken down by 
the body and has had its demand boosted in the EU especially. The demand for shea is likely to 
increase in the future because of the above reasons and as such a need of substantial investment in 
the value chain to take advantage of the increased demand. An important feature of the shea from 
the NDZ is its higher content of shea butter which makes it well positioned to serve both the local and 
the foreign market. 
Main constraints and challenge 
1. Unavailability of vital processing machineries for the women primary processors. For instance, the 
Kinvili shea group indicated that they needed a kneading machine which can reduce drudgery. Other 
critical utilities needed include source of water.  
2. Marketing problem, these women groups are unable to market in bulk but only in bites apart from 
what they process for the major processors. These groups ideally prefer to collect the nuts all by 
themselves process and supply the butter.  
3. The challenge of snake bites face in the fields has been thoroughly deliberated by major value chain 
players and addressed to a larger extent by the provision of protective gears and snake serum kits. 
Institutional analysis and VC management 
The most active stakeholders in the shea industry are Civil Society Groups comprising the Shea 
Dealers Associations in all the regions of Northern Ghana, individuals as well as NGOs such as SNV, a 
Dutch Development Organization, TechnoServe, a US-oriented Food Security organization, the 
104 
Association of Church Development Projects (ACDEP) and its subsidiary, Savannah Farmers Marketing 
Company, Ghana Nuts and PBC. 
Women/youths/PWD 
The primary production is dominated by pickers who move in the wild to pick nuts for further 
processing and sale of raw nuts. Consequently, these women pickers are subject to conditions like 
snake bites. Aggregators and other NGOs provide support in the form of snake serum and protective 
gears. These activities are found to add value to the lives of women in the zone. 
Quantitative Analysis 
Table 17: Shea Processing Budget Per Kg 
REVENUE PER KG OF SHEA NUTS 
KG 
2.00 
Ton 
1,995 
Volume 
(Kg) 
Cost per 
Kg 
Total 
Amount 
Riped Fruits Collection (Man Hours) 
Depulping of Fruits (Man Hours) 
Boiling of Fruits 
   Water Expense 
   Firewood Expense 
Drying Cost ( Tarpulin Expense) 
De-husking and Sorting Cost  
   Mortar Expense 
   Labour Expense 
Packaging Expense 
Storage Expense 
Transportation 
Handling Expense 
TOTAL MATERIAL COST PER KG 
Consumables 
Hardware 
TOTAL SUPPLY CHAIN COST 
Gross Profit 
GM 
OVER HEADS 
Administration Cost 
CSR Activities 
Communication 
Social Security Contribution 
Council Fees 
TOTAL OVERHEADS 
0.40 
0.01 
0.23 
0.11 
0.11 
0.03 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.70 
0.54 
0.18 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0.40 
0.01 
0.23 
0.11 
0.11 
0.03 
0.01 
0.01 
- 
0.01 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.54 
0.18 
0.02 
0.01 
0.01 
0.02 
0.11 
105 
1.42 
1,421.58 
0.57 
29% 
573.42 
29% 
17.10 
0.17 
171.00 
PBIT 
0.40 
402.42 
VC ANALYSIS: VEGETABLES 
Introduction 
Vegetables can make an important contribution to food and nutritional security and can enhance 
livelihood of smallholders due to their high farmgate values per unit land area. Besides their 
economic, nutritional, and medicinal importance, vegetables are considered valuable because of their 
ability to fit into year-round production systems. 
In Ghana, cultivation of vegetables is an excellent source of employment for both rural and urban 
dwellers as it takes place in many rural areas through truck farming and in the outskirts of towns and 
cities in the form of market and backyard gardening to supply fresh produce to urban markets. It thus 
plays an important socio-economic role as well as in diversifying diets for improved nutrition. Ghana 
benefits from considerable foreign exchange through the export of vegetables such as okra and 
chillies to European countries. Chilli exports for instance have ranged between 26,000 and 41,000 MT 
per annum between 2010 and 2015 with corresponding foreign exchange from US$18.2 to US$28.7 
million. 
Pepper is the fourth most harvested crop in Ghana after cassava, plantain, and yam. It contributed 
GHS 2.01 million (7%) of estimated annual sales of GHS 29.51 million of fruits, roots and vegetables in 
Ghana in 2007. With the increase in population, rising household income levels, the influx of malls 
and the establishment of hospitality centers, the consumption of pepper is on the rise. 
As a commercial crop, pepper was ranked as the second valuable vegetable crop ahead of popular 
vegetables like okra and eggplant with an estimated total production of 88,000 metric tons in 2011. 
Ghana is ranked fourth in pepper production in Africa after Egypt, Nigeria, and Algeria. 
Main vegetables consumed in Northern Ghana 
Food Group 
Vitamin A rich vegetables and tubers 
Dark green leafy vegetables 
Other vegetables 
Specific vegetables 
Carrots, red pepper, sweet potato 
Amaranth, roselle, jute mallow, okra leaves, 
onion leaves 
Cabbage, garlic, okra, onion, tomato, eggplant, 
lettuce 
Production 
Location 
Around 80,000 ha are used for vegetable production in Ghana. Production of fresh vegetables takes 
place all around the country and is strongly related to the specific weather conditions and market 
windows. Irrigated agriculture is on the increase leading to new production areas around the Volta 
and Volta Lake as well as specific irrigation areas in and around Accra. 
South Ghana leads the production of pepper, as it has a competitive advantage over the North, 
because of the benefit of its two rainy seasons. It is estimated that around 1000,000 households are 
engaged in the cultivation of pepper in Ghana as a livelihood, and 20% of these households would be 
based in North Ghana. The price of pepper is low at harvest, but rises to over 200% during the dry 
season, because pepper is rarely cultivated under irrigation in Ghana. 
The major buyers of pepper are south Ghana based, with Accra, Kumasi, Techiman and Tamale being 
the key pepper markets. There are several road side and local markets within the environs of farm 
communities manned by pepper farmers or local trader. 
106 
In Ashanti region, more than 90% of the farmers engaged in cash crops cultivate tomato, hot pepper, 
garden eggs, and okra. Exotic vegetables such as cabbage, cucumber and carrot are not popular 
among them. Also, traditional leafy vegetables are not popular either. In that region, vegetables are 
mainly grown for sale (80%), before home consumption. 
Crop systems and characterization of producers 
Vegetable cropping systems were sole cropping, relay intercropping or multiple cropping where 
different vegetables were cultivated on separate plots. 
Pepper grows relatively quick with a maturity period of 3 to 4 months. It is mostly cultivated by 
smallholder farmers with average plot sizes of between 0.8Ha and 2.4Ha. Ghana produced 117,000 t 
over 14,000 ha in 2013. Statistics account for an increase on yields of 7 percent annually and 9 
percent on production for the period 2009-2013 while acreage has remained stable. Yields has grown 
up to 8Mt/Ha, yet far below the national achievable 32.3Mt/Ha, a situation that is reflective of the 
poor access to quality seeds, bad agronomic practices, poor use of organic and inorganic fertilizer, 
pest, and disease infestation. About 70% of pepper farmers produce under rain-fed conditions. 
However, with irrigation, it is possible to grow the crop all year round, which would transform 
farmer’s incomes. 
Ghana cultivates about 46,000 ha of tomato per year, which is between 5 and 10 percent of the 
acreage dedicated to food crops. As of 2013, production was estimated at about 340,000 t. The 
average yields oscillate around 7-7.5 t/ha, which is only 50 percent of what is deemed as achievable 
by MoFA. Kenyan farmers produce 22 t/ha and neighboring Burkinabe farmers 9 t/ha. 
Pepper farming is heavily resource intensive. It requires about two time the labour and financing 
resource required to cultivate grains. Improved seeds and fertilizer constitute one of the major costs 
of the pepper farmer. 
Overall farmers dedicate only a fraction of land to vegetable production. They are hardly organized in 
vegetable or horticulture groups, and neither are they trained specifically on vegetable production. 
Only in a few instances farmers work together to supply specialized suppliers and have more 
specialized knowledge on vegetable cultivation. 
In Northern Ghana, where there are no major buyers or exporters, there are virtually no out-grower 
schemes running, although linkages that result from repeated transactions between traders and 
producers prevail. Buyers from the South do provide seed to some larger farmers and nominate 
women traders to whom the farmer should sell as agents for the buyer. As these relationships are not 
formalized, the buyers change, and the new buyers introduces other varieties. With farmers retaining 
seeds, this results in many varieties being grown on the same plot of land, further depressing 
productivity. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
Local market centres are placed at the heart of the value chain and their performance make an 
impact both up and down the chain. In Ghana they are mostly operated by so-called « market queens 
» who serve as a point of sale for most buyers who run shops, hotels, and restaurants. The vegetable 
traders in Ghana are organized under these “queens”. The market queen is selected by all traders and 
is later introduced to the local traditional community leaders and the district assembly. For tomatoes, 
onions, and exotic vegetables (hot peppers, okra etc.), there are different market queens. 
Domestic bulk suppliers supply over 80 percent of the produce sold in the local market centres. Most 
of the bulk suppliers have supply contracts with the market queens, their supplies are regular and 
volumes are large. Some bulk suppliers can also supply directly to institutions or even hotels. 
Itinerant suppliers supply around 15 percent of the produce sold at local market centres. They 
operate similarly to the domestic bulk suppliers, but their volumes are small and do not have 
contracts or supply arrangements with the buyers/market queens. 
107 
The majority of the pepper traders deal in both fresh and dry pepper products with few dealing in one 
product only. Pepper products sold include fresh, dried powdered, dry pepper, shito and fresh hot 
pepper paste. 
A few traders provide loans to some farmers they have worked with for some time, and the farmers 
sell their produce to them. This practice though helpful to farmers is very is limited in scope and size 
of assistance. 
Market power on the pepper value chain rests with buyers who have access to final markets. This is 
due partly to farmers’ need for cash, forcing them to sell immediately after harvest, but mainly since 
the farmer is remote from the market and has no alternative but to sell through several 
intermediaries who all take a share of the final value created. The uncertainty over the market, 
caused by weak and informal relationships between actors on the value chain is a great limitation to 
farmer productivity, as they are unwilling to grow new varieties for fear that they may not be in 
demand in the local markets. 
Market opportunities 
Overall vegetable consumption in Ghana is still relatively small, also in comparison with other African 
countries like Kenya, but is expanding rapidly. Apart from local vegetables the most important 
vegetables are tomatoes, peppers (both sweet and hot chillies), onions and okra. Especially the 
market for tomatoes and peppers has boomed recently. 
The national consumption of pepper is estimated to be 230,000Mt per annum, with a growth rate of 
about 8% annually. Production has however failed to keep pace with demand, increasing marginally 
from 27,000Mt in 2000 to 79,000Mt in 2008. This supply gap is primarily due to low productivity. 
Most of the pepper traders deal in both fresh and dry pepper products with few dealings in one 
product only. Pepper products sold include fresh, dried powdered, dry pepper, shito and fresh hot 
pepper paste. 
The main market for vegetables for the coming years will still be dominated by open markets and 
smaller, street shops. The production systems will compete on price and less on quality. These 
markets include the large Agbobloshie, Makola and Tudu markets where specific commodity 
associations manage the market system. Price fluctuations are high following the different production 
periods. 
In terms of exports, Ghana’s vegetables show potential. While traditionally fruits were the main 
horticultural export crops, chillies and Asian vegetables (different types of gourds and okra) have 
become popular. In addition, baby corn and butternut squash production are picking up significantly 
since the arrival of the multinational VegPro. In general, exports of peppers are believed to have a 
comparative advantage over competitors like Kenya, given Ghana’s climatologic conditions and 
relatively short distance to the EU market. 
Main constraints and challenge 
The main constraints to enhancing productivity includes low soil fertility, poor use of organic and 
inorganic fertilizer, pests and diseases pressure with ineffective management practices, inadequate 
access to finance, unavailability and high cost of irrigation systems, inadequate knowledge of 
improved technologies coupled with the use of unimproved varieties.  
Lack of farmer access to high quality seeds of improved vegetable cultivars is one of the major 
constraints to the successful expansion of the vegetable industry in Ghana. The use of poor-quality 
vegetable seeds mainly obtained from informal sources by most farmers has compromised yields and 
productivity and rendered serious challenges to the success of crop productivity and improvement 
initiatives. Boosting agricultural productivity will require a more professional input supply system with 
better and more tailor-made information for farmers on the use, adaptability and effectiveness of 
seeds, fertilizers, and pesticides. The public extension system increasingly faces challenges and agro-
dealers so far have not taken up the challenge to also provide quality information and services. 
108 
Production of the crop is also mainly under rain-fed conditions and thus forcing the crop compete 
with other staple crops for land, labour, mechanization, and other productive resources, making it 
quite difficult for most farmers to increase their average land holding for production. There are also 
high post-harvest losses (estimated at 50%) because of poor farmer knowledge and skill in 
appropriate handling methods and lack of technology like cold storage. 
Another constraint to enhancing productivity is the undersupply of public service and support. Access 
roads from many farmer communities are in a deplorable condition, creating market access 
constraints for farmers. Funding for critical activities such as knowledge and information services, 
research and irrigation services are heavily inadequate and poorly governed. There is no significant 
public investment on the pepper value chain. Privately funded research is limited to foreign seed and 
input supplying companies with representation in Ghana. 
Less endowed farmers, with limited capital to invest depend on rural banks and micro finance 
institutions to enable them to cultivate the crop. Most of these financial institutions are ill resourced 
to advance agricultural loans to assist farmers improve their productivity. 
Women/youths/PWD 
Women constitute the largest group that provides market access to pepper farmers. As “middlemen”, 
they practically control the supply of pepper to the major markets as they own majority of the trucks 
that transports the product from the farm communities to the open markets. 
VC ANALYSIS: SMALL RUMINANTS 
Introduction 
Ghana produces only 30% of the national demand for meat. Northern Ghana accounts for 70% of the 
local production. Livestock keeping makes significant contribution to rural livelihoods. It provides 
employment and serves as a source of wealth creation for reducing poverty. The traditional system of 
producing small ruminants (sheep and goats) contributes significantly to the socioeconomic wellbeing 
of farm households in northern Ghana. Besides provision of meat and serving as an important source 
of income, sheep and goats also offer important non-pecuniary benefits such as the provision of 
draught power, hide, manure, savings, insurance against crop failure, farm portfolio diversification, 
and strong social relations. The traditional system of ownership is culturally complex and subsistent in 
nature. This has negatively affected expansion and commercialization of cattle production in Ghana. 
Livestock production in Ghana is low compared to demand. This is attributable to the fact that the 
potential to develop and expand the animal sector is not fully tapped. The country has a high 
potential to become self-sufficient in animal production, yet large quantities of meat are imported to 
meet demand. Small ruminant promotion should aim at improving production and productivity as a 
means of ensuring increasing meat production, consumption as well as rural family income 
diversification. 
Importation of live animals into Ghana 
Year 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Sheep 
16,738 
22,188 
15,763 
13,854 
Goats 
16,953 
32,012 
20,004 
16,900 
Production 
Location  
Northern Ghana, comprising the Upper East, Upper West, and Northern Regions, is the livestock hub 
of the country. It ranks first in the livestock production of Ghana. The region is well known to produce 
sheep (30% of the national output) and goats (35% of the national output).  
109 
In Ghana, small ruminants play an important role in food production systems. They have been an 
integral part of most rural, urban and peri urban households for a long time and their small sizes and 
relatively low cost of production make them a unique resource particularly suited to the limited 
resource base of these households. Sheep and goats are widely distributed and adapted in all agro-
ecological zones due to the various adaptive features they possess: higher fertility, shorter generation 
interval, higher adaptation to harsh environment and ability to thrive on limited feed. 
Production systems and characterization of producers 
The dominant production system is the extensive system (free-range). Under this system, no standard 
ruminant management practices are followed. It is characterized by minimum inputs, no investments 
beyond the foundation stock with animals grazing around, scavenging on refuse dumps, and sleeping 
on verandas and in the open. Animals do not benefit from prophylactic or curative medicinal 
treatment, little or no supplementary feed is offered, no good flock management is practiced and 
there is generally poor housing. Indications that the productivity of small ruminants in this system is 
low and that there is ample opportunity for improvement. Commercial cattle production outside the 
household is common involving farmers hiring the services of herdsmen to keep and manage the 
animals outside the community. 
There are many breeds of sheep, but the dominant is the indigenous West African Dwarf (WAD) or 
the Djallonke, distributed nation-wide. The WAD is acknowledged for its hardiness, trypanotolerance, 
tick tolerance, prolificacy, and suitability for year-round breeding. Although it is a small animal with an 
adult male weight of 25- 30kg and female weight of 20-25 kg, the WAD has the potential to be 
improved genetically through selection. 
In Ghana the WAD is mostly found in the south. The larger and long legged Sahelian sheep, and other 
crosses are found mostly in the north and peri-urban areas of the south. 
The non-adoption of fodder technologies can be attributed to a number of elements including: 
household labour constraint during harvesting of food crops and preparation of dry season vegetable 
production (which is a principal commercial enterprise) and inadequate attention for non-market 
institutional constraints that inhibited competitiveness of smallholder producers. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
The market structure of sheep and goat is characteristically lengthy, about 3 to 5 stages between 
producers and consumers, without significant value addition. The main actors in the cattle VC are 
farmers who are the primary producers, aggregators/ middlemen, large-scale regional livestock 
traders, transporters, feed (crop residues and conventional feeds) sellers, butchers, meat and milk 
processors, caterers, food vendors and restaurants, rural banks, veterinary medicine shops, 
international NGOs, and regulatory institutions (taxation, licensing, and warranties). The livestock VC 
in Ghana is not formally structured with the objective of creating jobs and improving local economies. 
The market channels of small ruminant farmers are through butchers and itinerant traders acting on 
behalf of abattoirs and food vendors. Some of the itinerant traders retail the animals at the weekly 
markets. They sell live animals to household for food or for breeding purposes whiles butchers and 
food vendors trade in meat to customers. 
Auction sales, sales to abattoirs, speculators, and private sales as the major modes of sales of 
livestock, with sales to abattoirs and speculators providing the most access to price information. A 
poorly functioning market of small ruminants could bring up about huge inequities in income 
distribution owing to exploitation by middlemen. 
Market opportunities 
Livestock marketing encompasses the sale, purchase or exchange of live animals and their products 
(milk, meat, wool, and hides) for income. Meat from sheep and goat are highly patronized by revelers 
of "chop bars" in all regions across the nation. Participation of small farmers in markets for small 
ruminants is relatively low in Ghana. Limitations experienced by smallholders i.e., water shortages 
110 
during the dry season, feed-related or health-related high mortality and theft of livestock persist 
because of institutional constraints. These include structural limitations related to availability of 
arable lands, weak support systems for animal production and health services delivery, communities’ 
preference that are skewed towards crop production more than animal husbandry, ineffective 
traditional and formal structures for justice delivery, and gaps in the interaction between 
communities and district and national level organizations such as the Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture, district assemblies, rural banks, and non-governmental organizations as well as traders 
and butchers. 
Confronted with such constraints, the strategies that most smallholders have adopted to be resilient 
entail diversified sources of livelihood, low input use in small ruminant production, and maintaining 
the flock as a capital stock and insurance. Only a few smallholders engage in market or demand-
driven production and/or exhibit successful strategies in small ruminant husbandry. For most 
smallholders, market production, which requires high levels of external inputs or intensification of 
resource use, may not be a viable option. 
Women/youths/PWD 
In the traditional system of rearing cattle in Ghana, cattle can be acquired and cared for by any 
member of the household but their ownership, control, and the decision to sell or slaughter for 
consumption is often the sole responsibility of the male household head. In recent times, this system 
of ownership and control is changing as more youth and women are gaining rights to take decision on 
how to manage and dispose off their animals.  
Institutional analysis and VC management 
There are currently cattle farmers’ and butchers’ associations in most cattle producing areas. Several 
interventions with a focus on smallholder small ruminant commercialization have been made to 
improve Ghanaian small ruminant production systems and markets, such as the National Livestock 
Services Project (1993 – 1999) and the Livestock Development Project (2003 – 2009). However, these 
have not changed the small ruminant production and marketing systems in any significant way. Under 
the “Rearing for Food and Jobs” policy programme of the Ghanaian Government, farmers can be 
profiled and formalized into primary farmer-based organizations to enable them benefit from training 
and credit. 
Nutrition and food security  
The meat of small ruminants is a source of protein in many local cereal-based diets and can improve 
the nutrition of children and pregnant women. The size of small ruminants, which, on average, 
generates about 20 to 35kg carcass weight, allows rural households to conveniently process them 
easily for home consumption with little or no need for preservation. 
VC ANALYSIS: POULTRY 
The domestic poultry meat market in 2017 was estimated at 193,000 MT, and the combined 
contribution of spent layers, broilers, cockerels, local chickens and guinea fowls representing the local 
poultry meat production was estimated at 35,000 MT. The imported frozen chicken was estimated at 
158, 000 MT in 2018, representing over 80% of the market share, due its affordability, availability, 
accessibility and convenient packaging for consumers. This gap between production and consumption 
has been filled by the imported frozen chicken mainly from the USA, Brazil and EU. 
High production costs hinder the production of chicken, the country’s most popular meat. Poultry 
meat production in Ghana is low due to the perceived lack of market for locally produced broilers. 
Instead, most poultry farmers produce eggs and reserve poultry meat production only for the various 
festivities such as Christmas, Eid-ul Fitr, Eid-ul Adha, etc. 
Poultry meat production, importation and consumption (,000 MT) in 2018 
2015 
% 
2016 
% 
2017 
% 
111 
 Production  
 Imports  
 Total Supply  
 33  
 118  
 151  
22 
78 
 33  
 144  
 177  
19 
81 
 35  
 158  
 193  
18 
82 
From GPP, the figures would be today more of a market size in the range of 350,000 MT, and a share 
of the local production around 5% only (95% importation). This would mean production has declined 
over the last 5 years. On the contrary, Ghana is self-sufficient for eggs. 
Production 
Location 
The major commercial chicken production zones are the urban areas in Ashanti, Bono, Bono East, and 
Greater Accra Regions and the administrative capitals of Western, Eastern, Central and Volta Regions. 
The Bono and Bono East Regions have the highest concentration of poultry farms in the country, but 
there is no hatchery, feed mill nor processing plant there. 
Poultry farms 
Regions 
Bono 
Urban areas 
Dormaa Ahenkro 
Sunyani 
Bono East 
Techiman 
Ashanti 
Kumasi 
Jamasi-Agona 
Eastern 
Koforidua 
Guinea fowl 
Greater Accra 
Upper East  
Upper West 
Northern 
Accra 
Bolgatanga 
Paga 
Bawku 
Wa 
Tumu 
Jirapa 
Tamale 
Savalugu 
Sanlerigu 
Kumbugu 
Production systems and characterization of producers 
There has been a steady growth in the production of chicken locally since the year 2000. The stock of 
chicken increased from 20.5 million in 2000 to 74.5 million animals in 2017. 
Commercial poultry production in Ghana can be categorized into large-scale, medium-scale and small-
scale enterprises. Domestic commercial farms are privately owned by individuals or a family. All 
poultry farmers in Ghana, regardless of the scale of production, finance all their activities and are 
responsible for marketing their own produce. 
Farm categories 
Birds number 
Farm breakdown in 
Ghana 
112 
Large scale 
beyond 50,000 
20% (40 large poultry 
farms) 
Medium scale 
Small scale 
from 15,000 to 50,000 
Less than 15,000 
80% 
The medium-scale and the small-scale categories rely on hatcheries for their day-old chicks and feed 
mills for their feed. The large and medium-scale category produces primarily eggs. Included in the 
small-scale category are backyard poultry producers who mainly produce broiler birds. The medium 
and small-scale operators practice minimal biosecurity, predisposing these farms to disease out-
breaks. 
Ghanaian poultry producers need eight to ten weeks to produce broilers up to an average live weight 
of 2.0-2.25 against a standard of six weeks which increases the cost of production. This yield gap is 
due to a number of factors which include: poor quality of DOCs, insufficient vaccination coverage, 
poor feeding and overcrowding. The average cost per kg of producing broilers in Ghana is estimated 
at GH15 (USD 2.7) for large-scale producers and higher for small-scale producers. Layer birds reach 16 
weeks before starting laying eggs. Average industry egg production is 230 to 250 eggs per layer per 
year. 
Farmers have very limited knowledge in feed formulation. More than 80% of poultry farmers in Ghana 
produce their own feed because of the cost of feed on the market. Feed cost constitutes about 60%-
70% of total cost of production, making the unit cost per live bird very high. Partnerships with local 
training institutions to run short courses for poultry farmers in the areas of bio-security systems, feed 
formulation, use of veterinary medicines, administering of vaccines, etc. are needed. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
The VC is said to be highly fragmented, with producers’ associations reluctant to work together. Also, 
most of these associations would not be reliable partners as they would have been formed only to 
capture subsidies.  
The outgrower model is not dominant so far, with large producers tending to be fully integrated 
(production of feed, hatcheries, processing capacities, etc.). However, some of the major players have 
showed interest to test the model under the GPP approach. 
Production of day-old chicks (DOC): even though there are local hatcheries that produce day-old 
chicks, the quality is generally low, so most poultry farmers prefer to buy imported day-old chicks, 
especially layer day-old chicks. In 2018, Ghana imported more than 500,000 broiler day-old chicks and 
more than 7,100,000 layer day-old chicks. Currently, day-old chicks for commercial production are 
primarily supplied by 15 local hatcheries and 8 importers. The importers mostly import the day-old 
chicks from the Netherlands and Belgium. Demand for day-old chicks exceeds supply by both local 
hatcheries and imports. 
Feed production: Ghana’s poultry feed industry has shifted to producing layer feed due to the drop 
off in domestic broiler production. About 80% of feed produced by commercial feed millers is layer 
feed.  
Feed manufacturers in Ghana can be categorized into commercial feed millers and on-farm self--
millers. Ghana has about 17 commercial feed mills with a total installed operating capacity of 1,000 
metric tons (MT) per day. However, most feed millers are only producing at about 40 to 50 % of their 
capacity due to low demand from the local poultry industry. The average amount of compound feed 
produced in Ghana is about 10,000 MT annually in the past few years. 
Broiler feed is primarily purchased by small-scale backyard poultry producers because large-scale 
poultry producers mostly make their own feed. The commercial feed millers produce mainly mash 
feed, a few produce high feed concentrates, and one feed mill pellets feed. Most small-and medium-
scale poultry producers prefer feed concentrates because it is cheap, convenient and less bulky for 
transportation. 
113 
The main ingredients for compound feed are locally produced maize or imported yellow maize and 
wheat bran. Maize typically would form about 60% of total feed formulation. The poultry industry 
consumes nearly 30% of all maize produced in Ghana. Feed prices in Ghana have been increasing 
primarily due to the rising cost of maize. The GoG program “Planting for Food and Jobs” is expected 
to cause a reduction in maize prices. Soybean meal inclusion in poultry feed is low due to its high cost. 
The inclusion level of soybean meal ranges from 10 to 18% of the feed ration for layers and 15 to 25% 
for broilers. Controlling animal feed costs is critical in this industry since it represents approximately 
60-70% of total production cost. For this reason, feed manufacturers are switching to low-cost 
substitutes such as palm-kernel cake, groundnut cake and fish meal, by-products of agro-processing. 
Market opportunities 
The market grows at a rate of 6% per annum. However, consumption patterns of households in urban 
areas in Ghana are heavily weighted towards imported frozen poultry products. The reasons for this 
trend are that it is cheaper than locally produced poultry (in 2019, 2.5 USD/kg against 2.7 USD for 
locally produced broiler) and it is already pre-cut and dressed. As such, the convenience of a ready-to-
use chicken product has boosted consumer demand. Furthermore, the rapid growth in the 
restaurant, hotel and fast food sector has increased demand for frozen poultry products in the past 
few years. 
The national value chain does not respond to the needs of the market and has led to a decline in 
market share to 5%. Market needs require poultry meat to be affordable, available, accessible and 
conveniently packaged. However, local poultry processors in Ghana lack the infrastructure and 
equipment to produce chicken cuts that are preferred by most consumers. 
Opportunities exist to increase production to fill the 158, 000 tons supply gap being occupied with 
importation of frozen chicken currently. To substitute import, investments are needed in processing 
plants, setting up of hatcheries, proper vaccination and good biosecurity measures to reduce 
morbidity and mortality, increasing local production of maize and soya bean to reduce feed cost, 
breeding and using locally adaptable birds for poultry meat production. 
Main constraints and challenge 
Significant constraints to poultry meat production in Ghana have made the value chain 
uncompetitive. Competition from the subsidized imported dressed chicken is the foremost problem 
for broiler production in Ghana. Imported poultry used to be cheaper by 50-60 percent than the 
locally produced. Apart from its affordability, the imported frozen chicken is available throughout the 
country in a convenient package. Ghanaians have continued over the recent years to develop the 
preference for this imported frozen chicken, which has now taken over 80% of the chicken meat 
market in the country. Most poultry companies are today focused on eggs. 
The high cost of quality blended feeds, that represent more than 60 percent of total production costs, 
and inefficient feed management practices are largely responsible for the high production costs of 
poultry products. It is mainly caused by high cost of maize and soyabean meal which are the two main 
ingredients used in the preparation of poultry feed. The production of these key ingredients is 
insufficient to meet competing demand for human consumption as staples and animal feed. 
Therefore, a chunk of the maize and soya bean used in the poultry industry is imported, which raises 
the cost of these grains. It is compounded by the fact that some feed mills are producing below 
capacity. 
Veterinary extension service is significantly inadequate within the poultry production regions in the 
country. This has resulted in frequent spread of disease-causing pathogens and high mortalities 
among birds. Farmers tend to use antibiotics indiscriminately in an attempt to solve the problems. 
Over the years, Ghanaian poultry farmers have been relying on DOCs imported from temperate 
regions. These birds are selected for greater growth rate and body weight based on environmentally 
controlled conditions and are not therefore able to perform up to their full potential when raised 
under tropical conditions. The use of poultry breed which have been developed under tropical 
114 
conditions is crucial for enhanced productivity and heat and disease resistance. In Ghana, birds that 
are adaptable to heat stress have been developed at KNUST63 and Animal Research and need to be 
spread. More generally, the sanitary situation in most Ghanaian poultry farms is poor which results in 
substantial losses due to morbidity and mortality. 
Besides, there are other constraints impacting negatively on the domestic poultry production 
competitiveness, including inadequate financial and insurance instruments to support value chain 
actors, high interest rates on loans for production or inadequate cold processing and storage facilities 
and transport. 
Institutional analysis and VC management 
The Animal Production Directorate (APD) and the Veterinary Services Directorate (VSD) of the 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) has the oversight responsibility of the Poultry sector and 
other animals/livestock. Whiles APD oversees production issues, VSD takes care of health. Their roles 
are to ensure effective and efficient implementation of government policies on livestock and poultry. 
In 2017, the GoG launched the Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) program aiming at creating food 
security and produce raw material to feed the agro-processing industries while creating jobs in the 
process. According to the Ashanti regional director of MoFA, the introduction of this program helped 
the poultry sector to cut down cost and decreased the number of imported feeds in the country. 
In 2019 has been launched the Rearing for Food and Jobs program aimed at developing a competitive 
and more efficient livestock industry, that will increase domestic production, reduce importation of 
livestock products, contribute to employment creation, and improve livelihoods of livestock value 
chain actors. The government has set an ambitious target to invest in the poultry component of the 
program as a major step to substitute the importation of chicken into the country. According to 
MoFA, goal is to reduce the USD 380 million yearly import bill when 20 years ago the country 
exported chicken to her neighbor. The focus is on building the appropriate infrastructure to boost 
local production. Farmers will be supplied with required inputs to produce soya beans this year as a 
measure to get more feed for the poultry industry. 
Currently, the only donor supporting the Poultry sector in Ghana is the United States Department of 
Agriculture through the Ghana Poultry Program (GPP; 2015-2021). It is being implemented by 
ACDI/VOCA and TechnoServe to expand local production and processing of poultry meat and eggs in 
Ghana. The project aims at increasing the competitiveness of the poultry value chain using inclusive 
system approach. The target beneficiaries of the project include processors, input suppliers, financial 
institutions, business service advisors and buyers. The project’s interventions are in four areas: 
capacity building, financial services, training, and market access. Trough GPP, local companies trained 
smallholder farmers in outgrower model on cost-efficient broiler production techniques and 
contract agreements and negotiations at demonstration farms. They supply the outgrowers with 
inputs such as day-old chicks, feed, and vaccines while the farmers raise the birds for six weeks. 
An extension officer manages logistics and provides technical assistance. 
Technology transfer is very weak in the industry currently. Few NGOs have been able to bring MoFA, 
Research Institutions and the Universities closer to the FBOs to ensure technology transfer. There is 
therefore a huge opportunity for GoG, Development Partners (DPs) and various NGOs to play a 
mediation role between FBOs and MoFA, Universities and Research Institutions to arrange regular 
meetings to enhance technology transfer. 
Existing Poultry Producer Associations and Clusters (2016) 
63 Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology  
115 
G.F. = Guinea fowl; Poultry = Chicken 
Producer Association 
Cluster 
Administrative 
Region 
Upper East Region 
Asera 
1 
Asongtaaba 
Bolgatanga 
Korania 
Yam-Zamsug 
Zuarungu 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
GF 
GF 
GF 
GF 
GF 
GF 
Bongo 
Bongo  
Gagbire 
Bolga 
Korania 
Teli 
Gagbire 
(Tempane) 
Bolga Municipal 
Kasena Nankana 
Municipal 
(Telli Zebilla), 
Zuarungu 
Bolga Municipal 
Bawku 
Poultry  Bawku 
Bawku Municipal 
Bawku Municip. 
GF 
Bawku 
Bawku Municipal 
Bawku East 
10  Paga 
Upper West Region 
11  Gbare 
12  Sissala East 
GF 
GF 
GF 
GF 
Bawku 
Bawku East  
Paga 
Kasena Nankana 
Municipal 
Gbare 
Jirapa 
Tumu 
Sissala East 
District 
Jirapa Dist 
13  Ngogtaa-iri 
Poultry 
Jirapa 
14  Sombo 
GF 
Sombo 
Nadole Kaleo 
15  Upper West 
Poultry  Wa 
Wa Municipal 
16 
Loggu 
17  Chaang 
18 
Lawra 
GF 
GF 
GF 
Loggu 
Wa East 
Chaang 
Nadole Kaleo 
Lawra 
Lawra District 
19  Charia 
Poultry  Charia 
Wa 
20  Kpansoubo 
Group 
Northern Region 
21  Savelugu Nantom   Poultry  Savalugu 
Poultry  Kpansoub
o 
Wa Municipal 
Savelugu 
22  Tamale 
GF 
Tamale 
Tamale 
116 
Ecological Zone  Membershi
p 
20 
62 
53 
28 
16 
69 
45 
32 
40 
37 
72 
30 
12 
50 
68 
20 
53 
54 
56 
15 
20 
40 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Sudan 
Savannahh 
Sudan 
Savannahh 
Sudan 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Transitional 
Forest 
Forest 
Forest 
23  Sanlerigu 
24  Kumbugu 
25  Central Gonja 
GF 
GF 
GF 
Sanlerigu 
Sanlerigu 
Kumbugu 
Kumbugu 
Yapei 
Central Gonja 
34  Kwabere East 
35  Afiegya Kwabere   Poultry  Kodie 
36  Antwima 
Poultry  Nkawie 
Poultry  Abuakwa 
Bono Region 
26  Wenchi 
27  Chiraa 
28  Sunyani 
29  Dormaa 
Bono East Region 
30  Techiman 
Volta Region 
31  Ho 
Oti Region 
32 
Ashanti Region 
33  Ejisu Juaben 
Jasikan 
Nwabiagya  
37  Sekyere South 
38  Ashanti 
Mampong  
39  Kumasi Poultry 
Industry Major 
Actors 
Eastern Region 
40  Koforidua 
Central Region 
41  Cape Coast 
Western Region 
42  Tarkwa 
43  Takoradi 
Poultry  Wenchi 
Poultry 
Poultry 
Poultry  Dormaa 
Ahenkro 
Wenchi 
Chiraa 
Sunyani Mun. 
Dormaa 
Poultry  Techiman 
Techiman 
Transitional 
Poultry  Ho 
Ho Municipal 
Forest 
Poultry 
Jasikan 
Jasikan District 
Forest 
Poultry  Ejisu and 
Ejisu-Juaben Dist 
Forest 
Juaben  
Kwabere East 
Afiegya Kwabere 
Antwima 
Nwabiagya   
Sekyere South 
Forest 
Forest 
Forest 
Forest 
Ashanti Mampong  Forest 
Poultry 
Jamasi 
and 
Agona 
Poultry  Ashanti 
Mampong 
Poultry  Kumasi 
Kumasi Metro 
Forest 
Poultry  Koforidua  Koforidua 
Forest 
Poultry  Cape Cost  Cape Cost 
Poultry  Tarkwa 
Poultry  Takoradi 
Tarkwa 
Sekondi - 
Takoradi 
Greater Accra Region 
44  Greater Accra 
Poultry  Accra 
45  Oyarifa Poultry 
Poultry  Oyarifa 
46  Dodowa 
47  GNAPF 
Poultry  Dodowa 
Accra 
Greater Accra 
Metropolitan 
La-Nkwanta-
Madina Municip. 
Shai Osudoku 
Accra Metro. 
117 
Coastal 
Savannahh 
Forest 
Forest 
Coastal 
Savannahh 
Coastal 
Savannahh 
Forest 
Coastal 
Savannahh 
50 
150 
30 
30 
100 
30 
118 
105 
123 
115 
30 
22 
62 
32 
57 
52 
18 
45 
200 
30 
32 
400 
10 Reg. 
Assoc. 
Climate 
In Ghana, temperatures are often too high for chicken which cause heat stress. It causes significant 
reductions in growth, egg production and fertility and compromises immune competence, renders 
farm animals susceptible to diseases and increases mortality and production. The local poultry breeds 
in Ghana are adaptable but are highly unproductive. On the contrary, exotic birds imported from 
Europe by small- and large-scale poultry farms are highly sensitive to heat. The effect of heat stress is 
exacerbated by climate change. However, efforts to mitigate the effects of climate change have been 
biased towards crop production.  
VC ANALYSIS: POULTRY 
The domestic poultry meat market in 2017 was estimated at 193,000 MT, and the combined 
contribution of spent layers, broilers, cockerels, local chickens and guinea fowls representing the local 
poultry meat production was estimated at 35,000 MT. The imported frozen chicken was estimated at 
158, 000 MT in 2018, representing over 80% of the market share, due its affordability, availability, 
accessibility and convenient packaging for consumers. This gap between production and consumption 
has been filled by the imported frozen chicken mainly from the USA, Brazil and EU. 
High production costs hinder the production of chicken, the country’s most popular meat. Poultry 
meat production in Ghana is low due to the perceived lack of market for locally produced broilers. 
Instead, most poultry farmers produce eggs and reserve poultry meat production only for the various 
festivities such as Christmas, Eid-ul Fitr, Eid-ul Adha, etc. 
Poultry meat production, importation and consumption (,000 MT) in 2018 
 Production  
 Imports  
 Total Supply  
2015 
 33  
 118  
 151  
% 
22 
78 
2016 
 33  
 144  
 177  
% 
19 
81 
2017 
 35  
 158  
 193  
% 
18 
82 
From GPP, the figures would be today more of a market size in the range of 350,000 MT, and a share 
of the local production around 5% only (95% importation). This would mean production has declined 
over the last 5 years. On the contrary, Ghana is self-sufficient for eggs. 
Production 
Location 
The major commercial chicken production zones are the urban areas in Ashanti, Bono, Bono East, and 
Greater Accra Regions and the administrative capitals of Western, Eastern, Central and Volta Regions. 
The Bono and Bono East Regions have the highest concentration of poultry farms in the country, but 
there is no hatchery, feed mill nor processing plant there. 
Poultry farms 
Regions 
Bono 
Urban areas 
Dormaa Ahenkro 
Sunyani 
Bono East 
Techiman 
Ashanti 
Kumasi 
Jamasi-Agona 
Eastern 
Koforidua 
Greater Accra 
Accra 
118 
Guinea fowl 
Upper East  
Upper West 
Northern 
Bolgatanga 
Paga 
Bawku 
Wa 
Tumu 
Jirapa 
Tamale 
Savalugu 
Sanlerigu 
Kumbugu 
Production systems and characterization of producers 
There has been a steady growth in the production of chicken locally since the year 2000. The stock of 
chicken increased from 20.5 million in 2000 to 74.5 million animals in 2017. 
Commercial poultry production in Ghana can be categorized into large-scale, medium-scale and small-
scale enterprises. Domestic commercial farms are privately owned by individuals or a family. All 
poultry farmers in Ghana, regardless of the scale of production, finance all their activities and are 
responsible for marketing their own produce. 
Farm categories 
Birds number 
Large scale 
beyond 50,000 
Farm breakdown in 
Ghana 
20% (40 large poultry 
farms) 
Medium scale 
Small scale 
from 15,000 to 50,000 
Less than 15,000 
80% 
The medium-scale and the small-scale categories rely on hatcheries for their day-old chicks and feed 
mills for their feed. The large and medium-scale category produces primarily eggs. Included in the 
small-scale category are backyard poultry producers who mainly produce broiler birds. The medium 
and small-scale operators practice minimal biosecurity, predisposing these farms to disease out-
breaks. 
Ghanaian poultry producers need eight to ten weeks to produce broilers up to an average live weight 
of 2.0-2.25 against a standard of six weeks which increases the cost of production. This yield gap is 
due to a number of factors which include: poor quality of DOCs, insufficient vaccination coverage, 
poor feeding and overcrowding. The average cost per kg of producing broilers in Ghana is estimated 
at GH15 (USD 2.7) for large-scale producers and higher for small-scale producers. Layer birds reach 16 
weeks before starting laying eggs. Average industry egg production is 230 to 250 eggs per layer per 
year. 
Farmers have very limited knowledge in feed formulation. More than 80% of poultry farmers in Ghana 
produce their own feed because of the cost of feed on the market. Feed cost constitutes about 60%-
70% of total cost of production, making the unit cost per live bird very high. Partnerships with local 
training institutions to run short courses for poultry farmers in the areas of bio-security systems, feed 
formulation, use of veterinary medicines, administering of vaccines, etc. are needed. 
VC description and identification of main VC actors 
The VC is said to be highly fragmented, with producers’ associations reluctant to work together. Also, 
most of these associations would not be reliable partners as they would have been formed only to 
capture subsidies.  
119 
The outgrower model is not dominant so far, with large producers tending to be fully integrated 
(production of feed, hatcheries, processing capacities, etc.). However, some of the major players have 
showed interest to test the model under the GPP approach. 
Production of day-old chicks (DOC): even though there are local hatcheries that produce day-old 
chicks, the quality is generally low, so most poultry farmers prefer to buy imported day-old chicks, 
especially layer day-old chicks. In 2018, Ghana imported more than 500,000 broiler day-old chicks and 
more than 7,100,000 layer day-old chicks. Currently, day-old chicks for commercial production are 
primarily supplied by 15 local hatcheries and 8 importers. The importers mostly import the day-old 
chicks from the Netherlands and Belgium. Demand for day-old chicks exceeds supply by both local 
hatcheries and imports. 
Feed production: Ghana’s poultry feed industry has shifted to producing layer feed due to the drop 
off in domestic broiler production. About 80% of feed produced by commercial feed millers is layer 
feed.  
Feed manufacturers in Ghana can be categorized into commercial feed millers and on-farm self--
millers. Ghana has about 17 commercial feed mills with a total installed operating capacity of 1,000 
metric tons (MT) per day. However, most feed millers are only producing at about 40 to 50 % of their 
capacity due to low demand from the local poultry industry. The average amount of compound feed 
produced in Ghana is about 10,000 MT annually in the past few years. 
Broiler feed is primarily purchased by small-scale backyard poultry producers because large-scale 
poultry producers mostly make their own feed. The commercial feed millers produce mainly mash 
feed, a few produce high feed concentrates, and one feed mill pellets feed. Most small-and medium-
scale poultry producers prefer feed concentrates because it is cheap, convenient and less bulky for 
transportation. 
The main ingredients for compound feed are locally produced maize or imported yellow maize and 
wheat bran. Maize typically would form about 60% of total feed formulation. The poultry industry 
consumes nearly 30% of all maize produced in Ghana. Feed prices in Ghana have been increasing 
primarily due to the rising cost of maize. The GoG program “Planting for Food and Jobs” is expected 
to cause a reduction in maize prices. Soybean meal inclusion in poultry feed is low due to its high cost. 
The inclusion level of soybean meal ranges from 10 to 18% of the feed ration for layers and 15 to 25% 
for broilers. Controlling animal feed costs is critical in this industry since it represents approximately 
60-70% of total production cost. For this reason, feed manufacturers are switching to low-cost 
substitutes such as palm-kernel cake, groundnut cake and fish meal, by-products of agro-processing. 
Market opportunities 
The market grows at a rate of 6% per annum. However, consumption patterns of households in urban 
areas in Ghana are heavily weighted towards imported frozen poultry products. The reasons for this 
trend are that it is cheaper than locally produced poultry (in 2019, 2.5 USD/kg against 2.7 USD for 
locally produced broiler) and it is already pre-cut and dressed. As such, the convenience of a ready-to-
use chicken product has boosted consumer demand. Furthermore, the rapid growth in the 
restaurant, hotel and fast food sector has increased demand for frozen poultry products in the past 
few years. 
The national value chain does not respond to the needs of the market and has led to a decline in 
market share to 5%. Market needs require poultry meat to be affordable, available, accessible and 
conveniently packaged. However, local poultry processors in Ghana lack the infrastructure and 
equipment to produce chicken cuts that are preferred by most consumers. 
Opportunities exist to increase production to fill the 158, 000 tons supply gap being occupied with 
importation of frozen chicken currently. To substitute import, investments are needed in processing 
plants, setting up of hatcheries, proper vaccination and good biosecurity measures to reduce 
morbidity and mortality, increasing local production of maize and soya bean to reduce feed cost, 
breeding and using locally adaptable birds for poultry meat production. 
120 
Main constraints and challenge 
Significant constraints to poultry meat production in Ghana have made the value chain 
uncompetitive. Competition from the subsidized imported dressed chicken is the foremost problem 
for broiler production in Ghana. Imported poultry used to be cheaper by 50-60 percent than the 
locally produced. Apart from its affordability, the imported frozen chicken is available throughout the 
country in a convenient package. Ghanaians have continued over the recent years to develop the 
preference for this imported frozen chicken, which has now taken over 80% of the chicken meat 
market in the country. Most poultry companies are today focused on eggs. 
The high cost of quality blended feeds, that represent more than 60 percent of total production costs, 
and inefficient feed management practices are largely responsible for the high production costs of 
poultry products. It is mainly caused by high cost of maize and soyabean meal which are the two main 
ingredients used in the preparation of poultry feed. The production of these key ingredients is 
insufficient to meet competing demand for human consumption as staples and animal feed. 
Therefore, a chunk of the maize and soya bean used in the poultry industry is imported, which raises 
the cost of these grains. It is compounded by the fact that some feed mills are producing below 
capacity. 
Veterinary extension service is significantly inadequate within the poultry production regions in the 
country. This has resulted in frequent spread of disease-causing pathogens and high mortalities 
among birds. Farmers tend to use antibiotics indiscriminately in an attempt to solve the problems. 
Over the years, Ghanaian poultry farmers have been relying on DOCs imported from temperate 
regions. These birds are selected for greater growth rate and body weight based on environmentally 
controlled conditions and are not therefore able to perform up to their full potential when raised 
under tropical conditions. The use of poultry breed which have been developed under tropical 
conditions is crucial for enhanced productivity and heat and disease resistance. In Ghana, birds that 
are adaptable to heat stress have been developed at KNUST64 and Animal Research and need to be 
spread. More generally, the sanitary situation in most Ghanaian poultry farms is poor which results in 
substantial losses due to morbidity and mortality. 
Besides, there are other constraints impacting negatively on the domestic poultry production 
competitiveness, including inadequate financial and insurance instruments to support value chain 
actors, high interest rates on loans for production or inadequate cold processing and storage facilities 
and transport. 
Institutional analysis and VC management 
The Animal Production Directorate (APD) and the Veterinary Services Directorate (VSD) of the 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) has the oversight responsibility of the Poultry sector and 
other animals/livestock. Whiles APD oversees production issues, VSD takes care of health. Their roles 
are to ensure effective and efficient implementation of government policies on livestock and poultry. 
In 2017, the GoG launched the Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) program aiming at creating food 
security and produce raw material to feed the agro-processing industries while creating jobs in the 
process. According to the Ashanti regional director of MoFA, the introduction of this program helped 
the poultry sector to cut down cost and decreased the number of imported feeds in the country. 
In 2019 has been launched the Rearing for Food and Jobs program aimed at developing a competitive 
and more efficient livestock industry, that will increase domestic production, reduce importation of 
livestock products, contribute to employment creation, and improve livelihoods of livestock value 
chain actors. The government has set an ambitious target to invest in the poultry component of the 
64 Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology  
121 
program as a major step to substitute the importation of chicken into the country. According to 
MoFA, goal is to reduce the USD 380 million yearly import bill when 20 years ago the country 
exported chicken to her neighbor. The focus is on building the appropriate infrastructure to boost 
local production. Farmers will be supplied with required inputs to produce soya beans this year as a 
measure to get more feed for the poultry industry. 
Currently, the only donor supporting the Poultry sector in Ghana is the United States Department of 
Agriculture through the Ghana Poultry Program (GPP; 2015-2021). It is being implemented by 
ACDI/VOCA and TechnoServe to expand local production and processing of poultry meat and eggs in 
Ghana. The project aims at increasing the competitiveness of the poultry value chain using inclusive 
system approach. The target beneficiaries of the project include processors, input suppliers, financial 
institutions, business service advisors and buyers. The project’s interventions are in four areas: 
capacity building, financial services, training, and market access. Trough GPP, local companies trained 
smallholder farmers in outgrower model on cost-efficient broiler production techniques and 
contract agreements and negotiations at demonstration farms. They supply the outgrowers with 
inputs such as day-old chicks, feed, and vaccines while the farmers raise the birds for six weeks. 
An extension officer manages logistics and provides technical assistance. 
Technology transfer is very weak in the industry currently. Few NGOs have been able to bring MoFA, 
Research Institutions and the Universities closer to the FBOs to ensure technology transfer. There is 
therefore a huge opportunity for GoG, Development Partners (DPs) and various NGOs to play a 
mediation role between FBOs and MoFA, Universities and Research Institutions to arrange regular 
meetings to enhance technology transfer. 
Existing Poultry Producer Associations and Clusters (2016) 
G.F. = Guinea fowl; Poultry = Chicken 
Producer Association 
Cluster 
Administrative 
Region 
Upper East Region 
Asera 
1 
Asongtaaba 
Bolgatanga 
Korania 
Yam-Zamsug 
Zuarungu 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Bawku East 
10  Paga 
Upper West Region 
11  Gbare 
GF 
GF 
GF 
GF 
GF 
GF 
Bongo 
Bongo  
Gagbire 
Bolga 
Korania 
Teli 
Gagbire 
(Tempane) 
Bolga Municipal 
Kasena Nankana 
Municipal 
(Telli Zebilla), 
Zuarungu 
Bolga Municipal 
GF 
GF 
Bawku 
Bawku East  
Paga 
Kasena Nankana 
Municipal 
GF 
Gbare 
Jirapa 
122 
Bawku 
Poultry  Bawku 
Bawku Municipal 
Bawku Municip. 
GF 
Bawku 
Bawku Municipal 
Ecological Zone  Membershi
p 
20 
62 
53 
28 
16 
69 
45 
32 
40 
37 
72 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Sudan 
Savannahh 
Sudan 
Savannahh 
Sudan 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
12  Sissala East 
GF 
Tumu 
13  Ngogtaa-iri 
Poultry 
Jirapa 
Sissala East 
District 
Jirapa Dist 
14  Sombo 
GF 
Sombo 
Nadole Kaleo 
15  Upper West 
Poultry  Wa 
Wa Municipal 
16 
Loggu 
17  Chaang 
18 
Lawra 
GF 
GF 
GF 
Loggu 
Wa East 
Chaang 
Nadole Kaleo 
Lawra 
Lawra District 
19  Charia 
Poultry  Charia 
Wa 
20  Kpansoubo 
Group 
Northern Region 
21  Savelugu Nantom   Poultry  Savalugu 
Poultry  Kpansoub
o 
Wa Municipal 
Savelugu 
22  Tamale 
23  Sanlerigu 
24  Kumbugu 
25  Central Gonja 
GF 
GF 
GF 
GF 
Tamale 
Tamale 
Sanlerigu 
Sanlerigu 
Kumbugu 
Kumbugu 
Yapei 
Central Gonja 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Guinea 
Savannahh 
Bono Region 
26  Wenchi 
27  Chiraa 
28  Sunyani 
29  Dormaa 
Bono East Region 
30  Techiman 
Volta Region 
31  Ho 
Oti Region 
32 
Ashanti Region 
33  Ejisu Juaben 
Jasikan 
Poultry  Wenchi 
Poultry 
Poultry 
Poultry  Dormaa 
Ahenkro 
Wenchi 
Chiraa 
Sunyani Mun. 
Dormaa 
Transitional 
Forest 
Forest 
Forest 
Poultry  Techiman 
Techiman 
Transitional 
Poultry  Ho 
Ho Municipal 
Forest 
Poultry 
Jasikan 
Jasikan District 
Forest 
Poultry  Ejisu and 
Ejisu-Juaben Dist 
Forest 
Juaben  
34  Kwabere East 
35  Afiegya Kwabere   Poultry  Kodie 
36  Antwima 
Poultry  Nkawie 
Poultry  Abuakwa 
Nwabiagya  
Kwabere East 
Afiegya Kwabere 
Antwima 
Nwabiagya   
Forest 
Forest 
Forest 
123 
30 
12 
50 
68 
20 
53 
54 
56 
15 
20 
40 
50 
150 
30 
30 
100 
30 
118 
105 
123 
115 
30 
22 
62 
32 
37  Sekyere South 
38  Ashanti 
Mampong  
39  Kumasi Poultry 
Industry Major 
Actors 
Eastern Region 
40  Koforidua 
Central Region 
41  Cape Coast 
Western Region 
42  Tarkwa 
43  Takoradi 
Poultry 
Jamasi 
and 
Agona 
Poultry  Ashanti 
Mampong 
Sekyere South 
Forest 
Ashanti Mampong  Forest 
Poultry  Kumasi 
Kumasi Metro 
Forest 
Poultry  Koforidua  Koforidua 
Forest 
Poultry  Cape Cost  Cape Cost 
Poultry  Tarkwa 
Poultry  Takoradi 
Tarkwa 
Sekondi - 
Takoradi 
Greater Accra Region 
44  Greater Accra 
Poultry  Accra 
45  Oyarifa Poultry 
Poultry  Oyarifa 
46  Dodowa 
47  GNAPF 
Poultry  Dodowa 
Accra 
Greater Accra 
Metropolitan 
La-Nkwanta-
Madina Municip. 
Shai Osudoku 
Accra Metro. 
Coastal 
Savannahh 
Forest 
Forest 
Coastal 
Savannahh 
Coastal 
Savannahh 
Forest 
Coastal 
Savannahh 
57 
52 
18 
45 
200 
30 
32 
400 
10 Reg. 
Assoc. 
Climate 
In Ghana, temperatures are often too high for chicken which cause heat stress. It causes significant 
reductions in growth, egg production and fertility and compromises immune competence, renders 
farm animals susceptible to diseases and increases mortality and production. The local poultry breeds 
in Ghana are adaptable but are highly unproductive. On the contrary, exotic birds imported from 
Europe by small- and large-scale poultry farms are highly sensitive to heat. The effect of heat stress is 
exacerbated by climate change. However, efforts to mitigate the effects of climate change have been 
biased towards crop production.  
124 
Annex 8. Estimated single blended rate for apex Ghana 
Background:  
IFAD project design team has requested assistance from PMI team to calculate a weighted single 
interest rate for a combined fund sourced from five different lines of credit being offered by public 
and private sources. The five lines of credit will be domiciled with an Apex Bank Ghana. Each of these 
five lines of credit have a maturity of 20 years. The APEX will then on-lend to to IFAD/PROSPER clients 
who are AgriSMEs and Coops. They in turn will on-lend to small farmers.  
The lines of credit are: 
1)      LoC1 – $6.9 m from GCF to Apex at interest rate of 0% 
2)      LoC2 – $13.9 m from GCF to Apex at interest rate of 1%   
3)      LoC3 – $14 m from IFAD to Apex at interest rate of 2%  
4)      LoC4 – $1 m from other investors to Apex at interest rate of 4% 
5)      LoC5 – $2.5 m for Apex’s own resources at treasury bond rate of 12% 
Assumptions:  
The analysis is based on the following questionable assumptions: 
Risk Profile/Premium: Level of risk for AgriSME and FO is exactly the same. Therefore, risk premiums 
are assumed to be the same, which is not realistic. 
Ops EXP/Spreads: Assumptions based on typical spreads charged by impact investors active in Ghana. 
Bank benchmark COC rates (term deposits) in Ghana are between 9-12%. 
Results: 
Nominal Rate - APEX to Clients (Average): 9.5% 
Nominal Rate - APEX to Risky Clients: 9.9% 
Nominal Rate - APEX to Less Risky Clients: 8.7% 
The rates to final beneficiaries above still stand in the concessional range, since for reference, near-
prime rates practiced in Ghana are on average 21% p.a.65 
Weighted COC Calculation:  
                          Amount                     Weight               Cost 
Concessional Tranche 
LOC1-                   $6.9M                  (19.27%)                0 
LOC2-                  $13.9M                  (38.8%)              .388 
LOC3-                   $14 M                   (39.1%)               .78 
LOC4-                    $1M                       (2.8%)              .112 
Weighted Total Average Cost on Concessional: 1.28% 
Single Interest Rate Calculation – Hard Currency (HC) 
Weighted Average Cost of 
Funding 
ADD: Operating Expenses 
1.28% 
2.5% 
Drawn from calculation above 
Based on typical FM fees charged over 
AUM 
65 More details at https://www.bog.gov.gh/economic-data/interest-rates/.  
125 
ADD: Risk Premium 
ADD: Spread 
2.52% PEGGED (See point 1 
below) 
1.0% 
Nominal RATE in USD 
7.3% 
Assumes high risk Agri market  
Assumes additional opportunity costs /plus 
margins 
APEX to Clients 
(1) Risk-premium is pegged by a 1.5 FIXED Agri market multiplier of the difference between US 
average lending rates (PEG1 - 3.54% in 2020) and US 20-year T-bill (PEG2 - 1.86% in 10-9-21): 
Risk-premium HC = 1.5 x (PEG1 – PEG2) = 1.5 x (3.54 – 1.86) = 2.52% 
Single Interest Rate Calculation – Soft Currency (SC) 
SC Cost of Funding 
ADD: Operating Expenses 
12% 
2.5% 
ADD: Risk Premium 
ADD: Spread 
13.5% PEGGED (See point 2 
below) 
1% 
Nominal RATE 
29% 
Apex Required Return 
Based on typical FM fees charged over 
AUM 
Assumes high risk Agri market  
Assumes additional opportunity costs /plus 
margins 
APEX to Clients 
(2) Risk-premium is pegged by a 1.5 FIXED Agri market multiplier of the difference between Ghana’s 
average lending rates (PEG3 - 21% in December 2020) and Apex’s benchmark term deposits (PEG4 - 
12%): 
Risk-premium SC = 1.5 x (PEG3 – PEG4) = 1.5 x (21 – 12) = 13.5% 
Final WACC – Incorporating HC and SC 
Of course, the PEGGED values 1-4 can be calculated and included to the final WACC for each year by 
Apex, to ensure that, given the project’s long duration, we don’t end up making loans too cheap or 
expensive for the proposed mechanism. To the final WACC, we add a 0-1.5% Individual Risk Spread, to 
be charged based on the risk parameters of each entity (e.g., size, financial health, repayment 
history). 
126 
WACCAmount (M)WeightRateCostConcessional HC35.893.5%7.3%0.068Commercial SC2.56.5%29.0%0.019Sum38.38.7% 
Annex 9. Rural finance environment in Ghana 
According to AfDB, Africa’s financial system is lagging behind other developing regions in every 
dimension of financial sector development, from regulations, and product sophistication to access, 
gender, and inclusion. The financial systems are small, concentrated, and unaffordable, with limited 
outreach. However, financial systems in Africa have also seen dramatic transformation, over the past 
two decades, in market structure and stability. There are enormous differences across sub-regions 
and countries, ranging from well-developed financial systems in middle-income countries, to shallow 
banking systems offering only the most basic banking services in fragile and poor states. Variation and 
disparity also exists within countries, like Ghana's polarized demographic structure between the 
northern regions, and the fast-developing southern regions. Every sub-region on the African continent 
fares differently in terms of progress towards financial development but as a whole access to finance 
is one of the major constraints for private sector development. The World Bank’s enterprise survey’s 
data reveals that many African MSMEs report access to finance as a major barrier.  
Overview of the rural financial sector in Ghana 
According to the National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy Report (2018), the financial 
sector in Ghana grew over the past few years, but it remains bank-dominated and citycentric. Access 
to sustainable financing remains a huge challenge in rural Ghana notwithstanding decades of 
interventions by various donor-funded projects, NGOs and philanthropic individuals. The poorest 
regions are the most financially excluded, particularly in the northern belt, implying that rural 
residents and women have less access to banks than do their urban and male counterparts. Rural 
residents, women, and the poor rely on Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs) and informal financial 
services. Most prominently those are rural banks, savings and loans companies and microfinance 
institutions with social missions which provide the financial intermediation services for the rural 
population of Ghana, as opposed to the commercial banks which are predominant in the city centres. 
The low economic activity (depending mainly on low-value agriculture), very high transaction costs 
associated with providing credit in small volumes to widely dispersed and often remotely located 
borrowers, the high volatility of agricultural production arising from the uncertainty of rain patterns, 
among other factors, make rural communities unattractive to major financial institutions which have 
the capacity to spur on development. The emergence of rural community banks (RCBs), savings and 
loans companies (S&Ls) and microfinance institutions (MFIs) was in response to ever growing need to 
rope every Ghanaian into the banking system for development. RCBs, S&Ls and MFIs have designed 
tailor-made products which fit the unique needs of the unbanked rural poor. 
Rural Community Banks (RCBs) 
RCBs are specialised institutions engaged primarily in deposit-taking business within a defined 
catchment area. They are unit banks owned by members of the rural community through the 
purchase of shares and are licensed to provide financial intermediation. They were first initiated in 
1976 to expand savings mobilization and credit services in rural areas not served by commercial and 
development banks. In recent times, rural banks in Ghana are the largest providers of formal financial 
services in rural areas and hold a big chunk of the total banking outlets in the country (IFAD, 2008). 
RCBs are licensed and regulated by the Bank of Ghana (BoG) in accordance with the Banks and 
Specialized Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) to offer savings, credit and payment 
services. The mobilization of savings and granting of credits are basic banking activities that give rise 
to risk in the operations of the RCBs, hence the role of the BoG. 
To establish an RCB, the BoG has established various requirements, among which are the following: 
The minimum paid-up capital of GH¢1,000,000 or as may be determined by BoG from time to time, 
with not more than 25% of the initial paid-up capital held in property, plant and equipment (capital 
127 
expenditure). In other words, at least 75% of the initial paid-up capital shall be in liquid cash resources 
to support operations.  
The shareholding of rural banks is restricted only to Ghanaians as follows:  
 
Individual shareholding; not exceeding 30% of total shares,  
  Community participation; not less than 20% of total shares,  
  Family participation; not exceeding 40% of total shares, and  
  Corporate bodies; not exceeding 50% of total shares. 
Within the supervisory structure for the RCBs is the ARB Apex Bank Limited which acts as their “mini-
central bank”. The ARB Apex Bank Limited was registered as a public limited liability company in 
January 2000 with the RCBs being its shareholders. It was granted a banking licence in June 2001 and 
was admitted to the Bankers Clearing House as the 19th member in August 2001. ARB Apex Bank 
Limited has 11 branch offices throughout the country in the following locations: Accra, Cocoa House, 
Kumasi, Sunyani, Bolgatanga, Cape Coast, Takoradi, Koforidua, Hohoe, Tamale and Wa. 
The ARB Apex Bank Limited offers the following services to the RCBs: 
  Cheque clearing services, 
  Corresponding banking services, 
  E-Banking services, 
  Purchase of government securities, 
  Remittance services,  
  Fixed term deposit services (the apex certificate of deposit), and  
  Financing (on-lending to RCBs). 
There are currently 144 licensed RCBs which are spread across the country and offering various 
financial and transformational services to the rural population. Of the 144 RCBs nationwide, 70 are 
located within the Middle and Northern belts, representing 49% of the total number of RCBs (refer to 
the list below). 
Table 1: List of RCBs in Middle and Northern belts 
128 
As expected, RCBs are mainly focused on the provision of savings, loans and nonfinancial products to 
their clients to stimulate the rural economies where they operate. The various types of deposit 
products offered by RCBs include: 
Current (checking) accounts,  
Susu accounts,  
Term deposits, cash collateral (compulsory savings) accounts, and  
Savings accounts. 
129 
NameAddressTelephone #Email AddressRegionAdansi Rural BankFomena, Head Office+233 57 443 8510adansiruralbank@yahoo.comAshantiAhafo Ano Premier Rural BankWioso, Head Office+233 20 998 1757premierahaano@yahoo.co.ukAshantiAkrofuom Area Rural BankAkrofuom, Head Office+233 24 489 2655aarbho@yahoo.comAshantiAmanano Rural BankNyinahin, Head Office+233 20 800 7254amananorbl.nyinahin@yahoo.comAshantiAmansie West Rural BankAntoakrom, Head Office+233 27 759 9442awrblimited@yahoo.comAshantiAsante Akyem Rural BankJuansa, Head Office+233 50 133 3446asanteakyemrb2010@yahoo.comAshantiAsokore Rural BankAsokore, Head Office+233 32 209 2188info@amrb.com.ghAshantiAtwima Kwanwoma Rural BankHead Office+233 32 229 8900atwikwancentral@yahoo.comAshantiAtwima Mponua Rural BankToase, Head Office+233 50 590 3125atwimamponua@yahoo.comAshantiAtwima Rural BankFoase, Head Office+233 50 138 7040foaseatwima@yahoo.comAshantiBosomtwe Rural BankKuntenase, Head Office+233 32 209 8076bosomtwerb@yahoo.comAshantiBosome Freho Rural BankHead Office+233 24 360 0001bosomefreho@yahoo.comAshantiJuaben Rural BankJuaben, Head Office+233 20 852 1968jrbmain@gmail.comAshantiKumawuman Rural BankKumawu,Head Office+233 20 202 9550kumawumanrb@yahoo.comAshantiKwamaman Rural BankKwamang, Head Office+233 50 128 9184kwaman82@yahoo.comAshantiNsutaman Rural BankNsuta, Head Office+233 32 249 0680nsutamanrbl@yahoo.comAshantiNwabiagya Rural BankBarekese, Head Office+233 32 209 1880Nwabiagyarb@yahoo.co.ukAshantiOdotobri Rural BankJacobu, Head Office+233 20 870 9493odotobribank@yahoo.comAshantiOffinso Rural BankOffinso, Head Office+233 32 209 1619frankkfrimpong@yahoo.comAshantiOkomfo Anokye Rural BankWiamoase, Head Office+233 20 434 4906okofokye83@yahoo.comAshantiOtuasekan Rural BankKofiase, Head Office+233 32 209 2002otuasekanrbl@yahoo.comAshantiSekyedumase Rural BankSekyedumase, Head Office+233 50 128 6161info@sekobank.comAshantiSekyere Rural BankJamasi, Head Office+233 32 209 1612info@sekyerebank.comAshantiYaa Asantewaa Rural BankEjisu, Head Office+233 54 194 3586yarbgh@yahoo.comAshantiEjuraman Rural BankEjura, Head Office+233 20 923 5573info@erbank.com.ghAshantiAkumadan Rural BankAkumadan, Head Office+233 50 158 4413info@akumadanruralbank.comAshantiAsokore Mampong Rural BankAsokore Mampong+233 32 249 4413, 50 153 2408info@amrb.com.ghAshantiTepaman Rural BankTepa Ashanti, Head Office+233 50 129 5909tepamanruralbank@yahoo.comAshantiKwabre Area Rural BankKodie-Kumasi Head Office+233 32 249 8368/9AshantiAhafo Community BankKukuom, Head Office P.O.Box 33+233 35 209 5470atwimamponua@yahoo.comAhafo RegionAsutifi Rural BankAcherensua, Head Office+233 50 149 5901info@asutifiruralbank.comAhafo RegionAtweaban Rural BankBox 18, Brong AhafoDuayaw-Nkwanta, Head Office0264787023; 0208030423info@eastakimruralbankltd.comAhafo RegionBomaa Area Rural BankBomaa, Head Office P. O. Box 108, Bechem-B/A+233 50 133 8174jomororuralbank@yahoo.comAhafo RegionDerma Rural BankDerma, Head Office P.O. Box 1+233 50 125 5049dermaarearuralbankltd@rocketmail.comAhafo RegionAmantin & Kasei Rural BankP O Box 128 Ejura Ashanti+233 20 205 5170amakacom@ymail.comBono EastFiagya Rural BankP. O. Box 130, Nkoranza+233 20 437 1847fiagyaruralbank@yahoo.comBono EastKintampo Rural BankP. O. Box 98, Kintampo+233 50 125 5074kintamporuralbankltd@yahoo.comBono EastNkoranza Kwabre Rural BankP.O.Box 97+233 20 261 3286nkorabre1983@yahoo.comBono EastYapra Rural BankP.O.Box 109,+233 20 207 7430yaprabank@yahoo.comBono EastBaduman Rural BankP.O.Box 6, Badu+233 20 693 9866 35 209 1454brbbadu@yahoo.comBono RegionBomosadu Rural BankP. O. Box 432, Senase, Berekum.  Brong+233 50 443 6394bomosadurb@gmail.comBono RegionCapital Rural BankP. O. Box 18, Abesim+233 20 872 5878crbabesimagency@yahoo.comBono RegionDrobo Community BankP. O. Box 12 Drobo+233 50 309 5003ferkanda1@yahoo.co.ukBono RegionNafana Rural BankP. O. Box 123.Sampa+233 24 221 0416nafanaruralbank@yahoo.comBono RegionNkoranman Rural BankP. O. Box 20, Berekum-Seikwa+233 50 699 5019nkoranmanbl@yahoo.comBono RegionNkrankwanta Area Rural BankP.O.Box 1  Nkrankwanta+233 50 689 1011narbank@yahoo.comBono RegionNsoatreman Rural BankP. O. Box 14 Nsoatre+233 35 202 3669nsoatrerb@gmail.comBono RegionSuma Rural BankP. O. Box13,Suma Ahenkro,B/A+233 20 207 7804sumaruralbank@yahoo.comBono RegionWamfie Rural BankP. O. Box 26 Wamfie, B/A+233 20 997 7754wrbheadoffice@yahoo.comBono RegionWenchi Rural BankP. O. Box W30+233 35 219 7204wenchirb4u@yahoo.comBono RegionKaaseman Rural BankP. O. Box 157 Berekum+233 20 435 5327kaasemanruralbank@yahoo.comBono RegionAsubonten Rural BankP.O. Box 57, Worawora+233 20 320 2332asubontenrb@gmail.comOti RegionKpassa Rural BankP. O. Box 10 Nkwanta+233 54 433 2289department.kpassarbl.ict@gmail.comOti RegionNorth Volta Rural BankP. O. Box 5 Jasikan+233 50 144 8009northvolta@yahoo.comOti RegionKaakye Rural BankP O Box Kc 33, Kete-Krachi+233 30 396 2568kaakyebank@yahoo.comOti RegionBangmarigu Community Bank Limited (West Mamprusi)   Walewale Box 34 Savelugu0208 286 372; 0544557072westmcb@live.co.uk Northern EastBessfa Rural Bank LimitedGaru P. O. Box 160 - Bawku0209320568bessfarb@yahoo.comUpper EastBongo Rural Bank LimitedBongo, P.O.Box 39, Bongo0382093960bongoruralbankltd@yahoo.comUpper EastBonzali Rural Bank LimitedNayilifong, P.O.Box 119703720-22506bonzaliruralbank@yahoo.comNorthernBorimanga Rural Bank LimitedMohifong, Box 34 Savelugu03720-93217borimangabank@yahoo.comNorthernBuilsa Community Bank LimitedSandema Town P. O. Box 250242973741; 0208281269bucobank@gmail.comUpper EastBuuwuloso One Stop Rural BankP.O. Box Dm111, Damongo0372094942buuwulosorb@yahoo.comNorthernLawra Area Rural Bank LimitedLawra P.O.Box380501389618lawraarearuralbanklimited@yahoo.comUpper WestMaltaaba Community BankBongo, Head Office+233 50 655 0500Upper WestNaara Rural Bank LimitedPaga Town P. O. Box 140244881321 , 0208779990naararural@yahoo.comUpper EastNandom Rural Bank LimitedNandom Lorry StationBox10 Nandom0501287701 / 2nandomruralbank@yahoo.com Upper WestSissala Rural Bank LimitedTumu P O Box 980244097070Upper WestSonzele Rural Bank Jirapa District P. O. Box 160244293957sonzeleruralbank@yahoo.comUpper WestTisungtaaba  / East Mamprusi Community Bank East Mamprusi Box 11 Gambaga0208163744laduayire@yahoo.comNorthern EastTizaa Rural Bank LimitedNk Gushegu P.O.Box 477 Tamale0501576037 - 8tizaarbl@yahoo.comNorthernToende Rural BankMarket P.O.Box 5,Zebilla0244436380; 0242607123toendesabil2004@yahoo.comUpper EastZabzugu Rural Bank LimitedZabzugu P. O. Box Zb 29. Zabzugu0372091343; 0203077482; 0242271350NorthernRURAL BANKS IN NMIDDLE AND NORTHERN BELTS 
As of March 2021, RCBs reported total deposits of GHS 5.573 billion, rising from GHS 5.322 billion in 
March 2020 (ARB Apex Bank, 2021). 
On the asset side, RCBs transform the deposits of their clients into loans and advances to meet the 
financing needs of businesses and individuals in the communities in which they operate. RCBs offer 
different types of local currency loans and advances reflecting the demands of their unique locations. 
Generally, loan products include the following: 
individual loans,  
 
  group loans,  
  agribusiness loans,  
  business loans,  
  education loans,  
 
salary loans among others. 
The ARB Apex Bank reports that total loan portfolio of RCBs reached GHS 1.966 billion as of March 
2021 (from GHS 1.842 billion in March 2020), concentrated on individuals (65.72%) who are mostly 
into trading (37.47%). In view of the fact that RCBs do not operate branches in other communities 
(i.e., RCBs are unit banks), the performance of their loan products reflect the dominance of specific 
economic activities in their respective communities. These economic activities are categorized into 
the following sectors as reported by ARP Apex bank as of March 2021:  
  Agriculture: 7.12%, 
  Cottage industries: 1.87%, 
  Transportation: 4.42%, 
  Trading: 37.47%, and  
  Others: 49.12%. 
The quality of loans and advances continue to pose a challenge, compounded by the effects of the 
covid-19 pandemic. Nonetheless, RCBs appear to have a higher portfolio quality than commercial 
banks. Non-Performing Loans (NPLs) slightly increased from 11.13% as at December 2020 to 11.23% 
in March 2021. Past due of 14.28% was within the prudential benchmark but Loss/NPL of 62.25% was 
far above the 20% maximum benchmark. These were however superior to the performance of 
commercial banks which recorded NPL ratio of 15.49% (14.82% in the previous quarter), past due of 
22.49% and Loss/NPL ratio of 61.9%.%. This could be due to a closer monitoring by the RCBs of their 
clients. 
RCBs are frequently engaged in nonfinancial services such as financial literacy trainings, trainings on 
Good Agriculture Practices (GAP), health education and other interventions, usually as part of their 
corporate social responsibilities.  
To ensure the resilience of RCBs, the ARB Apex Bank Limited consistently tracks the performances of 
all rural banks. Using its quarterly rankings, RCBs are classified into Strong, Satisfactory, Fair and 
Marginal. The assessment for these ratings covers RCBs’ capital, assets (including asset quality), 
profitability and liquidity. Out of the 70 RCBs within the middle and northern belts, 66 RCBs were 
rated as of December 2020 with 9 RCBs emerging Strong and 22 emerging Satisfactory. The remaining 
35 RCBs were rated Fair or Marginal. 4 of the 9 strong RCBs in the middle and northern belts 
(representing 44.4%) are located in the Ashanti Region while Bono East and Upper East contributed 2 
strong RCBs each (22.2%) and Upper West Region contributed 1 RCB. 
Rating of RCBs in the Middle & Northern Belts as of December 2020: 
The list of the Strong RCBs within the northern and middle belts are as follows: 
130 
BANK 
# 
Kintampo 
1 
Yapra 
2 
Atwima Kwanwoma 
3 
Otuasekan 
4 
Amansie West 
5 
Juaben 
6 
7 
Builsa 
8  Maltaaba 
9 
Sonzele 
AVERAGE SCORE 
REGION 
1.44 
Bono East 
1.44 
Bono East 
1.25 
Ashanti 
1.38 
Ashanti 
1.44 
Ashanti 
1.50 
Ashanti 
1.25 
Upper East 
Upper East 
1.44 
Upper West  1.13 
With their average scores between 1.50 and 2.50 points, the following RCBs were ranked Satisfactory 
as of December 2020:  
# 
BANK 
REGION 
AVERAGE SCORE 
Amantin & Kasei 
Kumawuman 
Tepaman 
Ahafo Ano 
Bosomtwe 
Adansi 
Sekyere 
Atwima Mponua 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5  Odotobri 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  Asante Akyem 
11  Asokore 
12  Offinso 
13  Okomfo Anokye 
14  Nwabiagya 
15  Yaa Asantewaa 
16  Asokore Mampong 
17  Ahafo Community 
18  Asutifi 
19  Bonzali 
20  Tizaa 
21  Toende 
22  Naara 
1.75 
Bono East 
1.63 
Ashanti 
1.63 
Ashanti 
1.63 
Ashanti 
1.88 
Ashanti 
1.94 
Ashanti 
1.94 
Ashanti 
2.00 
Ashanti 
2.00 
Ashanti 
2.00 
Ashanti 
2.06 
Ashanti 
2.06 
Ashanti 
2.13 
Ashanti 
2.25 
Ashanti 
2.38 
Ashanti 
2.38 
Ashanti 
1.75 
Ahafo 
2.38 
Ahafo 
1.94 
Northern 
Northern 
2.50 
Upper East  1.88 
Upper East  2.50 
Ashanti Region alone contributed 15 of the 22 RCBs which are ranked Satisfactory (68.2%) while 
Upper East, Northern and Ahafo regions contributed 2 RCBs each in the same category. 
Savings and Loans Companies (S&L) 
The emergence of S&Ls and MFIs in Ghana resulted from the gap that existed between the outreach 
of formal commercial banks and the demand for financial services. Individual savings collectors known 
all over West Africa as Susu, made small, short term and sometimes interest-free advances to their 
regular clients. The widespread operations of the Susu led many analysts to start proposing that 
combining the capital of formal banks with the intrinsic advantages of the informal agents (Susu 
operators) could result in solving the financial gap problems. The idea led to the conceptual 
development of the Savings & Loans sector in the financial system of Ghana. 
131 
Savings & Loans companies in Ghana are noted to create access to productive capital for the poor, 
together with human capital, which is empowered through education and training, and social capital 
incentives achieved through local organization building. The BoG have overall supervisory and 
regulatory authority in all matters relating to S&Ls as in banks and other nonbank financial institutions 
in Ghana with the purpose to achieve a sound, efficient banking system in the interest of depositors 
and other customers and the economy as a whole, pursuant to the Banks and Specialised Deposit-
taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). 
Like RCBs, S&Ls are authorised to provide savings, loans and nonfinancial products to their target 
customers. With a minimum capital requirement of GHS15 million, S&Ls are authorised to operate 
branches in various parts of the country, thereby enhancing their capacity for outreach and 
diversification. 
There are currently 25 licensed S&Ls which have their operations in various parts Ghana, with 
prominence within the southern belt and Kumasi: 
Savings and Loan Name 
ABii National  
Adehyeman  
Advans Ghana  
Asa  
Assurance  
Bayport  
Best Point   
Bond  
Direct  
Equity 
Golden Link  
Golden Pride  
Izwe  
Jins  
Letshego  
# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16  Multi Credit  
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
Opportunity International  
Pacific. 
Pan - African  
Progress  
Services Integrity  
SIC Life  
Sinapi Aba  
The Seed Funds  
Utrak  
Location 
Cantonments, Accra 
Accra-Ghana 
Accra – North 
Mamprobi Accra 
Accra 
Accra North 
Cantonments, Accra 
Tema 
Cantonments, Accra 
Cantonments, Accra 
Accra 
Accra 
Accra 
Accra 
Accra 
Kumasi – Ashanti 
Accra 
Kumasi - Ashanti 
Cantonments, Accra 
Accra 
Accra 
Adabraka - Accra 
Nhyiaso, Kumasi 
Cantonments - Accra 
Kumasi 
S&L companies, like their commercial banking counterparts, tend to shy away from financing 
agribusinesses particularly at the production level due to the perceived high risks in the sector. As a 
result, most of them have specialised in consumption loans to government workers and business 
loans to traders. 
The performance of selected S&Ls as of December 2020 is presented below 
Table 2: Financial performance of selected S&L 
132 
Based on author’s construct 
Opportunity International S&Ls (OISL) is a subsidiary of Opportunity International, a global institution 
dedicated to helping clients transform out of poverty. It operates in 23 countries across the globe 
serving nearly 10 million clients with micro loans, savings, micro insurance and non-financial services. 
The global office is based in Chicago, USA. As of December 2020, OISL had 579,448 clients of which 
40,797 were loan clients. Loan portfolio was GHS 152.3 million and client deposit balances were GHS 
228 million. With a total asset of GHS 312.5 million and shareholders net worth of GHS 46 million, this 
makes OISL one of the biggest savings and loans company in Ghana. 
With branches scattered within the middle and northern belts, it have demonstrated absolute 
commitment towards agricultural financing over the years. OISL currently serves over 22,800 
agribusiness loan clients who are mostly located within the northern and middle belts with a total 
agriculture loan portfolio of GH 39 million. During the 10-year period of introducing the agriculture 
loan product, OISL has disbursed over GHS 200 million in loans to farmers for production. 
Access to financing in Ghana’s agriculture sector 
Over a period of 25 years, bank lending to agriculture in Ghana has been on the general decline in 
spite of the various agro-financing mechanisms implemented. The share of agriculture in total 
commercial bank lending in Ghana is illustrated below. 
Figure 1: Agriculture as a percentage of commercial bank lending in Ghana (PWC, 2017) 
133 
Name of S&LProfitCash/InvestmentLoans portfolioTotal assetsCustomer DepositsNet worthLiquidityROAROEASA69,172,50092,989,591254,536,921354,151,737159,559,734158,597,22058%20%44%LETSHEGO32,613,87069,105,279552,484,130684,837,998169,662,92389,038,44941%5%37%JINS1,284,4844,856,05922,579,24631,669,28914,757,43015,347,84333%4%8%BEST POINT11,525,28025,172,74034,007,077342,743,062303,173,83633,270,7168%3%35%OISL9,427,96027,957,065152,356,924312,551,525227,968,26946,038,99012%3%20%ABII NATIONAL3,202,04111,477,08420,270,652121,974,510112,099,6026,643,53410%3%48%SISL4,409,70737,804,503134,988,859184,945,94924,260,76381,150,901156%2%5%BAYPORT17,842,42721,965,372675,781,352801,324,717104,470,260143,322,23121%2%12%SINAPI ABA3,615,05147,337,290144,896,090213,025,201141,784,19616,967,60633%2%21%PACIFIC386,73414,813,64211,479,04432,488,85524,023,7236,546,07162%1%6%DIRECT442,13428,947,81838,546,74463,403,15626,139,90119,448,523111%1%2%BOND644,67276,722,912280,224,256384,205,196166,801,92682,130,49546%0%1%PROGRESS41,59556,423,7535,336,71369,458,93151,705,13516,529,220109%0%0%PAN-AFRICAN(246,858)41,050,08058,320,432118,071,82090,173,01415,917,51246%0%-2%GOLDEN PRIDE(710,913)27,689,60611,006,70260,277,30257,780,724(834,399)48%-1%-85%ADVANS(2,705,713)12,169,941118,915,978164,664,45462,985,76729,860,94219%-2%-9%MCSL(8,051,896)139,354,33777,819,401301,225,423278,373,10619,499,55550%-3%-41%EQUITY(2,289,460)4,174,6228,169,63181,703,36761,196,36014,932,6317%-3%-15%GOLDEN LINK(8,879,601)5,881,73711,873,47947,259,04540,782,235(5,811,452)14%-19%-153%UTRAK(7,314,718)9,530,77020,666,45036,795,59832,606,0951,739,47529%-20%-421%Financial Performance of Key S&Ls 
Lending dropped from their double-digit figures in the mid-1990s to under 4% of total bank credit in 
2015. The low participation in lending to the agricultural sector is characterized by the following 
features: 
  Eight commercial banks accounted for 88.5% of the amount of loans granted, 
  ADB alone was responsible for nearly 40%, 
  Three banks (ADB, EBG, and SB) provided more than two-thirds of the loans, 
 
  15 commercial banks had less than 1% of their loans in the agricultural sector. 
Local banks accounted for 57.3%, 
The financing of agriculture by commercial banks in the country is largely dominated by a few ones, 
indicating the low risk appetite that commercial banks, generally, have for the sector. As a proxy for 
private sector investment, bank lending to the agriculture sector is mimicking the downward slide in 
the public sector. The public sector contribution to agriculture sector remains low, resulting in slower 
agricultural sector growth rate in Ghana over the last two decades. The government’s budget 
allocation needs to increase to stimulate better growth. Despite expressed commitment to the 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) since 2003, the funding 
allocation made by the Government of Ghana from its Budget Statement and Economic Policies 
indicate an underinvestment in the sector. Between 2013 and 2016, only a tenth of the target 
amount planned for the sector was actually disbursed. Furthermore, the allocated amounts tend to 
fund recurrent expenditure, which leaves a disproportionally small amount for investments. 
The RCBs also lend only 7.12% to agriculture. As a result of this, the RCBs perceive agriculture as very 
risky, and are very reluctant in lending to agriculture. A few RCBs lend more significantly to agriculture 
(like for example Builsa Community Bank that lends 34%66) because they are operating in areas where 
agriculture is the main economic activity of the population. PROSPER will have to plan to do a more 
thorough assessment of the RCBs such as Builsa in order to understand their business model, and 
how they manage to run sustainable operations while dealing primarily with agricultural customers, 
with the view to seeing if lessons could be shared and replicated across different financial institutions.  
With growing pressure on governmental resources and emerging priorities, much is expected from 
the private sector to step in the gap, especially in the non-infrastructure space, and to drive growth 
inducing investments in the agricultural sector. There will also be the need for a deliberate increase in 
government’s budgetary contribution to the agricultural sector targeting relevant infrastructure in 
particular. This should help to crowd in the participation of the private sector, using various vehicles / 
models, not least via public private partnerships. 
Prominent constraints to accelerated lending by financial institutions include the low availability of 
risk mitigating instruments, the weak capacities of both lenders and borrowers, and a general lack of 
incentives. Below are presented a more comprehensive list of key constraints to agricultural lending 
in Ghana. 
Table 3: key constraints to agricultural lending and implications for PROSPER 
Aspect 
Weak capacity 
of borrowers 
Description 
Weak capacities of borrowers in terms of 
management, HR, financial management, risks 
associated with agricultural businesses undermine 
their ability to repay their loans. 
Implications for PROSPER 
The Project should include 
capacity building for the 
borrowers.   
66 http://www.bucobank.com.gh/  
134 
Weak capacity 
of lenders 
It has been determined that banks have weak 
capacities when it comes to lending to agriculture 
and to the business activities of all value chain 
actors. Low understanding of the technical issues of 
agriculture, and relating to the risks they present, 
tends to affect effective lending. Lenders also have 
weak capacity to design products, as well as for 
structuring deals relating to agriculture. 
Limited 
distribution 
channels 
The benefits relating to setting up branches in rural 
areas, where a lot of the agricultural activities is 
low. 
Inadequate 
incentives for 
agricultural 
lenders & 
borrowers 
Low incentives exist to promote increased appetite 
for lending to the agricultural sector. This is in 
addition to interest rates being high and market 
access for borrowers being generally weak. 
Operational costs are high, because of limited 
infrastructure, and cost of capital is also high 
(because they depend on deposits of their clients, 
where they provide higher interest rate). 
The Project should include 
market assessment and capacity 
building for the FIs. 
The Project should support the 
RCBs in expanding their footprint 
in rural areas through new 
technologies. 
Financial subsidies (on interest 
rate) should be provided to the 
RCBs. Technical Assistance and 
training to be more efficient and 
do better assessment of the 
clients. 
Mismatch of 
the duration of 
the liabilities 
and the assets. 
Most of the liabilities of the financial institutions 
are short term, coming mainly from deposits from 
the customers – while the agricultural customers 
usually require longer term loans, to financing their 
operations over several agricultural seasons.  
The loan terms provided to the 
financial institution should have a 
duration that is significantly 
longer than the current financing 
options available in the market.    
Support should be provided to 
the partner agricultural company 
in leveraging on lessons learned 
from the AGRIFIN program in 
other countries. 
Help design a sustainable 
mechanism that will remain 
operational and develop after 
programme closure. 
Low risk 
mitigating 
instruments 
Agricultural insurance is rather new and weak 
against a backdrop of risks such as inadequate 
rainfall, diseases and pests, low yield and markets 
being present and high. 
Inadequate 
credit risk 
enhancing 
instruments 
Agriculture in Ghana is largely undertaken by 
smallholder farmers who produce most of the 
food. These farmers usually have no collateral to 
secure their borrowings. Apart from Exim Guaranty 
Company Ltd., all other credit risk guarantee 
instruments have been short-term project based. 
Examples include AGRA/Stanbic Bank First Loss 
Guarantee, DANIDA/AGRA Stanbic/UT Bank/Sinapi 
Aba S&Ls risks sharing instrument. Exim Guaranty’s 
exposure to the agricultural sector is also rather 
low. 
(see sections below) 
Challenges for women in accessing finance 
135 
Access to finance is not gender neutral, with men having better access to finance than women. The 
analysis of firms’ perception of access to finance by world regions and firm ownership indicates that 
many African women MSMEs perceive access to finance to be a major obstacle (44%), more than in 
any other developing region, including when disaggregated by gender. On average more women than 
men across the developing world consider access to finance to be a significant barrier (except for 
Central Asia and Eastern Europe). This finding is in line with economic literature and the available 
research on gender access to finance issues. 
The total financing gap for women in Africa is estimated at USD 42 billion and the financing gap for 
women in Agriculture is estimated at $15.6 billion. The highest credit gap for women across the 
continent was found in the Central and North regions, followed by the Southern, West and finally East 
regions. The Central and North regions alone make up more than half of the total credit gap. The gap 
difference among regions can on average be as wide as near USD 70,000 per enterprise. Moroccan 
women business owners appear to have the highest average credit value gap. 
African women entrepreneurs face specific access to finance disadvantages as compared to their 
male counterparts. Women account for only 20% of the banked population as compared to 27% for 
men in the region. Nonfinancial barriers often restrain women from accessing financial services. 
These include: (i) the broader business and legal environment that may differentially affect women 
and men in businesses; (ii) personal characteristics of the entrepreneurs (such as differences in 
educational attainment and skills); (iii) characteristics of the firm (size, area of specialization, location, 
formal/informal sector); and (iv) constraints within financial institutions (little familiarity with women 
entrepreneurs). 
High amount of collateral and high interest rates are often found to be impeding women’s financial 
access. Women’s low level of financial literacy limits their knowledge of available funds and financial 
products that they could have availed otherwise. Various national governments and policy makers 
have embraced an agenda for greater financial inclusion of women/ youth entrepreneurs, but the 
existing gender finance programs are typically of limited scale or still at infancy stage. In Ghana, a 
number of banks offer tailored products for women and youth in business, but the country surveys 
suggest this does not typically represent a major share of their portfolio. 
Environment for access to credit among female entrepreneurs in Ghana: demand side 
Women are usually more cautious about taking on debt they cannot responsibly service, while men 
are (for better or worse) bolder in terms of the values of loans requested. Female staple foods traders 
trade in heavy volumes, and many are cash rich but are unsophisticated in terms of planning business 
growth. In terms of service needs, the perception is that female customers entrepreneurs are more 
handholding, more business growth, and more financial management advice than male-led 
entrepreneurs. 
Female entrepreneurs need more and different levels of technical assistance to access financing than 
their male counterparts. Located upstream in the value chains, female entrepreneurs in the target 
chains require more intensive levels of service and lower amounts of financing than their male peers. 
Given their size (primarily micro and small), the financing needs required most often fall below the 
“missing middle” target ($25,000 – $500,000), and in segments of the value chain where margins are 
lowest.  
Demand for finance among women and youth along the value chain remains highly unsatisfied, and 
the nature of demand in each segment is different. Given their location in the value chains, the nature 
of demand is different among female and male actors within each segment. Credit is mainly available 
to the small and medium female actors downstream in the rice, soy, and maize value chains who wish 
136 
it, however the scale of financing and terms offered (e.g., interest rate, collateral requirements) by 
private financial institutions (PFI) to these actors do not meet their businesses’ needs. The same is 
true for micro traders in the target value chains, who also are largely able to access credit from formal 
financial institutions and also from the buyers they source product for, but not in amounts sufficient, 
or for the length of time, most favourable for their businesses to grow. Formal credit is tightest for 
the smallholder farmers in each value chain.  
Women in Ghana’s north are largely ignored by both formal and informal lenders as potential 
customers for credit for a variety of reasons, both economic and cultural. Most women smallholder 
farmers work on rice, maize, or soya farms with their husbands, and are likely to be illiterate and 
innumerate, and often defer to their husbands in farm matters, in particular when it comes to 
accessing input loans. Men in northern Ghana are therefore the primary recipients of smallholder 
input credit. Many aggregators and traders, including female traders, prefer not to lend to women 
smallholder farmers in Ghana’s north, as the perception is that they don’t control the farm or 
household resources. Other female smallholder farmers in different geographic regions, such as rice 
farmers in Kumasi in the Ashanti region, are able to access inputs (seeds) from buyers and processers, 
but report that they cannot afford formal financing at prevailing interest rates given the size of plots 
they manage, even if they could access required collateral. 
In general, at current productivity levels and plot sizes (90% of smallholder farmers operate on 
holdings of less than 2 ha), and even if they are bundled into groups (making them more attractive 
and less risky customers for PFIs), smallholder farmers throughout the country may be unlikely to 
generate sufficient revenue to successfully repay input loans to formal PFIs at prevailing interest 
rates. 
Environment for access to credit among female entrepreneurs in Ghana: supply side 
On the supply side, a number of PFIs are strategically entering the financial services for women 
market with new products and networking platforms. Some of the larger banks (Ecobank, Barclays) 
are also engaged in heavy competition to dominate market share in agribusiness lending. However, 
the concept of serving men and women differently within the agribusiness sector remains foreign to 
even these forward-thinking, innovative PFIs, and none, including the PFIs with large female clientele, 
have seriously mapped the financial services demand within these specific value chains (maize, rice, 
soy) by gender. 
In addition to streamlining approvals for new agribusiness clients, Ecobank is expanding its lending to 
rural community banks and microfinance institutions as a strategy to enlarge access to finance among 
women and underserved sectors. RCBs are seen by Ecobank as more suitable actors to reach 
upstream clients, such as women, in the target value chains. 
Fidelity studied the agribusiness and SME markets intensively, and recently acquired ProCredit to 
serve the “missing middle” in the SME sector. Fidelity reports that the SME sector represents a 
reported 92% of all businesses in the country, and that 40% of the country’s GDP is generated by 
SMEs; it has targeted agribusiness and microfinance institutions as key segments of the SME market it 
will focus on. Until now, Fidelity had not considered further segmenting the SMEs in terms of male 
and female markets. However, it has strong board and management commitment to undertake a 
large-scale financial inclusion expansion campaign targeting women that includes agent identification 
and expansion, mobile banking expansion, “smart accounts” for individuals and group lending through 
the village savings and lending association (VSLA) model in collaboration with NGOs. Fidelity has 
invested heavily in this line of business, conducting international visits to witness best practices in 
financial inclusion and hiring experts in this field to lead the bank’s efforts. Fidelity created 400 new 
agents in the last years and has opened 250,000 smart accounts since this product was unveiled. 
137 
Fidelity intends to make Village Saving and Loan Groups totally cashless through a new mobile 
banking application, as soon as it can fine-tune its software application. 
Access Bank is keen to enter the agribusiness lending space. It is looking at agro processing and 
exporting as key sectors for expansion. It has launched the W Initiative, a bundling of banking 
products for women, segmented into young professionals (savings, salary advance, debit card, local 
transaction link card), businesswomen (corporate account, m-power account, staff salary account, 
credit cards, savings products for children, insurance, and instant savings), families (current account, 
target savings account, single savings account, early savings accounts for children, accounts for youth, 
accounts for elderly, savings for dependents and domestics), and maternal health financial products 
(such as fertility treatment loans). Access Bank is looking at women as an entirely new sector, and 
believes it is the only bank to approach women in this manner in Ghana. Access Bank’s managing 
director believes, this is a smart move to improve its value proposition to the Ghanaian customer and 
satisfy the interest of its capital providers. Access Bank conducted a thorough analysis of the small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SME) market, and as part of this study, surveyed the needs of women, 
although not women in the agribusiness sector, as the bank has “run away from this sector” given the 
bank’s unfamiliarity with agribusiness lending in general. As part of the W Initiative, Access Bank 
supports networking among its female clients, and holds trainings and “power briefs” for its members 
on different subjects to improve their capacity as businesswomen. 
An estimated 80% of the overall lending portfolio of Sinapi Aba Savings and Loans Ltd. (SASL) is to 
women, and 40% of its agricultural customers are women. This is less a PFI strategy than a natural 
occurrence, as SASL began as a microfinance institution, and small loans “naturally attract” more 
women than men. It is concerned about the interest rate charged to women clients, and would also 
welcome assistance to obtain concessional capital, however SASL has a board resolution barring it 
from borrowing in international currencies. The bank currently lends to an estimated 12,000 female 
agribusiness clients, primarily smallholder farmers, rice millers, aggregators, and market processors of 
soya beans. SASL has recently piloted a new loan product among 1,600 female rice producers that 
triangulated the financial institution, women rice producers, and a buyer. SASL provided input loans 
for the smallholder farmers and a purchase price was negotiated between producers and the buyer. 
SASL’s repayment rate among smallholder farmers for input loans in this pilot was an impressive 
98.7% (far above the estimated 21% rate of non-performing agribusiness loans on the whole in 
Ghana). However, SASL found that many women ended up side-selling their rice to other buyers 
offering better prices. 
The Government of Ghana is not seen by PFIs to be taking an active role in expanding agricultural 
finance. According to a 2014 study commissioned by Making Finance Work for Africa and the German 
government, agricultural finance (other than for the cocoa sector) has not been articulated by the 
GOG as a strategic priority. 
Derisking instruments in Ghana 
Agricultural insurance 
Ghana’s agricultural insurance market is currently very basic and underdeveloped. There is no 
legislation in place. Unlike in Nigeria, there is no central government sponsorship, and supply-side 
interest seems low. There is no legal framework for the provision of agricultural insurance in the 
country since the Insurance Law of 2006, Act 724 has no provisions for agricultural insurance. There 
was a draft amendment bill relating to insurance, which has not yet received the approval of Cabinet.  
According to the National Insurance Commission (NIC), there is a marketing agreement among all the 
key stakeholders of the insurance industry for the operation of the Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool 
(GAIP). GAIP is the only entity providing agricultural insurance in the country at present and it 
138 
represents 17 pool members. These are private sector insurance companies under the membership of 
the Ghana Insurance Association (GIA). 
The Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool provides agricultural insurance products for the following: 
  Drought Index Insurance targeting smallholder farmers through aggregators, 
  Multi-Peril Crop Insurance targeting commercial farmers and agribusiness (minimum farm 
size should be 20 hectares) for both cereals (food crops) and forestry or tree crops, 
  Poultry Insurance targeting poultry farmers, 
 
Livestock Insurance (for cattle) targeting smallholder cattle farmers. This is yet to be piloted. 
However, there is no subsidy on agricultural insurance and that makes it unaffordable to the small 
producers who demand insurance products. The other actors of the agricultural value chain require 
traditional insurance, which is readily available. There is availability of both Direct Insurers and 
Reinsurers for the provision of the traditional insurance products to satisfy any value chain. 
Only Ghana Reinsurance Company has a treaty with GAIP for its Drought Index Insurance, while the 
other lines of business are reinsured with a foreign reinsurer, i.e., Swiss Re. The other reinsurance 
companies do not participate in the agricultural insurance market in Ghana. 
Key issues are reported to be: 
  The industry does not have adequate agricultural insurance products to satisfy the demands 
of the market, 
  GAIP has capacity challenges which need to be addressed, 
  The local reinsurance capacity is a challenge which needs to be addressed. 
Introduction to GIRSAL 
Ghana’s experience with credit risk guarantee funds has been limited over the years. Over the last 
decade, the main credit guarantee scheme has been the Exim Company Guaranty Company, which 
was set up by the Bank of Ghana to provide credit guarantee to financial institutions who seek to 
enhance their credit risk cover. 
The Ghana Incentive-based Risk Sharing Scheme for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) is aimed at 
encouraging lending by financial institutions to agriculture to help accelerate growth, spur 
agribusiness development, and reduce capital constraints that limit competitiveness in agriculture. 
GIRSAL is rooted in the incentive-based risk sharing scheme conceived by Alliance for a Green 
Revolution in Africa (AGRA) to leverage lending by private financial institutions into agriculture. 
Nigeria was the first African country to implement this scheme in what is called Nigeria Incentive-
based Risk Sharing Scheme for Agricultural Lending (NIRSAL), and the program was built on the 
following five pillars: 
Risk sharing facility 
Insurance facility 
Technical assistance facility 
Bank rating mechanism   
Bank incentive mechanism 
USD 300 million 
USD 30 million 
USD 60 million 
USD 10 million 
USD 100 million 
GIRSAL has been conceptualized very much like NIRSAL with a sixth pillar added to take full account of 
the potential contribution that advances in digital finance could benefit agriculture in Ghana. The six 
pillars are: 
Risk sharing facility: to support development of risk sharing instruments to reduce the risks of banks 
through credit risks enhancements, 
139 
Insurance facility: to support development and deployment of insurance products for agriculture to 
lower risks faced by smallholder farmers and agribusinesses, 
Technical assistance facility: to strengthen the institutional capacity of banks and intermediaries to 
support new lending into agriculture, develop new platforms to support delivery of loans to rural 
areas, as well as provide technical assistance to farmer groups and agribusinesses, 
Bank rating scheme: to rate banks in Ghana based on their lending to agriculture, with the aim of 
creating extra incentives for banks that are achieving impacts in agricultural lending, 
Bank incentive mechanism: to develop incentives to reward banks that are lending to the agriculture 
sector, based on the volume of lending, effectiveness of lending, and impacts, 
Digital finance: to significantly increase the low-cost distribution and administration of financial 
services particularly in rural areas using mobile phones and other digital distribution channels. 
Together, these six pillars are aimed at de-risking agricultural value chains, building long term capacity 
and institutionalizing incentives for agricultural lending. The risk sharing- and insurance facilities 
contribute to de-risking agriculture finance value chains. The technical assistance facility enables 
building long-term capacity by means of training and information to farmers, institutions and private 
entities, and the development of a common platform for communication. Bank incentive mechanisms 
and the agricultural bank rating scheme institutionalize incentives for agriculture lending through 
enhancing the visibility of ‘beneficial partners’ and by establishing mechanisms that increase the 
attractiveness of agriculture lending to banks. Lastly, digital finance services have the capability to 
increase access to financing by leveraging on existing technologies and hence enhances the outreach 
to farming communities (accessibility) concerning the products, and the product itself (access). 
GIRSAL’s multiplier effect for insurance could serve as a catalytic factor for transforming, at an 
accelerated pace, the agricultural insurance industry in Ghana, leveraging examples elsewhere in 
Africa, including from NIRSAL. Agricultural insurance is well patronized when bundled with what 
farmers need (especially with the smallholder farmers who are in the majority in African agricultural 
production space). In Kenya it was bundled with seeds; in Malawi under the World Bank project, it 
was bundled with agricultural lending; while in Zambia, NWK bundled it with inputs for farmers. The 
Weather Index Insurance is also becoming economical to distribute to large smallholder farmers and 
it covers what the Private Insurance Providers are not willing to put on the market. 
The opportunity with GIRSAL: GIRSAL intends to promote risk sharing among the key stakeholders in 
the agricultural financing environment. Agricultural insurance is one of the risk mitigation tools that 
will be required to de-risk agricultural lending. This comes with the opportunity of creating a large 
market for the providers of agricultural insurance in the insurance industry. 
The financial institutions and agricultural insurance providers will be working in the same space. This 
could result in collaboration with one another; as financial institutions use life insurance products as a 
requirement for granting personal loans, similarly, FIs could demand agricultural insurance from 
customers before facilities are granted or approved. 
There should be a legislation or regulation that will provide the necessary legal framework for the 
operations of agricultural insurance in the country. Furthermore, the legislation could accommodate a 
comprehensive agricultural policy which will include, among other things, the agricultural lending and 
provision of agricultural insurance, etc. 
140 
Annex 10. Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households 
The strategic focus of PROSPER is on the smallholder farmers to make them more competitive by 
increasing their capacity to respond to market demand in terms of quality, price, time and volume as 
well as making them more resilient to climate change. To achieve this, there is the need to provide 
capacity building to Farmer Based Organizations (FBOs) within the PROSPER clusters in the various 
stages of the value chain. 
In order to build resilience of value chain stakeholder to negative impacts of climate change, one of 
the subcomponents of PROSPER (i.e. subcomponent 1.3) is dedicated to climate change resilience. 
This is aimed at mainstreaming climate change resilience across the selected agricultural value chains. 
Financed with the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant during the first 
cycle of implementation of PROSPER, this subcomponent is targeted for the implementation of 
activities in the Northern part of Ghana to address the challenges of increasing dry spells, drought 
occurrence and the issues of land degradation and low soil fertility. This subcomponent has three 
main focus areas: (i) commercially valid adaptive trials and demonstrations of modern conservation 
agriculture (CA) practices (ii) demonstrations of efficient water-use techniques within new and 
existing irrigation systems, and (iii) institutional capacity building and enhanced public awareness of 
private and public value chain actors in the field of climate change resilience. 
PROSPER also targets to achieve 50% participation of women and 30% youth. PROSPER also aims at 
making sure that women and youth actively participate in the development of new and existing value 
chains in their communities. Women and youth can participate in value chain development at 
different levels of the chain which includes aggregations, processing, cleaning and sorting, marketing, 
preservation and storage among others. To achieve this, there is the need to provide capacity building 
to women and youth within the PROSPER clusters in the various stages of the value chain to enhance 
women and youth economic  
The TAMALE North District has been selected as one of the beneficiaries, with details of selected 
communities and sites outlined in the appendix. 
OBJECTIVES OF THE ASSIGNMENT 
The objectives of the assignment are: 
to facilitate the adoption and upscale of Conservation Agriculture and other climate-smart agriculture 
(CSA) practices by smallholder farmers  
to contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts by training selected community 
members in nursery establishment, seedling production and alley cropping.  
to build the capacity of households to be able to add value to agricultural products for home 
consumption and for marketing 
Promote women economic empowerment through media campaigns, access to financial services 
including savings and credit, improved nutrition and enterprise development 
SCOPE OF THE ASSIGNMENT 
The specific activities to be undertaken by the Service Provider include but are not limited to the 
following: 
Climate Smart Agricultural Demonstration 
141 
Identify new self-motivated smallholder farmers that have had some experience with 
Allocate Extension Agent(s) responsible for each of the communities to provide technical 
i. 
Conservation Agriculture (CA) and other Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) technologies to be 
supported with seeds, inputs and crop protective products to established up to 2-acre CA field. 
ii. 
Organize radio sensitization and awareness creation on Conservation Agriculture, 
environmental safeguards and other Climate Smart Agricultural technologies among AEAs and the 
community members based on the CA manual training and experience from the PROSPER 
demonstration over the past years. 
iii. 
advice/backstopping (planting, NPK and Urea application, crop relay and harvesting) to the 
smallholder farmers supported on Conservation Agriculture (CA), Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) 
technologies, and other related climate change activities in the operational area.  
iv. 
visiting farmer-fields with all farmers) of the participating farmers in each of the selected communities 
on CA and CSA technologies.  
v. 
irrigation and rain-fed periods) and supported farmer-fields to assess field performance and provide 
technical advice to farmers, where needed.  
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
and financial institutions. 
Undertake crop cutting to report on yields from the CA demonstration sites and farmer-fields. 
Provide training in post-harvest handling and field management and report on the training.  
Facilitate the operation of group activities and linking them to market, Value Chain Drivers 
Organize field days for farmers on CA and CSA technologies and 4 cross-farmer-visits (thus, 
Undertake regular monitoring and supervision visits to the demonstration sites (during 
Note: In terms of farmer selection, it is expected that 20 self-motivated farmers in already existing 
PROSPER supported communities will be identified from registered and functional FBOs. Districts to 
be supported under this intervention for the first time, 40 self-motivated farmers are to be selected 
from two registered and functional FBOs. Consult PROSPER for criterion for the selection of these 
farmers. 
Value Chain Development- Women and youth focused trainings 
  Designate a WIAD officers to participate in TOT for cascading training on Selection, Planning 
and Management (SPM) of Income Generating Activities (IGAs) 
  Promote good food and nutrition practices among 150 households: 
  Organize cooking demonstrations to show appropriate food combination for healthy leaving 
  Facilitate Peer to peer education on nutrition and food safety: gender champions would be 
 
identified and trained on various topics including food and nutrition. These champions would 
be giving printed Nutrition sensitization and training materials to facilitate their delivery of 
the education or campaign contents across all geographic locations identified 
Identify and mobilize Mother to mother support groups; This would be done in collaboration 
with the WIAD and community nutrition officers within the districts. They would identify or 
form these groups where they do not exist and educate them on good nutrition in feeding the 
family. These officers would also visit group meetings and community meetings to sensitize 
them on family nutrition and the right behavior toward feeding young children. Counselling 
posters would be printed for use for this purpose. 
  Cooking demonstrations to provide practical sessions on how foods are to be combined to 
create a balance meal. 
  Train 150 women and youth on agro-based processing and enterprise development: 
 
Identify agro processing and enterprise development capacity need specific to the District 
(preservation and handling of high horticultural crops, home based gardening, nutrition 
education, agro processing of fruits, soybeans, rice, cassava etc.). 
  Assess, identify and recruit participants based on the needs assessment to be trained on the 
specific areas identified.  
142 
  mobilize the participants to a training venue and train them on identified capacity areas 
  Document the training and write reports on each training including pictures and attendance 
sheet. 
  Carry out radio sensitization and campaigns on women empowerment in agriculture: 
  The topics for the radio sensitization and campaigns include: 
  Women and youth control of decisions about agricultural production 
  Women and youth access to and decision-making power about productive resources 
  Women and youth Control of use of income earned  
  Women and youth participation in Leadership in the community 
  Time allocation to daily activities for women and youth 
  Make follow ups to monitor the application of knowledge and report results 
  Support trainees to start managing new livelihood enterprises among women and youth  
  Facilitate Entrepreneurs linkage to financial services 
  Support entrepreneurs to register their businesses with the registrar general department 
Consult PROSPER Value Chain Officers and other interest groups for the criterion for the selection 
Indicators to be updated quarterly 
INDICATOR  
Outcome: Value chain stakeholders and local production systems increase their resilience to climate change 
> Land under climate-resilient practices 
TARGET  MEASUREMENT (ACTIVITIES) SOURCES 
Area (ha) under CA demo farms  
Area (ha) of fields of CA FBO members of demo 
farms  
Area (ha) Fields of farmer under CA upscale 
Land under VC demo 
Area (ha) of land under Agroforestry 
Total (area - hectare) 
> Irrigated land using efficient technology 
Total (area - hectare) 
> Yield from conservation farming for maize 
Total (ton/hectare)  
> Direct beneficiaries having improved water 
management practices (ASAP) 
Total (number of people) 
> Yield from conservation farming for soya 
Total (ton/hectare)  
> 1.1.2 Farmland under water-related 
infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated 
Total (area - hectare) 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
2 
143 
Area (ha) under solar-powered borehole 
intervention  
Area (ha) under efficient water use demo 
Area (ha) under bunding 
Yield (T ha-1) of maize from demo field 
Yield (T ha-1) of maize from CA upscale farmer fields  
Members (no.) of FBO under CA demos benefiting 
from borehole  
2. Members (no.) of FBO provided with bunding  
3. Members (no.) of FBO under PROSPER supported 
WUA  
4. Members (no.) of FBO under Efficient Water Use 
demonstration  
Yield (T ha-1) of soya from demo field 
Yield (T ha-1) of soya from CA upscale farmer fields  
Land area (ha) under CA demos benefiting from 
borehole 
Land area (ha) under WUA demo and farmer fields  
Land area (ha) under bunding  
INDICATOR  
> Households (HH) supported with increased 
water availability or efficiency 
Total (household) 
> Production and processing facilities supported 
with increased water availability and efficiency 
TARGET  MEASUREMENT (ACTIVITIES) SOURCES 
Number of HH members of beneficiaries under CA 
demos provided with boreholes  
Number of HH members of beneficiaries of efficient 
water use (EWU) demo  
Number of HH members of beneficiaries supported 
with bunding 
1. Number of boreholes provided for demo fields  
2. Number of boreholes provided in other FBOs  
3. Number of demo facilities under efficient water 
use (EWU)  
Total (number) 
Output 1: Adaptative trials and demonstrations of modern conservation agriculture and water-efficient irrigation 
techniques are undertaken 
> Demonstrations undertaken (ASAP) 
Count of all demonstration supported by PROSPER-
ASAP 
Count of demonstrations established after ASAP 
CSA training 
Total (number) 
> WUAs trained/supported 
Total (number) 
> Individuals engaged in NRM and climate risk 
management activities 
Count of WUAs formed/supported  
Number of individuals under CA Demo FBOs  
Number of individuals under CA upscale  
Number of individuals under Agroforestry training  
Number of individuals under WUAs FBO 
Number of Climate Champions in the Department 
Number of individuals under other PROSPER 
supported demo  
Number of individuals and other partners receiving 
daily weather information 
Total (number of people) 
Women (number of people) 
Output 2: Climate change resilient production technologies and practices are promoted among rural producers 
> CI 3.1.1: Number of groups supported to 
sustainably manage natural resources and 
climate-related risks 
Number of FBOs/groups practicing CA 
Number of FBOs/groups supported under 
Agroforestry training  
Number of WUAs formed/supported  
Number of FBOs/groups supported under Efficient 
Water Use 
Number of groups supported to manage climate-
related risks 
Total (number) 
> CI 1.1.4: Number of persons trained in 
production practices and/or technologies 
<1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices 
and/or technologies (crop) [Number of persons 
trained in Climate Change Resilience, ASAP]> 
1. Number of persons trained under the CA FBOs 
2. Number of persons trained under Agroforestry  
3. Number of persons trained under WUA 
4. Number of persons trained under EWU  
5. Number of Climate change champions  
6. Number of persons trained supported with other 
Climate Change resilience practices  
144 
INDICATOR  
Gender based training and capacity development for women empowerment in agriculture 
TARGET  MEASUREMENT (ACTIVITIES) SOURCES 
Number of HHs provided with targeted support 
to improve their nutrition 
Total (household) 
Number of persons receiving training in 
different capacity areas 
Total (number of people) 
Women Empowerment in Agriculture 
supported 
Number of household members trained on good 
nutrition practices 
Number of mothers counselled on good nutrition 
Number of cooking demonstrations carried out 
Number of women and youth trained on selection 
planning and management of Income generating 
activities 
 Number of women and youth trained on agro-
based processing 
Number of women in leadership position in various 
community-based organisations (FBOs, Village 
Saving and Loan Groups. And other groups) 
Number of women accessing production resources 
(land, inputs, credit) 
Number of women involved in Village Saving and 
Loan Groups and other saving s groups and 
Number of women and youth establishing and 
managing income generating enterprises 
Total (number of people) 
Duration of the Assignment  
The Service Provider shall commence the services within five (5) calendar days of the effective date of 
the contract or such time as the parties may agree in writing. The duration of the assignment is 12 
calendar months from the effective date.  
Expected Outputs of the Assignment 
The expected outputs are as follows:  
  Climate resilience and adaptation 
  Capacity of smallholder farmers built in climate change resilient production technologies and 
practices promoted among rural producers 
  Three quarterly report with updates on number of farmers supported by PROSPER (by age 
and gender), sensitization processes and feedback from farmers, general outputs and 
recommendations  
  End of year report indicating a narrative on key accomplishments in 2021, successes, 
challenges, lessons learnt, exit strategy and sustainability plan. 
Under the Value Chain Development- Women and youth focused trainings 
At least one hundred and fifty (150) women including youth trained on gender-based topics including 
agro-processing, nutrition education and enterprise skills development 
At least 150 women including youth have gone through hands on skills training on agro processing 
and skills development including homebased gardening.  
A total of 150 women and youth trained on Business enterprise development and management 
At least 50 entrepreneurs supported to register their businesses 
Three quarterly report with updates on all trainings well documented and on each training include 
pictures and attendance sheet. 
145 
With the support of PCU and supervision from the District Agricultural Development Unit help 
monitor and provide report on the applications of the training by the participated FBOs.
146 
Annex 11a. Sample MOU between PROSPER and District Assembly 
MINISTRY OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE 
(PROSPER) 
MOFA/IFAD GRANT No: wwwwwww 
LOAN No: XXXXXX 
IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT 
 BETWEEN 
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE 
(PROSPER) 
AND 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE-, TAMALE NORTH DISTRICT  
ON 
BACKSTOPPING, MONITORING AND SUPERVISORY SERVICES FOR CONSERVATION AGRICULTURE 
DEMONSTRATION PLOTS AND FARMERS FIELDS AND TRAINING AND SUPPORTING WOMEN AND YOUTH 
EMPOWERMENT 
WITHIN THE PROSPER PROJECT 
Preamble: 
This IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT is made on this ………………….day of………………. 2021 between the 
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE 
1 
(PROSPER)  (hereinafter called the Client), represented by its National Programme Coordinator (which 
shall include the person or persons for the time being performing the duties of that office), on one part  
AND  
The Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District (hereinafter called the Service Provider) 
represented by the Director (which shall include the person or persons for the time being performing the 
duties of that office) on the other part. 
WHEREAS, the Government of Ghana through the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) has received 
a loan from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) towards the implementation of 
the PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE 
(PROSPER) with the overall goal to enhance incomes and food security in order to improve the livelihoods 
of the rural poor in Ghana.  
WHEREAS, PROSPER has requested the Service Provider to perform the tasks required (herein called ‘the 
services’), the Service Provider, undertakes to perform the services in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of this agreement.  
AND WHEREAS, the client and provider (hereinafter referred to as the Parties) wish to establish a link to 
foster collaboration. 
NOW, therefore, the Parties have decided to enter into this Agreement (herein referred to as the 
Implementation Agreement) which defines the framework for the collaboration of the two parties. 
The following have been agreed between both parties: 
General Provisions  
Notices 
All notices, requests or demands under this Agreement shall be in writing in English and shall be given by 
delivery to the premises of the Parties or by registered mail, telex, facsimile, or electronic mail. All notices 
shall be effective when received by the receiving Party at the following address: 
For the PROSPER:    
P. O. Box M37, Accra,  
Greater Accra Region 
Tel. +233-3220-33159.  
email: info@PROSPER.org 
For the Department of Agriculture, 
TAMALE NORTH DISTRICT 
UPPER EAST REGION 
2 
Each Party agrees to nominate the following representatives as the primary point of contact for the 
accomplishment of the objectives of this agreement. 
                                                                     TAMALE North District Dept of Agriculture 
Department of Agriculture,  
PROSPER 
Mr. K K   
National Programme Coordinator 
PROSPER 
                                                                                  Upper East Region                                 
P. O. Box M37 
Accra                                                     
Tel: 0244339768 
E-mail:  k.k@PROSPER.org 
Tel.: 0244035453 
E-mail: jl@yahoo.com  
James Langbon 
Director 
Objective of the Agreement 
The objective of this IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT is to provide a non-binding legal framework for the 
cooperation and to set forth the terms and conditions under which the Parties hereto will cooperate in 
carrying out activities as referred to in the obligations below. 
Obligations of the Client and the Service Provider 
THE SERVICE PROVIDER SHALL: 
The Service Provider shall undertake the following tasks in accordance with the General Conditions and 
Terms of Reference attached to this agreement: 
The specific activities to be undertaken by the Service Provider include but are not limited to the 
following: 
Climate Smart Agricultural Demonstration 
Identify new self-motivated smallholder farmers that have had some experience with 
i. 
Conservation Agriculture (CA) and other Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) technologies to be supported 
with seeds, inputs and crop protective products to established up to 2-acre CA field. 
Organize radio sensitization and awareness creation on Conservation Agriculture, environmental 
ii. 
safeguards and other Climate Smart Agricultural technologies among AEAs and the community members 
based on the CA manual training and experience from the PROSPER demonstration over the past years. 
iii. 
Allocate Extension Agent(s) responsible for each of the communities to provide technical 
advice/backstopping (planting, NPK and Urea application, crop relay and harvesting) to the smallholder 
farmers supported on Conservation Agriculture (CA), Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) technologies, and 
other related climate change activities in the operational area.  
iv. 
Organize field days for farmers on CA and CSA technologies and 4 cross-farmer-visits (thus, 
visiting farmer-fields with all farmers) of the participating farmers in each of the selected communities on 
CA and CSA technologies.  
3 
Undertake regular monitoring and supervision visits to the demonstration sites (during irrigation 
v. 
and rain-fed periods) and supported farmer-fields to assess field performance and provide technical 
advice to farmers, where needed.  
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
financial institutions. 
Undertake crop cutting to report on yields from the CA demonstration sites and farmer-fields. 
Provide training in post-harvest handling and field management and report on the training.  
Facilitate the operation of group activities and linking them to market, Value Chain Drivers and 
Note: In terms of farmer selection, it is expected that 20 self-motivated farmers in already existing 
PROSPER supported communities will be identified from registered and functional FBOs. Districts to be 
supported under this intervention for the first time, 40 self-motivated farmers are to be selected from 
two registered and functional FBOs. Consult PROSPER for criterion for the selection of these farmers. 
Value Chain Development- Women and youth focused trainings 
Designate a WIAD officers to participate in TOT for cascading training on Selection, Planning and 
Management (SPM) of Income Generating Activities (IGAs) 
Promote good food and nutrition practices among 150 households: 
  Organize cooking demonstrations to show appropriate food combination for healthy leaving 
  Facilitate Peer to peer education on nutrition and food safety: gender champions would be 
identified and trained on various topics including food and nutrition. These champions would be 
giving printed Nutrition sensitization and training materials to facilitate their delivery of the 
education or campaign contents across all geographic locations identified 
Identify and mobilize Mother to mother support groups; This would be done in collaboration with the 
WIAD and community nutrition officers within the districts. They would identify or form these groups 
where they do not exist and educate them on good nutrition in feeding the family. These officers would 
also visit group meetings and community meetings to sensitize them on family nutrition and the right 
behavior toward feeding young children. Counselling posters would be printed for use for this purpose. 
Cooking demonstrations to provide practical sessions on how foods are to be combined to create a 
balance meal. 
Train 150 women and youth on agro-based processing and enterprise development: 
 
Identify agro processing and enterprise development capacity need specific to the District 
(preservation and handling of high horticultural crops, home based gardening, nutrition 
education, agro processing of fruits, soybeans, rice, cassava etc.). 
  Assess, identify and recruit participants based on the needs assessment to be trained on the 
specific areas identified.  
  mobilize the participants to a training venue and train them on identified capacity areas 
  Document the training and write reports on each training including pictures and attendance 
sheet. 
  Carry out radio sensitization and campaigns on women empowerment in agriculture: 
  The topics for the radio sensitization and campaigns include: 
  Women and youth control of decisions about agricultural production 
  Women and youth access to and decision-making power about productive resources 
  Women and youth Control of use of income earned from  
  Women and youth participation in Leadership in the community 
4 
  Time allocation to daily activities for women and youth 
  Make follow ups to monitor the application of knowledge and report results 
  Support trainees to start managing new livelihood enterprises among women and youth  
  Facilitate Entrepreneurs linkage to financial services 
  Support entrepreneurs to register their businesses with the registrar general department 
Consult PROSPER Value Chain Officers and other interest groups for the criterion for the selection 
With the support of PCU and supervision from the Regional Agricultural Development Unit (RADU), help 
monitor and provide report on the applications of the training by the participated women. 
THE CLIENT SHALL: 
  Provide funds for the implementation of the activities indicated above as Obligations for the 
service provider. The Client will provide the funds based on the agreed scope and budget prior to 
the implementation of any of the above activities.  
  Conduct TOT training on Selection. Planning and management of income Generating activities 
(IGAs) 
  Conduct orientation for participating staff on details of implementation of each activity 
  Develop selection criteria in collaboration with relevant stakeholders and institution to identify 
beneficiaries where required 
  Coordinate, monitor and supervise the training at community level 
Termination of Agreement 
Termination by Client  
The Client may terminate this agreement in formal writing to the Service Provider at any time during the 
execution of the project.   
The Client may terminate the agreement for the following reasons: 
  When it has been mutually agreed that the Service Provider has not fulfilled its obligations 
mentioned under this Agreement in which case 30-day notice will be given the Service Provider 
before termination; 
  When it has been mutually agreed that funds of the Agreement are misused or used for other 
purposes than the objective mentioned; 
  When the Service Provider ceases operations, or undergoes a change in management which 
causes a considerable reduction in the Implementing Partner’s implementation capacity; 
  For other reasons, not mentioned above, but which severely undermine the projected benefits of 
this agreement. 
Termination by the Service Provider 
5 
  The Service Provider may terminate this agreement in formal writing to the Client at any time 
during the execution of the project providing the reasons and prior notice of the termination.  
 
In such case, the Service Provider shall be responsible for its action and reimburse all funds 
advanced by the Client which have not yet been spent following the implementation programme. 
  The Service Provider may terminate the agreement when the Service Provider and the Client 
mutually determine a breach in terms of this Agreement by Client to adversely affect the capacity 
of the Service Provider to deliver effectively. 
  For other reasons not mentioned above, but which severely undermines the projected benefits of 
this agreement to the Service Provider or both parties. 
Termination Procedures 
Any party terminating the agreement shall give a twelve (12) days’ notice of its intention in writing to the 
other party. The parties shall attempt to resolve any disputes or differences of any kind arising between 
the parties in connection with the interpretation of the IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT. 
Any disagreement between the Client and the Service Provider relating to the interpretation or 
implementation of the IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT, which cannot be resolved by mutual agreement 
between the parties may be submitted by either party, on giving twelve [12] days’ notice to the other 
party, to a Board of Arbitration. Such Board shall comprise three members; one of whom shall be 
appointed by the Head of Civil Service, the second by Department of Agriculture. The decision of such a 
Board shall be final and binding upon the two parties.  
Independence of Parties 
Neither Party shall be considered a joint venture of the other, nor can either Party act as an agent for the 
other for any purposes whatsoever other than for the purposes of this Agreement. No Party has the 
authority, either expressed or implied, to enter into any agreement, incur any obligations on behalf or 
commit the other Party in any manner whatsoever except as may be provided in this Agreement and as 
may be agreed upon from time to time in writing.  
Confidentiality 
Any non-public information received or learned by either party relating to the other Party’s business 
and/or products shall be kept in confidence by the receiving or learning Party and shall neither be used by 
such receiving or learning Party nor disclosed to any other person for any purpose outside the 
IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT. 
Intellectual Property 
The Parties recognize the importance of intellectual property as a component of PROSPER. Both parties 
own all rights, titles and interest in the data and works they create under this IMPLEMENTATION 
AGREEMENT. Both parties acknowledge that knowledge, data and know-how gained under the 
agreement will be available for humanitarian purposes, and the benefits of any intellectual property 
6 
developed as part of the agreement will be made accessible to the public throughout the developing 
countries of the world (‘‘Global Access’’). 
The exchange of materials for research under this IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT will be carried out 
following the Material Transfer Agreement, if applicable. All intellectual properties generated outside 
collaborative research belong solely to the party conducting such research. In all such cases as mentioned 
above due cognizance will be to the Intellectual Property law of the land. 
Publication 
Any publication from the collaboration shall give due recognition to the roles played by both parties to 
determine the authorship. With the consent of the other party, one party can publish these findings with 
due recognition of the contributions of the other party. The manuscript review process prior to 
publication shall follow the internal processes of both institutions.  The fund provider shall be 
appropriately acknowledged. In all such cases as mentioned above due cognizance will be made to the 
intellectual property law of the land. 
Indemnification and Liabilities 
  Subject to other provisions in this Agreement, each Party shall indemnify and hold harmless the 
other Party’s employees, representatives, and executive officers from and against any liability, 
damages costs or expenses, or any claim, action, suit or other proceeding arising out of the 
execution or implementation of this Agreement except to the extent that 
  Such liability, damages, claim, action suit or other proceeding is caused willfully by the Party 
being held liable or 
  Such liability, damages, claim, action suit or other proceeding is caused by or results from 
negligence on the part of such a Party. 
  Force Majeure 
If either party is temporarily unable by reasons of force majeure to meet any of its obligations under this 
IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT, and if such party gives written notice of the event within twelve (12) 
days after its occurrence, such obligations of the party as it is unable to perform by reason of the event 
shall be suspended for as long as the inability continues. 
Neither party shall be liable to the other party arising from any event referred in item 3 below or delays 
arising from such event. 
The term Force Majeure as used herein shall mean acts of God, strikes, lockouts or other industrial 
disturbances, acts of public enemy, war, blockades, insurrection, riots, epidemics, lightening, floods, 
washouts, civil disturbances, explosion and other similar events not within the control of either party and 
which by the existence of due diligence neither party is able to overcome. 
 Effectiveness 
This agreement shall become effective on the day of its signature by both parties and expire by After 
Eight (8) weeks thereafter unless extended by an amendment to this Agreement or unless terminated as 
provided under section 5.o of this Agreement. 
7 
 Amendment of Agreement 
The terms of this agreement can be amended with the agreement of both parties by means of exchange 
of letters through the authorized officials at each institution. Either party may initiate the exchange of 
letters. 
IN WITNESS whereof the said parties hereto have executed this deed the day and year first above written. 
In the interest of implementing a programme of technical cooperation of mutual benefit to the 
contracting parties, two (2) original copies of this IMPLEMENTATION AGREEMENT are signed by the 
respective officers on the day, month and year indicated below: 
FOR AND ON BEHALF OF  
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 
TAMALE NORTH DISTRICT  
FOR AND ON BEHALF OF PROSPER 
Name: Mr. James Lanbong 
              Name: Mr. K. K 
Designation: Director 
Designation: National Programme Coordinator    
Signature………………………… 
 Signature………………………… 
Witness  
Witness  
      Name …………………………... 
Name………………………………… 
     Signature……………………….. 
Signature……………………………... 
8 
APPENDIX 1. GENERAL CONDITIONS 
Services 
1.  
The Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District shall follow the Terms of Reference and 
subsequent further definitions of Terms of Reference agreed by both parties. The Client in consultation 
with the TAMALE North District Department of Agriculture- may make amendments to the Terms of 
Reference, without by doing so, changing the nature of purpose of the services if, as a consequence 
hereof the scope of the service is widened or narrowed, the total remuneration shall be adjusted 
accordingly and the contract period shall be revised. 
 Information 
2. 
Each party shall promptly inform the other party of any event or situation, which may necessitate an 
agreement between the Parties on a modification in the scope, character or execution of the services or 
in other aspects of the agreement. The Department of Agriculture-, TAMALE North District shall furnish 
the Client with such information concerning the services as stipulated in the Terms of Reference.  
Sub-Contracts 
3.  
The Client or the Service Provider may not assign or subcontract any part of the services to be performed 
without the written approval of the other party. 
Reporting 
4.  
The Terms of Reference and/or the Work Plan and Budget will set forth the nature and timing of reports 
to be prepared in the context of the services. 
Total Sum 
4.  
The budget for the activities to be carried out under the agreement for the year is Twenty-Eight Thousand 
Two hundred and Forty -Three Cedis (GH¢ 28,243.00) The details of items and costs are summarized in 
Table 1 and 2below. 
9 
SUMMARY OF ESTIMATED COST 
Table 1: Budget for Climate Change Activities-Climate Smart Agricultural Demonstration 
ITEM  DESCRIPTION 
AMOUNT (GH CEDIS) 
1 
2 
3 
Fuel for backstopping by AEAs  
Fuel for field monitoring, supervision and reporting 
Refreshment for field days and CA sensitization 
Total Cost  
Table 2: Value Chain Development- Women and youth focused trainings 
ITEM  DESCRIPTION 
1 
2 
3 
Fuel for monitoring  
Resource persons for demonstration and training  
Ingredient, airtime and snack 
AMOUNT (GH CEDIS) 
Total Cost  
Disbursements 
6.  
Disbursement of funds shall be based on quarterly advance upon submission of relevant reports of 
activities within that quarter and satisfactory retirement of all previous imprest/advance (where 
applicable) issued for the purpose of this agreement and furnishing of due reports. 
Retirements 
7.  
The Programme Coordination Unit (PCU) shall ensure that Programme’s funds disbursed for the purpose 
of the Programme’s eligible expenditures are accounted for through expenditure returns. Expenditure 
Returns to be submitted to PROSPER shall not be later than fourteen (14) days after the expiry of the 
period for which such imprest was issued. 
Retirement of imprest shall include (but not limited) to: 
Statement of receipts and payments (indicate total amount received, total payments under each 
expenditure headings, and undisbursed balance); 
Payment vouchers and all relevant attachments;  
Expenditure analysis form (analysed into cost categories and Programme components); and 
Trial balance, bank statement, and bank reconciliation statement. 
S/N  Description of Specific Activities Carried 
IG#  Amount Spent 
Analysis of Expenditure  
out 
Total (GHC) 
Table 3: Imprest Retirement Format 
(GHC) 
DSA  Fuel   T & 
Others  
T 
Summary  
Total Amount Received/Advanced:  GHC……………………………………………………….…. 
Less Total Amount Spent:  GHC……………………………………………………….……………. 
1 
Balance To Be Paid/Received:  GHC …………………………………..…………………………… 
Ownership of Work 
8.  
Reports and all relevant data compiled or prepared in the course of the Services shall be the property of 
the Client unless otherwise decided by the Client. Such material shall be sorted and indexed by the 
Implementing Agency prior to delivery to the Client. The Implementing Agency may retain a copy thereof, 
provided, however, that such material shall not be used by the Implementing Agency for purposes 
unrelated to the agreement without prior written approval of the Client.  
Periodic Monitoring 
9.  
The Client will carry out independent monitoring of the progress of work periodically. The Client may also 
engage an independent Service Provider to evaluate the work. 
2 
APPENDIX 2 TERMS OF REFERENCE 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE 
(PROSPER) is a Government of Ghana (GoG) programme designed to provide a framework for a long-term 
financing arrangement for private sector-led, pro-poor agricultural value chain development in Ghana. It’s 
being financed by the International Fund for International Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Ghana (GoG). The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) is the lead implementing Ministry. The overall 
goal of PROSPER is to contribute to sustainable poverty reduction in rural Ghana through the pursuit of 
specific Programme Development Objective of ‘’agribusinesses – including smallholders – increase their 
profitability and resilience to climate change’’. 
To achieve its objectives, PROSPER is designed along four strategic axis: (i) linking smallholder farmers to 
agribusinesses to enhance pro-poor growth; (ii) nationwide scaling up of successful value chain 
investment approach; (iii) promoting and mainstreaming climate change resilience approaches in Ghana, 
in particular in the Northern Regions financed under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture 
Programme (ASAP); and (iv) knowledge management, harmonization of intervention approaches and 
policy support.  
The primary focus of PROSPER are smallholder farmers and resource-poor rural households, in particular 
women, youth (15-24 years) and young adults (25-34 years). Intermediate beneficiaries are 
agribusinesses, input dealers, financial institutions and commercial farmers, Ghanaian and international 
investors – of varying scale who invest in new or expand business opportunities in the appropriate value 
chains.   Business models or value chain clusters must be inclusive – i.e., they should provide 
opportunities for strengthening market linkages of small-holder producers and must also offer business 
opportunities for both men and women.  
Justification 
The strategic focus of PROSPER is on the smallholder farmers to make them more competitive by 
increasing their capacity to respond to market demand in terms of quality, price, time and volume as well 
as making them more resilient to climate change. To achieve this, there is the need to provide capacity 
building to Farmer Based Organizations (FBOs) within the PROSPER clusters in the various stages of the 
value chain. 
In order to build resilience of value chain stakeholder to negative impacts of climate change, one of the 
subcomponents of PROSPER (i.e. subcomponent 1.3) is dedicated to climate change resilience. This is 
aimed at mainstreaming climate change resilience across the selected agricultural value chains. Financed 
with the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant during the first cycle of 
implementation of PROSPER, this subcomponent is targeted for the implementation of activities in the 
Northern part of Ghana to address the challenges of increasing dry spells, drought occurrence and the 
issues of land degradation and low soil fertility. This subcomponent has three main focus areas: (i) 
commercially valid adaptive trials and demonstrations of modern conservation agriculture (CA) practices 
(ii) demonstrations of efficient water-use techniques within new and existing irrigation systems, and (iii) 
institutional capacity building and enhanced public awareness of private and public value chain actors in 
the field of climate change resilience. 
3 
PROSPER also targets to achieve 40% participation of women and 30% youth. PROSPER also aims at 
making sure that women and youth actively participate in the development of new and existing value 
chains in their communities. Women and youth can participate in value chain development at different 
levels of the chain which includes aggregations, processing, cleaning and sorting, marketing, preservation 
and storage among others. To achieve this, there is the need to provide capacity building to women and 
youth within the PROSPER clusters in the various stages of the value chain to enhance women and youth 
economic. 
The TAMALE North District has been selected as one of the beneficiaries, with details of selected 
communities and sites outlined in the appendix. 
OBJECTIVES OF THE ASSIGNMENT 
The objectives of the assignment are: 
 
 
 
to facilitate the adoption and upscale of Conservation Agriculture and other climate-smart 
agriculture (CSA) practices by smallholder farmers  
to contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts by training selected community 
members in nursery establishment, seedling production and alley cropping.  
to build the capacity of households to be able to add value to agricultural products for home 
consumption and for marketing. 
  Promote women economic empowerment through media campaigns, access to financial services 
including savings and credit, improved nutrition and enterprise development. 
SCOPE OF THE ASSIGNMENT 
The specific activities to be undertaken by the Service Provider include but are not limited to the 
following: 
Climate Smart Agricultural Demonstration 
i. 
Identify new self-motivated smallholder farmers that have had some experience with 
Conservation Agriculture (CA) and other Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) technologies to be supported 
with seeds, inputs and crop protective products to established up to 2-acre CA field. 
Organize radio sensitization and awareness creation on Conservation Agriculture, environmental 
ii. 
safeguards and other Climate Smart Agricultural technologies among AEAs and the community members 
based on the CA manual training and experience from the PROSPER demonstration over the past years. 
Allocate Extension Agent(s) responsible for each of the communities to provide technical 
iii. 
advice/backstopping (planting, NPK and Urea application, crop relay and harvesting) to the smallholder 
farmers supported on Conservation Agriculture (CA), Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) technologies, and 
other related climate change activities in the operational area.  
Organize field days for farmers on CA and CSA technologies and 4 cross-farmer-visits (thus, 
iv. 
visiting farmer-fields with all farmers) of the participating farmers in each of the selected communities on 
CA and CSA technologies.  
v. 
and rain-fed periods) and supported farmer-fields to assess field performance and provide technical 
advice to farmers, where needed.  
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
financial institutions. 
Undertake crop cutting to report on yields from the CA demonstration sites and farmer-fields. 
Provide training in post-harvest handling and field management and report on the training.  
Facilitate the operation of group activities and linking them to market, Value Chain Drivers and 
Undertake regular monitoring and supervision visits to the demonstration sites (during irrigation 
4 
Note: In terms of farmer selection, it is expected that 20 self-motivated farmers in already existing 
PROSPER supported communities will be identified from registered and functional FBOs. Districts to be 
supported under this intervention for the first time, 40 self-motivated farmers are to be selected from 
two registered and functional FBOs. Consult PROSPER for criterion for the selection of these farmers. 
Value Chain Development- Women and youth focused trainings 
Designate a WIAD officers to participate in TOT for cascading training on Selection, Planning and 
Management (SPM) of Income Generating Activities (IGAs) 
Promote good food and nutrition practices among 150 households: 
Organize cooking demonstrations to show appropriate food combination for healthy leaving 
Facilitate Peer to peer education on nutrition and food safety: gender champions would be identified and 
trained on various topics including food and nutrition. These champions would be giving printed Nutrition 
sensitization and training materials to facilitate their delivery of the education or campaign contents 
across all geographic locations identified 
Identify and mobilize Mother to mother support groups; This would be done in collaboration with the 
WIAD and community nutrition officers within the districts. They would identify or form these groups 
where they do not exist and educate them on good nutrition in feeding the family. These officers would 
also visit group meetings and community meetings to sensitize them on family nutrition and the right 
behavior toward feeding young children. Counselling posters would be printed for use for this purpose. 
Cooking demonstrations to provide practical sessions on how foods are to be combined to create a 
balance meal. 
Train 150 women and youth on agro-based processing and enterprise development: 
Identify agro processing and enterprise development capacity need specific to the District (preservation 
and handling of high horticultural crops, home based gardening, nutrition education, agro processing of 
fruits, soybeans, rice, cassava etc.). 
Assess, identify and recruit participants based on the needs assessment to be trained on the specific 
areas identified.  
mobilize the participants to a training venue and train them on identified capacity areas 
Document the training and write reports on each training including pictures and attendance sheet. 
Carry out radio sensitization and campaigns on women empowerment in agriculture: 
The topics for the radio sensitization and campaigns include: 
Women and youth control of decisions about agricultural production 
Women and youth access to and decision-making power about productive resources 
Women and youth Control of use of income earned  
Women and youth participation in Leadership in the community 
Time allocation to daily activities for women and youth 
Make follow ups to monitor the application of knowledge and report results 
Support trainees to start managing new livelihood enterprises among women and youth  
 Facilitate Entrepreneurs linkage to financial services 
Support entrepreneurs to register their businesses with the registrar general department 
Consult PROSPER Value Chain Officers and other interest groups for the criterion for the selection 
Indicators to be updated quarterly 
INDICATOR  
Outcome: Value chain stakeholders and local production systems increase their resilience to climate change 
> Land under climate-resilient practices 
TARGET  MEASUREMENT (ACTIVITIES) SOURCES 
Area (ha) under CA demo farms  
Area (ha) of fields of CA FBO members of demo 
farms  
5 
INDICATOR  
TARGET  MEASUREMENT (ACTIVITIES) SOURCES 
Total (area - hectare) 
> Irrigated land using efficient technology 
Total (area - hectare) 
> Yield from conservation farming for maize 
Total (ton/hectare)  
> Direct beneficiaries having improved water 
management practices (ASAP) 
Total (number of people) 
> Yield from conservation farming for soya 
Total (ton/hectare)  
> 1.1.2 Farmland under water-related 
infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated 
Total (area - hectare) 
> Households (HH) supported with increased 
water availability or efficiency 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
2 
Total (household) 
> Production and processing facilities supported 
with increased water availability and efficiency 
Area (ha) Fields of farmer under CA upscale 
Land under VC demo 
Area (ha) of land under Agroforestry 
Area (ha) under solar-powered borehole 
intervention  
Area (ha) under efficient water use demo 
Area (ha) under bunding 
Yield (T ha-1) of maize from demo field 
Yield (T ha-1) of maize from CA upscale farmer fields  
Members (no.) of FBO under CA demos benefiting 
from borehole  
2. Members (no.) of FBO provided with bunding  
3. Members (no.) of FBO under PROSPER supported 
WUA  
4. Members (no.) of FBO under Efficient Water Use 
demonstration  
Yield (T ha-1) of soya from demo field 
Yield (T ha-1) of soya from CA upscale farmer fields  
Land area (ha) under CA demos benefiting from 
borehole 
Land area (ha) under WUA demo and farmer fields  
Land area (ha) under bunding  
Number of HH members of beneficiaries under CA 
demos provided with boreholes  
Number of HH members of beneficiaries of efficient 
water use (EWU) demo  
Number of HH members of beneficiaries supported 
with bunding 
1. Number of boreholes provided for demo fields  
2. Number of boreholes provided in other FBOs  
3. Number of demo facilities under efficient water 
use (EWU)  
Total (number) 
Output 1: Adaptative trials and demonstrations of modern conservation agriculture and water-efficient irrigation 
techniques are undertaken 
> Demonstrations undertaken (ASAP) 
Count of all demonstration supported by PROSPER-
ASAP 
6 
INDICATOR  
TARGET  MEASUREMENT (ACTIVITIES) SOURCES 
Total (number) 
> WUAs trained/supported 
Total (number) 
> Individuals engaged in NRM and climate risk 
management activities 
Count of demonstrations established after ASAP 
CSA training 
Count of WUAs formed/supported  
Number of individuals under CA Demo FBOs  
Number of individuals under CA upscale  
Number of individuals under Agroforestry training  
Number of individuals under WUAs FBO 
Number of Climate Champions in the Department 
Number of individuals under other PROSPER 
supported demo  
Number of individuals and other partners receiving 
daily weather information 
Total (number of people) 
Women (number of people) 
Output 2: Climate change resilient production technologies and practices are promoted among rural producers 
> CI 3.1.1: Number of groups supported to 
sustainably manage natural resources and 
climate-related risks 
Number of FBOs/groups practicing CA 
Number of FBOs/groups supported under 
Agroforestry training  
Number of WUAs formed/supported  
Number of FBOs/groups supported under Efficient 
Water Use 
Number of groups supported to manage climate-
related risks 
Total (number) 
> CI 1.1.4: Number of persons trained in 
production practices and/or technologies 
<1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices 
and/or technologies (crop) [Number of persons 
trained in Climate Change Resilience, ASAP]> 
1. Number of persons trained under the CA FBOs 
2. Number of persons trained under Agroforestry  
3. Number of persons trained under WUA 
4. Number of persons trained under EWU  
5. Number of Climate change champions  
6. Number of persons trained supported with other 
Climate Change resilience practices  
Gender based training and capacity development for women empowerment in agriculture 
Number of HHs provided with targeted support 
to improve their nutrition 
Total (household) 
Number of persons receiving training in 
different capacity areas 
Total (number of people) 
7 
Number of household members trained on good 
nutrition practices 
Number of mothers counselled on good nutrition 
Number of cooking demonstrations carried out 
Number of women and youth trained on selection 
planning and management of Income generating 
activities 
 Number of women and youth trained on agro-
based processing 
INDICATOR  
TARGET  MEASUREMENT (ACTIVITIES) SOURCES 
Women Empowerment in Agriculture 
supported 
Total (number of people) 
Duration of the Assignment  
Number of women in leadership position in various 
community-based organisations (FBOs, Village 
Saving and Loan Groups. And other groups) 
Number of women accessing production resources 
(land, inputs, credit) 
Number of women involved in Village Saving and 
Loan Groups and other saving s groups and 
Number of women and youth establishing and 
managing income generating enterprises 
The Service Provider shall commence the services within five (5) calendar days of the effective date of the 
contract or such time as the parties may agree in writing. The duration of the assignment is 12 calendar 
months from the effective date.  
Expected Outputs of the Assignment 
The expected outputs are as follows:  
  Climate resilience and adaptation 
  Capacity of smallholder farmers built in climate change resilient production technologies and 
practices promoted among rural producers 
  Three quarterly report with updates on number of farmers supported by PROSPER (by age and 
gender), sensitization processes and feedback from farmers, general outputs and 
recommendations  
  End of year report indicating a narrative on key accomplishments in 2021, successes, challenges, 
lessons learnt, exit strategy and sustainability plan. 
Under the Value Chain Development- Women and youth focused trainings: 
  At least one hundred and fifty (150) women including youth trained on gender-based topics 
including agro-processing, nutrition education and enterprise skills development 
  At least 150 women including youth have gone through hands on skills training on agro 
processing and skills development including homebased gardening.  
  A total of 150 women and youth trained on Business enterprise development and management 
  At least 50 entrepreneurs supported to register their businesses 
  Three quarterly report with updates on all trainings well documented and on each training 
include pictures and attendance sheet. 
  With the support of PCU and supervision from the District Agricultural Development Unit help 
monitor and provide report on the applications of the training by the participated FBOs. 
8 
Workplan for implementation 
No.  Activity  
Month – 2021/2022 
March  April  May 
June 
July  August  Sep.  Oct.  Nov.   Dec.   Jan.  Feb.  March 
2 
1 
3 
Selection of 
beneficiary Farmer 
Based 
Organization(s) 
Supply of inputs and 
equipment   
Provision of 
technical 
backstopping by the 
Districts/Municipals:   
a. Planting 
b. Fertilizer 
application 
c. Urea application  
d. Cover crop relay 
e. Harvesting 
f. Post harvesting 
activities  
Nutrition education 
Cooking 
demonstrations 
Selection planning 
and management of 
income generating 
activities 
Facilitate the 
registration of 
existing and new 
enterprises 
8  Mentor and 
monitor the 
adoption of 
trainings among 
households 
4 
5 
7 
6 
9 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSULTANCY ASSIGNMENT 
4.0 
Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District (AEAs and WIAD especially) shall be resourced to 
carry out the services described above by PROSPER on behalf of MoFA. 
The offices of MMDAs and decentralized MOFA offices shall be involved in monitoring of the project 
while the project shall be managed by PROSPER Zonal Offices under the guidance of the Climate 
Change Adaptation Manager and Value Chain Officer.   
5.0 
DURATION OF ASSIGNMENT  
Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District shall commence the services within five (5) 
calendar days of the effective date of the contract or such time as the parties may agree in writing. 
The duration of the assignment is shall be twelve (12) calendar months from the Commencement 
date.  
6.0 
PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF REPORTS 
Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District shall report to the National Coordinator, of 
PROSPER, the Contracting Authority, or his representative for all activities and consultations. All 
reports and relevant data compiled or prepared in the course of the services shall be the sole property 
of PROSPER and shall not be shared without prior permission from PROSPER. 
Detailed Report – DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, TAMALE North District shall submit a detailed 
Report for all tasks executed detailing location, date, number of participant’s outcomes and 
recommendations for any activity undertaken (monitoring, field days etc.). All reports shall be 
submitted in English.   
Outputs on monitoring and reporting 
7.0 
The expected outputs which are the detailed reports shall include the following: 
If field monitoring and supervision, the observations made  
If field days, the type of technology introduced/demonstrated to farmers  
  Name of community, date of visit, number of farmers interacted with (by age and sex) 
 
 
  General outputs and recommendations  
  Details of the training, methodology and outcomes 
  Sessions conducted with videos, pictures and attendance sheets.  
  An evaluation report of the training, indicating General outputs and recommendations  
  Plans for backstopping the AEAs in the training of the FBOs. 
IMPLEMENTING AGENCY’S INPUTS 
8.0 
For the proper execution of the assignment, Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District shall 
provide  
  Personnel  
  Equipment (camera, laptop, GPS etc.) 
  Vehicles and/or motorbikes for the execution of the assignment  
  Other logistics such as stationary for the implementation of the project. 
SERVICES AND FACILITIES TO BE PROVIDED BY PROSPER  
10.0 
Upon written request by the Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District, to PROSPER, funds 
will be released by PROSPER based on the agreed scope of work at any period within the 
Implementation Agreement.  
NOTE: 
a)  Payments will be made directly to the Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District   
b)  Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District will be responsible for the disbursement and 
retirement of funds. 
c)  Request for replenishment will be made by the Department of Agriculture, TAMALE North District 
through the Director. 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
11 
APPENDIX 3. DETAILED BUDGET 
Climate Smart Agricultural Demonstration 
Unit of 
Measurement 
No.  Description 
Quantity  Frequency  Unit 
Cost/ 
GHC 
Total 
Cost/GHC 
Remarks 
Litres 
100 
8 
Litres 
100 
6 
Litres 
100 
4 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Fuel for backstopping by AEAs to 
FBOs and other PROSPER climate 
change activities 
Fuel for field monitoring, 
supervision and reporting (Crop 
Officers, MIS and Accountants) on 
PROSPER climate change activities 
Fuel for quarterly field monitoring 
and supervision by District 
Director on PROSPER climate 
change activities 
Radio sensitization and awareness 
creation on Conservation 
Agriculture, environmental 
safeguards and other Climate 
Smart Agricultural technologies  
5 
Signage for new group field 
Number 
2 
SUB TOTAL 
Frequency 
includes 6 
field-day 
organization 
and 2 cross-
farmer-
visits 
Frequency 
includes 6 
farmer-
field-day 
monitoring 
visits 
Quarterly 
monitoring 
visiting by 
the 
Directors 
1 radio 
sensitization 
every 
quarter of 
the year 
Table 2: Value Chain Development- Women and youth focused trainings 
Name of district 
No. of training sessions in the district 
No. Farmers per district 
Number of traning modules 
No. of Communities 
No. Liters per trip * 2 
TAMALE North  
10 
300 
5 
5 
45 
No.  Description 
Unit of 
Measurement 
Quantity  Frequency 
Unit 
Cost/ 
GHC 
Total 
Cost/GHC 
Remarks  
Training of AEAs 
Fuel for DDA Directors monitoring 
1 
Litres 
45 
3 
2  Monitoring and reporting (MIS & Acct)  No. of sessions 
10 
1 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
Monitoring 
visit once 
every 
quarter   
12 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Resource persons (WIAD) for cooking 
demonstrations 
sessions 
Resource Persons (WIAD) for SPM 
training 
Resource persons for Radio discussions 
on WEA 
Resource person from Ghana Health 
Service (GHS) 
No. of FBO 
persons 
7 
Ingredients for cooking 
demonstrations 
sessions 
8 
Airtime for Radio discussions 
air time 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
9 
Snacks 
Total 
persons 
70 
5 
5 
5 
10 
5 
5 
5 
 Five 
sessions 
with 5 
different 
topics  
 5 sessions  
per FBO  
Collaborate 
with GHS 
for 
nutrition 
education   
collaborate 
with 
nutrition 
GHS  
 2 sessions 
per topic 
discussed 
(1 repeat)  
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
13 
APPENDIX 4. TEMPLATE FOR REPORTING   
Cover Page: 
Insert a picture from the field. 
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE 
(PROSPER)  
XXXXXXXX QUARTER PROGRESS REPORT 2022 
Region 
Name of MMDA 
Name of Director 
Signature of Director 
Executive summary 
*Half a page 
Brief Introduction  
*Half a page 
Period of Reporting 
Activities carried out 
Report on results 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
14 
Table 2: Programme Retirement Sheet  
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE (PROSPER) 
MINISTRY OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 
NAME OF IMPLEMENTING PARTNER…………………………………… 
CHEQUE       No……………………… 
ACTIVITY DESCRIPTION……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
PROGRAMME RETIREMENT SHEET 
SN 
DESCRIPTION OF SPECIFIC 
ACTIVITIES CARRIED OUT 
PV No 
AMOUNT 
SPENT (GHS) 
ACTIVITY ANALYSIS 
PLOUGHING 
COST 
BUDING 
COST 
FUEL 
COST 
TOTALS 
SUMMARY 
TOTAL AMOUNT RECEIVED 
LESS TOTAL AMOUNT SPENT 
BALANCE/REFUND 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
Name………………………………… 
Designation…………………………………….. 
Signature…………………………………… 
Date……………………………… 
Table 3: Attendance Sheet 
Name……………………….. 
Designation……………………….. 
Signature…………………………… 
Date………………………. 
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES, SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE (PROSPER) -PROSPER 
MINISTRY OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 
Name of Districts Assembly 
Community 
Activity 
MOFA Responsible Officer 
Attendance list ………………………………… 
Date: ……………………… 
S/N  NAME 
SEX 
POSITION 
SIGNATURE/TUMB PRINT  CONTANCT 
DATE 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
15 
Analysis  
Table 4: Beneficiary Information 
Value chain  Total  By Sex 
Male  
By Age 
   Female   Youth (15-24)   Youth (25-34)  ≥35  
Analysis  
3.0 Monitoring and Supervisory Activities  
3.1 Observations  
3.2 Findings  
3.3 Follow up Action Recommended  
Analysis  
Overall Implementation:   
4.1 Status of Implementation 
4.2 Significant Achievements (Expected and Unexpected)   
Budget Implementation 
Table 5: Budget, Releases and Expenditure  
Budget   Amount Released   Total expenditure   Variance (+/-)  Remarks  
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
16 
Analysis  
List Problems/principal Constraints and steps towards mitigation: 
6.1 Constraints Encountered  
6.2 Steps taken to reduce the impact 
7.0 
 Planned Activities for Next Reporting Period 
Report Template for Capacity Building Activities 
8.0  
For all FBOs/Farmer Capacity Building activities, an Excel Reporting Template containing the following 
fields will be sent to each AEAs for PROSPER reporting purposes. 
DATE/PERIOD OF TRAINING 
ID NUMBER 
FIRST NAME  
LAST NAME 
FULL NAME 
SEX 
AGE 
AGE BRACKET 
PHONE NUMBER 
NAME OF TRAINEE ORGANIZATION 
(FBO, MOFA UNIT, VCD) 
REGION 
DISTRICT 
COMMUNITY 
VENUE OF TRAINING 
TYPE OF TRAINING 
TRAINING MODULE 
START DATE 
END DATE 
NAME OF TRAINER 1 
PHONE OF TRAINER 1 
EMAIL OF TRAINER 1 
DATA COLLECTED BY 
DATA REVIEWED BY 
DATA ENTERED BY 
REMARKS 
Annex 11b. Sample MOU for the BRCs 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
17 
Annex 12. Sample MOU with APEX BANK 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
18 
Annex 13. Sample Business Plan 
Table of contents 
Executive Summary 
  Executive Summary 
  Business Details 
  Key Personnel 
Vision 
  The business idea 
  Business goals  
  What the business does 
 
Legal requirements  
Marketing 
  Market research 
  Managing market risks 
  Pricing 
  Promotion 
Running the business 
  Staff 
  Premises 
  Suppliers 
  Equipment 
Managing operational risks 
  Finance 
  Profit and loss forecasts 
  Sourcing finance 
Managing financial risk 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
19 
Annex 14. Targeting - Regional Information 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
20 
Belt/ZoneRegionDistrictsClimate Change Vulnerabilityincidence of povertyFood and nutrition insecurityimportance of maize value chainimportance of rice chainimportance of soy chainimportance of poultry value chainimportance of shea value chainimportance of cashew value chainimportance of vegetables value chainPROSPERMetrop(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)NorthernUpper West 0[general data on separate sheet]77.3% of HH are poor22.8% of HH are food insecure 67,058.76 Ha.  (average yield 1.7 Mt/Ha. - 4 Districts concentrate 56% of production area: Sissala East, Sissala West, Wa East, Nadowli)  5,497 Ha.  (average yield 1.5 Mt/Ha. - 3 Districts concentrate 57% of production area: Wa West, Wa East, Jirapa)  14,385 Ha.  (average yield 1.2 Mt/Ha. - 2 Districts concentrate 53% of production area: Wa West, Wa East) Plantain: --              Groundnut:  157,426 Ha. -        Cowpea: 65,104 Ha.NorthernUpper East0[general data on separate sheet]81% of HH48.7% of HH 52,688 Ha. (average  yield 1.7 Mt/Ha. - 3 districts concentrate 61% of production area:  Garu Tempane, Binduri, Bawku Municipal)43,350 Ha. (average  yield 2.6 Mt/Ha. - 4 districts concentrate 57% of production area:  Builsa North, Bawku West, Garu Tempane, Kassena Nankana Municipal)16,320 Ha. (average  yield 0.9 Mt/Ha. - 2 districts concentrate 55% of production area:  Bawku West, Pusiga)Plantain: --              Groundnut:  39,192 Ha. -        Cowpea: 24,436 Ha.NorthernNorth East0[general data on separate sheet]81.5% of HH33% of HH21,406 Ha. (average  yield 1.7 Mt/Ha. - 2 districts concentrate 61% of production area:  West Mamprusi, Mamprugu Moagduri)10,888 Ha. (average  yield 1.7 Mt/Ha. - The West Mamprusi district concentrates 54% of production area)15,838 Ha. (average  yield 1.8 Mt/Ha. - 2 districts concentrate 56% of production area: East Mamprusi, West Mamprusi)Plantain: --              Groundnut:  25,746 Ha. -        Cowpea: 16,167 Ha.NorthernSavanah0[general data on separate sheet]70% of HH22.7% of HH27,646 Ha. (average  yield 2 Mt/Ha. - 2 districts concentrate 51% of production area: Sawla/Tuna/Kalba, Bole)10,552 Ha. (average  yield 2.4 Mt/Ha. - 2 districts concentrate 69% of production area: East Gonja, Central Gonja)6,314 Ha. (average  yield 1.5 Mt/Ha. - 2 districts concentrate 69% of production area: East Gonja, West Gonja)Plantain: --              Groundnut:  22,366 Ha. -        Cowpea: 8,633 Ha.NorthernNorthern1[general data on separate sheet]66.4% of  HH30.7% of HH94,188 Ha. (average  yield 1.6 Mt/Ha. - 7 districts concentrate 53% of production area:  Nanumba South, Savelugu, Nanton, Tolon, Tamale, Nanumba North, Karaga)54,540 Ha. (average  yield 2.3 Mt/Ha. - 5 districts concentrate 50% of production area: Tamale, Tolon,   Savelugu, Nanton, Yendi)45,389 Ha. (average  yield 2 Mt/Ha. - 5 districts concentrate 56% of production area: Mion, Yendi, Nanumba North, Gushiegu, Kpandai)Plantain: --              Groundnut:  50,330 Ha. -        Cowpea: 31,179 Ha.MiddleBono East0[general data on separate sheet]53.1% of HH16.7% of HH98,069 Ha.  (average yield 2 Mt/Ha., 2 districts concentrate 47% of production area: Kintampo North, Nkoranza North)2,605 Ha.  (average yield 1.7 Mt/Ha., Sene East  concentrates 50% of production area, including the 2nd, Sene West, they account for 80% of area)N/APlantain: 3,005 Ha  -            Groundnut:  15,287 Ha. -        Cowpea: 7,357 Ha.MiddleBono0[general data on separate sheet]34.7% of HH12.2% of HH98,960 Ha.  (average yield 1.9 Mt/Ha. - 4 districts concentrate 49% of production area: Sunyani, Sunyani West, Berekun East, West)1,134 Ha.  (average yield 1.5 Mt/Ha. - 2 districts concentrate 100% of production area: Dormaa West & Dormaa)N/APlantain: 29,598 Ha. -              Groundnut:  2,663 Ha. -            Cowpea:  1,593 Ha.MiddleAhafo0[general data on separate sheet]42.5% of HH17.3% of HH27,407 Ha. (average yield 2 Mt/Ha. - 2 districts concentrate the 46% of production area: Tano North, Asunafo North) 939 Ha. (average yield 1.6 Mt/Ha. - 3 districts concentrate the 62% of production area: Asutifi North, Asutifi South, Tano North) N/APlantain: 54,574 Ha. -              Groundnut:  --            Cowpea:  --MiddleAshanti1[general data on separate sheet]28.2% of HH6.2% of HH127,410 Ha. - (average yield 1.76 Mt./Ha. - 6 Districts concentrate 50% of production area:  Ejura Sekyedumase; Offinso North; Asante Akim North; Mampong Municipal (Sekyere West);  Ahafo Ano North ;   Ahafo Ano South)13,837 Ha. - (average yield 2.7 Mt./Ha. - 3 Districts concentrate 51% of production area:  Ejura Sekyedumase, Adansi South,  Atwima Mponua)N/APlantain: 112,563 Ha. -              Groundnut:  6,101 Ha. -        Cowpea: 8,101 Ha.MiddleOti0[general data on separate sheet]58.6% of HH8% of HH22,103 Ha. - (average yield 1.9 Mt./Ha. - 3 Districts concentrate 51% of production area: Kadjebi, Nkwanta North, Nkwanta South )22,961 Ha. - (average yield 4.6 Mt./Ha. - 3 Districts concentrate 53% of production area: Jasikan, Biakoye, Kadjebi)N/APlantain: 8,268 Ha. -              Groundnut:  3,352 Ha. -        Cowpea: 1,852 Ha.Notes: See sheet  on C. Change and COVID shocksPercentage of total households per region which are poor, by wealth proportion of the poor amongst rural respondents (55.82%) is higher than their urban (19.8%) counterpartsSource: 2020 Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Assessment (CFSVA) Survey. April, 2021(Survey completed, Key Findings doc still in progress)Percentage of total households per region which are food insecure.Source: 2020 Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Assessment (CFSVA) Survey. April, 2021 - (Survey completed, Key Findings doc still in progress)Upper East has 5 out of the 10 worse-off districts in terms of food insecure HH nationwideNorthern has 3 out of the 10 worse-off districts… Upper West & North East complete the 10 worse-off districts nationwide, with 1 district each in the list.The 2020 survey covered all 260 administrative districts in the 16 regions in Ghana98.2% of rural households participated in the survey, and 96% of urban HH.Data for 2017 - Source: Ghana Open Data Initiative ( https://data.gov.gh/)Data for 2017 - Source: Ghana Open Data Initiative ( https://data.gov.gh/)Data for 2017 - Source: Ghana Open Data Initiative ( https://data.gov.gh/)Data for 2019  - Source:  Statistics, Research and Info. Directorate (SRID), Min. of Food & Agric.- May, 2020.percentage of areas cultivated and wherepercentage of areas cultivated and wherepercentage of areas cultivated and wherepercentage of areas cultivated and wherestatus and what areas are more vulnerable within the regionincidence of poverty, percentage of poor people and where in the regionincidence of food and nutrition insecurity and where in the regionpercentage of areas cultivated and where (Ashanti for example has concentration in the north)percentage of areas cultivated and where (ashante for example has concentration in the north)percentage of areas cultivated and where in the region                                           
Annex 15.  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
REPUBLIC OF GHANA 
PROMOTING RURAL OPPORTUNITIES SUSTAINABLE PROFITS AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE – PROSPER 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK - ESMF 
Figure 0. Administrative Map of Ghana 
-- DRAFT REPORT -- 
          September 2021 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
21 
PREFACE  
This Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the Government of 
Ghana will be applied to all activities financed by the International Fund for Agriculture 
Development (IFAD) through the  leadership of  the Government of Ghana, more precisely 
the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) for technical and/or financial support to the 
“Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience - 
PROSPER”.   
PROSPER Project Coordination Unit (PCU), supported, both financially and technically by 
IFAD will, at the request of the MOFA be hosted at the national level in the field, most likely 
in Tamale, and responsible for the overall coordination of project activities, with field-based 
environmental, climate, and social safeguards compliance, as well as gender and social 
inclusion works directly led by the respective locally recruited Senior Safeguards and 
Climate Specialists - SSCS, and Senior Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist - SGSIS to 
ensure good compliance on safeguards, as well as on Gender and Social Inclusion 
mainstreaming so to foster                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and sustain an overall satisfactory project safeguards performance throughout its lifespan. 
They will frequently liaise with District level hired Focal Points (DFP) as part of the MOU 
with Local Authorities (DDAs) supported by Ghanaian Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) on all safeguards-related issues, consistently with both applicable national legislations, 
and IFAD SECAP procedures. The same goes also with regards to financial intermediaries 
aimed at supporting local farmers to access to fundings. APEX Bank, the designated entity, 
will also have a Safeguards and climate coordination unit at their level. An Environmental, 
Social, Climate Specialist and a Gender and Social Inclusion Specialists will be hired to 
ensure all funding proposal are screened and in full compliance prior to their funding. 
Until the physical footprints of proposed project activities are clearly defined by/after project 
approval67, this document will remain a living document and thus subject to subsequent 
modifications and changes in line with the evolving situation or scope of the project activities. 
As an iterative process, therefore, much closer participatory consultation with the IFAD, 
GoG, and formal clearance and public disclosure of this ESMF will be necessary. 
67 - This is also function of the variation of the current Project Development Objective (PDO), which is susceptible to variation before/by the 
Appraisal stage. Until then, the ESMF remains flexible and adaptable based on any changes that occur. 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
22 
Table of Content 
1 
PREFACE.………………………………………………………………………………………
………2 
ABBREVIATIONS..……………………………………………………………………………
……….5 
List of 
Tables……………..…………………………………………………………………………….
7 
List of 
Figures..………………….……………………………………………………………………..
7 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY..…….……………………………………………………………………….8  
I. 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………
...…12 
  1.1   Country and Project Context and 
Rational…………………………………………………….13 
  1.2   Project Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Risk Rating and 
Category.………..16 
  1.3   Special aspects relating to IFAD's Corporate mainstreaming 
priorities………………….....17 
  1.4   Rationale and Objective of the 
ESMF..………………………………………………………..19 
  1.5   Stakeholder Consultation Approach & 
Methodology………………………………………...20 
  1.6   Information and Public Disclosure of the 
ESMF……………………………………………..20 
  1.7   Outline of the ESMF 
Report..……..…………………………………………………………...20 
II. PROJECT 
DESCRIPTION…………………………………………………………………………21Erro
r! Bookmark not defined. 
  2.1  Project Development 
Objective…………….…………………………………………………..21 
  2.2  Theory of 
Change…………………………….…….…………………………………………...21 
  2.3   Project Components, Outcomes & 
Activities...………………………...………………..…...Error! Bookmark not defined. 
  2.4   Project geographic area of intervention and Target 
group….……………….…………..…..31 
III.  ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE & SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROFILES OF PROSPER 
AREAS..35 
  3.1   Physical 
Environment……………………..……………………………………………………35 
  3.2   Biological 
Environment….……………………..……………………………………………...40 
  3.2   Socio-Economic 
Environment………………………………..……………………………….41 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
23 
IV.   APPLICABLE POLICY, Legal & institutional framework GOVERNING THE 
ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE & SOCIAL RISKS, IMPACTS AND BENEFITS 
MANAGEMENT OF PROSPER………………………………… 
………………………………………………………44      
  4.1  National Framework..…………………………………..…………… 
………………..….……44 
  4.2  International 
Framework………….…………………………….…………………..………….46 
  4.3  IFAD 
Policies/Strategies/Procedures……………………………………….…..…………....47 
  4.4  IFAD Climate Change Strategy (2010) 
………….………………………………………….…49 
  4.5  IFAD Environmental and Natural Resources Management (ENRM2011) 
Policy…………..49 
  4.6  IFAD Strategy and Action Plan on Environment & Climate Change (2019-
2025)…………..50 
V POTENTIAL SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL & CLIMATE RISKS, IMPACTS AND 
PROCEDURES IN ADDRESSING PROSPER 
COMPLIANCE……………………………..……... 51 
  5.1 Overview of PROSPER Environmental, Climate & Social Risks, Impacts & 
Benefits……...51 
  5.2 Breakdown of Risks, Impacts & Opportunities per 
Component...……………..………...…..51 
  5.3 Assessment of Cumulative 
Impacts…………………………………………………………….59 
  5.4 Potential impacts and for socioeconomic infrastructure project 
………………….………….60 
  5.5 Environmental, Climate and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)……………………...61 
  5.6 Analysis of 
Alternatives………………………………………………………………………….65 
  5.7 The Without project 
scenario…………………………………………………………………...67 
VI    ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN - 
ESMP.....................68 
  6.1  Mitigation Measures 
Checklist…………………………………………………………………68 
  6.2  Approach to Enhance Project 
Implementation………………………………………………..72 
  6.3 Integrated Pests and Pesticides Management 
Plan……………………………………………74 
  6.4  ESMF Monitoring and 
Evaluation……………………………………………………………..76 
  6.5  ESMF Implementation Timeline and 
Budget………………………………………………...78                                                                                   
VII.  CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE 
AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT & 
MONITORING…………………………………………………….…80 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
24 
  7.1  Strengthening Capacity and Improving 
Resilience………………………………………..….80 
VIII.  PUBLIC CONSULTATION, PARTICIPATION & INFORMATION 
DISCLOSURE.......……82 
  8.1  Stakeholders Consultation and 
Participation……………………………………………..…...82 
  8.2  ESMF 
Disclosure…………………………………………………………………..…………...82 
IX.    GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM - 
GRM……….………………………………………83 
  9.1 Rationale for 
Grievances…………………………………………….…………………………..83 
  9.2 Managing 
Grievances……………………………………………………………………………83 
  9.3 Closing the Loop and Fostering 
Sustainability…………...……………………………………84 
X. 
CONCLUSION…………………………………………………………………………...……
…...85 
REFERENCE & 
BIBLIOGRAPHY…………………………………………………………...………87 
ANNEXES……………………………………………………………….……………….....…
……….89 
2 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
25 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Acronyms 
1D1F 
AAFORD 
ABP 
ASWG 
AU 
BAC 
BBP 
BoG 
BP 
BRC 
CSA 
COP 
DA 
DAES 
DDA 
DSF 
DDWS 
DNA 
EA 
EIA 
ESA 
ESMF 
ESMP 
ESRF 
ESIA 
ESS 
FARA 
FAO 
FMA 
FNS 
GADP 
GAIP 
GASIP 
GBV 
GCF 
GCX 
GEA 
GEWE 
GFD 
GHG 
GIRSAL 
GJSP 
GoG 
GRM 
GSI 
Meaning 
One District One Factory 
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development Project 
Advanced Business Plan 
Agricultural Sector Working Group 
African Union 
Business Advisory Centre 
Basic Business Plan 
Bank of Ghana 
Business Plan 
Business Resource Centre 
Climate-Smart Agriculture 
Conference of the Parties to the United-Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change 
District Assembly 
Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services 
District Department of Agriculture 
District Stakeholder Forum 
District Department of Water and Sanitation 
Designated National Authority 
Environmental Assessment 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Assessment/Audit 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems Exposed to 
COVID-19 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
Agribusiness Learning Alliance 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United-Nations 
Financial Management Assessment 
Food and Nutrition Security 
Ghana Agricultural Development Plan 
Ghana Agricultural Investment Programme 
Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme 
Gender based violence 
Green Climate Fund 
Ghana Commodities Exchange 
Ghana Enterprises Agency 
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment 
Ghana Federation of the Disabled 
Greenhouse Gas 
Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing Agricultural Lending 
Ghana Jobs and Skills Project 
Government of Ghana 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Gender and Social Inclusion 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
26 
Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist 
Gender and Vulnerability Specialist 
IFAD Country Office 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
International Finance Corporation 
Interim Financial Report 
Income Generation Activities 
GSICS 
GVS 
ICO 
IFAD 
IFC 
IFR 
IGA 
IGREENFIN  Inclusive Green Financing Initiative 
IPM 
IPRM 
IWRM 
KAP 
LFM 
LULUCF 
MDDW 
MESTI 
MIYCN 
MLGRD 
MNDPF 
MoF 
MoFA 
MoGCSP 
MoTI 
MPI 
MSME 
MSP 
NCD 
NDC 
NFIDS 
NNP 
NOTUS 
NRGP 
NRM 
PERD 
PFI 
PFJ 
PRM 
PROSPER 
Integrated Pest Management 
Integrated Project Risk Matrix 
Integrated Water Resources Management 
Knowledge Attitude Practice 
Logical Framework Matrix 
Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry  
Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women 
Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation 
Maternal, infant, and young child nutrition 
Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development 
Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection 
Ministry of Trade and Industry 
Multidimensional Poverty Index 
Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise 
multi-stakeholder platform 
Non-communicable disease 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy 
National Nutrition Policy 
No Objection Tracking and Utilities System 
Northern Rural Growth Programme 
Natural Resources Management 
Planting for Export and Rural Development 
Participating Financial Institutions 
Planting for Foods and Jobs 
Procurement Risk Matrix 
Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental 
Resilience 
Person with Disability 
Person Living with Disability 
Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme 
Rural Commercial Bank or Rural Community Bank 
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance 
Rural Enterprises Programme 
Rural Financial Services Project 
Rural Institution 
Roots and Tubers Improvement & Marketing Programme 
Social Behaviour Change Communication 
Steering Committee 
PWD 
PLWD 
RAFIP 
RCB 
RAMSAR 
REP 
RFSP 
RI 
RTIMP 
SBCC 
SC 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
27 
SCGV 
SCS 
SDG 
SSCS 
SGSIS 
UNSDP 
WEF 
WSMT 
Safeguards, Climate, Gender and Vulnerability 
Safeguards and Climate Specialist 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Senior Safeguards and Climate Specialist 
Senior Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist 
UN Sustainable Development Partnership 
World Economic Forum 
Water and Sanitation Management Team 
GHANA- PROSPER Project-- ESMF, Sept. 2021 
28 
LIST OF TABLES & FIGURES  
FIGURES 
1 
22 
Figure 0 : Administrative map of Ghana 
Figure 1 : PROSPER Theory of change  
Figure 1 : PROSPER Intervention Areas (Upper West & Upper East 
Figure 2 : Topography and Elevatin of Ghana 
Typical Vegetation zone  and average temperature  of Ghana 
Figure 4 : Map of average annual temperatures, annual precipitations of Ghana 
Figure 5 : Annual rainsfall patterns of Ghana 39 
Figure 6 : Cereal production estimated at above levels in 2020 
32 
35 
37 
56 
39 
TABLES 
36 
Table 1 : Data Snapshot: Key development indicators 
Table 2 : Data Snapshot Summary Statistics  38 
Table 3 : Data Snapshot cooupled inter-comparison program, No% (CMIOS) 
Table 4 : National applicable laws & Institutional framework 
Table 5 : International Regulations and conventions 47 
Table 6 : Breakdown of risk, impacts and mitigation measures per component 
55 
Table 7 : Environmental and social management framework (ESMF) for PROSPER 
Table 8 : Commodity Value Chain  65 
Table 9 : Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Table 10 : Definition of consequences 
Table 11 : ESMF Timeline and Budget 
Table 12 : Training activities and estimated budget  80 
Table 13 : Key Safeguards staffing for the PCU, PIU for PROSPER 
Table 14 : Grievance Redress Mechanism 
73 
78 
81 
44 
83 
69 
38 
62 
29 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Ghana is a lower-middle-income country with an estimated per capita GDP (i.e., $2,221 
(2019), 6.5% one of the highest rates in the world). Ghana’s economy is heavily dependent 
on the export of specific commodities (i.e., gold, cocoa and oil), and remains vulnerable to 
commodity price shocks. Ghana is a country in a dynamic transition trend from extreme 
fragility to greater resilience to external and climate-induced shocks, but many development 
challenges remain despite the tangible sustainable development efforts initiated by both the 
current and previous Government authorities/regimes. In this challenging environment and 
context, Government is addressing the main drivers of country fragility, namely high rates of 
population growth and outmigration, limited access to resources, regional instability, 
unsustainable fiscal deficits, the limited capacity of the public administration, and structural 
vulnerabilities and shocks such as climate change and environmental degradation. These 
drivers of the country fragility are resulting in intensely negative socio-economic and 
environmental effects particularly in the agricultural sector. At present there are insufficient 
financial resources and technical capacity to build the resilience of organizations for 
transformative smallholder agriculture.  
While several reforms lead to a more conducive business environment, Ghana’s rank in the 
2020 Doing Business Report was 118 among 190 economies. The impact of COVID-19, still 
ongoing, has resulted in economic slowdown and socioeconomic challenges that are detailed 
below. 23% of Ghana’s population are monetary poor and 8.2% live in extreme poverty.  
When it comes to multidimensional poverty (across three dimensions: education, health, and 
living standards). The highest concentration of extreme poor (36%) lives in the Savannah 
region.68 Poverty, in the Middle Belt and other areas is lower than in the North. Agriculture 
accounts for 21% of Ghana’s total GDP, 71% of employment in rural areas, over 40% of 
export earnings. Factors contributing to rural poverty include underdeveloped agricultural 
technologies, poor access to financial services (especially among women), lack of secured 
market linkages, inadequate marketing infrastructure, post-harvest losses, lack of advisory 
services, and cumulative environmental degradation. Most of Northern Ghana falls within the 
Guinea Savannah Ecological Zone. Here smallholders grow mainly soya, maize, sorghum, 
rice, millet and vegetables. The challenges affecting agricultural development are 
compounded by the negative effects of climate change, such as increasing dry spells and 
rising temperatures, and degradation of arable land and critical infrastructure. 
The Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience 
Project (PROSPER) aims to strengthen the integration, climate resilience and environmental 
sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority VCs in the Northern and Middle 
Ecological Belts of Ghana taking advantage of the increased demand created by the national 
agro-processing strategy. PROSPER aims to provide a framework for the long-term 
engagement with and financing for private sector-led, pro-poor agricultural VC development 
tailored to the specific needs and potential of small-scale producers and operators in targeted 
regions of Ghana.  
PROSPER is aligned with the development strategies set out in the Medium-Term National 
Development Policy Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021) and priorities set by MoF in the 
National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy (NFIDS 2017-23). MoFA's Ghana 
Agriculture Investment Plan (2018-2021) – Investing for Food and Jobs, Gender and 
Agricultural Development Strategy (2015), is aligned with the international development 
68 Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018. 
30 
framework including the UN 2030 SDGs (2015), AU CAADP-Malabo Declaration on 
Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for Shared Prosperity and Improved 
Livelihoods (2014) and the ECOWAS Vision 2050 (2021). PROSPER aligns with the 
MoGCSP’s National Gender Policy (2015), the Agenda for Jobs (2018-21) policy 
framework, National Youth Policy (2010) and Nutrition Policy (2014), while taking into 
account changes in the socioeconomic landscape of the country and recent developments at 
the international level. 
The geographical targeting strategy of PROSPER considers (i) high rural population, (ii) high 
poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food and nutrition insecurity, (iv) strong concentration 
of female and male youth and (v) presence of economic opportunities relevant to the project 
in each district, combined with indicators of climate vulnerability and the level of cumulative 
degradation of the productive NR base (particularly soil, water and trees). 
The geographic area of intervention extends to eight regions in the above-mentioned Belts. 
All five regions in the Northern Belt, (Upper West, Upper East, North-East, Savannah and 
Northern), have a high poverty head count, the highest 92% (Wa West District, Upper West). 
The three neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, Bono and Oti) are relatively 
less poverty stricken on average than those in the Northern Belt but contain pockets with a 
markedly high poverty head count peaking at 78% Kintampo South District, Bono East. The 
number of regions has risen from five at Independence to the present 16, but the 
administrative divisions do not coincide with the environmental and socioeconomic 
conditions. Broadly, poverty is progressively deeper from South to North with the drier 
climate and increasingly challenging setting for agriculture with the negative impact of 
climate change. The poverty analysis underpinning the geographical targeting of PROSPER 
is presented in the PIM. 
Selection criteria will be developed and validated with communities. These criteria include: 
(i) poverty and food insecurity; (ii) community interest and demand; (iii) synergies with other 
donor-supported projects; (iv) site potential (including downstream effects, physical cultural 
resources, hydrogeological potential and saline-water intrusion dynamics in rice production 
schemes);(v) proximity to weekly rural markets and linkages with off-takers, and; (vi) land 
size of group members (not exceeding five hectares of land under rice/vegetables). The 
project targeting strategy, including gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
Key environmental, climate and social risk category classification and issues: 
--- 
In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Change Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP), PROSPER is classified as a Category B operation and equally falls under 
category B of Ghana’s Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) Guidelines and 
Procedures, implying that PROSPER is likely to cause limited environmental and social 
impacts which are mostly small in size, mostly site-specific and thus can be successfully 
managed by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures provided in this 
ESMF. Key risks, impacts and opportunities to environmental and social management are: 
poor governance and lack of institutional, technical and organizational capacity, 
implementation capacity by service providers for foreseen socioeconomic infrastructures; 
which will be addressed through the effective implementation of the ESMF/ESMP. As stated 
in component 1 (precisely subcomponent 1.2 ) community-driven socioeconomic 
infrastructure will be subject to feasibility studies/ESIA and approval by EPA. The project 
will not result in involuntary resettlement, or  impact on physical cultural resources. 
31 
From a Climate Change Risk Assessment standpoint, the project is classified as High. The 
target communities are substantially dependent on climate-sensitive natural resources, 
especially rainfed agricultural plots and tree crops such as shea and cashew. Large parts of 
the project area are increasingly exposed to droughts and flash-flooding. GHG emissions 
through increased production and processing and climate variability, including unexpected 
dry spells, unpredictable rainfall and low/high temperatures, can affect the project risks, 
impacts, sustainability and returns on investments. However, the project has the potential to 
integrate climate resilience measures, such as improved techniques of growing and 
processing of tree crops (cashew and shea) and in the fight against deforestation through the 
systematic use of integrated agroforestry systems, solar panels and/or biogas using efficient 
and usable friendly biodigesters, as well as the usage of biofertilizer. Systematic climate risk 
analysis will be undertaken by the project throughout implementation to ensure adequate and 
timely monitoring and management of climate change risks. 
Environmental management and monitoring plans 
Pertinent national legal, institutional, and regulatory frameworks were carefully reviewed to 
set in context the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for PROSPER. 
The environmental, climate and social context and present challenges for the targeted eight 
regions were reviewed. Some of the mitigation and adaptation plans recommended in the 
ESMF include, amongst others: 
   capacity building of multiple actors in technical, management and governance 
aspects, and strengthening of women’s and youth farmers organizations, 
  At household level, upgrading of vegetable gardens but also water infrastructure with 
solar or biogas powered irrigation pumping systems, intercropping, systematically 
introducing nutrient and vitamin-rich crops particularly for the selected VCs (rice, 
maize, soybean), agroforestry, promotion of sustainable land and water management 
practices and youth training support/youth incubation including on sustainable 
management of natural resources.  
  Infrastructure investments (feeder, track roads, causeways, culvert, small connecting 
bridges) will be subject to screening, feasibility studies and license approval by the 
relevant institutions to ensure that there is minimal social and environment impact but 
also the infrastructures withstand to climate change impacts (floods, salinity, wildfire, 
etc....).  
  Ecosystem preservation activities as the rehabilitation of thousands of hectares of 
mangroves and  community forests.  
  creation of solution-oriented inclusive platforms for high-level policy dialogue 
between private operators, FBO/RIs and public authorities and access to land and 
credit/loans. . 
  support climate resilient and smart infrastructure in the targeted areas  to expand 
arable land and water management productivity and reduce poor people's vulnerability 
to natural hazards, food insecurity and nutrition, the nature of risks and exposure to 
climate change.  
  Sustainable land use and forest ecosystems will contribute to reducing GHG 
emissions. Climate resilient infrastructure (land and water development) and upgraded 
household-level vegetable gardens will lead to secure production and reduce the risk 
of low yields while contributing to expanding the period of production from the 3 
months of the rainy season to 6 to 9 months within the dry season.  
32 
  Good climate resilient/smart agricultural practices in rice, maize, soybean, Shea and 
Cashew, and household-oriented horticulture will be promoted to address drought, 
flooding, salinization, locusts effects and harsh environments (land degradation).  
  Development of a capacity building strategy, the project will address the limited 
knowledge of climate change impacts on smallholder agricultural value chains and 
landscapes and effective adoption and implementation of adaptation interventions.  
  development of new modules on climate resilient agriculture, waste management and 
renewable energy for solar-operated boreholes/water pumps and other 
warehouses/workshop centers.  
  Improve collaboration with Ghana National Meteorological Agency to ensure 
production and dissemination of key agro-climatic information to farmers at regular 
intervals.  
  As much as is possible, discourage cultivation in areas that are very close to the major 
river systems to minimize overflow during normal flow seasons 
  Improve collaboration with research institutes to introduce early maturing/short 
duration and flood resistant rice varieties to the farmers to reduce flood impacts 
  Support and strengthen Seed Labs/silos/warehouses to be able to carry out rigorous 
tests on seeds to ensure that only genuine foundation seeds are used by farmers 
  If any usage is foreseen, timely collaborate with regulating agencies to ensure that 
agrochemicals, soil fertility systems meet the approved FAO/WHO standards; training 
and certification of ‘spraying gangs’ to eliminate agrochemical misapplication; public 
health and safety concerns and soil and water pollution 
  Support Value Chain actors in conversion of rice wastes into briquettes and vegetable 
stalk to animal feeds  
  Improve community security arrangements by supporting dialogue and understanding 
between farmers and pastoralists to reduce resource conflicts. Support to   
strengthening existing informal and formal existing grievance redress mechanisms 
proposed in the ESMF/ESMP and establishing new ones where they don’t exist. Such 
systems will address concerns that may be raised associated with other project 
activities. 
  Avoid farming along recognized grazing routes and demarcated grazing reserves, 
transhumance corridors or cattle ranches;  
  Support promotion of land governance and efficient land management as adaptation 
measures  
  Contractors will be required to comply with national and state regulations governing 
the environment, public health and safety and labor practice.  
Estimated Costs for Environmental and Social monitoring plans 
A total of $3 million USD has been estimated for the environmental and social monitoring 
for PROSPER. About $2,080,000 is expected to be expended at the base 3 years while the 
rest is spread across the 4th to 8th year. The fund covers environmental and social monitoring 
plans including:  
  Site specific studies for socio-infrastructure rehabilitation and new infrastructure 
(including roads, causeways, markets infrastructures, etc.), will be conducted  
  Training including ‘spraying gangs’, draining of rice paddies, and construction of 
water harvesting structure for dry season irrigation ;  
  Support for conflict resolution including stakeholders’ dialogue on conflict 
management and land governance 
  Health and Safety including Health insurance for agro-entrepreneurs.  
33 
A successful mainstreaming of ESMF into implementation of the PROSPER project also 
requires adequate sensitization and the strengthening of institutional capacities through 
capacity building programs. The sums of $920,000 and $2,080,000 respectively have been 
estimated for additional capacity building activities and the hiring of Focal points at local 
Government level in all the 85 districts of project areas. In total, both the Environmental and 
Social Monitoring costs and capacity building cost, and the cost of hiring key specialists 
account for $3,000,000 to enhance environmental, climate and social opportunities as well as 
and address any potential adverse impacts. 
. 
34 
1- INTRODUCTION  
To support its sustainable development strategy and program, particularly towards alleviating 
rural poverty of the most fragile and vulnerable populations by the end of 2035, the 
Government of Ghana has requested and obtained the support of the International Food and 
Agriculture Development (IFAD) with the development of the "Promoting Rural 
Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience (PROSPER)" project69. 
This ESMF has been prepared in support to the PROSPER project. The project has been 
screened against IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP) and deemed a Moderate Risk project for Social and Environmental safeguards, and 
High Risk thereby requiring appropriate avoidance and mitigation measures in place to ensure 
that all activities are carried out consistently with the SECAP and applicable national 
regulation and core requirements.  
This ESMF has been prepared in such a way as to set out the basic principles, rules, 
guidelines, and procedures for screening, assessing, and managing the likely potential social, 
environmental and climate risks and impacts of those proposed outputs and activities already 
been defined, as well as yet undefined interventions. It contains measures and plans to avoid, 
and where avoidance is not possible, to reduce, mitigate and/or offset adverse risks and 
impacts. The ESMF specifies the most likely applicable social and environmental policies, 
standards, protocols, and requirements and how those requirements will be met through 
procedures for the screening, assessment, approval, mitigation, and the robust monitoring and 
reporting of social, environmental and climate risks and impacts associated with the activities 
to be supported under PROSPER.  
For the project outputs that have been defined with a reasonable degree of certainty, this 
ESMF includes indicative provisions outlining the management plans required to addressing 
likely social, environmental and climate change related risks and impacts, as well as several 
of the requirements of applicable policies, standards, procedures, including the applicable 
national regulations. The preparation of the ESMF was consultative enough and inclusive of 
women, youth, and vulnerable groups and many other key stakeholders met during the field 
consultations, namely the Ministry of Agriculture (both in Accra and in Tamale and Kumasi) 
- District Directorates of Agriculture (DDA), the Ministry of Environment and forestry, The 
Environmental Protection Agency, the Ministry of Water, the District Directorate of Water 
Agencies (DDW), the local government, Municipalities/Mayors, Academia and Research 
centers, local Farmer-based Organization/FBO, farmers cooperatives, Women and/or Youth 
Associations, Private sectors active in the Agricultural field, local Banks, other 
government/donor funded operations, etc. Once completed, and consistently with IFAD 
requirements, the ESMF will be publicly disclosed both in-country and on the IFAD website, 
prior to the project approval to ensure project stakeholders and any other interested party has 
a free access to the documents. Both the Government of Ghana and IFAD will ensure all 
approved documents are available on their respective website to enable whoever is interested 
to freely and publicly access these documents and provide any inputs they found necessary. 
Since stakeholders’ consultation and engagement is an iterative process, this process will be 
continued and randomly monitored to ensure systematic consistency and transparency 
throughout the project lifecycle.  
69 - Moving forward and for simplification purpose, we will be most often using the term “The Project” in lieu and place of the full 
denomination of the "Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience (PROSPER)" project. 
35 
1.1. Country and Project Context and Rationale 
A.  National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
a.  National Context 
Economic context. Ghana is a lower-middle-income country with an estimated per capita 
GDP of USD 2,221 (2019). In 2019, GDP grew by 6.5%, up from 6.3% in 2018 – one of the 
highest rates in the world. Ghana’s economy is dependent on the export of a limited number 
of commodities such as gold, cocoa and oil, and remains vulnerable to commodity price 
shocks. In 2020, the inflation rate was 9.2%, unemployment at 4.53%, and national debt at 
78% of GDP (64% in 2019).70 While several reforms lead to a more conducive business 
environment, Ghana’s rank in the 2020 Doing Business Report was 118 among 190 
economies. The impact of COVID-19 has resulted in economic slowdown and socioeconomic 
challenges that are detailed below. 
Poverty and food insecurity. 23% of Ghana’s population are monetary poor and 8.2% live 
in extreme poverty.71 When it comes to multidimensional poverty (across three dimensions: 
education, health, and living standards), the proportion increases to 45.6%, especially in rural 
areas, where it is far higher (64.6%) than urban areas (27.0%).72 Wealth distribution is biased 
towards men: 62% of female-headed households fall into the two poorest quintiles – 
compared to 39% of male-headed households. The regions of the Northern Belt have the 
highest prevalence of poverty, up to 62% in the rural areas. The highest concentration of 
extreme poor (36%) lives in the Savannah region.73 Poverty, in the Middle Belt and other 
areas is lower than in the North. While some of the regions have lower poverty levels overall, 
there are persistent pockets of poverty, food insecurity, undernourishment and malnutrition. 
Persons with disabilities (PWD) represent 3% of the total population.74 More than half living 
in rural areas are concentrated in the Middle Belt and almost a quarter in the Northern Belt. 
Ghana has a prevalence of undernourishment of 7%, while moderate or severe food insecurity 
in the population stands at 49.6%. 
Agricultural and rural development context. Agriculture accounts for 21% of Ghana’s 
total GDP, 71% of employment in rural areas, over 40% of export earnings. Agricultural 
imports are substantial, mainly wheat, rice, chicken (frozen), milk and fish. Rain fed 
agriculture prevails in 96% of arable land. Around 85% of farming households own less than 
10 ha of land and more than two-thirds own less than 2 ha cultivable land. Factors 
contributing to rural poverty include underdeveloped agricultural technologies, poor access to 
financial services (especially among women), lack of secured market linkages, inadequate 
marketing infrastructure, post-harvest losses, lack of advisory services, and cumulative 
environmental degradation. Only 37% of the rural population has access to accounts in 
formal financial Institutions (FIs). Furthermore, rural institutions are generally weak with 
limited capacity to support small-scale producers. The challenges affecting agricultural 
development are compounded by the negative effects of climate change, such as increasing 
dry spells and rising temperatures, and degradation of arable land and critical infrastructure. 
Most of Northern Ghana falls within the Guinea Savannah Ecological Zone. Here 
smallholders grow mainly soya, maize, sorghum, rice, millet and vegetables. Rice cultivation 
in the valley bottoms has great potential to reduce poverty levels. Dry season vegetable 
70 Statisa, 2021. 
71 Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018. 
72 Ghana’s Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Report, UNDP, 2020. The indicators that contribute most to multidimensional poverty in 
Ghana are lack of health insurance coverage, undernutrition, school lag and households with members without any educational qualification. 
73 Ghana Living Standards Survey, 2018. 
74 2010 Population and Household Census. 
36 
production is significant at irrigation sites. The productivity for these crops remains below 
potential, due in part to lack of access to inputs, mechanization and extension outreach. Shea 
trees cover around 77,670 square kilometres in the Northern zone and support the livelihood 
of approximately 900,000 rural women. Trade in shea butter has been rising with strong 
export demand. 
The Middle Belt falls within the transition ecological zone. Here smallholders grow mainly 
cassava, plantain, maize, yam and soya, with rice cultivation in valley bottoms. The cashew 
value chain (VC) generates income for about 350,000 smallholder farmers. Cashews can 
grow on even marginal lands and can stabilize the soil in which it grows while serving as 
carbon sinks. However, production is affected by (less than 50% of potential) factors such as 
difficulty in accessing good planting materials and improved farm inputs, inadequate 
extension services, access to credit, weak RIs and lack of effective pricing and marketing 
mechanisms, pest infestations, incidences of bush fire, loss of soil nutrients and inadequate 
soil moisture. 
Vegetables such as tomato, pepper, okra, garden eggs and cabbage are grown mostly under 
rainfed conditions as backyard production for subsistence and commercial purposes in both 
the Northern and Middle Belts. Availability is highly seasonal, peaking June-September. 
Productivity is usually less than 50% of attainable potential due to traditional cultivation 
practices, the lack of irrigation systems, limited use of improved inputs and high post-harvest 
losses. 
The livestock sector is an important component of Ghana’s agriculture. In 2019, the sector 
contributed about 13.3% of agricultural GDP in direct products and had a growth rate of 
5.4%, (SRID, 2020). Most rural households (41.5%) keep some form of livestock, livestock 
as an adjunct to crop farming. Small and large ruminants are kept as a form of security and 
not as a source of protein, so the direct contribution to household food and nutrition security 
is low. 
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a GDP growth of 1.1% in 2020 down from the pre-
pandemic levels of 4.8% in 2020. Petroleum receipts, import duties and other tax revenues 
were negatively affected, reducing the fiscal space for the GoG. 77.4% of households in 
Ghana have experienced declines in income. Reduced remittances to rural areas contributed 
to food insecurity. The country’s average monthly food inflation recorded an increase from 
8.4% in March 2020 to 13.7% in July 2020. While food prices continued to rise into 2021, 
the overall economic crisis eased and growth is projected to increase to 4.0% in 2021 and 
4.1% in 2022. 
To mitigate the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, the GoG took several measures, 
including: the establishment of the Coronavirus Alleviation Programme (CAP), starting with 
a USD 219 million contribution from the Ministry of Finance (MoF); a reduction in the inter-
bank policy rate from 15.5% to 14% by the Central Bank of Ghana; lowering reserve 
requirements from 10% to 8% to increase credit availability and affordability. The Ministry 
of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) launched an Agricultural Response Plan increasing the 
supply of subsidized seeds and fertilizers to poor smallholders; IFAD’s Emergency Support 
to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems Exposed to COVID 19 (ESRF) supported the GoG 
efforts in this area. 
Ghana’s economy showed signs of recovery in the second half of 2020 and is projected to 
grow by 4.2% in 2021 and 5.3% in 2022. However, volatile commodity prices and lingering 
uncertainty over the COVID-19 pandemic still present key downside risks.75 
National strategies, policies, and lead institutions. The Medium-Term National 
Development Policy Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021) recognizes the growth of agriculture 
75 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/ghana/overview. 
37 
as the main driving force for rural development and transformation. The Ghana Agricultural 
Development Plan (GADP) focuses on the development of the agricultural sector from 2018 
to 2021 through modernization and transformation. MoFA has increased support to the 
production of field crops through the Planting for Foods and Jobs (PFJ) initiative for famers 
in the Northern and Middle Belts with 2-3 acres land to access improved seeds and fertilizers, 
with a 50% subsidy, extension services and marketing opportunities. GoG is implementing 
the PERD (2019-2023) programme for job creation and export diversification through tree-
crops and has established the Tree Crops Development Authority. To ensure coordination and 
policy dialogue, MoFA chairs the Agricultural Sector Working Group (ASWG) established 
between the GoG and development partners including IFAD. 
The One District One Factory (1D1F) programme led by the Ministry of Trade and Industry 
(MoTI) aims at establishing at least one medium-to-large-scale industrial enterprise in every 
district to create quality jobs and achieve a balanced spread of industries. The programme 
established 104 companies so far, of which 68 were existing companies and 36 newly built, 
employing 150,975 people) As part of 1D1F, the IFAD-supported Rural Enterprises 
Programme (REP) established 58 ENABLE Youth factories as a vehicle for employment 
creation for tertiary level graduates. In 2020, an MSME and Entrepreneurship Policy was 
approved, which led to the transformation of the NBSSI into the Ghana Enterprises Agency 
(GEA). A network of 166 Business Advisory Centres (BACs) and 57 Business Resource 
Centres (BRCs) has been established across the country under an arrangement between REP, 
GEA and participating District Assemblies, to provide high-value business development 
services to the business community. 
b.  Rationale for IFAD involvement 
The development challenge and prognosis. The underlying issue flagged is the persistence 
of intractable poverty in many rural communities dependent on agriculture in the drier 
Northern parts of the country. The prevailing low input-low output rainfed farming systems 
in the north and middle zones are suboptimal and neither financially nor environmentally 
sustainable. Additionally, with a long history of over-exploitation, the economic carrying 
capacity of the heavily depleted productive NR base is declining whilst the number of 
dependents increasing. The negative effects of rapid climate change are making bad 
conditions worse. The remedy is to uplift rural economies by transforming the bedrock of 
small-scale farming from predominantly subsistence to financially and environmentally 
sustainable systems tied into functioning markets. This rationale focuses on both the supply 
side – the scale and technical transformation of production – and a marked increase in the real 
demand for the produce, whilst ensuring that the most vulnerable people are not left behind in 
poverty. 
For the producers, individually and in groups, the imperative is the technical and 
organisational skills needed to progress to “farming as a profitable business” and to transition 
to agricultural and land management practices that reverse the depletion in the NR base, both 
on- and off-farm, crucially soil, water and trees. A key mindset change is to engage 
proactively with other private sector operators to build collaborations that are mutually 
beneficial and with balanced bargaining power. To this end, the critical linkage in the VC is 
the first, between producers and agribusinesses. 
On the demand side, the agricultural market prospects in the North and Middle Belts are 
promising, with strong global demand for maize, shea and cashew and rapidly increasing 
domestic demand and import substitution possibilities for rice, soya and poultry. GoG is 
investing heavily in the scale and capacity of “upstream” VC actors through 1D1F and other 
programmes. However, the mass of rural producers is not able to capitalise on the growth in 
demand, being effectively outside the mainstream economy. The development challenge for 
38 
PROSPER is to broaden, deepen and extend the reach of these commodity VCs to engage 
with significant numbers of primary producer groups. The resulting “demand pull” is much 
stronger than “supply push” in driving local medium-term economic growth. The increased 
volume of business is expected to create opportunities for enterprises in agro-processing and 
value addition at all scales, fuel employment and incomes within local economies through a 
multiplier effect, and thereby raise the food security and nutrition security of whole 
communities. 
IFAD’s comparative advantage. The Fund has a wealth of technical expertise to partner 
countries in addressing rural poverty combined with the capacity to mobilise resources at a 
scale that can make a lasting impact on the lives of vulnerable people. IFAD has a strong 
record in Ghana in working with poor rural communities in the food and agriculture sector in 
the Northern and Middle Belts. A portfolio of projects has focused on various closely related 
aspects directly relevant to the design of PROSPER. Roots and Tubers Improvement & 
Marketing Programme (RTIMP) took an integrated commodity chain approach. Northern 
Rural Growth Programme (NRGP) combined commodity chain and rural infrastructure 
development with access to financial services. Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme 
(RAFIP) followed by Rural Financial Services Project (RFSP) have built up the 
microfinance subsector. Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (GASIP) is 
concentrated on agribusiness linkages and VC development, with measures to promote 
climate change resilience. Rural Enterprises Programme (REP) seeks to promote rural 
business, many of which are based on agriculture and NRs. Most recently, Affordable 
Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development Project (AAFORD) is focused on 
smallholder access to formal credit. Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food 
Systems exposed to COVID 19 (ESRF) was a rapid response to support smallholders coping 
with the pandemic. 
PROSPER will scale up and build on this broad and deep experience, lessons learned, fruitful 
partnerships and cumulative development achievements of the above discussed IFAD 
projects in Ghana. Corporate knowledge of areas of direct relevance to the new initiative 
include: capacity, membership and sustainability of RIs and MSMEs; resilience building and 
the sustainable use of NRs; capacity of extension services to support VC producers and 
actors; creation of market linkages; capacity of BACs and BRCs to provide training to RIs 
and MSMEs; affordable loans in a market segment where FIs do not operate; partnerships 
with Apex Bank and other FIs to promote inclusive rural financial services; innovative 
cashless credit model76; and one-time Matching Grants (MGs) for beneficiary groups 
ensuring subsequent access to affordable credit to sustain their marketing partnerships 
1.2 Project Environmental, Climate and Social Risk Rating and Category 
1.2.1 Environment and social category 
The initial screening of proposed PROSPER activities reveals that the potential 
environmental and social risks rating is medium/moderate to low. The main risks relate to 
(i) value chains activities (rainfed and/or irrigated agriculture, cashew and shea trees 
cultivation, harvesting and processing, horticulture, rain/stormwater harvesting, nutrition, 
health and income generation related poultry: and (ii) basic socioeconomic infrastructure 
including NRM remediation works, feeder road rehabilitation and farm access tracks, and 
shared social infrastructure including human water supply systems, green energy and 
sanitation facilities. Most of these impacts are small in scale, very limited, mostly site-
76 Eligible farmers receive inputs and services from vendors and providers; rural banks pay the sellers; after harvest and sale of the produce, 
farmers repay the loan. 
39 
specific and readily avoidable if not considerably reduced with appropriate mitigation plans 
(ESMP), as stated in the project’s ESMF. 
From a social safeguards standpoint, because all agricultural lands are community owned 
there will be no new land acquisition aside from those land left as fallows so the project will 
not have any foreseen negative social and environmental impacts such as the involuntary 
taking of lands or restriction on access to and/or use of assets resulting in the physical and/or 
economic displacement of project affected persons (PAP). PROSPER is not foreseen to affect 
negatively local pastoral communities or sites of historic, religious or cultural significance, 
land development beyond 100 ha77, feeder roads with a length of lesser than 10 km linking 
communities or farm tracks. PROSPER is rated as a ‘Category B’ project and its social and 
environmental risks is assessed to be Medium/Moderate to Low. 
As a Category B operation78, a formal Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
is required during project implementation. Sub-project screening will then reveal the depth of 
the site-specific instrument to prepare for compliance purpose. Further analysis of the conflict 
dimensions and site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) will be 
mainstreamed throughout PROSPER implementation lifecycle. Moreover, to ensure 
safeguards compliance and project sustainability, a Safeguards and Climate Change 
Specialist and a Gender, social inclusion and Vulnerability Specialist (GBV/EASH/VAC) 
will be part of the PCU. Quarterly safeguards and climate compliance reports summarizing 
the level of compliance and performance of project activities implementation will be prepared 
and shared to inform IFAD and stakeholders. 
1.2.2 Climate Risk classification 
From a Climate Change Risk Assessment standpoint, the project is classified as High. The 
target communities are substantially dependent on climate-sensitive natural resources, 
especially rainfed agricultural plots and tree crops such as shea and cashew. Large parts of 
the project area are increasingly exposed to droughts and flash-flooding. GHG emissions 
through increased production and processing and climate variability, including unexpected 
dry spells, unpredictable rainfall and low/high temperatures, can affect the project risks, 
impacts, sustainability and returns on investments. However, as part of its Business Plans 
under Component 2.1 the project has the potential to integrate climate resilience measures, 
such as improved techniques of growing and processing of tree crops (cashew and shea) and 
in the fight against deforestation through the systematic use of integrated agroforestry 
systems, solar panels and/or biogas using efficient and usable friendly biodigesters, as well as 
the usage of biofertilizer. Such mitigation measure will be introduced through awareness 
raising campaigns and capacity building programmes in climate smart agricultural strategies, 
climate finance and strong collaboration with extension services, weather, and climate 
monitoring agencies to receive regular and timely agro-climatic information, and the adoption 
of appropriate unmechanized cultivation technologies, crops varieties, and climate resilient 
and low emissions practices. Systematic climate risk analysis will be undertaken by the 
project throughout implementation to ensure adequate and timely monitoring and 
management of climate change risks. 
1.3 Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities 
Gender. Women constitute 58% of the rural labour force. Despite Ghana ranking second in 
the ECOWAS Gender Inequality Index, the country is ranked 117 out of 156 countries in the 
77 The project will not invest on land development beyond 100 ha contiguous. Most of the beneficiaries have on average less than 2 ha and even 
combined per site, it is less than 50 ha contiguous. 
78 The project will not invest in any category A subproject activities. 
40 
WEF Global Gender Gap Report. Traditional culture and entrenched gender inequality limit 
women’s access to education, healthcare, good nutrition, credit, extension services, new 
technologies, inputs and output markets participation in the public sphere and community 
decision-making. Female-headed households have less access to land for farming and are 
more likely to be smallholders (87% compared with 60% of male-headed households). The 
GoG adopted the National Gender Policy (2015) to mainstream gender, women‘s 
empowerment and social protection concerns into national development processes, NRs and 
agriculture. A Gender and Agricultural Development Strategy (GAD II) was developed in 
2015 by the MoFA Women in Agriculture Directorate to support mainstreaming gender. 
Youth. The country has a youth bulge (15-35 years of age79) with 57% of the total population 
being below the age of 25. The rural community consists of 56% youth, compared to 44% in 
urban contexts. Youth contribute to family labour for agricultural production and engage in 
other activities such as processing, warehousing and transportation but are unable to pursue 
farming independently due to limited access to land, credit, quality inputs and sustainable 
profitable output markets. Due to limited access to jobs, inadequate training and illiteracy, 
youth unemployment and underemployment in Ghana reached 12% and 50% respectively80 
resulting in growing youth migration from rural areas to urban centres. 
Initiatives to provide jobs, building capacities and opportunities for youth include the 
Medium-term National Development Policy Framework (2018-2021); the PFJ in agriculture 
and related sectors, the Initiative for Sustainability, Stability and Security (3S) under the 
IFAD managed Rural Resilience Trust fund and focusing on the Northern Belt; the IFAD-
supported REP; and the Youth Agripreneurship Development Programme, jointly run by 
AGRA and Nestle. Despite these initiatives from GoG and development partners, the 
outreach to youth from semi-subsistence smallholder families remains limited. 
People Living with Disabilities (PLWD). Statistically, people with disabilities make up 3% 
of the population. Disability in Ghana is considered both a human rights concern and a 
developmental issue due to its strong links to exclusion, discrimination and poverty. In 2006, 
the Parliament of Ghana passed the Persons leaving with Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715). The 
Act protects the rights of PLWDs and makes specific provisions to guarantee the right to 
education, healthcare, employment and movement of PLWDs. The Act also established the 
National Council on Persons with Disability. The Council is charged with the responsibility 
of proposing and evolving policies and strategies to enable PLWDs to integrate and 
participate fully in national development. 
However, despite efforts being made educating the public, PWDs are still stigmatized, 
discriminated against and socially excluded. There is strong correlation between disability 
and poverty. Poor health, limited schooling and employment opportunities are impacting 
negatively on the socioeconomic status of affected households. Households with disabled 
members may be vulnerable to poverty due to extra costs of living with a disability. 
Nutrition. Ghana is 'on course' to meet two targets for maternal, infant, and young child 
nutrition (MIYCN) reducing anaemia among women of reproductive age (46.4% of women 
aged 15 to 49 years still affected) and achieving the low-birth-weight target (14.2% of infants 
having a low weight at birth). No progress has been made towards achieving the exclusive 
breastfeeding target, with 42.9% of infants aged 0 to 5 months exclusively breastfed. Ghana 
is 'on course' to meet the target for stunting (chronic undernutrition), with 17.5% of children 
under 5 years of age affected but rises to 33% in the Northern Region. Some progress has 
been made towards achieving the target for wasting (acute undernutrition) but 6.8% of 
79 The National Youth Policy in Ghana (2010). 
80 Youth Employment Programmes in Ghana: Options for Effective Policy Making and Implementation, World Bank, 2020. 
41 
children under 5 years of age are still affected. The prevalence of overweight children under 5 
years of age is 1.4% and the country is 'on course' to prevent the figure from increasing.81 
Ghana has shown limited progress towards achieving the diet-related non-communicable 
disease (NCD) targets. The country has shown no progress towards achieving the target for 
obesity, with an estimated 16.6% of adult women and 4.5% of adult men living with obesity. 
Diabetes is estimated to affect 6.6% of adult women and 6.4% of adult men. The diet mainly 
relies on starchy roots, fruit and cereals. The diversity of diets remains low with limited 
intake of protein and a general reluctance to consume fruits and vegetables, causing stunting 
in preschool-aged children and anaemia amongst pregnant women. A long-term Food and 
Nutrition Security (FNS) Strategy has been developed which was used to review the National 
Nutrition Policy (NNP). 
The NNP aims to address nutrition related challenges of feeding practices for infants and 
young children and nutrition among women of reproductive age, as well as the promotion of 
nutritionally adequate safe diets among other nutrition services. Ghana joined the Scaling Up 
Nutrition (SUN) Movement in 2011 and has established national, regional and district level 
multi-sectoral nutrition coordination mechanisms. Ghana’s multi-stakeholder platform 
(MSP), the Nutrition Cross-Sectoral Planning Group (CSPG), continues to expand, bringing 
together ten sectors today. The five northern regions have regional nutrition MSPs. 
Climate and environment. Climate change is projected to affect vital water resources, 
energy supplies, crop production and food security, with the Northern zone the most 
vulnerable. Ghana is already experiencing increased extreme weather conditions with higher 
incidences and prolonged periods of flooding and droughts. The country’s dependence on the 
production of crops that are sensitive to climate change (cassava, cocoa, and shea) and lack of 
agricultural diversification exacerbate Ghana’s vulnerability. Energy production meets 
demand, but rural communities continue to rely on fuelwood, resulting in forest depletion 
estimated at a 2% loss per annum. 
Agriculture is estimated to be the second largest contributor (10.05 MtCO2e) to Ghana’s 
greenhouse gas emissions after the energy sector (15.02 MtCO2e). Ghana is committed to 
implementing its National Climate Adaptation Policy, as highlighted in the National Climate 
Change Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) and its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement. 
           In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, PROSPER qualifies as: 
☒ Climate finance: PROSPER will integrate adaptation and mitigation measures in the value 
chain packages, supported by special financial mechanisms adopted by the project. 
☒ Nutrition sensitive: PROSPER will select nutrition sensitive value chains, increase 
production of highly nutritious crops and animal sourced foods, promote food conservation, 
post-harvest processing and value addition, and promote better dietary patterns by providing 
nutrition education and Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC). 
☒ Youth sensitive: PROSPER will target male and female youth (50% each), adding their 
access to land as a precondition for community participation in the project. PROSPER will 
support the establishment of youth group-led enterprises along the selected value chains and 
will provide targeted financial inclusion, skills development, and capacity building. 
1.4 Rationale and Objectives of the ESMF  
Like its neighbouring countries, especially from the northern and southern (east and west) 
parts, Ghana is one of the world’s most vulnerable countries to adverse climate change 
impact, ranking 109th out of 181 countries according to the 2020 ND-GAIN index. Ghana is 
facing pronounced risks of higher temperatures, lower and more erratic rainfall, increased 
81 https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/africa/western-africa/ghana/. 
42 
frequency of droughts and floods, significant loss of soil fertility and potential for submersion 
of large land areas given rising sea levels on its whole costal area. Land degradation, 
salinization, coastal erosion, land quality reduction, and low agricultural productivity are 
serious threats to national food security. Mean annual temperature has increased by 1.0°C 
since 1960. Linear trends indicate that wet season rainfall has decreased significantly 
between 1960 and 2006. Climate change projections predict an increase by 1.1 to 3.1°C by 
the 2060s, and 1.8 to 5.0°C by the 2090s (UNFCC,2016). The country is likely to experience 
increased incidence of drought and lengthened dry spells, particularly in the northern belt 
region (Upper West & Upper East). Combined, these factors are serious threats to 
agricultural productivity and national food security. By its nature, the project will contribute 
to meeting IFAD’s corporate commitment on mainstreaming areas which are environment 
and climate (25% of investment climate focused); nutrition (50% PLG nutrition sensitive), 
gender (25% gender sensitive), youth (50% youth focused). 
In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Change Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP), PROSPER is classified as a Category B Program and fall under category B and 
with ‘High’ Climate Risk. The most vulnerable areas from a climate change perspective will 
be the Northern region of the country where rain shortage and droughts are seriously 
affecting communities’ productivity and self-sufficiency on freshwater, the balance of which 
is determined by rainfall conditions and, increasingly, sea level rise from the southern region 
that will have tangible effect on watercourses in the middle and northern belt regions.  
The PDR and SECAP note have classified PROSPER as an environmental and social 
Category ‘B’ operation based on the adverse environmental and social effects, small in scale, 
mostly site specific and thus readily manageable by appropriate mitigation measures; and a 
‘High’ Climate risk classification indicating the need for an in-depth climate risk analysis to 
be conducted during and throughout project implementation stages. The SECAP noted 
environmental and social risks mainly from: productive infrastructures and socioeconomic 
infrastructure, conflict and lack of ownership, unstainable agricultural practices, land 
development. The SECAP recommended an ESMF be developed to inform the design of 
PROSPER. 
The main objectives of the ESMF, as per the terms of reference of this study, are to define the 
principles, rules, guidelines, and procedures to develop the Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF, inclusive of an ESMP) with adequate budgets to 
satisfactory guide PROSPER implementation team. 
The objectives of this ESMF are: 
  To establish clear procedures and methodologies for the E&S and climate planning, 
review, approval, and implementation of sub-projects to be financed under the loan 
facility; 
  To specify appropriate roles and responsibilities and outline the necessary reporting 
procedures, for managing and monitoring E&S and climate concerns related to sub-
projects;  
 To provide practical resources for implementing the ESMF, including general 
guidance on the development of E&S Management Plans (ESMPs) and their 
implementation 
 
1.5 Stakeholders Consultation Approach and Methodology:  
This ESMF builds on the Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedure (SECAP) 
note prepared for the concept note stage of the project  and field work during design stage 
with the objectives to:  evaluate the impact of current and future trends of climate change and 
43 
environment on the programme's objective to reduce rural poverty and build the resilience of 
target groups; and propose adaptation/mitigation options for climate and natural resources 
management (NRM) issues with positive outcomes on project targeted groups in the northern 
and middle belt regions.  
In terms of the technical scope, the ESMF reviewed environmental, climate and social 
impacts, focusing on unsustainable agricultural practices, land development, likely impacts 
from land development (including irrigation infrastructure) climate change, and human 
conflicts and insecurity issues. It also reviewed several institutional, legal and policy 
documents and frameworks related to agriculture, environment, climate, access to land, and 
gender issues in Ghana. The IFAD’s Social, Environment and Climate Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP), IFAD’s new environment and climate strategy 2019-2025, the Gender 
Equality and Women's Empowerment, Targeting and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse policies 
were also consulted in developing this ESMF document. Consultations were made with 
stakeholders in the project targeted 2 regions/zones of the country during the design of the 
project. The field visit targeted the Northern and Upper East Regions, as well as in the middle 
Belt and Kumasi region, from 10th to 15th August 2021. The purpose of the field visit is to 
consult with stakeholders to collect relevant data and information to support the design of 
PROSPER. The consultations were participatory, inclusive, and proactive as they involved a 
broad range of stakeholders, farmers, RIs/CBO, academia, research institutes, GoG agencies 
(MOFA, DDA, EPA, MOW, MOI, ...) as well as private sector (RCB, SMEs, FIs). 
1.6 Information and Public Disclosure of ESMF 
IFAD’s Policy on the public Disclosure of Documents (2010) requires full disclosure to the 
public and includes information notes on projects being developed for Board presentation, 
agreements for approved loans and grants, and project/program design documents. This 
ESMF will therefore be publicly disclosed on both IFAD’s official website 
(http://www.ifad.org) and on the Government of Ghana’s website.  
1.7 Outline of the ESMF Report 
The ESMF report is structured as follows:  
Introduction 
 
  Project Description 
  Environmental, Climate and Socioeconomic Profile of the PROSPER Project 
Targeted Areas 
  Political, Strategic, Legal, and Institutional Framework Governing Environmental, 
 
Social and Climate Risk, Impacts and Opportunity Management  
Identification and Assessment of Potential Environmental, Social and Climate Risks, 
Impacts and Opportunities of PROSPER 
  Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
  Stakeholders Consultation, Participation and Engagement 
  Grievance Redress Mechanism 
  Conclusion  
  Bibliography 
  Annexes 
44 
2- PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
2.1 Project Development Objectives  
The PROSPER Project Development Objective is: Strengthen the integration, climate 
resilience and environmental sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority VCs 
in the Northern and Middle Ecological Belts taking advantage of the increased demand 
created by the national agro-processing strategy. PROSPER aims to provide a framework 
for the long-term engagement with and financing for private sector-led, pro-poor agricultural 
VC development tailored to the specific needs and potential of small-scale producers and 
operators in targeted regions of Ghana. 
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, PROSPER qualifies as: 
☒ Climate finance: PROSPER will integrate adaptation and mitigation measures in the 
value chain packages, supported by special financial mechanisms promoted by the project. 
☒ Nutrition sensitive: PROSPER will select nutrition sensitive VCs, increase production of 
highly nutritious crops and animal sourced foods, promote food conservation, post-harvest 
processing and value addition, and promote better dietary patterns by providing nutrition 
education and Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC). 
☒ Youth sensitive: PROSPER will target male and female youth (each group with a 
minimum of 50% eligible youth), adding their access to land as a precondition for community 
participation in the project. PROSPER will support the establishment of youth-led enterprises 
along the selected VCs and will provide targeted financial inclusion, skills development and 
capacity building. 
Geographical targeting. The geographical targeting strategy of PROSPER considers (i) high 
rural population, (ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food and nutrition insecurity, 
(iv) strong concentration of female and male youth, (v) presence of economic opportunities 
relevant to the project, (vi) the level of cumulative degradation of the productive NR base 
(particularly soil, water and trees) and (vii) indicators of climate vulnerability including 
evidence on the historical and projected impact of changes in temperature and precipitation. 
The geographic area of intervention extends to eight regions in the North of the country. All 
five regions in the Northern Belt, (Upper West, Upper East, North East, Savannah and 
Northern), have a high poverty head count, the highest being 92% for Wa West District, 
Upper West. The three neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, Bono and Oti) 
are relatively less poverty stricken on average than those in the Northern Belt but contain 
pockets with a markedly high poverty head count peaking at 78% for Kintampo South 
District, Bono East. The number of regions in Ghana has risen from five at Independence to 
the present 16, but the administrative divisions do not coincide with the environmental and 
socioeconomic conditions. Broadly, poverty is progressively deeper from South to North 
given the drier climate and increasingly challenging setting for agriculture with the negative 
impact of climate change. The poverty analysis underpinning the geographical targeting of 
PROSPER is presented in the PIM. 
Food insecurity prevalence as reported is not necessarily corresponding to the poverty head 
count. WFP food security and nutrition monitoring updates (June 2020) show high levels of 
moderate and severe food insecurity in the target regions, including the worst-off districts in 
the nation in terms of food insecure households. Main barriers to food security are food 
availability and accessibility. This affects access to micronutrients, especially for women and 
children. 
There are significant regional disparities concerning nutrition security in Ghana. Northern 
Region is worst off when it comes to rural (extreme) poverty, rural child stunting (chronic 
undernutrition) and the prevalence of anaemia among women and children. The national 
child wasting (acute undernutrition) rate stands at 7%, with the highest prevalence reported 
45 
for Northern Region (10.9%). The presence of persons with disabilities also has marked 
regional differences. The Ghana Micronutrient Survey (2017) reports that the proportion of 
women (15 to 49 years) not meeting the Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) 
score ranged from 37.9% to 42.4% in the target regions, with a high national average of 
40.2%82. The prevalence of PWDs by district ranges from 3.0% to 8.3% in the Northern Belt 
and from 7.3% to 12.4% in the Middle Belt. 
This will be achieved through the implementation of three complementary components, two 
of them mutually supportive as described below. 
2.2 Theory of Change 
 Developmental challenges. The main development challenges in the project area are high 
levels of rural poverty, youth and women unemployment, food insecurity, malnutrition in all 
forms, climate change and accelerating environmental degradation. Most poor farmers are 
engaged in low input-low output production in the small-scale rainfed field-crop sector, 
which is neither financially nor environmentally sustainable. In the absence of linkages to 
VCs, marketing tends to be haphazard even in good years. There are significant numbers of 
vulnerable people – women, youth, people with disabilities –excluded from the rural 
agricultural economy. 
These challenges are compounded by accelerating NR scarcity and degradation exacerbated 
by climate change and a growing rural population. Traditional farming systems and 
diminishing access to energy in rural areas leads to soil erosion, deforestation and loss of 
command over water; the productive land becomes progressively less fertile, and yields 
decrease. These factors expose rural livelihoods to external shocks, limiting the ability of 
households to meet their basic needs. The lack of access to healthy and diversified diets leads 
to compromised diets, particularly for pregnant/lactating women and children under two 
years. 
On the demand side, VCs are suboptimal with progressively less market offtake in remote 
areas. Farmers sell any surplus produce in local markets or to traders and middlemen straight 
after harvest when prices are low. In these circumstances, there are few opportunities for 
individual households and whole communities to accumulate the human, physical and 
financial resources needed to modernize production and progress from subsistence. Women 
and youth are most affected due to many factors including socio-cultural exclusion. The 
absence of public investment over many years has resulted in a lack of basic infrastructure, 
such as reliable potable water supplies, which places constraints on both livelihoods and 
living standards. 
 Opportunities. PROSPER will tackle these formidable challenges with a market 
approach. On the supply side, the project will invest not only in the technical capabilities of 
primary producers and processors but also in the organisational and business skills required 
to enter lasting commercial arrangements. Climate change has drawn attention to the 
cumulative depletion of the NR base, with much formerly productive land and forest already 
beyond the point of no return. The aim of the work with farmers will be to increase 
productivity and profitability rather than short-term production, in ways that slow and then 
reverse the rapid deterioration of the productive land, both on- and off-farm. Advice and 
demonstrations of climate-resilient farming practices such Conservation Agriculture will be 
supported by purposeful remediation works in the wider landscape after years of neglect. The 
key success factor in this regard is progress towards proactive NR management 
82 Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) is an indicator for the adequacy of the diet in a household 
46 
arrangements, with acceptance of community responsibility for the fragile land. 
Environmental sustainability is a necessary condition for successful “farming as a business”. 
Even limited additional profit coming into a poor community can trigger growth in the local 
economy, including opportunities for new enterprises to provide support services to the 
farmers. This requires access to rural climate finance to incentivize the sector to adopt best 
adaptation and mitigation practices. 
The project recognises fully that stimulating field and tree crop production alone, however 
well the agronomy is adjusted to the environment, will not benefit the target population 
without a substantial increase in the real demand for the produce, in terms of volume, prices 
that at least cover production costs and access to the multi-step markets. The argument hinges 
on the efficacy of demand pull rather than supply push. PROSPER takes a VC approach for 
the selected commodities, in which the smallholders are linked into the existing private sector 
VCs. The key link for a primary producer group is a contract arrangement with an 
agribusiness or aggregator. PROSPER is oriented to facilitate such private sector 
arrangements by guiding and coaching the emergent RIs and MSMEs, developing business 
plans as appropriate for groups with differing levels of maturity, engaging with larger-scale 
VC actors (“drivers”) and arranging access to affordable financial services as needed. These 
mainstream business interventions are complemented with measures to include marginalised 
and vulnerable people and to invest in shared public socioeconomic infrastructure to improve 
the living conditions of whole communities. 
Success with the growth in agricultural production in the framework of rapidly expanded 
value chains will drive up the incomes of the whole economy in the target rural communities 
and stimulate local demand for increased and additional support services both in the sector 
and in the wider population. It is this secondary demand that will provide opportunities for 
youth to escape from the under- and unemployment prevalent in the project area. PROSPER 
is designed to help youth along an authentic pathway from poverty by providing general 
training on running a business, helping to set up micro-enterprises of all types (related to the 
six PROSPER value chains) and linking the emergent MSMEs to affordable finance. The 
new enterprises then contribute themselves to the recovery of the local economy. 
PROSPER will promote women’s participation and empowerment by addressing barriers 
prevalent in the geographical context of the project. Major constraints are represented by low 
level of education among poor women, already existing workload, and lack of willingness of 
spouses and other family members to support full participation of women in project activities. 
PROSPER will mitigate these constraints by increased participation in training (e.g. Financial 
Literacy) and promotion of educational and income generation activities; labour - saving and 
women-friendly technologies to address workload; community awareness on gender equality 
as a vehicle for prosperity and the introduction of GALS approach. PROSPER will advocate 
for different male role models by encouraging men to support women’s participation through 
guarantee of land and other resources required. Gender targeting in PROSPER will include 
the inclusion of young women (youth) and women with disabilities (PWDs).  
Training and meetings with PWDs will be organized in close-by locations in the 
communities, in sensitive teaching and learning environments. To cater to the special needs 
of the PWDs with visual, hearing, physical and speech impairments, PROSPER will train 
them in braille, sign and audio languages. 
In PROSPER nutrition and health will be promoted through several pathways, including 
selection of value chains that are nutrition- and climate sensitive or that will make a high 
contribution to nutrition; food conservation, post-harvest processing and value addition; 
promotion of vegetable gardens; and nutrition education. Specific trainings and a Social 
Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) strategy will be developed to promote non-
47 
discriminatory intra-household food distribution, adequate diets for adolescent girls, 
consumption of diversified diets, food hygiene and safety, and improved WASH practices as 
well as the discrimination of negative socio-cultural habits like teenage marriages and early 
pregnancies resulting in low-birth weight babies as major risk factors for malnutrition. 
Figure 1: Theory of Change 
The project recognises fully that stimulating field and tree crop production alone, however 
well the agronomy is adjusted to the environment, will not benefit the target population 
without a substantial increase in the real demand for the produce, in terms of volume, prices 
that at least cover production costs and access to the multi-step markets. The argument hinges 
on the efficacy of demand pull rather than supply push. PROSPER takes a value chain 
approach for the selected commodities, in which the smallholders are linked into the existing 
private sector VCs. The key link for a primary producer group is a contract arrangement with 
an agribusiness or aggregator. PROSPER is oriented to facilitate such private sector 
arrangements by guiding and coaching the emergent groups and enterprises, developing 
business plans as appropriate for groups with differing levels of maturity, engaging with 
larger-scale VC actors (“drivers”), and arranging access to affordable financial services as 
needed. These mainstream business interventions are complemented with measures to include 
marginalised and vulnerable people and to invest in shared public socioeconomic 
infrastructure to improve the living conditions of whole communities. 
48 
2.3 Project Components, Outcomes and Activities 
PROSPER comprises two mutually supportive components concentrated on increasing the 
real demand for sustainably grown produce by significant numbers of people living in poor 
rural communities while enhancing their capacity to meet this demand through more efficient 
climate-resilient agricultural practices and natural resource management to mitigate the 
negative impact of climate change. The intended outcomes are increased incomes, greater 
food and nutrition security, and improved health status. 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure.  
The expected component outcome is: Improved and sustainable livelihoods in target areas 
supported by strengthened rural institutions and improved socioeconomic infrastructures. 
These actions are concentrated on investing in “public goods” within and for the benefit of 
the targeted 100,000 beneficiaries in the project areas. 
Subcomponent 1.1 Capacity building of rural institutions, enterprises and households 
comprises a range of institution-building and skills development activities to enable target 
communities to take ownership of and accountability for their own development initiatives, to 
promote sustainable community-based NR management, to strengthen their ability to 
implement modern sustainable and climate resilient farming, and to adopt healthier diets. 
Community mobilisation, cluster identification and planning. The project will seek to 
secure community interest in PROSPER and the approaches it is promoting with a series of 
interactive workshops and consultations at regional and district levels, starting with three 
regions in the first phase. The list of districts for project engagement will be finalized in 
discussions with local and national authorities. In each selected district, the project will 
identify and form clusters of neighbouring communities through a screening of NRM and 
socioeconomic conditions and mobilisation meetings at village level.83 Where interest is 
strong, the community leadership decides to commit to PROSPER and opportunities exist 
around the target value chains, a Cluster Committee will be established to interact with the 
project and manage implementation. 
Cluster Planning. For each participating cluster, PROSPER will facilitate the collaborative 
development of a bespoke community-driven Cluster Plan (CP). Each CP will set out local 
priorities for communal socioeconomic investments and identify potential production and 
related business opportunities that may be realized by RIs and MSMEs under Component 2 
and/or with community resources. The CP will inform the agenda for PROSPER action in 
each location, concentrating on investments responding directly to climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, and supplementing any existing development plans of local authorities or 
other development partners. The CP will underpin the local three-year PROSPER-community 
partnership and remain with the cluster leaders and Local Authorities as a live document to 
guide development planning during and after implementation. 
Capacitation of rural institutions and enterprises. This action entails bolstering both the 
governance and management structures and the technical capacities of active rural bodies, 
(including farmer/producer-based organisations and other economic interest groups such as 
VSLAs and MSMEs), and thereby their capacity to function as effective VC partners. It is 
envisaged as a purposeful major investment in human resource capital to develop a more 
conducive environment for the economic activities of the rural population. Within this drive 
to grow the rural economies by expanding business activity for groups, the poverty focus of 
83 In this document, a “cluster” is a term for several neighbouring settlements sharing natural resources. It has no administrative significance but 
locates the combined population in the specific land area upon which they depend and provides the project with a convenient unit for planning 
and operational purposes. Each cluster will include various common economic interest groups, such as Farmer Based Organisations and VSLAs, 
alongside non-profit community structures. To avoid confusion and excessive use of acronyms, the term Rural Institution (RI) is used here for a 
production-related group and Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprise (MSME) for any business set up for other purposes. 
49 
PROSPER entails extending the group-based opportunities to substantial numbers of 
vulnerable and economically marginalised people. 
The programme of training, skills development and related demonstrations will be delivered 
by district extension services backed up by MoFA technical departments and other line 
ministries as well as PROSPER technical assistance. In preparation for the work, the project 
will reinforce the technical skills of public service frontline field staff, reorientated to a 
modern business approach to farming including the adoption of climate-friendly agronomic 
practices and natural resource remediation. The action will be launched with an awareness-
raising workshop in each district on opportunities for Youth in and around the smallholder 
agriculture sector and the PROSPER value chains. Cluster-level surveys will identify groups 
and MSMEs, both pre-existing and potential, interested in and likely to benefit from capacity 
building. The group identification process will be gender sensitive with a special focus on 
women, youth and PWD. 
The District Department of Agriculture (DDA) will lead an extension campaign organised 
around group organisational skills, climate-smart demonstrations and practical training 
sessions on topics such as conservation agriculture, agronomical practices and “farming as a 
business” tailored to the local agroecological conditions and main VCs in the cluster. 
Financial literacy, orderly record keeping and the basics of business conduct will be 
addressed to complement instruction on the technical aspects of sustainable production. 
Emphasis will be placed on the need for a marketing plan for every planting: “production 
with a purpose”. An estimated 4,500 RIs and 800 MSMEs will be trained over the life of 
PROSPER. Off-farm, the training will centre on the remediation and proper management of 
the depleted shared NRs which are key to the livelihoods of farming communities. Best 
practices in soil and water conservation, tree planting and NRM, (to be supported in many 
target clusters with remedial works under subcomponent 1.2 below), will be shown to be 
beneficial to all the present and future users of the landscape. The capacity-building 
campaign will extend to non-producer economic interest groups who will be given training 
on enterprise development, particularly value addition and support services. Many will be 
Youth-based and start-ups stimulated by the project. 
Household nutrition and healthy diet. Alongside the measures to capacitate target groups 
to generate and sustain income and to manage and remediate their NRs, PROSPER will 
deliver an inclusive community-wide nutrition and healthy diet agenda to benefit all 
households, in synergy with the promotion of nutrition-sensitive farming and vegetable 
cultivation. This initiative serves as a counterbalance to the drive to produce food for sale, 
shifting attention to the nutritional value of the food consumed. The action will start with a 
Participatory Needs Assessment in each target community and entail training on household 
methodologies (HHM) and domestic financial literacy for up to 2,400 selected households. 
The Gender Action Learning System (GALS) as part of HHM will be introduced to enhance 
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment (GEWE) in PROSPER. GALS will create the 
togetherness in self-selected families to develop a vision and strategy to get themselves out of 
poverty. A Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) study will be conducted to understand 
better local issues around nutrition and diet, and to serve as a baseline for the Social 
Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) strategy. At the centre of nutrition activities will 
be a household education programme delivered through care groups by peers comprising 
demonstration nutrition gardens for healthy diversified diets, dedicated training on post-
harvest management, nutrition education and SBCC for communities. 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. This development 
activity seeks to realize some of the “public goods” investments prioritized and chosen by 
local communities through the Cluster Planning process. Three complementary types of 
climate-resilient infrastructure will be eligible: Off-farm/watershed works and hazard 
50 
mitigation measures; Feeder roads and farm tracks; and Communal social infrastructure. 
These investments aim to improve the sustainability of NR-related livelihoods and to 
stimulate socioeconomic advancements in the participating clusters. 
The NR remediation infrastructures may comprise soil and water conservation structures, 
such as contour bunds, reforestation and shelterbelts, bench terraces, tied ridges, water 
harvesting and storage ponds, as well as climate change mitigation measures in line with 
local conditions. The District Assembly will undertake all procedures as appropriate to 
acquire/lease any land needed for construction. PROSPER envisages expanding and 
rehabilitating strategic road networks (feeder roads and farm tracks, culverts and small 
bridges), as well as shared domestic water supply structures (boreholes with hand or solar 
pumps), sanitation facilities and waste management systems, and alternative/green energy 
schemes (including resource and energy recovery from waste). 
Each capital investment plan will include appropriate management, operation, maintenance 
and ongoing financing arrangements, with overall responsibility resting with the community 
where relevant. In each case, agreement will be reached between the District Assembly and 
the community leadership on the post-construction asset management by various community 
gender-balanced committees, building on previous local norms and the organisational 
training delivered under Subcomponent 1.1. The off-farm/watershed works and hazard 
mitigation infrastructure and the Feeder roads/Farm tracks will be funded 100% by the 
project. For water supply, the current national practice is for communities to make a cash 
contribution equivalent to one-year facility maintenance costs that shall be deposited in a 
bank account to demonstrate commitment towards long-term sustainability of the installation. 
For household toilet systems, the project will pay for the core element of the facility, such as 
the concrete slab or digni-loo unit, while the beneficiaries excavate the pit and build the 
superstructure with their own resources. 
Off-farm/watershed works and hazard mitigation infrastructure will be community-managed. 
The infrastructure for NR remediation and environmental protection will be maintained by a 
Natural Resources and Environmental Management Committee to be established under the 
project. Feeder roads and farm tracks will be maintained by the Department of Feeder Roads, 
who will be involved in implementation to enable them to take over post-construction 
maintenance. Water harvesting, water supply and waste systems will be managed by a Water 
and Sanitation Management Team (WSMT), a statutorily recognised body operating under 
the auspices of the District Assembly Works Department. Water will be sold at the tap and 
revenue raised used to maintain the supply systems. Sanitation and waste management 
systems will be maintained by the concerned households. Environmental sanitation and waste 
disposal and recovery systems will be coordinated by the WSMT and supervised by the 
District Assembly Works Department. An Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), which is prepared as part of the PROSPER design, will identify 
potential impacts of the infrastructure elements under the subcomponent and will integrate 
measures for addressing them. 
Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small 
operators around selected agricultural value chains. The expected outcome is: 
Smallholders and small businesses draw greater benefits from the increasing market outlets 
for agricultural produce through comprehensive financial, capacity and marketing support.84 
Whereas the first component will invest in the human, physical and natural resources of the 
target communities, the second component is concentrated on investing in the “private 
84 Small businesses comprise enterprises and organised groups engaged in income generating activities other than primary production. The 
members are drawn from the same population. 
51 
goods” of the population to bring about a sustained uplift in the earning capacity of 
agricultural producer groups and related enterprises. The aim is to expand business activity 
both within the target communities and in lasting agreements with other actors in the selected 
VCs. The project is realistic in recognising the differing prospects of the targeted beneficiary 
groups and the extent to which access to finance is the main constraint they face. In this 
context, the PROSPER emphasis on climate-friendly business development must be balanced 
with social and welfare considerations for the most-disadvantaged households. 
The distinction between smallholders and small operators in this analysis is important. The 
project’s drive to modernise agriculture in and extend the reach of the key value chains to 
economically marginalised communities is centred on the small-scale farmers but intended to 
reduce the poverty of the whole population. Alongside the capacity building of smallholders, 
PROSPER is geared to promote real economic opportunities for the substantial numbers of 
underutilised people in the same population, particularly the youth, not all of whom want to 
be in farming anyway. PROSPER is not intended to create jobs directly, but it is capacitated 
to help entrepreneurs to set up enterprises and facilitate access to appropriate finance, 
providing regular income for the “small operators”, the growing number of rural people not 
directly dependent on primary production. The project will make existing smallholders better 
off but will create new jobs and enduring earning opportunities for presently unemployed 
youth. 
Subcomponent 2.1 Sustainable marketing linkages and business development. This 
subcomponent comprises three activities. In the first, Value chain analysis, PROSPER will 
build on the preliminary value chain analysis conducted during project design. It will 
examine in depth the status and characteristics of each selected national value chain– soya, 
rice maize, cashew, shea and poultry – and map the VC actors located close to the target 
communities, particularly the first stage market linkages between producers and others in the 
chains. The general presumption is that most smallholder farmers and their groups in remote 
areas have no established marketing arrangements and interact opportunistically with buyers 
and middlemen only as and when they harvest a surplus. The number and location of private 
sector operators, including larger agribusinesses working with contracted outgrowers, is not 
well documented. PROSPER will commission a detailed structural examination of each VC, 
including an estimation of the value added at each link, to provide a sound platform for 
project interventions. 
The practical and intensive developmental activity Promotion of linkages between producers 
and value chain actors is aimed at generating enduring partnerships between producers 
engaged in climate-resilient farming and larger-scale agribusinesses within locally 
appropriate forms of robust and equitable contract relationships in the private sector. 
PROSPER itself will not enter business relations with the parties at any stage. This second 
activity will concentrate on those eligible RIs and MSMEs that demonstrated interest and 
potential in the Component 1 capacity building interventions. Group eligibility for PROSPER 
support centres on meeting membership criteria regarding the minimum proportion of 
specified disadvantaged groups: women, female and male youth, PWDs and landless or near-
landless households. These criteria allow for and, for practical reasons, encourage a minority 
of non-eligible members with productive land holdings of up to 10 ha in each group. 
With the support of the Business Advisory Centres (BACs)/Business Resource Centres 
(BRCs) and DDAs, the project will engage with VC actors in each participating district with 
an information-gathering and analysis exercise. An initial assessment will be conducted of 
the organisational status and maturity of the targeted groups (RIs and MSME), building on 
the cluster profiling at project inception, (Component 1.1). Groups will be evaluated in terms 
of their organisational proficiency, level of capitalization, acquired skills in financial 
management and potential to establish business agreements with VC actors such as traders 
52 
and processors. The producer groups will be categorized broadly into two streams going 
forward: those deemed ready to advance to formal business arrangements with larger VC 
actors and external financial services; and those needing more time and coaching to 
consolidate their organisational and financial capacity to engage in business. This objective 
evaluation will be instrumental in proper targeting and sequencing to access further project 
support and appropriate financial services. 
It is expected that 50% of those disadvantaged individuals targeted under Component 1 
(50,000 people) by PROSPER will qualify for assistance under this subcomponent. The 
marginalised, poorer and most vulnerable RIs (composed of more than 50% members with 
access to land of 1 ha or less and 40% women, 30% youth and 15% people with disability) 
and smaller MSMEs (fewer than 9 employees) progressing from Component 1 will be offered 
training sessions backed up by demonstrations and events at the cluster level on climate risk 
mitigation, resilience and integration into business plans and on VC linkages and green 
bankable propositions, with particular attention to potential MSMEs dedicated to women, 
youth and PWDs. Meetings will raise awareness, share information, bring together potential 
partners, and seek to conclude RI and MSME agreements with VC actors. These beneficiaries 
will be assisted in the preparation of a basic Business Plan (BP) to aid the consolidation of 
their income-generating activities and consideration for financing, (see below). 
The relatively better-off RIs that: (i) have a larger proportion of well-off beneficiaries (less 
than 50% of the members have access to an area of 1 ha of land and no more than 10% have 
access to 5-10 ha of land) and a lesser proportion of vulnerable people (40% women, 30% 
youth and 5% PWDs); and (ii) meet the organisational and financial literacy requirements 
will be offered a more advanced version of the trainings and demonstrations leading towards 
the establishment of business partnerships in each target district. MSMEs (with up to 29 
employees) will be engaged in the same developmental processes if their business can be 
shown to contribute to increasing the offtake from the primary target group and extending the 
reach of the VCs in remote locations. These beneficiaries will be assisted in the preparation 
of a more advanced version of an orthodox Business Plan to support an application for 
external commercial credit. Those poorer RIs and MSMEs that perform well in the entry 
level scheme are able and encouraged to progress to this advanced level activity. 
The centrepiece of the third activity, Development of business plans, is the generation of a 
sound, achievable and fully costed plan appropriate to the resources and prospects of each 
concerned entity. For the less mature RIs and MSMEs referred to above, a simple but realistic 
BP will be prepared with the support of BRCs, BACs, DDAs and PFIs as available. The 
Cluster Committees from Component 1.1 will be strengthened and upgraded to include PFIs 
and other VC actors to participate in BP development and realisation. Each basic BP should 
include inputs, simple tools and equipment, and whatever other cost items are required, set 
against a realistic estimate of returns. It should be green in design and address effectively 
climate and NR degradation risks and impacts. BPs could be developed by individual or 
multiple RIs and standalone MSMEs with the prerequisites of potential formal market 
linkages (supported by the project or pre-existing), proper organisational skills and an 
adequate level of internal capital. The BPs will be evaluated by an independent agent/service 
provider (to avoid elite capture or any risk of political interference) and, if acceptable, used to 
support a request for financial support. 
For stronger RIs and MSMEs, the project will provide the opportunity for professional 
support by technical assistance and the BACs/BRCs in close collaboration with the PFIs in 
preparing a fully fledged BP and facilitating access to affordable finance, (see 
53 
Subcomponent 2.2 below).85 The strengthened Cluster Committees will participate in 
devising workable local collaborative arrangements to implement the BPs. The PFIs 
themselves will be receiving capacity building and mentoring support from PROSPER to 
extend their outreach and are expected to engage fully with their potential customers early in 
the business planning stage. An advanced BP may include working capital as well as capital 
items such as inputs, mills, machinery, vehicles, tools, equipment and minor infrastructure. 
Each BP should be green in design and address effectively the climate change adaptation and 
mitigation challenges and NR degradation risks. 
For PROSPER, the imperative is to promote and expand businesses operating an aggregator-
primary producer model that is prepared to engage with the IFAD target RIs and related 
enterprises to become their interface with the market. This VC chain development is key to 
moving the sector on from the failing unsustainable smallholder farming systems. Such 
businesses are likely to comprise a substantial VC actor led by an entrepreneur “driver” and 
multiple producer groups under contract, all active in the private sector. The project is also 
geared to preparing and facilitating the BPs of larger standalone MSMEs (up to 29 
employees). 
Subcomponent 2.2 Access to rural financial services. The objective is to promote a savings 
culture among PROSPER’s beneficiaries, facilitate realization of the cluster-level Business 
Plans and improve enduring access to suitable financial resources for the beneficiaries to 
engage in profitable agribusiness. Expected outcomes: farmers through RIs and related local 
MSMEs are integrated step-by-step into the formal financial system and have lasting access 
to adapted and affordable financial services to develop their agribusinesses, including green 
investments. Such access is a necessary though not sufficient condition for rapid sectoral 
development. 
PROSPER financial services are structured around three instruments appropriate to the 
various situations prevailing in rural areas as regard capacities and professionalization: 
(1) Saving and Loan Groups (VSLA model) for sparking the saving habit within 
communities; (2) a Matching Grants fund for capitalizing emergent RIs to engage in 
commercial agriculture and smaller MSMEs around the selected VCs and supporting food 
and nutrition security promotion schemes for the most vulnerable groups; and (3) a Blended 
Finance Facility operated as a refinancing facility (RF) by PFIs to ensure sustainable access 
to financial services for growing FIs and MSMEs, (see details in respective sections below). 
These instruments form a global graduation process by which beneficiaries will be able to 
increase their access to financing solutions over time as they build their financial and 
management capacities and develop their business relationships with other VC actors. 
Savings mobilisation/Saving and Loan Groups. Within the array of institution building 
activities under Component 1 concentrated on promoting income generating activities for RIs 
and MSMEs, the project will emphasise the need for savings mobilisation and internal capital 
formation by all beneficiary groups as a prerequisite for forming sustainable businesses and, 
as and when appropriate, accessing external financial services. 
In that context, PROSPER will support the creation and strengthening of savings and credit 
groups, based on the VSLA model that various IFAD-funded projects have been using with 
success.86 The objectives are: to promote the saving habit and culture as a way to increase 
self-financing capacities for farmers and other VC actors, thus reducing their dependency on 
external resources; and to build internal capital in order to reduce the need for and cost of 
credit in the longer term. Savings and credit groups will be identified through the initial 
85 The concept of supporting “flexibility to achieve sustainability” in financing rural poor people is central to IFAD’s new Inclusive Rural 
Finance Policy, with less emphasis on commercial (market-priced) finance at the entry level. 
86 CARE has also had successful experience in developing the concept for women in Ghana. 
54 
profiling process, preferably with all members engaged in the same activity, such as trading 
or processing. 
As they form the group and start transactions, members will be trained in financial literacy 
and banking activity management. Savings deposited will constitute initial capital that will be 
leveraged in subsequent investment in equipment on credit with project support. Through the 
financial education programme, PROSPER will encourage groups to save for future needs, 
such as raising their counterpart contribution to access Matching Grant funding. Participating 
PFIs will be trained in product development to incentivise saving. The project will help to 
create or strengthen 5,300 VSLAs in the targeted regions. MSMEs will be targeted by the 
same programme. After one year in operation, groups will be assessed on their level of 
savings, member participation and commitment to developing business activities. The best 
rated groups will qualify to apply for and benefit from the Matching Grant (MG) fund or 
Blended Finance Facility (BFF). 
Matching Grants. As a second stage, PROSPER will operate a MG fund to capitalize less 
mature FIs and MSMEs toward raising their production and value addition capacities as part 
of a business agreement with VC actors, including nucleus farmers, offtakers, processors, 
traders, aggregators and agroindustry.87 Eligibility for a MG will entail more demanding 
performance criteria. It is expected that participating groups will enhance their business 
proficiency and become more reliable in the eyes of potential VC partners. PROSPER will 
promote the adoption of innovative, climate smart and resilient technologies and practices to 
achieve financial and environmental sustainability in the context of climate change and NR 
depletion. The MG as a one-off support will help RIs to finance the investments described in 
their BP. 
Three MG funding channels are proposed, for RIs, MSMEs and Nutrition and other poverty 
initiatives. The level of grant/contribution required will vary according to the VC and the 
profile of the beneficiaries targeted. For women groups, youth groups and PWD eligible for 
the Nutrition and other poverty initiatives funding channel, no BP will be required for small 
income-generating schemes focused on promoting diversification towards nutrition and food 
security, (for example, year-round vegetable production schemes). RIs will be assessed 
against the realization of their BPs and capacity to expand business with their offtaker 
partner. Similarly, stand-alone MSMEs will be rated on their performance against their BP. 
The best rated RIs and MSMEs will qualify to prepare an advanced BP with project 
assistance (under Subcomponent 2.1) and to access an affordable loan from PFIs through the 
BFF. It is expected that 30% of MG recipients will graduate to BFF financing during the 
project timeline. 
Blended Finance Facility (BFF). The BFF will develop, test and rollout green financial 
products to finance advanced BPs by the more developed RIs and MSMEs that have the 
potential to undertake commercial agriculture with climate mitigation and adaptation 
interventions in partnership with other VC actors.88 The Facility is set up to contribute to the 
opening up of the climate finance market in Ghana.89 The BFF will be made available as the 
third financial product for eligible groups some of whom may not have accessed an MG. BFF 
will direct the financing only to qualified PROSPER RIs and MSMEs who present bankable 
BPs with climate mitigation and adaptation interventions. Under the condition of being linked 
formally with VC actors under contract arrangements, qualified RIs and MSMEs will gain 
87 This systematic objective selection approach and self-targeting mitigate potential elite capture of the MG fund. 
88 Only for the six main VCs: rice, maize, soya, poultry, cashew and shea. 
89 Currently, there is almost no demand for climate finance in Ghana because uptake of climate mitigation and adaptation technologies is still in 
its very early stages. BFF will be one of the very first funds set up by IFAD in Ghana to contribute to climate finance market 
development. 
55 
access to BFF credit at a blended on-lending rate for financing a more sophisticated BP that 
has a strong focus on adaptation and mitigation in the face of climate change impacts on 
small-scale agriculture. Selected RIs within the same cluster and along the same VC will be 
helped to come together to develop and finance an advanced BP, which could include support 
to the VC actor as needed, provided that the BP show clear benefits of such support to the 
IFAD target group taking part. Another BFF funding channel will be made available to BPs 
developed by small enterprises, (up to 20 employees). 
The project will provide this affordable financing solution to the best RIs and MSMEs 
capacitated to invest on a larger scale (heavy equipment, working capital, inputs, TA) and to 
grasp other business opportunities. The BFF will operate as a refinancing facility (RF) 
beyond PROSPER closure to continue providing sustainable access to affordable finance for 
groups to maintain and develop their business activities with focus on climate mitigation and 
adaptation. 
The BFF will be developed through combining/blending at least five different loanable 
resources with the objective to foster the development of a climate lending market.90 The 
BFF will mix concessional funds from development institutions with commercial private 
resources. The five resources are: (i) two lines of credit from the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF)/IGREENFIN Phase I, with both lines at highly concessional cost of funds (0% for 
climate mitigation and 1% for climate adaptation activities); (ii) one line of credit from IFAD 
resources at a concessional cost of funds of 2%; (iii) the Association of Rural Banks (ARB) 
Apex Bank of Ghana and its Rural Commercial Bank (RCB) members, who will engage their 
own resources at a treasury bond rate (reference cost of funds) of 12%; and (iv) resources 
from other private sector investors and/or other development agencies, at a market cost of 
funds of at least 20%.91 
PROSPER will support access by the above-mentioned groups to credit lines for green 
agricultural investments, leveraging the Inclusive Green Finance Initiative (IGREENFIN-I) 
under the GCF Great Green Wall Umbrella Programme (GGWUP). IGREENFIN-I will 
support (i) Mitigation measures for reducing/mitigating GHG emissions and (ii) Adaptation 
activities to strengthen climate resilience of the Project beneficiaries. Through IGREENFIN-
II, PROSPER will build RIs and MSMEs’ capacities to understand climate threats, identify 
and implement adaptation and mitigation solutions, design viable/profitable business plans, 
improve financial education, business management and development, and access green loans 
from banks and MFIs. IGREENFIN-II will also: strengthen the commitment to green and 
inclusive financing by financial intermediaries, MSMEs and others; contribute to climate 
resilience-strengthening activities in production and processing in addition to those activities 
required by SECAP for climate proofing; and support adaptation and mitigation activities 
included in beneficiaries’ BPs through IGREENFIN-II adaptation Window I and 
IGREENFIN-I mitigation Window II respectively. 
The BFF will be established at and managed by the ARB Apex Bank. The Apex Bank, as the 
Investment Fund Manager, will provide wholesale liquidity on blended terms to its RCB 
members and other interested retail financial institutions operating with reasonable outreach 
in the PROSPER project area, for on-lending for smallholder agricultural production and 
90 A dedicated technical team of IFAD experts, private sector independent consultants and Apex Bank bankers and economists carried out a 
joint exercise to determine the blended affordable on-lending rate. Details of the adopted approach to the interest rate determination are 
documented in a “Technical guidance note on determining the on-lending rate from blending and structuring a mixture of highly concessional 
and commercially-priced loans”. 
91 The ARB Apex Bank in collaboration with PROSPER will look for investors and other development partners. A technical guidance note (in 
the PIM) shows that the average cost (wholesale rate) of the blended funds will be in the single digits (less than 10%) and the average structured 
interest rate applied to the clients (on-lending or retail rate) will also be in single digits. This latter is compared to the current market rate of 
between 26% and 28% applied by Apex Bank’s network of RCBs. 
56 
MSMEs development.92 The Apex Bank relies on its due diligence processes to select its 
partner retail RCBs and other qualified FIs. This blended financing arrangement will leverage 
existing derisking tools, including GIRSAL’s partial credit guarantee scheme, GAIP’s 
smallholder insurance scheme and GCX market access and warehouse receipt systems. 
To contribute to mitigating the risk averseness of participating RCBs and other FIs, 
PROSPER will contribute 50% of the premium to be paid by these FIs to the GIRSAL partial 
credit guarantee fund for a coverage of up to 70% loss.93 In addition, to encourage 
beneficiaries to take up high value but risky climate mitigation and adaptation interventions, 
PROSPER will contribute 50% of the insurance premium paid by clients to GAIP.94 To 
ensure optimal participation from the clients, the agricultural insurance product solicited 
(weather index insurance and/or area yield index insurance) will be bundled with the credit 
requested from the PFIs. Among the multiple uses of the TA associated with the BFF, part 
will be used to address key bottlenecks, including the risk averse nature of FIs in Ghana to 
finance smallholder agriculture, lack of affordable liquidity in the banks and unaffordable 
interest rates for smallholder producers. The BFF will be developed and set up at the Apex 
Bank by an external expert sourced by PROSPER. At inception, BFF PROSPER will be 
linked with BFF AAFORD. 
Partner RCBs and other retail FIs selected to channel BFF financing to beneficiaries will have 
to commit to offering the predetermined single digit on-lending interest rate negotiated 
between the Apex Bank and the project, while ensuring a reasonable return and sustainability 
to the participating RCBs and FIs. In addition to contributing to the credit guarantee fund and 
the agricultural insurance, a cash contribution of around 25% of the cost of the BP will be 
required from the RIs, including a contribution from the partner offtaker, the loan being 
limited to the remaining amount. IGREENFIN technical assistance to RCB staff will be 
deployed towards climate change capacity building and financial product development. The 
BFF will have a dedicated unit in the ARB Apex Bank to run the day-to-day activities of the 
BFF in coordination with PROSPER. The BFF will be supported by the project’s M&E core 
team. 
Component 3. Project management and Policy engagement.  
The expected outcome of the support component: Efficient and timely delivery of PROSPER 
development results and support to evidence-based sectoral policy formulation. 
Subcomponent 3.1 Project management. PROSPER will be facilitated by an 
implementation support structure embedded in the host GoG agency providing liaison, 
physical and financial project management, reporting and accounting, proactive knowledge 
management and learning activities, and monitoring and evaluation functions. Details are set 
out in section Ka below and in the PIM. 
Subcomponent 3.2 Policy engagement. PROSPER will support developing an enabling 
policy environment that will help achieve the project’s goals and objectives through the 
provision of technical assistance, organising high-level round table discussions, establishing 
policy dialogue fora, holding conferences and advocacy as appropriate. This will be 
underpinned by analytical work and KM products from PROSPER, IFAD and other 
development partners. 
92 For purposes of flexibility to achieve sustainability (IRF Policy 2021), the evolution and performance of the innovative blended fund will be 
closely monitored by a dedicated GCF/IGREENFIN TA-supported M&E Unit lodged at the Apex Bank. The dedicated M&E team will collect 
and analyse data that will be used to inform recommendations and/or decisions to be taken at midterm (MTR) on whether to make any 
adjustments to the blended fund and its operations. 
93 The premium is currently estimated at 1% of loan portfolio to PROSPER clients. 
94 Details of the premium determination will be worked out with GAIP in time for the beneficiaries to access BFF. 
57 
Top of the agenda are the policy ramifications of the large-scale trial of the new financial 
sector product “climate/green finance” as a potentially important development instrument in 
Ghana in coping with climate change. Without substantial incentives, the private sector is 
unlikely to borrow at scale to remediate NRs at landscape level that have long been 
neglected, under-invested, over-exploited and regarded as “free goods” by traditional 
agriculturalists and pastoralists. However, there are potential policy alternatives for public-
private partnerships to invest in an ambitious NR recovery and reconstruction programme. 
Properly managed with appropriate technology, such an approach could provide employment 
for large numbers of people. Climate/green finance could leverage massive public investment 
in adaptation and mitigation if a conducive policy framework were devised. 
Other areas of policy engagement include (i) focus on creating an enabling environment for 
investment in agriculture, including access to productive land and improving effectiveness of 
public expenditure in agriculture, and (ii) financial policies to enhance smallholders’ access 
to financial services and formalize MSMEs, strengthening their role along different value 
chains. Salient sectoral policy issues identified during implementation will be supported as 
well. The project will commission ad hoc studies on policy issues related to the IFAD Ghana 
COSOP and the scope of PROSPER. 
58 
2.4 Project geographic area of intervention and target groups 
2.4.1 Geographical targeting. The geographical targeting strategy of PROSPER considers 
(i) high rural population, (ii) high poverty prevalence, (iii) high rate of food and nutrition 
insecurity, (iv) strong concentration of female and male youth and (v) presence of economic 
opportunities relevant to the project in each district, combined with indicators of climate 
vulnerability and the level of cumulative degradation of the productive NR base (particularly 
soil, water and trees). 
The geographic area of intervention extends to eight regions in the above-mentioned Belts. 
All five regions in the Northern Belt, (Upper West, Upper East, Northeast, Savannah and 
Northern), have a high poverty head count, the highest 92% (Wa West District, Upper West). 
The three neighbouring regions in the Middle Belt (Bono East, Bono and Oti) have 
significant poverty levels and contain pockets with a markedly high poverty head count 
peaking at 78% Kintampo South District, Bono East. The number of regions has risen from 
five at Independence to the present 16, but the administrative divisions do not coincide with 
the environmental and socioeconomic conditions. Broadly, poverty is progressively deeper 
from South to North with the drier climate and increasingly challenging setting for 
agriculture with the negative impact of climate change. The poverty analysis underpinning 
the geographical targeting of PROSPER is presented in the PIM. 
Food insecurity prevalence as reported is not necessarily corresponding to the poverty head 
count. However, the latest food security and nutrition monitoring updates of WFP (June 
2020) show high level of food insecurity (moderately and severe) in the target regions, 
including the worst-off districts in the whole nation in terms of food insecure households. 
Main barriers to food security are food availability and accessibility. This affects access to 
micronutrients, especially for women and children. 
There are significant regional disparities concerning nutrition security in Ghana. The 
Northern region is worst off when it comes to rural (extreme) poverty, rural child stunting 
(chronic undernutrition) and the prevalence of anaemia among women and children. The 
national child wasting (acute undernutrition) rate stands at 7%, with the highest prevalence 
reported for Northern region (10.9%). The presence of persons with disabilities also has 
regional differences. Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDDW) is an indicator for the 
adequacy of the diet in a household. The Ghana Micronutrient Survey (2017) reports that the 
proportion of women (15-49 years) not meeting the MDDW score ranged from 37.9% to 
42.4% in the target regions, with a high national average of 40.2%. The prevalence of PWDs 
by district ranges from 3.0% to 8.3% in the Northern Zone and from 7.3% to 12.4% in the 
Middle Belt. 
Figure 2: PROSPER Intervention Areas 
59 
60 
2.4.2 Target groups.  PROSPER’s primary target groups will be: (1) the poorest and poor 
households, identified at inception through participatory methodologies appropriate to their 
circumstances; and (2) vulnerable people who have little access to assets and economic 
opportunities due to social exclusion, marginalization and the negative impact of climate 
change, targeted for participation in economic groups (RIs and MSMEs) promoted by the 
project.95 
The poorest households hold not more than 1 ha cultivable land or are landless whilst poor 
households comprise smallholders with less than 2 ha cultivable land whose livelihoods are 
vulnerable to NR degradation and climate change risks. Vulnerable people within the poor 
rural population include women (40%), unemployed female and male youth between 18-35 
years (30%) and persons with disability who are economically active (5%), many being part 
of the poor/poorest households. Market-oriented farmers with 2-10 ha cultivable land will 
also benefit from project support as minority members of the eligible groups and enterprises. 
The combined total number is estimated at 100,000 beneficiaries. Market-oriented-farming 
households with more than 10 ha of arable land and larger private sector entities may 
participate in project activities such as capacity-building only if they offer employment or 
business opportunities to the primary target group. 
PROSPER is highly gender sensitive. Overall, 40% women outreach will be targeted. 
PROSPER will address the barriers to women’s participation and empowerment prevalent in 
the geographical context of the project. Involvement in training, educational and income 
generating activities will be promoted by ensuring there is enough time to reach everybody 
through community meetings and that activities are arranged in a way convenient to women’s 
lives. PROSPER will include activities expected to attract women’s participation, such as 
shea and savings and credit groups. The project will work with local media and trusted local 
NGOs. Gender targeting in PROSPER includes the inclusion of young women (youth) and 
women with disabilities (PWDs). 
Both male and female unemployed youth (18-35 years) will be targeted, particularly for off-
farm opportunities in MSMEs related to primary production along the selected value chains, 
such as the provision of mechanised land preparation services, the use of by-products for 
animal feed, and crop aggregation. Each MSME would have a 60% minimum membership 
requirement of eligible youth. PROSPER will concentrate on potential vulnerabilities 
affecting specific sections within the youth category, for examples: ensuring that young 
women have the same opportunities as their male counterparts to participate in and benefit 
from the project; and inclusion of female and male youth with disabilities. The steady 
migration of youth from the rural areas to towns, observed in many countries, is a rationale 
response to the lack of earning opportunities. The country cannot afford to waste the resource 
of unemployed young people. A key part of the remedy is supporting individual 
entrepreneurs in setting up any business they choose with their own resources, thereby 
creating authentic local employment. PROSPER is designed to be as flexible as possible in 
responding to the energy and aspirations of youth in setting up enterprises from the bottom 
up. 
In sensitizing communities about the project, PROSPER will create awareness about PWDs 
and the differing nature of impairments. The participatory identification of households with 
PWDs will be carried out while developing Cluster Plans. The needs assessment of the PWDs 
will follow tailored approaches for capacity building, economic engagement and social 
protection depending on the nature of impairment. PROSPER will aim to mainstream 
95 The socially sensitive household methodologies to be employed, as recommended strongly by GASIP supervision missions, are mentioned in 
the Household nutrition and healthy diet campaign section under Subcomponent 1.1 below and in detail in the PIM. 
61 
women, youth and PWDs through their inclusion in the project-supported RIs, MSMEs and 
other activities. 
2.4.3 Phased approach. Selection of all eight proposed PROSPER regions is based on 
exhaustive analysis of available poverty, food insecurity and socioeconomic data in the 
Northern and Middle Belts. The plan is to start with three of the poorest regions to conduct 
the various project-wide inception activities without over-extending Government and 
management resources and to align with the pattern of project financing. The project will 
start implementation in three adjacent regions in the Northern Belt (Calibration Phase): 
Northern, Upper West and either Savannah or North East. The original concept envisaged 
this cautious approach, with all project activities tried from inception and scaled up when 
modalities are shown to be effective. The project structure is flexible and phasing can and 
should be adjusted in the light of experience gained in the first years, particularly with lessons 
learned from piloting the innovative Blended Finance Facility (BFF). 
The project will be scaled up to the remaining five target regions, (Replication and Scalability 
Phase), by the middle of the third year of implementation according to four trigger 
conditions: (i) filling the financing gap (currently estimated at USD 38.4 million), in part or 
in full from IFAD-12 (IFAD); (ii) Government meeting its PROSPER cofinancing 
commitments during the Calibration Phase (GoG); (iii) MoUs with implementing partners 
established and progressing well (PROSPER management); and (iv) satisfactory 
arrangements in place with regard to the operation of the Matching Grants and Blended 
Finance Facility (PROSPER management). The worst-case scenario if the financing gap is 
not filled by year three is a reduction in project scope for the remaining period. If other 
triggers related to overall performance are not met, this could lead to restructuring of the 
project to or any other possible remedies to address the underlying issues. 
62 
3 ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL PROFILE OF PROSPER TARGET 
AREAS 
3.1 Physical Environment  
  Topography and Relief  
The Ghana landscape topography is predominantly undulating and of low relief with slopes 
of less than 1%. Despite the gentle slopes, about 70 % of the country is subject to moderate to 
severe sheet and gully erosion. The highest elevation in Ghana, Mount Afadjato in the 
Akwapim-Togo Ranges, rises 880m above sea level. There are five distinct geographical 
regions:  
• The low plains, stretching across the southern part of the country.  
• The Ashanti Uplands, stretching from the Côte d’Ivoire border in the west to the elevated 
edge of the Volta Basin in the east.  
• The Akwapim-Togo Ranges in the eastern part of the country consist of a generally rugged 
complex of folded strata, with many prominent heights composed of volcanic rock. The 
ranges begin west of Accra and continue in a north-easterly direction, finally crossing the 
border into Togo.  
• The Volta Basin occupies the central part of Ghana and covers about 45 percent of the 
nation’s total area. The basin is characterized by poor soil, generally of Voltaian sandstone.  
• The high plains in the northern and north-western part of Ghana, outside the Volta Basin, 
consist of a dissected plateau. Soils in the high plains are more arable than those in the Volta 
Basin  
The relief of Ghana has been influenced considerably by its geological history. The land is 
generally below 600m. A ridge and furrow topography is evident on Pre-Cambrian rocks 
reflecting the fold trends. The lowest lying areas occur in the middle Volta Basin and in a 
broad belt along the coast. Physiographic regions include the coastal plains, the Buem-Togo 
ranges, the forest dissected plateau, the southern Voltaian Plateau, the Savanna High Plains 
and the Gambaga scarp. The topography will largely inform the design of physical 
component of the Project, especially the likely small earth dams, dugouts to harvest storm 
waters. 
Figure3: Topography and elevation for Ghana 
63 
Ghana, located along the south-central coast of West Africa, shares borders with the Republic 
of Togo to the east, Burkina Faso to the north and Cote d’Ivoire to the west. Ghana has an 
area of 239,460 km2 and its territorial coastal waters extends 200 nautical miles off the coast. 
Ghana’s territory has many water bodies, which include the Lakes Volta and Bosomtwe, 
which occupy 3,275 km2, as well as other seasonally flooded lakes that occupy another 
23,350 km296. The country has two broad ecological zones: forest zone, which cover 30% of 
the southern region and the Northern Savannah Ecological Zone, which covers the remaining, 
drier, 70%. More than 70% of the country’s land area is dedicated to agriculture97. Figure 2 
shows the topography and elevation for Ghana. 
Ghana is a lower middle-income, developing country with a stable and democratic 
government. In 2019, 
the country’s population was 30.4 million people with an annual population growth rate of 
2.2%. Projections suggest that the population will increase to 37.3 million people by 2030 
and 51.2 million people by 205098.  
Over 55% of Ghanaians reside in urban areas, which are expected to experience considerable 
growth, with 63% and 73% of the population residing in urban areas by 2030 and 205099. The 
country has a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$66.9 billion (2019) and had an annual 
growth rate of 6.5%100. The impacts of climate change on Ghana’s overall economic growth 
are predominantly negative (Table 1). Since 2010, economic growth has been fueled by high 
commodity prices and newly developed offshore oil resources. Despite a recent transition to 
an industry and services-oriented economy, 45%of the workforce still relies on work 
dependent upon rainfed agriculture. 
The fisheries sector contributes 4.5% to GDP and is another important source of income and 
nutrition, providing livelihoods for as many as 2.2 million people. Ghana’s Northern 
Savannah Ecological Zone, where agricultural production is centered and where poverty rates 
are most severe, will see increasing risks as the climate changes101. The risks posed by 
climate change in Ghana include risks for the health and agriculture sectors, primarily due to 
altered rainfall patterns and coastal area flooding102. 
Table 1.  Data snapshot: Key development indicators 
Indicators  
Life Expectancy at Birth, Total (Years) (2019)  
64.1 
Population Density (People per sq. km Land Area) (2018)    
% of Population with Access to Electricity (2018)  
GDP per Capita (Current US$) (2019)  
Source: Ghana Country Profile, The World Bank Group, 2021 
130.8 
82.4% 
$2,202.10 
97
ghanc3.pdf  
98
96
 -UNDP (2019). Climate Change Adaptation Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.adaptation-undp.org/explore/western-africa/ghana 
 -Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ 
 -World Bank (2019). Internal Climate Migration Profile – Ghana. 
 -World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: Population Estimates and Projections, Ghana. URL: https://databank. 
99
worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=health-nutrition-and-population-statistics:-population-estimates-and-projections  
100
worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&country 
101
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
102
 -World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: World Development Indicators, Ghana. URL: https://databank. 
 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
 -UNDP (2019). Climate Change Adaptation Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.adaptation-undp.org/explore/western-africa/ghana 
64 
  Drainage and Water Resources 
Ghana’s water resources potential is divided into surface and groundwater sources. Surface 
water resources are mainly from three river systems that drain Ghana, namely: the Volta, 
Southwestern and Coastal River systems. The Volta system is made up of the Red, Black and 
White Volta Rivers as well as the Oti River. The Southwestern River system is made up of 
the Bia Tano, Ankobra and Pra Rivers. The Tordzie/Aka, Densu, Ayensu, Ochi-Nakwa and 
Ochi-Amissah comprise the Coastal River systems. These river systems make up 70%, 22% 
and 8% respectively of Ghana’s total land area of about 240,000 km2. In addition to these, 
the only significant natural freshwater lake in Ghana is Lake Bosomtwi. This is a meteoritic 
crater lake located in the forest zone, with a surface area of 50 km2, and a maximum depth of 
78m (i.e. Ministry of Water Resources, Works and Housing, 2007).  
  Climate and103 Vegetation  
Ghana has a warm, humid climate. Mean annual rainfall of the country is estimated at 1,187 
mm. Mean annual temperatures range from 26.1 °C near the coast to 28.9 °C in the extreme 
north (Figure 3A). Annual potential open water evaporation has been estimated as ranging 
between 1,350 mm in the south to about 2,000 mm in the north. The actual amount of 
evaporation depends on several factors including water availability, vegetation cover and 
prevailing weather conditions among others. 
There are six agro-ecological zones defined based on climate, reflected by the natural 
vegetation, and influenced by the soils (Figure 3B). Rainfall distribution is bimodal in the 
forest, transitional in coastal zones, giving rise to a major and a minor growing season. In the 
remaining two agro-ecological zones, the unimodal rainfall distribution gives rise to only one 
growing season. Only in some parts of the country is the climate favourable for non-irrigated 
agriculture. Rainfall exceeds potential evaporation during relatively short periods. Even in the 
southern forest zone where rainfall is at its highest, irrigation is essential for short season 
crops during the dry period. The unreliability of rainfall is a cause of concern. Complete crop 
failures can be expected in most northern areas in about one in every five years. This risk can 
rise to one in every three years during low rainfall periods. The lean season would be targeted 
by the Project to engage the poor in the public works component. 
          Figure 4. Typical vegetation zones (left) and average temperatures (right) in Ghana 
 -World Bank (2021). DataBank – World Development Indicators. URL: https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-
103
developmentindicators 
65 
The ND-GAIN Index104 ranks 181 countries using a score which calculates a country’s 
vulnerability to climate change and other global challenges as well as their readiness to 
improve resilience. This Index aims to help businesses and the public sector better identify 
vulnerability and readiness in order to better prioritize investments for more efficient 
responses to global challenges. Due to a combination of political, geographic, and social 
factors, Ghana is recognized as vulnerable to climate change impacts, ranked 109 out of 181 
countries in the 2020 ND-GAIN Index. The more vulnerable a country is the lower their 
score, while the more ready a country is to improve its resilience the higher it will be. 
Norway has the highest score and is ranked 1st. Figure 2 is a time-series plot of the ND-
GAIN Index showing Ghana’s progress. 
Ghana submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC in 2016, in support 
of the country’s efforts to realize its development goals and increase its resilience to climate 
change. Ghana also published its Fourth National Communication to the UNCCC in 2020. 
Ghana is particularly focused on increasing its resilience through the development of 
sustainable land use practices, including food security, climate-proof infrastructure, energy 
security, sustainable forest management and urban waste management. Key sectoral focus is 
on energy, industry, agriculture, waste, and forestry sectors to reduce the country’s carbon 
footprint105. 
Ghana’s generally tropical climate is strongly influenced by the West African monsoon 
winds, which varies slightly along with the country’s varied topography. Across Ghana, 
annual rainfall ranges from 1,100mm in the north to approximately 2,100 mm in the 
southwest. The northern part of the country has one rainy season, which extends from May to 
September; the south has two rainy seasons: the first from April to July and the second from 
September to November. The dry season (December to March) brings the arid and dusty 
harmattan winds that blow from the Sahara Desert, and is marked by low humidity, hot days 
104
 -University of Notre Dame (2020). Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative. URL: https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/ 
 -Republic of Ghana (2016). Nationally-Determined Contributions. URL: https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/ 
105
Ghana%20First/GH_INDC_2392015.pdf 
66 
(T >25°C) and cool nights (T <20°C) Average annual temperatures are approximately 27°C, 
with higher temperatures generally exhibited in the north and during the country’s dry season. 
The area between the forest in the southwest and the savannah in the north is vital for 
domestic food production, due to more reliable rains and an extended growing season106. 
Ghana is highly vulnerable to climate variability and change, which continues to pose a threat 
to future growth and development. Rising sea levels, drought, higher temperatures, and 
erratic rainfall negatively impacts infrastructure, hydropower production, food security and 
coastal and agricultural livelihoods. Approximately ¼ of the population lives along the coast 
in rapidly expanding urban areas like Accra and are especially vulnerable to flooding and 
waterborne diseases. Drought and reduced rainfall threaten access to reliable power sources, 
already erratic and insufficient. The climate and socio-economic environment in semi-arid, 
coastal and wetland areas across Ghana make communities vulnerable to food insecurity and 
unstable livelihoods as well as leading to unsustainable agroecological systems, crop failure 
and unproductive rangelands107. 
Analysis of data from the World Bank Group’s Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP) 
(Table 3) shows historical information for 1901–2020. Mean annual mean temperature for 
Ghana is 27.3°C, with average monthly temperatures ranging between 25°C–26°C (June to 
September) and 28°C–29°C (February to April). Mean annual precipitation is 1,189.9 mm, 
with highest rainfall occurring May to September, with extremely low precipitation falling 
between November to January, for the most recent climatology, 1991–2020108.  
Table 2.  Data snapshot: Summary statistics109 
Climate Variables:    
Mean Annual Temperature (°C)  
Mean Annual Precipitation (mm)  
mm 
Mean Maximum Annual Temperature (°C)    
Mean Minimum Annual Temperature (°C)    
          1901–2020 
27.3°C 
1,189.9 
32.5°C 
22.1°C 
Table 3.  Data snapshot: Coupled Inter-comparison Project No.5 (CMIP5) ensemble 
projection 
Cmip5 Ensemble Projection                                                2020–2039              2040–2059                 
2060–2079                2080–2099 
Annual Temperature Anomaly (°C)                                   +0.6 to +1.5              +1.2 to +2.7              
+1.7 to +3.8              +2.3 to +5.3 
                                                                                              (+0.9°C)                    (+1.7°C)                     
(+2.7°C)                   (+3.6°C) 
106
 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
107
 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
 -WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/ 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
108
climate-data-historical 
109
 -WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/ 
climate-data-historical 
67 
Annual Precipitation Anomaly (mm)                                  -16.7 to +22.0            -22.2 to 
+30.4          -22.9 to +38.9       -29.7 to +45.2 
                                                                                             (+0.9 mm)                 (+0.3 mm)                 
(+2.9 mm)             (+1.6 mm) 
Note: The table shows CMIP5 ensemble projection under Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCP8.5). Bold value is the range (10th–90th Percentile) and values in parentheses 
show the median (or 50th Percentile).  
Figure 5.  Map of average annual temperature (°C) (left); annual precipitation (mm) (right) of 
Ghana, 1991–2020110 
Figure 6.  Annual Rainfall Patterns 
110
 -WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana. URL: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana 
68 
Temperature 
Temperatures in Ghana have risen by approximately 1°C since the 1960s (an average 
increase of 0.21°C per decade) (Figure 5). The number of very hot days (Tmax >35°C) have 
increased by over 13% per year, and hot nights (Tmin >26°C) increasing by 20% per year; 
with the most pronounced increase occurring between September and November111. Overall, 
the rates of increase have been more rapid in the north of the country, and minimum 
temperatures in the southern regions (rainforest and coastal, agro-ecological areas) have 
increased. However, the rate of temperature rise for the middle and northern parts of Ghana 
(savannah zones) were +37%112. 
Precipitation 
Precipitation in Ghana, and the West Africa region, experience a high degree of interannual 
and interdecadal variability. However, since the 1960s, an overall reduction in cumulative 
rainfall of 2.4% per decade was observed113. Changes in decadal rainfall declined in the 
111
 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
112
 -Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ 
ghanc3.pdf 
113
 -USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/ 
69 
middle of the country, with more intense rainfall events occurring in both the north and south 
of the country, indicating an increase in the intensity of rainfall events and possibility of 
increased dry spell durations114. 
3.2 Biological Environment  
  Ecology  
There are six broad ecological divisions in Ghana that are rich and varied. The project area 
has savanna ecology, which extends into the neighboring countries. It is classified into the 
Guinea savanna and the Sudan savanna ecological zones.  
  Flora  
The Guinea savanna covers more than 90% of the land surface area of the Northern Savanna 
Zone but not restricted to it. It stretches from the upper regions down south to the forest 
fringes. The zone includes the grassland of the north and the derived savannaon the fringes of 
the forests.  
The interior savanna contains 1,519 vascular species known to be native or naturalised to the 
savanna zones of Ghana. Six species including Ceropergia gemmifera, Commiphora dalzielii, 
Ptleopsis habeensis and Eugenia coronta are rare in Ghana and internationally. The Guinea 
Savanna consists generally of fire tolerant, deciduous, broad‐ leaved trees interspersed in a 
ground flora of mainly grass, sometimes more than 1.5m high. The more important grasses of 
grazing value include Andropogon gayanus and in densely populated areas, Diectomis 
fastigiata, Pennisetum pedicellatum and Loudetia togoensis are common. Other species that 
occur are Hetropogon contortus, Schoenfeida gracilis and Aristidaa hordeacea. The common 
trees include Vitellaria paradoxa (shea), Parkia biglobosa (dawadawa), Piliostigma 
thonningli, Combretum glutinosum, Anogeissus sp., Detariums p., Afzelia sp., Prosopiss p., 
Pterocarpuss p., Butyrospermums p., Antiaris sp., Vitex sp., Piliosstigmas p., Lonchocarpuss 
p. and Acacias p.  
The Sudan Savanna occurs mainly in the Bawku East, Bawku West and Bolgatanga districts 
at the extreme northeastern corner of the Northern Savanna Zone. Its total coverage is less 
than 10% of the zone. The vegetation is made up generally of open savanna with short grass 
interspersed with relatively short low branching deciduous, broad, and thin‐ leave trees. The 
common trees include species of Adansonia Digitata, Butyrospermum, Acacia Albida and 
Parkia Biglobosa. The vegetation in most of the project area is characterized by a mosaic of 
forest, savanna, marshes and grassland. The ecology is for the most part severely altered. This 
is a reflection of prolonged unregulated grazing, burning, and intensive cultivation.  
There are 72 forest reserves in the northern savanna made up of 23, 33 and 16 in the 
Northern, Upper East and Upper West in that order. They range in size from 0.4km2 to 1,116 
km2. However, many of these areas are under pressure from subsistence farmers, livestock 
herders and others who engage in illegal activities in the reserves (Acheampong, 2001).  
  Fauna  
Many of the large wildlife species, which are common to tropical Africa, are also found in 
Ghana. They live mostly in the savanna eco‐system and include Panthera leo (lions), 
Panthera pardus (leopards), Loxodonta aficana (elephants), Syncerus caffer (buffalo), 
Neotrigus pygmaeus (royal antelope) and Colobus and Cercopithecus sp (monkeys), 
Hippopotamus amphibius and Crocodilus sp. Snakes include pythons and poisonous ones 
2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
114
ghanc3.pdf 
 -Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ 
70 
such as Naja nelanoleuca (cobra), Bitis gabonica (gaboon viper), Lizards, e.g. Veranus 
niloticus, often of striking colours are common, as are large snails, spiders and scorpions 
which are found in large numbers. The insect fauna is also very rich. The bird species include 
Francolinus sp (bush fowl) Falconidae sp (falcons, hawks, and eagles) Psittacus erithacus 
(grey parrot), Neophron sp. (vultures), Guttera edouardi (guinea fowl) and many more.  
Savanna fauna comprises at least 93 mammal species, about half of which can be considered 
to be large ones, over 350 bird species, 9 amphibians and 33 reptiles. About 13% of the 860 
recorded butterfly species in Ghana are associated with the savanna. The Wildlife 
Conservation Regulations of 1971, (LI. 685) has schedules which contain lists of wild 
animals found in Ghana. Fifty‐five of these are completely protected (Acheampong, 2001). 
  Rare or Endangered Species  
Populations of many wildlife species found in the savanna have dwindled as a result of 
human‐induced interventions, mainly through over hunting, inappropriate agricultural 
practices and expansion of agricultural land, road construction and bush burning (Appendix 
IV). The demand for wild animal meat (popularly called bushmeat in Ghana) is ever 
increasing, resulting in widespread hunting. As human populations in the northern parts of 
the country increases, exerting enormous pressure on the finite good "land" and creating land 
hunger among mostly the rural people, intact savanna woodlands and secondary groves 
which provide wild animals refuge and source of food become fragmented and unable to hold 
large populations of animals (Acheampong, 2001).  
  Wild Animal Migration  
Wild animal movement between reserves, groves and sanctuaries in the northern savanna 
may be limited because these are either fragmented or interspersed with farmlands. Studies 
have shown that wild animals move from Togo into Ghana and vice versa, using gallery 
forests along the Red Volta River. It is also on record that wild animals move from the GEF 
supported Nazinga Game Ranch in Burkina Faso to farms on the Ghana side of the Ghana‐
Burkina Faso border. Communities outlying protected areas have occasionally had their 
farms and property destroyed by wild animals mainly elephants that move outside the 
reserves, particularly in the dry season, in search for water and food. In 1997 elephants 
invaded some villages including Widinaba, Zongoiri, Nangodi, Sekoti and Datoko, all at the 
fringes of the Red Volta Forest Reserve, which is a natural trail for elephants moving from 
Togo into Ghana. Where villages received no help from the staff of Wildlife Division in 
driving these animals back into the reserves (or gallery forests) they resorted to killing the 
rampaging animals (Acheampong, 2001).  
3.3 Socio-Economic Environment  
  Demographic Characteristics  
As stated above, Ghana is a lower middle-income, developing country with a stable and 
democratic government. Ghana’s population as at 2010 stood at 24,658,823, comprising 
12,024,845 (48.8%) males and 12,633,978 (51.2%) females, culminating into a sex ratio of 
95.2. In 2018, the county’s population is estimated at 30,000,000. On regional basis, Ashanti 
Region is the most populous, with a population of 4,780,280, representing 19.4 percent of the 
country’s total population followed by Greater Accra, with a population of 4,010,054 
(16.3%). The least populous regions are Upper West with 702,110 persons constituting 2.8 
percent of the total population and Upper East with 1,046,545 persons or 4.2 percent of 
Ghana’s population. Population density stood at 103 persons per square kilometer in 2010. 
Average household size also stood at 4.4 (Ghana Statistical Service, 2012).  
71 
Most recent data show that in 2019, the country’s population was 30.4 million people with an 
annual population growth rate of 2.2%. If this trend continues, projections suggest that the 
population will increase to 37.3 million people by 2030 and 51.2 million people by 2050115.  
Ghana has a youthful population, thus consisting of a large proportion of children under 15 
years, and a small proportion of elderly persons (65 years and older). The proportion of the 
population living in urban areas in 2010 was 50.9%, with the level of urbanization varies 
from region to region. Nowadays, it is estimated that over 55% of Ghanaians reside in urban 
areas, which are expected to experience considerable growth, with 63% and 73% of the 
population residing in urban areas by 2030 and 2050116. 
In terms of ethnicity, Akans are the predominant ethnic group in Ghana (47.5%), followed by 
the Mole 
Dagbani (16.6%), the Ewe (13.9%), Ga-Dangme (7.4), Gurma (5.7%), Guang (3.7 %), Grusi 
(2.5%). The Mandes (1.1%) and other groups (1.4%) form the smallest ethnic group in 
Ghana. For religion, 71.2 percent of the population profess the Christian faith, followed by 
Islam (17.6%). Only a small proportion of the population either adhere to traditional religion 
(5.2%) or are not affiliated to any religion (5.3%).  
Literacy in Ghana is quite high, with majority (74.1%) of the population 11 years and older 
being literate. A large proportion (67.1%) of the population can read and write in English. 
About one-fifth (20.1%) can read and write in the English language only while 53.7 percent 
of the population can read and write in at least one Ghanaian language (Ghana Statistical 
Service, 2012).  
  Indigenous Groups  
Indigenous peoples, also known as first peoples, aboriginal peoples or native peoples, are 
ethnic groups who are the original settlers of a given region, in contrast to groups that have 
settled, occupied or colonized the area more recently. According to the World directory of 
minority and indigenous people in Ghana published by the Minority Group International, 
there are no groups in Ghana identified as indigenous people117.  
In relation to DFI requirements such as IFAD, there are no groups in Ghana that will meet the 
definition of ‘indigenous groups’118. As part of the implementation of PROSPER activities, it 
is not therefore foreseen to be any risk associated with indigenous groups that may trigger the 
requirement for the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) for compliance purposes.  
  Economic Characteristics  
Of population aged 15 years and older, 71.1% are economically active and of these, most are 
employed (94.7%). Only 5.3% are unemployed. Females in this age group are more likely to 
be unemployed (5.8%) than males (4.8%). Most of the regions have relatively high 
proportions of economically active persons. However, the highest proportion of economically 
active persons is in the Brong-Ahafo Region (74.4%) and the lowest is in the Ashanti region 
(69.4%). The proportion of unemployed population is highest in Greater Accra (7.8%) and 
lowest in Upper East (2.8%).  
115
 -World Bank (2019). Internal Climate Migration Profile – Ghana. 
 -World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: Population Estimates and Projections, Ghana. URL: https://databank. 
116
worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=health-nutrition-and-population-statistics:-population-estimates-and-projections  
117
 - https://minorityrights.org/   
118 - As per the requirements of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
UN, World Bank Environmental and Social Standard (ESS7) and IFC Performance Standard (PS 7). 
72 
About two-fifth (41.2%) of the economically active population aged 15 years and older are 
skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery workers. About 21% is also engaged as service and 
sales workers while 15.2% is craft and related trade workers. Skilled agricultural, forestry and 
fishery work remains the dominant occupation for both males (44.9%) and females (37.7%). 
However, a much higher proportion of females (31.7%) than males (10.2%) is engaged as 
service and sales work. In Ghana, this pattern is generally the same for most of the regions, 
with the three northern regions (Northern, 73.3%; Upper West, 72.3%; Upper East, 70.1%) 
having relatively high proportions of the economically active population engaged as skilled 
agricultural, forestry and fishery workers.  
According to Ghana Statistical Service, 2015, there is a high concentration of poverty in the 
North-Western part of Ghana. Though incidence in the districts of the South-Western parts is 
very low, there are however few districts with relatively high incidence. The concentration of 
poor persons is mainly observed in the northern than the southern districts of Ghana. Among 
the districts in Ghana, East Gonja in the Northern Region stands out as the district with most 
of the poor persons. Districts in the Southern Ghana on the other hand show very low 
concentration of poor persons, there are few districts with high number of poor persons, but 
these numbers cannot be compared to what pertains to districts in the northern and middle 
belts regions.  
Aside poverty incidence rate and number of poor persons, high depth of poverty is marked in 
districts in the northern half of the country as well. Across the country, inequality exists but 
follows no pattern. The poverty mapping exercise has revealed a striking pattern that would 
not have been apparent. 
  Human Health and Safety  
In the Savannah region, the quality of life rests ultimately on the basic conditions which 
influence health, morbidity and mortality in the population. These factors include the 
biological make-up of individuals, prevalence and severity of specific diseases, social, 
economic, and environmental conditions as well as the availability, accessibility, 
affordability, and utilization of health care facilities. The safety and human health in the area 
is further determined by the recurrent floods and droughts regularly devastate communities, 
infrastructure, and livelihoods.  
Women are exposed to more dangers concerning safety and health, as a result of the high rate 
of illiteracy, lack of specialized services (family planning, reproductive health and maternal 
care) that is reflected in the high rate of early marriages and teenage pregnancy, inadequate 
access to health care due to lack of health facilities (both hard and soft) and greater 
vulnerability in access to food and nutritional insecurity. The livestock sector poses potential 
threat to human health due to lack of veterinary services, quarantine Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture (MoFA) facilities and conflicts emanating from the activities the settler cattle 
herdsmen popularly. The poor health of animals has significant adverse implications for 
human health.  
  Cultural Diversity  
Members of the same ethnic group share certain beliefs, values and norms that relate to a 
common cultural background. The majority of the heads of households within the savannah 
zone are Mole-Dagbani (14.2 %) followed by Ewe (13. 3%) whilst the Mande (1.1%) 
constitute the smallest ethnic group. The GLSS6 show that the majority of the household 
heads in Upper East (67.2%), Northern (67.1%) and Upper West (65.0%) are Mole-Dagbani 
73 
and in Volta, Ewe (71.7%). Most of the household heads that belong to the Gurma ethnic 
group are located in the Northern (17.9%) and Volta (11.8%) regions.  
There is close relationship between family and household formation with regard to the type of 
socio-cultural practices that are prevalent in a particular society. The family system in any 
human society, whether it is the nuclear or extended type, depicts the type of kinship ties that 
hold the people together. Labour in the agriculture sector is influenced by cultural diversity 
among landowners, commercial famers and settler farmers. The agricultural sector is 
intrinsically associated with cultural practices, especially, the inland fishing, where in most 
communities is practiced at only specific times by the community as a group. The cultural 
aspect of people in the Savannah regions play part in the processing and preservation of 
traditional seeds and some plant species. Most agricultural activities are based on the cultural 
practices that prevent biotic and climatic hazards and contribute to food security. Cultural 
practices are further associated with the processing of food such as the shea butter, cassava 
flour, starch paste, “dawadawa” among others. 
74 
4 APPLICABLE POLICY, LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK 
GOVERNING THE SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE RISKS, 
IMPACTS AND BENEFITS MANAGEMENT OF PROSPER ACTIVITIES 
This section provides a review of the applicable policy, legal, and regulatory (PLR) 
framework related to the potential risks, impacts, and benefits of the implementation of 
PROSPER proposed activities. The PLR framework underpins how social and environmental 
safeguards, but also climate change issues will be gradually addressed and respected. It also 
compares national PLRs to applicable international law and, as appropriate, indicate 
institutional and operational weaknesses and capacities strengthening with recommendations 
to address identified gaps or weaknesses where appropriate and where indicated.  
In keeping with Ghanaian law, the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) is statutorily 
mandated to ensure that the implementation of all undertakings do not harm the environment 
and/or people and the ESMF and sites specific instruments to be prepared during project 
implementation will be in conformity with these core requirements. IFAD will work in 
tandem with the EPA and associated government agencies to ensure due compliance, 
although nature and level of impacts and risks will be managed in a manner consistent 
enough with IFAD’s SECAP requirements.  
Overall, the legal and institutional framework for environmental and social management, as 
well as climate change issues in Ghana includes, among many others, all of the below:   
4.1 National Framework 
Table 4. National Applicable Law and Institutional Framework 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant legislation 
and Clauses  
The 1992 
Constitution of 
Ghana 
Ghana Shared 
Growth and 
Development 
Agenda (GSGDA) 
Article 36 (9): 
Safeguarding the national 
environment for posterity  
Article 258: Lands and 
Natural  
Resources 
Article 270(1): 
Chieftaincy  
Article 22: Property 
rights of spouses 
Vision for the 
Environment and Natural 
Resource Sector in 
Section 4.2.2  
Land Policies 
National Land Policy, 
1999  
Administration of Lands 
Act of 1962 (Act 123) 
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
Parliament is yet to enact law to regulate 
the property rights of spouses as provided 
in article 22 (2). To avoid gender 
discrimination against women, benefit 
sharing arrangements will need to be 
formulated in detail, especially between 
husbands/wives or between partners.  
The GSGDA is consistent with REDD+, 
GCF principles and IFAD’s SECAP, and 
objectives and goes further to 
acknowledge the use of strategic 
environmental assessment to inform 
decision-making and mainstreaming 
environment into all sectors of the 
economy.  
The 1999 land policy does not appear to 
give support to off-reserve afforestation 
or reforestation programs as provided 
under Section 4.4 (d) of ensuring 
75 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant legislation 
and Clauses  
Lands Commission (LC) 
Act 2008, Act 767 
Office of the 
Administrator of Stool 
Lands Act 1994, Act 481 
Land Use and Spatial 
Planning Bill, draft 
October 2011 
Forest Policies 
and Regulations 
1994 Forest and Wildlife 
Policy  
2012 Forest and Wildlife 
Policy  
Forestry Commission Act 
of 1999 (Act 571)  
Forest Ordinance of 1927 
(Cap 157)  
Trees and Timber Decree 
of 1974 (NRCD 273)  
Trees and Timber 
(Amendment) Law of 
1983 (PNDCL 70)  
Trees and Timber 
Amendment Act of 1994 
(Act 493)  
Forest Protection Decree 
of 1974 (NRCD 243  
Forest Protection 
(Amendment) Act of 
1986 (PNDCL 142)  
Forest Protection 
Amendment Act of 2002 
(Act 624)  
Concessions Act of 1962 
(Act 124)  
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
sustainable land use. A review of the 
1999 Land Policy to encompass off-
reserve afforestation/reforestation 
programs, e.g. community 
forestry/dedicated forest etc. was 
recommended for REDD+ work.  
LVD Crop Compensation Rate: Current 
crop compensation rates do not cover 
timber tree species or naturally occurring 
trees or trees grown to provide 
ecosystem/environmental services.  
The Land Use and Spatial Planning Bill 
provides a comprehensive coverage of 
land use planning at national, regional and 
district levels relevant to REDD+, and 
agricultural and forestry lands. This Bill 
should be pushed to law. 
The 1994 Forest and Wildlife policy 
promotes collaborative management of 
forest resources with rural or forest-based 
communities in Ghana. The Collaborative 
Wildlife Management Policy (2000), gave 
rise to CREMAs, devolving management 
authority to representative community 
institutions to create incentives for 
sustainable management of natural 
resources at the community level. The 
CREMA mechanism, is an innovative 
natural resource governance and 
landscape-level planning tool that 
authorizes communities to manage their 
natural resources for economic and 
livelihood benefits. The aim was to 
encourage local people to integrate 
wildlife management into their farming 
and land management systems as a 
legitimate land-use option.  
The Timber Resources Management Act 
made it illegal for farmers and other users 
of off reserve lands to harvest any 
naturally growing trees for commercial or 
domestic purposes, even if it is growing 
on their land. It also prohibited logging 
76 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant legislation 
and Clauses  
Timber Resources 
Management Act of 1997 
(Act 547)  
Economic Plant 
Protection Act of 1979  
Interim Measures for 
Controlling Illegal 
Harvesting Outside 
Forest Reserves of 1995  
Forest Plantation 
Development Fund Act 
of 2000 (Act 583)  
Wildlife Conservation 
Regulations of 1971 
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
without prior authorisation from 
concerned groups or individuals.  
Under the Timber Resources Act, 
farmers, and land owners have legal rights 
to planted trees. When Timber Utilization 
Contracts are granted off-reserve, the 
contract holder is obliged to engage in a 
Social Responsibility Agreement (SRA) 
with the concerned communities in the 
proposed area of logging. According to 
the SRA, 5% of the stumpage fees should 
be directed to the community as 
compensation for damaged crops. 
However, this fee is often captured during 
the process and the SRAs have not been 
sufficiently effective in rewarding the 
farmers and communities for trees on 
their lands.  
In terms of legislation on off-reserve tree 
(both naturally-occurring and planted) 
harvesting and benefits to CREMAs, 
Timber Concessions Act of 1962 (Act 
124) and Article 267(6) of the 1992 
Constitution. Per these, the following are 
true for CREMAs, which are off-reserve:  
•All naturally-occurring timber on any 
other land is vested in the President and 
belongs to him.  
•Revenue from the exploitation of 
naturally-occurring trees is shared 
between the beneficiaries in the manner 
and proportion outlined in Article 267(6) 
of the 1992 Constitution.  
Presently, in the off-reserves, the revenue 
accruing from naturally-occurring trees is 
split 50%-50% between the State and the 
following (i. the Stool through the 
Traditional Authority ii. the Traditional 
Authority and iii. the District Assembly). 
One of the implications for CREMAs is 
that in the off-reserve areas, the farmers 
are currently only expected to be 
consulted by the Stool whenever 
concessions or timber rights are being 
given out in respect of naturally-occurring 
trees on their farms but are not 
beneficiaries of sale proceeds. If they are 
77 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant legislation 
and Clauses  
Mining and 
Mineral Policies 
National Mining Policy  
Minerals Commission 
Act 1993, Act 450  
Mining and Minerals Act 
of 2006 (Act 703)  
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
to benefit, it will most likely lie largely on 
the Stool. This is currently being 
reviewed by the MLNR and the Forestry 
Commission.  
For planted trees (in off-reserves), in 
theory, plantations are currently the 
easiest for CREMAs to benefit from: 
100% for farmers who are also 
landowners and 66% (two-thirds) for 
tenant farmers. Planted trees which are on 
farms is a little complicated as the farmers 
(or CREMA members) would still have to 
register individual trees in order to 
benefit.  
On the Wildlife Bill, the last update, as of 
December 2019, was that it was at the 
Cabinet level and is still not at 
Parliament.  
There are 3 ways timber can be harvested; 
i.e. by being issued a Timber Utilization 
Contract (TUC), Timber Utilization 
permit (TUP) and a Salvage permit. TUPs 
are given for large-scale harvests whiles 
TUC are for community/district/group 
harvests meant for social development. 
Timber harvested using a TUC (which 
happens to be given to community 
groups), cannot be sold. The best 
approach is to have community 
plantations/woodlots where they have a 
much better chance of profiting directly 
from its sale.  
Section 3 reveals that unless there is a law 
preventing the use of a land for some 
specified purpose, any land in the country 
may be the subject of application for a 
mineral right.  
Section 72 (1) gives the holder of a 
mining lease the upper hand with regard 
to the surface right. It is a source of 
conflict between mining firms and 
numerous farmers/farming communities 
with some surface rights within mining 
concessions.  
Current crop compensation rates cover 
known food/cash crops and some 
economic trees such as teak. There are no 
78 
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
rates for naturally grown trees or timber 
species. Shade trees in cocoa farms are 
usually not counted as crops and so do not 
attract compensation. Forestry officials 
salvage or harvest such timber trees in 
cocoa farms prior to destruction by 
mining companies.  
The environmental protection/climate 
change policies and regulations are 
consistent with the IFAD SECAP and the 
REDD+ principles and objectives.  
Most of the rivers identified for small and 
medium scale hydro power projects 
(Ankobra, Tano and Pra) have forests or 
forest reserves along sections of the river 
banks. Careful planning and choice of 
technology is required during the 
development of any hydro-electric dam in 
order to minimize inundation of forest 
along these water bodies.  
The charcoal export license manual does 
not indicate clearly which offences 
warrant suspension and which offences 
warrant cancellation of licence. It is silent 
on how long a person can be suspended 
and if one’s licence is cancelled whether 
he/she is eligible for re-application. 
The Water Policy factors climate change 
issues into consideration and is generally 
consistent  
Sector Policy  
Some relevant legislation 
and Clauses  
Environmental 
Protection & 
Assessment 
Policies and 
Regulations 
Energy Policies 
Environmental Protection 
Agency Act, 1994 Act 
490  
National Environment 
Policy, 2013  
Environmental 
Assessment Regulations 
1999, LI 1652  
National Climate Change 
Policy, 2013  
Strategic National 
Energy Plan  
National Energy Policy, 
2010  
Energy Commission Act 
1997, Act 541 
Renewable Energy Act, 
2011, Act 832  
Water Policy 
Agricultural 
Policy 
Water Resources 
Commission Act, 1996 
Act 522  
National Water Policy, 
2007  
Buffer Zone Policy, 2014  
Food and Agriculture 
Sector Development 
Policy (FASDEP)  
Ghana Irrigation Policy, 
June 2010  
Tree Crops Policy, 2012  
79 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant legislation 
and Clauses  
National Employment 
Policy  
Investment, 
Employment, 
Labour, Gender, 
Local 
government, 
National Gender and 
Children Policy  
 Ghana Investment 
Promotion Centre Act 
1994, Act 478 
Local Government Act 
1993, Act 462  
Local Government 
Service Act, 2003, Act 
656  
Chieftaincy Act 759 of 
2008  
National Pensions Act, 
2008, Act 766  
The Labour Act 2003, 
Act 651  
Workmen’s 
Compensation Law 1987  
Intestate Succession Law, 
PNDC Law 111 (1985)  
The Children’s Act 1998, 
act 560  
Factories Offices and 
Shop Act, 1970, Act 328  
Ghana National Fire 
Service Act 1997,  
Control of Bush Fires 
Law of 1983 (PNDCL 
46)  
Control and Prevention 
of Bush Fires Act 1990  
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
The National Labour Act of 2003 
provides information on public and 
private employment and sets out the 
objectives and procedures as well as the 
rights of workers. This Act will be 
followed by the CREMA Community 
Executive Management Committee for 
hire of a forester, community mobiliser, 
accountant and clerk under the 
Community Trust Fund; and the Forestry 
Commission in the hiring of labour for 
plantations through their co-financing.  
The National Employment Act is skewed 
towards industrial or manufacturing or 
processing companies and does not 
provide health and safety coverage for 
afforestation/ tree plantation activities. 
There is need for a separate health and 
safety policy for the forestry sector.  
The ADR Act does not apply to matters 
on the environment as indicated in 
Section 1b. REDD+ type of project 
should push for amendment or inclusion 
of some environmental matters in the 
scope of application under ADR with 
regard to REDD+ related issues where 
necessary 
80 
Sector Policy  
Some relevant legislation 
and Clauses  
Possible gaps and requirements to 
implement PROSPER and REDD+ 
projects  
Ghana Meteorological 
Agency Act, 2004, Act 
682  
Alternative Dispute 
Resolution Act 2010, Act 
798  
4.2.: International Framework 
Ghana is a signatory to several binding international agreements on the environment and 
social. Among the international commitments, conventions and agreements, the following 
protocols interfere with the PROSPER project's activities. 
Table 5: International Regulations and Conventions 
INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS  
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  
International Covenant on Economic, Cultural and Social  
International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination  
Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women  
Convention on the Political Rights of Women  
Convention on the Rights of the Child  
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment  
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict  
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child 
pornography  
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights of 1981  
International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169  
Convention concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour  
Convention on Equal Remuneration Convention  
Convention on Abolition of Forced Labour Convention  
Convention Concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation  
Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention  
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  
Universal Declaration of Human Rights  
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (with clarification on 
indigenous peoples)  
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP)  
Convention on Biological Diversity  
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change - Decision 1/CP.16-  
Paris Agreement  
Convention on the Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage 
Convention on the International Trade of Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
(CITES  
Ramsar Convention (the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance as 
Waterfowl Habitant)  
81 
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its amendments 
United-Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) 
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer 
Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCC 
Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) 
African convention on the protection of nature and natural resources 
4.3 IFAD policies/strategies/procedures 
SECAP 
The IFAD’S ten Environmental and Social Values and Principles are relevant to the 
PROSPER project.119 These social, environmental and climate values and principles are: 
  Address the vulnerability and adaptation needs for the rural poor; 
  Promote the sustainable use of natural resources and protection of key ecosystems;  
  Focus on partnership-oriented initiatives for improved social and environmental quality;  
  Address environmental and social impact assessments of agricultural and non-agricultural 
 
 
activities in an integrated manner; 
Incorporate externalities and minimize social costs; 
Implement participatory and inclusive approaches, with special emphasis on the role of 
women and youth;  
  Promote the development of Indigenous Peoples and other marginalized groups 
(pastoralists, hunters and gatherers);  
  Promote environmentally sound agricultural and manufacturing processes;     
  Ensure systematic environmental, social and climate monitoring;  
  Undertake Strategic Environmental, Social and Climate Assessments. 
 
IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and 
complaints with respect to alleged non-compliance of its environmental, social and 
climate policies and the mandatory aspects of its Social, Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedures. For more information, visit the IFAD webpage: 
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-complaints-procedure"; and IFAD 
SECAP Procedure120. 
The very objectives of the Environment, Social and Climate Impact Assessment in the 
IFAD’s SECAP procedure are to:  
 
identify key linkages between rural poverty and social climate and environmental 
management, and assess the potential environmental, climate and social impacts of the 
proposed project on the natural resource base and livelihoods of communities in the 
project targeted areas;  
  explore and identify key options for advancing environmental, climate and social 
 
sustainability; and  
recommend key opportunities to influence IFAD support towards environmental and 
social sustainability and climate smart development.  
This ESMF is intended to provide options that would inform and thus improve decision 
making of PROSPER project design. The key environmental, climate change and social 
issues to be addressed include:  
119 https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/a5e3ffcc-0ed7-4bc6-b523-39c25dc1edd8 
120 https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/a36f992c-5e31-4fac-8771-404bea02796b 
82 
  challenges faced to meet its rural development and food security goals;  
  the major environmental, climate change and social issues that have a bearing on 
IFAD operations in the country;  
  the direct impact and multiplier effect the mentioned issues have on the resilience of 
ecosystems and productivity of land and crops, natural resource management and 
rural livelihoods;  
  the scale of volatility and risks resulting from climate variability and change; and  
  regulatory frameworks which are related to rural development and environmental 
issues.    
The results of the ESMF and subprojects site specific ESMPs are:  
  an assessment of the environmental (and social/economic/institutional) issues 
particularly in the agricultural and rural development sector;  
  the identification of links with relevant ongoing initiatives;  
  the provision of specific measures, recommendations including opportunities to 
optimize adaptation, environmental and social management, and resource use; in the 
project area.  
These results will shed light on the important opportunities available to build resilience and 
adaptive capacity in the project under development.    
The Key Principles to guide the ESMF and the future subproject site specific ESMPs are to: 
  Look beyond the traditional ‘do no harm’ safeguards approach to mitigating 
environmental, climate change and social risks towards ‘doing good’ through greater 
focus on sustainability and management of environmental (rehabilitating degraded 
lands, seizing adaptation/mitigation opportunities and transforming the underlying 
inequalities that undermine inclusive development, etc.) and social impacts and risks;  
  Begin the environmental, social and climate impact assessment (ESCIA) with a 
scoping exercise with the objectives of identifying as much as possible the relevant 
social, environmental, and climate change issues, so that baseline data collection and 
impact assessment can focus on them; 
  Place strong emphasis on identifying opportunities and develop an appropriate 
management plan to enhance results and impacts;    
  Identify and compare alternative scenarios to recommend realistic proposals for 
design mission consideration;    
  identify capacity needs required to effectively implement the environmental and 
social management plan;  
  Produce a realistic monitoring plan, including appropriate change management 
processes;    
  Engage affected communities and other interested stakeholders throughout the ESCIA 
process, from scoping to review and comment on the final draft report prior to 
decision-making. 
4.4 The IFAD Climate Change Strategy (2010)121 
The IFAD’s climate change strategy calls for IFAD to systematically respond to increasing 
demands from clients for technical support and innovation to better respond to climate 
change. This means analyzing and addressing climate change challenges during the early 
stages of program and project design to build resilience and adaptive capacity. The strategy 
goal and purpose are to: 
121 https://www.ifad.org/topic/tags/climate_change/2154532 
83 
  Support innovative approaches to helping smallholder farmers build their resilience to 
climate change 
  Help smallholder farmers take advantage of available mitigation incentives and 
funding 
  Inform a more coherent dialogue on climate change, rural development agriculture 
and food security 
The main strategy output is a more ‘climate-smart’ IFAD, where climate change – alongside 
other risks, opportunities and themes – is systematically integrated into core programmes, 
policies and activities: 
  On operations, climate change can be – and in many cases already is – factored into 
IFAD’s operating model. This means incorporating it into our toolkit for the early 
stages of country programme and project design and for implementation. 
  On knowledge, innovation, and advocacy- IFAD will explore new arrangements for 
sourcing climate-related expertise, share ground-level experiences to ensure their 
application throughout IFAD-supported programmes, and continue our work to shape 
the global dialogue on climate change for smallholders. 
  On resource mobilization, the focus is to make IFAD’s expanding overall portfolio 
climate-smart. Increased supplementary climate funds will continue to be sought to 
deepen the integration of climate change into IFAD’s core programmes and to cover 
the increased cost this implies.  
  On internal organization, IFAD will make greater use of existing in-house skills and 
people and will implement a new organizational structure that brings together and 
increases its staff capacity on climate and the environment. It will also continue to 
demonstrate the values of environmental awareness internally. 
4.5 The IFAD Environment and Natural Resource Management (ENRM, 2011) Policy122 
Sustainable environment and natural resource management (ENRM) lies at the heart of 
delivering poverty reduction for rural people. Poor rural people face a series of 
interconnected natural resource management challenges. They are in the front line of climate 
change impacts; the ecosystems and biodiversity on which they rely are increasingly 
degraded; their access to suitable agricultural land is declining in both quantity and quality; 
their forest resources are increasingly restricted and degraded; they produce on typically 
marginal rain fed land, with increased water scarcity; energy and agricultural input prices are 
on a rising long-term trend; and declining fish and marine resources threaten essential sources 
of income and nutrition. 
Environmentally damaging agricultural practices are a major driver of these challenges. 
There is growing concern over inappropriate approaches that drive excessive use of fertilizers 
and pesticides, pollution of waterways and aquifers, build-up of salt in the soil, water scarcity 
in major river basins, declining levels of groundwater and loss of crop biodiversity. Large 
parts of Africa rely on rainfed agriculture with little or non-existent use of organic or 
inorganic fertilizers, soil erosion and poor access to seed varieties. Weak governance, 
damaging policies and changing consumption patterns lie at the heart of this environmental 
degradation: poor rural people, including smallholders, are often disempowered and thus 
unable to sustainably manage natural resources; a lack of clear land access and tenure rights 
removes incentives to maintain natural assets; distorting trade policies and fossil-fuel and 
other subsidies are key drivers. The response requires an ‘evergreen revolution’, powered by 
122 https://www.ifad.org/topic/resource/tags/climate_change/2096936 
84 
sustainable agriculture that balances crop/livestock, fisheries and agroforestry systems, so 
that surplus inputs are avoided, and soil fertility and ecosystem services are not 
compromised, while production and income are increased. Building on a growing body of 
evidence of the success of sustainable agriculture investments, there is a huge opportunity to 
further scale up multiple benefits.  
IFAD’s ENRM stresses that project designs present new opportunities to improve systematic 
integration and scaling up of ENRM of the portfolio. Such integration can help IFAD to 
engage in new and strengthened partnerships with specialized entities for enhanced and 
effective responses to issues associated with natural resources and, climate variability and 
change. ENRM is at the core of delivering IFAD’s poverty reduction and sustainable 
agriculture mandate because its target groups rely directly on the environment and natural 
resources for their livelihoods, and client demand for support for ENRM is increasing. 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) Policy: IFAD prioritises no tolerance 
for SEAH in its supported operations. Ensure that appropriate precautionary and remedial 
measures to identify/receive/remedy/report (proportionate to level of risks and impacts) any 
occurrences of potential SH/SEA risks/complaints are incorporated in both the project design 
and PIM (see IFAD policy on SEAH). 
4.6 IFAD Strategy and Action Plan on Environment and Climate Change 2019-2025 
This 2019-2025 Environment and Climate Change Strategy consolidates and updates IFAD’s 
strategy and policy frameworks on environment and climate change. It aligns with IFAD’s 
Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and responds to commitments to the Eleventh 
Replenishment of IFAD’s Resources (IFAD11). This strategy consolidates and updates 
IFAD’s strategy and policy frameworks on environment4 and climate change5 in light of 
internal and global policy changes over the last several years. Its preparation was led by 
IFAD’s Environment, Climate, Gender and Social Inclusion Division. 
 The consultative process involved staff, Board members and partners through interviews, a 
survey, workshops and meetings. The process also included benchmarking IFAD’s policies 
and practices against those of selected organizations. The strategy’s purpose is to guide IFAD 
in addressing environment and climate change across all its policies, strategies and operations 
(see figure 1 below). The strategy aims to achieve the following: 
 The main objective underlying this strategy is enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers 
and rural communities to environmental degradation and climate change impacts. This will 
ultimately provide the foundation for more prosperous livelihoods today and in the future. 
IFAD will contribute to meeting this objective through the following outcomes:  
  Governments are increasingly effective in integrating environment and climate 
 
 
change objectives and considerations into smallholder agriculture and other rural 
development policies and programmes. 
IFAD has the skills, capacity, partnerships, systems and resources needed to fully 
support governments in integrating environment and climate change into rural 
development policies and programmes. 
 IFAD investments contribute to the generation of environmental assets and services, 
and global public goods that make the livelihoods of poor rural people more 
prosperous and resilient, and IFAD’s own operations more environmentally 
sustainable.  
85 
 
IFAD becomes a global leader in generating knowledge on managing sustainable 
rural livelihoods – enabling IFAD to play a greater advocacy role in supporting global 
efforts to build a healthy planet 
86 
5. POTENTIAL SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE RISKS, IMPACTS 
AND PROCEDURES IN ADDRESSING PROSPER COMPLIANCE 
5.1 Overview of PROSPER Environmental, Climate and Social Risks, Impacts and 
Opportunities 
As stated earlier above, the screening of the foreseen project activities in each of the 
participating 8 regions, using IFAD’s Environmental, Climate and Social Screening Form 
(see Annexes X), revealed a rather moderate environmental and social risk rating, because of 
the low, site-specific nature, type and magnitude of the risks which are mostly reversible and 
easily manageable. The Project has been rated as a moderate risk and classified as a 
category B operation; however, given the level of greenhouse gas emission and the likely 
impacts of climate on both the physical (households, RIs, Livestock) and biological 
environment (fauna, flora, ecosystem, etc.), the climate risks was rated as High. Because at 
this very juncture the detailed footprints of foreseen projects sub-activities mainly in 
component 1 (precisely subcomponent 1.2) are not yet fully defined and known, and, will 
definitely not so be prior to project approval or during project implementation , therefore, as 
respectively prescribed by the IFAD’s SECAP and the applicable Ghanaian policies, 
standards and regulations, this environmental and social management framework 
(ESMF)123 is elaborated for due diligence in addressing identified impacts, risks and 
opportunities/benefits.  
Overall, the environmental, climate and social impacts of the PROSPER project will be 
positive, as well as generate series of opportunities for beneficiary communities, especially 
women, youth and disables. Besides the inequality in the labour market and presence of 
landless farmers in the project area who will be included in project activities; the project is 
expected to improve agricultural land, Community ecosystem, and the natural resources upon 
which Ghanaian farmers work is based, and on improved climate-resilient agricultural 
practices as well as improved natural resources management, specifically water management 
technics across the northern and middle belts regions. More specifically, better functioning 
ecosystems, controlled transhumance practices, and a greater and collaborative stakeholders’ 
engagement and participation, will positively affect human health, nutrition, and well-being 
in the long run. 
Socially, the project will engage women, youth, disables and broader vulnerable communities 
through a Gender Action Plan (GAP), with a great emphasis on the proactivity and diversity 
of RIss and MSMEs that ensures proactive mainstreaming of women, youth, and vulnerable 
groups into all activities, empowering them with community-driven agricultural skills and 
knowledge (i.e. multiplication of multifunctional kitchen gardens, maintenance of farm tracks 
and/or feeder roads, etc.). Livelihoods are expected to improve greatly, based on increased 
adaptive and climate resilient capacities and practices within the target communities of each 
of the participating districts. Investments in better and more adaptable machinery, equipment, 
technology, and high-quality agricultural inputs used on-farm and off-farm, as well as 
learning-by-doing technics through farmer-field schools/field demonstration practices, are 
expected to reduce impacts of climate change on agricultural productivity and production and 
yield better and more sustainable results in the northern and middle belts regions.  
123- As mentioned earlier, the ESMF will serve to further guide project implementing agencies and stakeholders on environmental and social 
assessment, mitigation of impacts, and monitoring and reporting procedures during project implementation, including grievance redress 
mechanisms (GRM) and other corporate institutional requirements, such as gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, child labor, 
workers influx, citizen engagement, etc.    
87 
Furthermore, the project is expected to positively impact government ministries and 
departments, facilitating improved coordination and planning of natural resources and 
agricultural extension services with a climate adaptation and mitigation focus. In addition to 
these positive impacts, the project incorporates special participatory training sessions and 
activities in farmer field demonstration and awareness raising campaigns, and similar formats 
under Component 1 to ensure that farmers are able to proactively enhance their livelihoods in 
ways that would not have occurred in a “without project” scenario. Under component 2, the 
Business Plans (subcomponent 2.1) will be encouraged to include measures to build 
resilience to climate impacts (supplementary irrigation, climate resilient inputs, conservation 
agriculture, etc) and mitigate emissions (use of renewables, solar panels, tree cultivation, 
regenerative agricultural approaches, reuse of crop residues and by-products as bio-fertilizer, 
livestock feed, biofuels, etc). Positive impacts of the project, namely increased indirect use of 
pesticides or incremental usage of biofertilizers will be mitigated and/or encouraged through 
gradual and sporadic training on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) practices to promote 
climate-smart and sustainable pest and pesticide management that reduces reliance on and 
overall use of pesticides on IFAD financed activities.  
In instances where pesticide use is unavoidable, training on the safe handling of pesticides 
will be provided and bio-pesticides and/or bio-fertilizers will be encouraged and promoted 
over other more hazardous and toxic varieties; with the end-view of protecting communities 
livelihoods resources (water bodies and forest and multifunctional kitchen gardens, etc.). The 
more people will be trained on the safe and secure usages of pesticides, the greater 
communities will be better off and the best for reconvening such knowledge sharing.  As 
enforced by IFAD’s protocols, there will be no pesticides procurement under PROSPER 
project, and highly hazardous pesticides will not be used in the project areas. The project is 
not focused on complex construction activities, though minor construction activities may be 
pursued for the sake of rehabilitating/constructing short distances feeder and/or track roads 
(7-9.5km of length), preparation of agricultural lands (mostly 2ha), constructing small earth 
dams to harvest stormwaters for the purpose of developing community-driven livelihood 
support activities (i.e. fish-farming, apiculture, tree nurseries, livestock drinking points, etc.), 
establishing new agro-met systems or some selected agriculture silos and/or warehouses; use 
of biodigesters and/or solar panel as green energy. Due to the small size of such water 
stations and/or community-driven infrastructures, potential negative impacts are expected to 
be minor and can be easily mitigated.  For example, biophysical environment risks (i.e. noise 
pollution during installation, air pollution due to dust, and health/safety risks, natural waste 
management, …) during installation of agro-met stations, warehouses, biodigesters, feeder 
and track-road, etc. are envisaged to be low-to-moderate, localized, and temporary.    
5.2   Breakdown of Impacts per Component 
Complementary to what is stated here above, the key findings on the screening and field 
assessment of PROSPER project foreseen activities’ positive and negative risks and impacts 
in the participating districts of the project intervention areas could be summarized as follows:  
5.2.1 Positive Impacts: The project is expected to improve the natural resources and 
agricultural land 
upon which farmers work, based on improved, climate-smart and resilient agricultural 
practices and integrated natural resources management (specifically water, arable land use 
management across the 2 belts).  
88 
 Environmentally and climate change, improved farming and poultry practices will 
support better functioning ecosystems, especially in these fragile and climate-weakened 
regions (i.e. Upper West and Upper East regions, Savannah region, etc.)  which, in turn, can 
positively affect human health, nutrition and social well-being in the long run. Investments in 
machinery and equipment, technology, and high-quality agricultural inputs (seed, trees, etc.), 
poultry productivity, both in terms of while meat and dunks for biofertilizer used on-farm and 
off-farm are expected to reduce impacts of climate change on and increase agricultural 
productivity and production in the PROSPER intervention areas. Special field demonstration 
sessions and activities under Component 1 will ensure that farmers are able to proactively “do 
better” than they would have done under the without-project scenario. For example, 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) will be used under the project to promote sustainable pest 
and pesticides management that reduces reliance on (and overall use of) pesticides, and rather 
promote the efficient and sustainable usage of bio-pesticides, and bio-fertilizers, that are 
climate sensitive and smart and respectful of both human and biological environments.  
Overall, the greatest positive benefits from the Value-chain crops (i.e., Rice, Maize, Soybeans  
poultry, Shea and Cashew) production perhaps lies in the ability to convert their diverse 
wastes to somewhat useful products. Rice wastes are excellent for charcoal briquette making 
which can serve as alternative source of fuel for heating in rural households. The same goes 
also for the animal dunks for propane gas production via biodigesters. Available literature 
proves to show that this will reduce the pressure on firewood and forest resources 
degradation, especially in the climate affected PROSPER intervention areas. The harvested 
rice, maize, soybean straws, as well as shea and cashew shells could also be excellent for 
hay/silage to feed animals, especially during the dry-season and drought periods. Poultry 
production not only contributes to enhance nutrition quality, generate more income for 
households, but the dunks used are biofertilizer/manure contributes to increase agriculture 
bioproduction. However, without the transformation and conversion knowhow and both 
technical and material resources, the waste from the abovementioned PROSPER’s VC crops 
will most likely become a nuisance with their concomitant effects on human and 
environmental health.  
 Socially speaking, livelihoods are expected to improve based on increased adaptive 
capacities within the target communities. Aside from considerably/gradually improving the 
nutrition died intake and conversely the health conditions, especially for under-5 years 
children, lactating new mothers and/or pregnant women, or malnourished and ill people; the 
project may also improve the living conditions of rural farmers, especially women and youth, 
both in terms of improved and affordable accessibility, but also in terms of climate smart 
usage of green energies (solar panels, solar pumps for water harvesting, and biodigesters 
through the usage of animal dunks, and biofertilizers, etc.). Demonstrations under sub-
component 1-1 will be designed to include such technologies. The project may also positively 
reduce levels of migrant labor, given that increased productivity of land may reduce the need 
for farmers to migrate in search of work elsewhere, be it in nearby Kumasi or Accra (rural 
exodus) or to the nearby neighboring countries (immigration). The drive to implement 
climate resilient agriculture and to establish climate smart water and natural resources 
management information portal is expected to positively impact government ministries and 
departments, facilitating improved coordination and planning of natural resources and 
agricultural extension services with a climate resilience and adaptation focus. The project 
also engages women and youth through a highly participatory and inclusive Gender Action 
Plan that ensures proactive mainstreaming of women into all activities, empowering women 
89 
with agricultural skills and knowledge, as well as facilitating their access to local markets and 
financing institutions (i..e income generation activities, etc.). 
5.2.2 Negative Impacts: Potential negative impacts are minor, mitigatable, and forecast only 
for the 
implementation stages.  
 From the social perspective, the project’s inclusion of landless farmers and tenants means 
that there is a potential risk of changes in tenant/landlord relationships due to increase in land 
value resulting from increased agricultural productivity. In addition to this, and as part of the 
wholehearted cultural induction/education of children, in Ghana, as in many other African 
countries, youth often assist their respective families with farming works, and there is 
therefore, a risk that those youth may work beyond what is age-appropriate, unless closely 
monitored. Likewise, given the climate impacts on the scarce natural resources, particularly 
animal/livestock feeding resources, there is a high potential of conflicts between farmers and 
herders due to animal divagation during transhumance periods; and as a worst scenario, 
which occurred not longtime ago given the proximity of the two major natural parks in both 
the Upper West and Upper East regions, wild animal divagation into parks-adjacent farming 
plots may result in a deadly conflict between farmers/villagers and Elephants, Hippos and 
other wild-ruminants; henceforth causing more food shortage and famine in the affected 
regions. 
 From an environmental and climate perspective however, increased agricultural 
production may result in the generation of new environmental waste from, for instance, slow-
release fertilizers that do not fully breakdown/decompose. Thus, increased production is also 
often a trigger for increased pesticides use, even if the pesticide use is indirect and not 
promoted under this PROSPER project. Provision of environmentally friendly seed and 
planting materials for the RIs and introduction of climate-resilient crop varieties also 
increases the project to medium risk, even though the inputs used, and varieties 
recommended would be registered/certified and already in use within the country (albeit on a 
smaller scale). Furthermore, the social issues described here above could also result in the 
increased usage of bush-meat hunting for survival purpose, which down the road may result 
in partially if not totally depleting the stock of wildlife in the project regions. Last of all, 
while the project is not focused on major construction activities, minor construction activities 
may however be pursued for the sake of establishing small water retention infrastructure (i.e. 
earth dams, boreholes, wells, etc.), agricultural warehouses (i.e. seed-banks, agricultural 
inputs, family-size silos, etc.) or feeder and/or track roads, other community-driven 
infrastructure (biodigesters, improved stoves, multifunctional kitchen gardens, etc.). Due to 
the small size of such infrastructures, potential negative impacts are expected to be minor, 
mostly site-specific and easily mitigatable, for example: noise pollution during installation, 
air pollution due to dust, and health/safety risks during installation and/or operationalization, 
etc.). All these negative impacts – most of which are linked to Component 1 – are envisaged 
to be low-to-moderate, localized, temporary, and thus mitigatable. 
5.2.3 Potential negative environmental impacts in the agricultural sector 
Despite being rated as a category B operation with limited environmental and social impacts, 
current available data reveal that a few potential negative environmental impacts have been 
experienced in Ghana and the subregion lately. Consequently, PROSPER has already planned 
some interventions that may benefit to other projects and country environmental, climate and 
social management. 
90 
Some of the other issues are the low productivity, limited access to markets; limited access to 
financial services and products especially for young people and women, inefficient and 
limited farming technologies and unstainable practices (i.e., deforestation, shifting 
cultivation, slash and burn technics, poor rain-waters harvesting, etc.) ; lack of gainful 
employment opportunities, off-season and off-farm, which spurs youth migration and 
decreases labour availability during the production season; local land access and user rights 
that require official recognition and results in gender disparities; unclear systems of 
succession which discourage on-farm investments; climate shocks, high rural illiteracy rates 
that impede adoption of improved technologies low availability of financing for family 
farming; and lack of capacity to efficiently deliver essential rural services such as extension 
advice and land registration and management.  
A breakdown of the expected positive and potential negative impacts, by output (all risks 
being linked to solely Component 1), is provided in the following charts, based on 
components description from the available Project Development Report (PDR)124: 
5.2.4 Climate Change Issues 
Overall, Ghana is vulnerable to increasing aridity, droughts and extreme rainfall events and 
flooding125, and faces significant challenges from a changing climate change to its ecology, 
economy, and society. In addition, Ghana has a high degree of risk to natural hazards and 
disasters. The country is exposed to risks from multiple weather-related hazards, particularly 
those due to floods and droughts in the Northern Savannah belt. There are also risks related to 
coastal resources, including storm surges and coastal erosion as well as landslides, 
earthquakes, pest infestations, locusts’ invasion, and wildfires. Between 1991 and 2011 the 
country experienced seven major floods. In 2010, floods in the White Volta River Basin 
affected hundreds of thousands of people and destroyed many of their livelihoods. Urban 
floods also regularly impact major cities. Current development dynamics and demographic 
changes in Ghana further compound the risk of disasters. These dynamics are related to rural 
poverty, rapid urbanization, and environmental degradation. Agriculture and livestock, two 
sectors most impacted by weather-related hazards, constitute the foundation of Ghana’s 
economy and employ 55% of the economically active population126. Climate change and 
variability are already affecting Ghana’s water resources damage and flood exposure is 
projected to result in $160 million annually, due to flooding127. Nevertheless, in Ghana there 
are already farming systems practices being undertaken by smallholder farmers that conform 
to the principles and strategies of sustainable agriculture (i.e. soil and nutrient management, 
water harvesting and use, pest and disease control, resilient ecosystems, genetic resources, 
multi-crops farming, etc.). 
124 -As of September 9, 2021. 
125
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
126
 -Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
 -GFDRR (2019). Ghana, Country Context. URL: https://www.gfdrr.org/en/ghana 
127
 -UNISDR (2018). Disaster Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: http://africa.cimafoundation.org/documents/869 
91 
a.  Overview of risks, impacts and mitigation measures per component, and ways for 
improvements 
Table 6: Breakdown of risks, impacts and mitigation measures per Component  
Risk identified 
Possible negative 
impacts 
Possible positive 
impacts 
Mitigation 
measures 
Component 1 :  
Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
The project will 
underline the use of 
water by promoting 
small irrigation 
projets (the "drop 
by drop" system, 
for instance, and 
other small-scale 
earth dams, 
boreholes, wells, 
etc.) in the 
lowlands, which 
are traditionally 
aimed at  setting up 
small-scale family 
farming. 
- Increased risk of 
COVID-19 
contamination 
(gathering at RIs 
demos plots, 
warehouse, 
workshops) 
-Increased usage of 
pesticides (i.e. risk of 
contamination at a 
much larger scale if 
not contained); 
- soil salinisation 
- conflicts over the 
sharing of water 
-Poor quality 
maintenance of water 
infrastructure and 
waterworks (leakages, 
floods and pollution of 
waterbodies, …) 
-Likely risk of increase 
degradation of 
deforestation and 
natural resources 
- decrease in the 
quantities of water 
available downstream 
- Social 
discrimination (risk of 
non-selection and/or 
inclusion of gender 
aspects during the 
selection process of 
TOT, as well as 
during the 
certification of TOT. 
Even so, risk of them, 
not being respected 
when leading a group 
of male farmers, etc.) 
-Poor knowledge 
transfer 
(inconsistence, 
incomplete with local 
women (cultural 
barriers, etc.), 
-more effective water 
management 
- longer period during 
which water is 
available. 
-Unforeseen land 
acquisition (i.e. 
fallow lands, 
increased land grab, 
further slash and 
burn and 
deforestation) 
-Increased violent 
conflicts partly due to 
(i) increased 
transhumance trends; 
(ii) rapid acquisition 
of new lands; or as a 
consequence of food 
shortage (iii) animal 
divagation 
- Target 
smallholders in 
the lowland areas 
- Involve local 
water services in 
charge of water 
(not only 
extension 
workers)  
- Adopt plans to 
share and 
distribute water at 
the platform level 
- Training and 
awareness-raising 
for producers on 
water-saving 
methods available 
(Integrated Water 
Resource 
Management, 
IWRM) 
Responsibility 
- EPA 
- DWS (District 
Water Services) 
- District and 
traditional 
authorities  
- Project 
coordination 
- DDA services  
- DWA (District 
Women Affairs)  
92 
Risk identified 
Possible negative 
impacts 
Possible positive 
impacts 
Mitigation 
measures 
Component 1 :  
Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
The project will 
regenerate or equip 
lowland areas for 
Multifunctional 
kitchen gardening 
or rice, maize, cow 
pea farming  
- increase in 
anthropogenic pressure 
on these areas 
- risks of conflicts 
arising between 
producers and new 
arrivals (agric. 
Migrants, etc.) 
- risk of conflict 
between crop farmers 
and livestock farmers; 
-Risks of poor 
maintenance of 
community 
infrastructure  
- crop diversification 
- increase in 
production and 
income 
- improvement in 
employment 
-improvement in farm 
field accessibility and 
transfer of harvested 
crops 
- Encourage 
dialogue between 
different parties 
- Support the 
operation of a 
land governance 
organization 
involving local 
communities and 
authorities; 
-promotion of 
climate-smart 
technics & tools  
Responsibility 
- Local 
MOFA/DDA 
services 
- Local platforms 
(RI, RCB, other 
FIs, 
- Project 
coordination 
- District and 
traditional 
authorities ; 
- Accessibility to 
local markets & 
support services, 
93 
Risk identified 
Possible negative 
impacts 
Possible positive 
impacts 
Mitigation 
measures 
Component 1 :  
Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
Responsibility 
The project plans 
to promote the use 
of multifunctional 
kitchen gardening 
seeds as well as 
forest plants and 
fruit trees 
(nurseries, 
banks/silos, …)  
- 
MOFA/DDA/MO
W/EPA technical 
services 
- RIs/RCBs and al. 
- Project 
coordination 
(Safeguards & 
Climate & Gender 
team) 
- 
University/Acade
mia/Local 
institutes or 
training centers 
-Promote local 
varieties and those 
adapted to the 
environment 
(those with short 
life cycles and/or 
drought/disease-
resistant) 
-Set up a 
programme to 
improve local 
species and 
varieties 
-Moving new, 
unsuitable, or invasive 
species from one area 
to another 
-Poor water 
infrastructure and civil 
works quality;   
-Pollution risk 
(biophysical & human 
environment) 
Accident risks during 
civil works 
(COVID-19, Ebola, 
physical, ...) 
-Risk of broader 
contamination of the 
surrounding 
watersheds, lands 
properties, air and 
atmosphere due to an 
excessive usage of 
uncontrolled 
pesticides.  
-Increased 
deforestation during 
water and/or 
road/tracks 
infrastructures 
construction/rehabilitat
ion,… 
-Risk of destruction of 
tree nurseries and/or 
agricultural crops prior 
to project appraisal due 
partially to (i) animal 
divagation, and (ii) 
transporting harvested 
crop out from the farm 
fields to the villages. 
- Agricultural 
diversification 
-Encourage native 
vegetables and tree 
species that are rural 
and of economic 
interest 
-Jobs creation for 
women, youth and 
vulnerable groups; 
-Gender 
Discrimination (due 
to frustrations 
generated from lack 
of transparency in the 
selection process of 
who the key 
beneficiaries could be 
for trainings and/or 
field visits or access 
to FIs, …),  
-Risk of persistent 
conflict between 
transhuman herders 
and farmers due to 
the poor visualization 
of existing/proposed 
transhumance 
corridors boundaries 
and schedules) 
- lack of transparency 
in  
94 
Risk identified 
Possible negative 
impacts 
Possible positive 
impacts 
Mitigation 
measures 
Component 1 :  
Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
Responsibility 
The project will 
make sufficient 
amounts of seeds 
and local plants 
available 
-Introduction of 
untested plants and 
seeds  
-Seed issues would 
no longer be a 
problem (endogenous 
and sustainable) 
- Ensure that 
specifications are 
strictly adhered to 
as regards seed 
and plant 
purchases 
- Involve seed and 
plant testing 
service + farming 
water services  
- 
MOFA/MOW/EP
A technical 
services 
- Project 
coordination 
(SCT) 
- RIs/Grower 
associations 
- RCB/FIs services 
- Private 
Sector/Market 
b.  Potential Impacts and Recommended Mitigation for Agriculture public and private 
enterprise Projects 
PROSPER selected value-chain crops such as Rice, Maize, Cowpea, Horticulture 
(Vegetables) and tree crops (Shea and Cashew) production, processing and 
marketing/commercialization are supported by the program with additional value chains 
including transportation, agrochemical applications, waste conversion and reuse. 
Figure 7: Cereal production in 2020 estimated at above - average levels 
FAO Country Briefs: Ghana, Reference Date: 28-January-2021 
 Rice, Maize, Soybean Cultivation and Processing  
Rice is fast becoming the most important staple food in Ghanaian homes. Rice paddies are 
becoming a common sight across the Ghanaian regions and especially in the selected 
95 
PROSPER regions with floodplains and major inland valleys. Lowland and highland rice is 
extensively cultivated along the tidal swamps along the riverbanks, which flood during the 
high tide in most of the regions or just irrigated.  
Although wetland rice is naturally suited to the flood plains and major river valleys, flood and 
drought are the major environmental and climate impact on rice. In recent past, several rice 
farms in Ghana, such as in southern/costal and middle belts have been lost to floods across 
the regions. In some cases, such as in the northern belt regions, droughts and dry spells have 
also been responsible for additional replanting costs as the plant wilted from low water and 
high temperature. Both floods and dry spells effects are often aggravated by lack of agro-
climatic information on key parameters including onset and cessation of the rains and 
duration and time of dry spells. These impacts can be mitigated through strong collaboration 
with the The Ghanaian Meteorological Agency (GMA) to prepare and disseminate place-
specific forecasts for farmers. 
Besides being specific and most fragile amongst the selected crops, the same goes also for 
Maize and soybeans, and tree plants crops (Shea and Cashew) and poultry. Their cultivation 
also requires clearing of lands and removal of virtually all the trees and wetland plants to 
provide enough sunshine for the rice paddy or others crops. Rice and other VC crops 
production may also impact on biodiversity, especially birds and rodents’ population that 
feed on these chosen crops’ grains. These technics also lead to forest and woodland 
degradation through selective cutting of trees for rice parboiling by local rice processors. 
Particularly rice waste, which can constitute a nuisance to the environment, it has the 
potential of being converted into charcoal briquettes for rice parboiling and household 
cooking and heating purposes. Local farmers that cultivate tubercules (Yam, Cassava, Cocoa 
Yam, etc.) and other tuber crops have also found a use for rice waste in mulching. The 
harvested rice stems can also be used for feeding cattle.  Rice, Maize, Soybean cultivation 
require agrochemicals and pesticides that can easily pollute surface and ground water bodies 
and environment. These are also vulnerable to pest infestations including stem borers which 
may lead to considerable loss of investment if not checked on time. The planted seeds are 
also important to the expected yield per hectare. Bad seeds can lead to substantial loss of 
investments. Thus, seeds quality control is imperative to lead to good productivity and 
maintain the expected return on investment.   
Emission of greenhouse gases (GHG - especially methane) from rice paddies remains a 
strong impact on climate. Although GHG emissions from rice, maize and/or soybean fields 
can be reduced by periodically draining for instance the rice paddies, farmers need to be 
trained in so doing. Furthermore, higher temperatures can make rice sterile with low 
productivity. Resource conflicts between farmers and pastoralists driven by climate change 
and poor land governance regimes poses significant threats to investments and human 
security in some of the project area. Most of the regions are tackling this by building mutual 
understanding and confidence between the two social groups – farmers and pastoralists. This 
is done through expanded community security and traditional committee that include 
representatives from the Farmers and pastoralists communities. However, mitigation 
measures including avoid farming on grazing routes and fencing of farms with crops that are 
repellent to grazing livestock are critically important. Poultry activities are seen not so as 
nutrition enhancement means, but also as both an income generation activity as well as 
climate-friendly resource for agricultural inputs. In fact, the use of poultry waste as 
biofertilizer/manure greatly contribute to reduce the use of chemical fertilizer, reduce GHG 
96 
emission and increase agricultural productivity and yield ; which is beneficial to farmers, 
especially in the horticulture sector.  
Some of the recommended mitigation measures for rice farming include: 
  Encourage the farmers to take risk transfer as loss mitigation measures – encourage 
and assist farmers to sign on to climate risk (including flood and drought) insurance 
with competent Agricultural Insurance institutions.  
 
  This will also mitigate possible losses from farm destruction occasioned by grazing 
livestock. A number of the projects implemented by some development partners in 
the regions are currently experimenting with this, but at limited scale.  
Improve collaboration with the Ghanaian Meteorological Agency to ensure 
production and dissemination (using existing extension vehicles and on smartphones 
devices) of key agroclimatic information to farmers in local languages and at 
frequent intervals. The agency may be empowered through setting up at least one 
mini-meteorological (Ag-Met) station in each participating District Department of 
Agriculture to improve the density of their climate stations and forecasts. Such 
climate stations may be set-up to include flood gauge and monitoring systems in the 
critical DDAs along the waterbodies.  
  As much as is possible, discourage cultivation in areas that are very close to the 
major river systems to minimize overflow during normal flow seasons. Avoid 
deforestation and cultivation in areas of high biodiversity/critical habitats/wetlands 
significance as well as in dry highlands; 
Improve collaboration with research institutes (such as IITA, Cereal Research 
Institutes, etc.) to introduce early maturing/short duration rice varieties to the 
farmers. This may make the peak flooding or drought season coincides with post-
harvest season rather than pre-harvest season as have witnessed in recent times. 
 
  Support for Seed lab – Equip and Strengthen seed labs to be able to carry out 
rigorous tests on seeds to ensure that only genuine foundation seeds are used by 
farmers to reduce loss or poor return on investment. 
  Ensure training and certification of ‘spraying gangs’ on what to apply, at what stage, 
and in what density, and human impacts (including need to wear personal protection 
gears) to safeguard the health of crops, soils, water and both the people and animals. 
  Collaborate with chemicals regulatory agencies to ensure that agrochemicals are 
genuine (eliminate expired and banned chemicals) and in training of spraying gangs 
and farmers 
  Encourage the use of organic manure in farms as much as possible 
  Make provision for conversion of rice wastes to briquette in all the rice processing 
units  
  Train-of trainers (TOT) for extension workers to step down training of farmers on 
methods for draining rice paddies in mid-season to reduce GHG emission; 
  Make provision for improved modern bird scaring-equipment on farms to reduce 
birds impact on rice farms and maintain avian population viability 
  Synchronized production timing for efficiency in bird management   
 
Improve community and neighborhood security arrangements by supporting 
dialogue and understanding between farmers and pastoralists to reduce resource 
conflicts 
  Avoid farming along recognized grazing routes/corridors and demarcated grazing 
reserves 
97 
  Promote efficient land management as adaptation - Collaborate with other 
organizations such as USAID, FAO and government committees on Land Reform to 
support policy dialogue with the Regional Governments and processes to improve on 
land governance by instituting land regimes that ensures efficient land management 
and administration with agricultural land cadastration and security of tenure and 
ensure land capitalism through a systematic land titling and registration process. 
  Work diligently with Business Coaches to better plan agricultural activities that yield 
real revenues,  
c.  Gender Equality and women and youth empowerment:  
Gender inequality remains a challenge that hinders efforts to achieve inclusive human 
development and economic growth. In the absence of equity and equality, certain project 
envisioned actions could have some impacts on gender bias/relations in the given 
communities of the participating districts within the 8 targeted region of the northern and 
middle belts. Impacts could be the aggravation of tendential disequilibrium both in terms of 
economic power between men and women, intellectual resources, and the know-how, and 
between local communities traditionally established or communally called/labelled 
“autochthones” and newly establish immigrant communities.  
Like everywhere in Africa, women in Ghana form a large proportion of the labour force in 
the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors (i.e., economic, business development, etc.) and 
are responsible for guaranteeing their family's nutrition and food security. The gender gap in 
agricultural productivity is linked to unequal access to essential agricultural inputs such as 
land, labour, techniques, and seeds, but also social, economic, and financial institutions and 
norms. These gender gaps are still very significant and that traditional gender norms remain 
tenacious, (the result being that women and girls are at a disadvantage in both the public and 
private spheres), including land ownerships. This limits opportunities for investments.  
  Youth:  The future of Ghana, as in any developing country around the world, depends 
heavily in the youth. In Ghana particularly, despite the tangible efforts the 
Government has been deploying lately, few young people see a future for themselves 
in agriculture or in the rural areas. Attracted by modernity and digital opportunities, 
rural Ghanaians millennials from families that are highly dependent on agriculture are 
migrating from rural areas to cities and abroad at an astounding rate. In most cases, 
once they reach their destination, they are forced to face unemployment, poor health 
conditions, social exclusion/inclusion, and inadequate living conditions in poor and 
unwelcoming slums. They are also highly vulnerable to radicalization by sex tourism, 
extremist/jihadist groups and human traffickers, especially in the Sahel with Boko 
Haram in the nearby Nigeria and Niger and Burkina Faso. Rural-urban migration can 
also be highly gender-biased. However, because of the size of the country, agriculture 
could be very attractive to the bulge of youth living in cities and working in rural 
areas or vice versa.  
  Resource Conflicts: As stated earlier, climate vulnerability is hitting hard on the 
available natural resources, especially in the PROSPER targeted areas. Henceforth, 
clashes between communities and pastoralists leading to heightened human insecurity 
remains one of the threats that should be considered during and throughout the 
implementation of PROSPER. This needs to be managed through iterative stakeholder 
engagement and strengthening of existing informal and formal grievance redress 
98 
systems to build confidence and understanding and address any complaints raised in a 
fair, responsive, and timely manner. PROSPER should also pursue land governance 
and sustainable land management that guarantees land capitalism and security of 
tenure as a mitigation option to often growing land conflicts.  
  Unsafe and Non-Healthy Working Conditions: Working conditions across sectors 
are generally poor in the rural areas due to relatively weak extension systems, and 
limited awareness of and non-compliance with health and safety standards. In the 
agricultural sector, the drudgery faced by most farmers makes them more vulnerable 
to agro-chemical toxins from wrong methods of handling and overuse of fertilizer and 
pesticides. In addition, due to the high level of poverty, children often help in the 
production and/or processing of agricultural commodities. Although cases of water-
borne diseases among rice farmers are not common in the project area, concerted 
efforts should be made to ensure that appropriate Personal Protective Equipment 
(PPE) are used while engaging in these activities, that PROSPER do not foresee to 
finance.  
  Managing expectations and Conflicts resurgence: Agriculture is now in the front 
burner of issues discussed in the whole country, more precisely in PROSPER targeted 
regions. Lately, there has been an increase in the awareness about agriculture and 
conflicts; and this has increased the expectation levels of local beneficiaries. In 
managing expectations, the project should ensure that the beneficiaries are 
enlightened and sensitized about the various similar projects and their activities in the 
areas. It is also important that information pertaining the PROSPER is disseminated 
through credible persons or media, especially reliable community leaders and focal 
points 
  Elite and Political Capture: Weak and non-transparent governance structures as well 
as exclusionary and divisive politics poses the risks of PROSPER being hijacked or 
captured by the political and administrative elite to benefit only their cronies with 
significant impacts on the target beneficiaries. The approach which ensures that 
prospective beneficiaries are selected based on laid down criteria should be clearly 
implemented in the selected project districts and regions. Luckily, this has been taken 
care of in the design of PROSPER, precisely in the approach to targeting and profiling 
of RIs and beneficiaries 
  PROSPER  will not exploit children and will not hire ineligible migrant workers, 
defined as workers who are not legally authorized to work in the country and / or 
sector in accordance with national law, and when it does not conflict with other IFAD 
Standards. All jobs will be governed by contracts signed in accordance with national 
and international labor conventions. In addition, the project will promote information 
and sensitization of communities on the risks incurred in the event of child labor, 
education and training of children, education and awareness on the use of dangerous 
and toxic products which can have negative effects on children, the use of 
technologies, mechanization and agricultural and post-harvest practices to increase 
productivity and reduce the risks of child labor demand, improve access to the water 
point for avoid the work especially of young girls in collecting water but also for 
watering livestock, taking into account the prohibition of child labor in procurement 
procedures. Training and awareness-raising on gender-based violence for 
communities and local authorities 
99 
  5.3      Assessment of Cumulative Impacts. 
Overall, the cumulative project impacts are expected to be positive, as the overall PROSPER 
project development objective is to “Strengthen the integration, climate resilience, social and 
environmental sustainability of smallholders and businesses in priority value chains in the 
Northern and Middle Ecological Belts taking advantage of the increased demand created by 
the national agro-processing strategy”. Even with these expected, major 
positive impacts, the project has been classified as moderate risk (i.e. Category B) largely due 
to inequality in the labor market and presence of landless farmers in the project area who will 
be included in project 
activities.  
In its efforts to improve the participating communities’ livelihoods and living conditions 
better off, the PROSPER Project equally carries on some important threats to the 
sustainability of the Environment (biophysical and human) in the northern and middle belts 
(NMB) areas. These cumulative impacts could be: 
  Agricultural pressure on the existing natural resources: land scarcity, loss of 
habitats, triggered wildfires, impactful climate change effects, the 
practice/implementation of certain activities that require huge agricultural lands 
(community wood-forest, nurseries, and plantations, and likely extensive usage of 
pesticides in the region that will/could further weaken land fertility and affect the 
overall quality of the NMB areas watershed could further increase the pressure over 
land in the riparian territories to PROSPER interventions areas. However, the 
established community-led co-management of certain natural resources and forest 
platforms and the development of income-generation activities (tree-nurseries, 
agroforestry, horticulture, honey production, aquaculture, etc. could surely help 
diversify communities’ source of income and safeguards the arable lands; and 
  Transhumance with its downsize effects: The NMB regions are ground for a rich 
livestock capital. Henceforth, recurrent conflicts between herders and farmers that 
oftentimes leads/results in deadly and socioeconomically detrimental outcomes. The 
implementation of solution-oriented measures could further exacerbate these 
restrictions and negatively impact herders. This was extensively discussed during the 
field consultation and more constructive alternatives ought to be designed and found 
to ease and satisfactorily facilitate the sustainable implementation of the PROSPER 
within the NMB regions;   
5.4  Potential Impacts and Recommended Mitigation for Socioeconomic Infrastructure 
Projects 
The following are some of the socioeconomic infrastructure projects likely to be embarked 
upon by the project; 
1. Construction and rehabilitation of feeder/track roads, causeways and spillways  
2. Construction and rehabilitation of feeder/track roads, causeways and spillways  
2. Construction and rehabilitation of culverts and feeder/track roads 
3. Construction and rehabilitation of processing facilities   
4. Land development activities 
5. Construction of small scale (earthen) dams and irrigation schemes  
Some of the potential impacts of socioeconomic infrastructure development include:  
  Land Access 
Socioeconomic infrastructure will require the availability of land resource for their provision. 
Given the small scale and nature of construction/rehabilitation of socioeconomic 
infrastructure no land acquisition is foreseen, as most construction/rehabilitations of feeder 
100 
road/track road vary between 7 to 9.5 km, agricultural plots are around 2ha and other 
socioeconomic infrastructure are small in size mostly localize on small portions of 
community lands, free of any claims128. The arrangement made for land will go a long way in 
determining sustainability of these socioeconomic infrastructure. Agriculture land 
development, irrigation activities and feeder/track roads construction or rehabilitation all may 
likely require some expanse of land. Some preconditions for socioeconomic infrastructure 
include assurance that Government or the community has guaranteed the lease of land to the 
beneficiaries during PROSPER lifespan, and the development of strategies for the 
maintenance and sustainability of the socioeconomic infrastructure by the concerned 
beneficiary/recipient parties.   
  Dust, Vibration and Noise 
The degree to which individuals perceive dust to be a nuisance depends on the frequency, 
intensity, and duration of a dust-generating event. Farmers usually engage in a variety of 
activities that uses equipment or practices that create dust. Most land clearing equipment 
generates some dust. Dust may also be generated as fugitive dust when fine particulates are 
lifted from fields, roads, buildings, and yards via air turbulence. The main mitigation 
measures recommended for mitigating dust including dust protection masks for machine 
operators and the spraying of water to reduce the level of dust during 
construction/rehabilitation, and/or transport activities.  
Heavy equipment used for feeder/track roads construction/rehabilitation create ground 
movement such that cracks can occur in adjacent buildings/facilities. These can also create 
some form of discomfort to inhabitants of the surroundings. If any an assessment of 
surrounding buildings around project intervention areas, would be carried out to ascertain the 
level of susceptibility to cracks because of ground movement. The buildings (warehouses, 
workshops) are to be strengthened and compensation paid for damages where it is 
unavoidable. Noise from the use of equipment is also a major concern. Operators should only 
use authorized construction equipment that produce a moderate decibel level and consider the 
times when people will experience less discomfort (i.e., daytime only). Feeder road 
construction and/or rehabilitation contractors will be expected to produce Contractors 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMP) for road construction and conduct 
environmental screening for the construction of farm tracks. 
  Deforestation 
The removal of vegetation cover and trees during construction/rehabilitation, depending on 
the scale and amplitude, can lead to deforestation and should therefore be avoided as much as 
possible. Where tree removal is unavoidable, this should be compensated by tree and 
vegetation replanting along the constructed roads. Trees removed from farm during land 
preparations should be equality compensated by planting trees in addition to hedges along the 
farm boundaries or nearby suitable community plots. 
  Surface and Ground Water Contamination 
Unchecked and unmonitored surface and underground exploration, for example during earth 
dams or dikes construction, can lead to ground water contamination if not properly planned. 
Appropriate impact studies/assessments should be conducted prior to the construction of such 
stormwater harvesting dams and/or irrigation structures. 
128 - The project will not invest on land development beyond 100 ha contiguous. Most of the beneficiaries have on average less than 2 ha and 
even combined per site, it is less than 50 ha contiguous. 
. 
101 
  Flooding/ Erosion/landslides/droughts 
Flooding, erosion, landslides and/or partial droughts can occur because of poor judgment and 
poor design and construction/rehabilitation practices. This is very evident during the 
stakeholders’ discussion for this ESMF. Adequate drainage should be provided for surface 
water run-off in all the roads and agriculture plots to be constructed or rehabilitated. 
Geotextiles and Vegetation cover should be   provided for slopes and indigenous grasses and 
shrubs with proven ability to stop erosion should be planted in areas undergoing erosion.  
Unnecessary dug- outs and/or excavation of soil from its natural terrain should be avoided to 
reduce flooding or partial droughts. Replacement of dug out soils should be carried out when 
necessary. 
5.5 Environmental and Socio-Economic Management Framework (ESMF) 
Table 9 below provides a framework for managing the likely impacts of the various activities 
expected to be implemented during the key parts in the agricultural value chain, i.e.; 
preparation/production, processing, marketing, transport (and supply). It is important to 
emphasize that these management plans are relevant to the entire PROSPER project, 
including the MSMEs and related socioeconomic infrastructure 
102 
 Table 7: Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for proposed PROSPER Agricultural Value Chain Stages 
Part in 
value chain 
Key issue 
Affecting the 
Environment 
Potential impact (negative) and positive) 
Environmental 
Economic 
Social & 
Institutional 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
Preparation/
Production 
 Forest and 
Woodland loss 
 Increased youth, 
 Land 
preparation – 
land clearing, 
cultivation, & 
other issues 
 Land & soil 
degradation 
women and men 
employment 
directly and 
indirectly  
 Use of earth- 
 Water and soil 
moving 
machines, e.g. 
tractors for 
clearing 
pollution 
 Flooding 
 Erosion 
 Increased sense 
of pride and 
responsibility by 
participating youth 
and women 
 Use of agro- 
chemicals 
 Bush fire 
 Resource 
conflicts 
 Possible agitation 
 Use of 
pesticides 
 Biodiversity loss 
 Waste management 
issues 
from youth not 
presently included 
in the programme  
Standard Mitigation 
Measures 
Monitoring & indicators 
 
Increased household 
income and reduced 
poverty 
 As much as possible, 
discourage the opening of 
virgin or pristine forests 
 Increased youth 
employment and social well-
being 
 Improved nutrition and 
food security 
 Train farmers in 
sustainable land use 
management practices and 
agrochemical management 
empowering the use of 
biotechnologies  
 Number of farmers that 
received training on 
sustainable land 
preparation 
 Change in forests area 
 Results from periodic 
soil and water analysis 
 Heath, safety, social and 
 Increased ability of 
 Deliver training and 
environment manual 
women and youth to manage 
their enterprises in 
productive and profitable 
manner, 
thereby increasing GDP and 
manpower development 
agricultural inputs to 
farmers on-time to enable 
them to adjust and adapt 
their planting and 
harvesting methods and 
timing 
 Number of value chain 
enterprises around soil 
testing and agrochemicals 
management  
 Stakeholder Engagement 
 Social exclusion - 
 Increased import 
 Adopt and enforce 
Plan 
 GHG emission 
 Drought 
women and youth 
and PLWD 
  Use of 
substitution especially of 
rice. Maize, cowpea, but also 
shea and cashew products. 
health, safety and 
environment rules at 
production sites  
child labour 
 But increasing associated 
 Encourage full 
  Possible 
loss of 
cultural 
assets  
environmental and social 
costs 
103 
exploration of the value 
chain including soil testing 
and agrochemical services  
 Develop     a     clear     
and     simple Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), 
incl.  grievance redress 
 Conflict resolution 
committee meetings 
 Lists of approved 
projects and their 
beneficiaries 
 Agreement on land 
access for women and 
youth and PLWD and land 
lease documents 
Part in 
value chain 
Key issue 
Affecting the 
Environment 
Potential impact (negative) and positive) 
Environmental 
Economic 
Social & 
Institutional 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
Processing 
 Waste generation 
 Unsafe and non- 
 Use of 
processing 
machine 
Parboiling of 
Rice  
 Air, water and land 
pollution 
healthy working 
conditions 
Possible use of 
 GHG emission 
from machines 
child 
Labourers 
  Use of wood 
for 
heating/parboil
ing 
  Migration 
influx to 
processing 
sites  
Standard Mitigation 
Measures 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Encourage the use of 
renewable and low-carbon   
energy   sources   during 
processing operations 
 Number of operators 
adopting renewable low 
carbon technologies 
 Number of enterprises 
 Adopt health, safety, and 
environment rules at 
processing sites 
established focusing on 
processing 
 Number of entrepreneurs 
adopting sustainable 
processing operations 
 Knowledge management 
/communication plans, 
stakeholder meeting 
reports, communication 
project flyers/leaflets 
sustainable agro- 
processing practices to 
reduce environmental, 
climate and social risks and 
impacts 
 Step up knowledge 
management and 
information dissemination 
to showcase the 
achievement of the project 
capacity, value additions and 
value chain development 
 Train farmers in 
 Increased sales and 
household income 
 Increased youth 
employment and social 
well-being 
 Improved processing 
 Improved nutrition and 
food security 
 Increased ability of youth 
to manage their enterprises 
in productive and profitable 
manner, thereby increasing 
GDP and manpower 
development 
 Increased import 
substitution of Rice 
 But increasing associated 
environmental and social 
costs 
104 
Part in 
value chain 
Key issue 
Affecting the 
Environment 
Potential impact (negative) and positive) 
Environmental 
Economic 
Social & 
Institutional 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
Marketing 
 Better access to 
 Construction 
 Dust, smoke, 
of 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure 
noise, ground 
movement / vibration 
the 
Local market and 
FIs 
 Deforestation 
 Water pollution 
 Flooding and 
erosion  from poorly 
constructed culverts, 
roads, etc. 
 Better access to 
production and 
processing sites by 
supervisory 
agencies 
penetration 
 Access to market 
information and market 
linkage and support services 
 Strengthened market value 
chain, with more profitable 
enterprises 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Improved market 
 Use construction 
 Observation of 
equipment with moderate 
decibel during construction 
construction equipment for 
dust, noise, smoke, 
vibration, etc. 
 Work inspection report 
on the environmental 
quality of market 
infrastructure 
 Health, safety and 
environment plans 
 Copy of consent of 
community /individuals on 
market infrastructure land 
site 
 Develop/adopt and 
enforce health, safety and 
environment rules at 
construction sites 
 Lawful and willing 
consent of community/or 
individuals on land site for 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure 
Roads must be constructed 
with drainages 
Develop contingency plans 
for dykes/spillways to 
manage  unexpected  
circumstances. 
 
 Improved access 
 Improved storage and 
to rural 
communities 
reduced waste and 
postharvest losses 
 Conflict over 
land and demand 
for compensation 
where infrastructure 
is to be constructed 
105 
Part in 
value chain 
Key issue 
Affecting the 
Environment 
Potential impact (negative) and positive) 
Environmental 
Economic 
Social & 
Institutional 
 Use of 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
 Influx of rural 
Transportati
Migrant workers  to 
on 
agri- enterprise sites 
and processing 
areas 
motorized and 
heavy 
transportation 
machines 
 GHG emission 
from transportation 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Increased ownership of 
motorized and other 
transport system 
 Organize transport 
entrepreneurs into an 
association for easy 
management 
 Increased number of 
service providers 
 Develop a code of 
 Code of conduct for 
transport operators 
 Minutes of meetings of 
transport operators’ 
association 
 Increased number 
of service providers, 
which boost the 
economy 
 Increased GDP 
 But increasing associated 
conduct, and health, safety, 
and environment regulation 
for transport operators 
environmental and social 
costs 
106 
5.6 Analysis of Alternatives 
The traditional approach to PROSPER selected VC crops (i.e. Rice, Maize, Cowpea, 
Horticulture (Vegetables) and shea and cashew) in Ghana is to reuse inputs and make use of 
available cultural technics with little concern for quality control. Based on the analysis of the 
approach thus far, the outcome has been to focus on high-yielding varieties. Farmers will be 
encouraged to abandon the predominant agronomic practices to improved, efficient and 
climate-smart agronomic practices as enumerated on Table 9. 
Table8: Commodity Value-Chain + Household Level Activities 
Commodity  
Value 
chain 
Rice, 
Maize, 
Soybeans   
  Recycling of paddy and use of 
Predominant Practice 
  Wrong application of soil 
untested seeds 
  Encourage paddy transplanting 
and tested seeds from certified 
seed producers/suppliers 
Climate Smart Agriculture practices 
amendments and agrochemicals  
  Use of low yield and long gestation 
varieties 
  Fertilizer spreading 
  Tillage operations remove all trees 
  Use of inorganic crop protection 
chemicals 
  No risk transfer measures to 
mitigate losses 
  No draining at mid-season increases 
methane emission 
  Farming activities not guided by 
agro-climatic information  
  Waste poorly managed and 
constitute nuisance 
  Wood for parboiling causing 
woodland and forest degradation  
  Limited to rainy season farming  
  Use wood for parboiling 
107 
  Encourage soil sample analysis 
and use of biofertilizers instead 
  Train and certify spraying 
gangs on the adequate usage of 
biofertilizer/biopesticides 
  Encourage the adoption of 
improved, pest resistant and 
early maturing varieties 
  Encourage deep application of 
bio-urea at 6cm- 
  10cm depth 
  Encourage minimum or zero 
tillage 
  Encourage the use of organic 
crop protection solutions like 
Neem oil and other bionutrients 
  Encourage carbon sequestration 
activities 
  Fence farms with hedges and 
trees to reduce animal 
intrusions 
  Encourage farmers to sign-on to 
agric insurance for no greats 
and risk transfer  
  Strengthen collaboration to 
ensure Farming activities is 
guided by agro-climatic 
information for better timing 
(i.e. with GAMA) 
  Train farmers to drain paddies 
at mid-season to reduce 
methane emission 
  Value chain to be created for 
waste conversion to briquette 
and greener energy  
Predominant Practice 
Climate Smart Agriculture practices 
Commodity  
Value 
chain 
  Parboiling to be done with 
briquettes and other alternative 
efficient energy sources such a 
biogas from animal dunks 
  Construct small earth dams to 
harvest stormwaters and use of 
drip irrigation scheme for dry 
season farming 
  Train farmers on construction 
of rainwater harvesting 
structure to retain water for dry 
season farming (i.e., fish 
farming and cattle drinking 
points) 
  Encourage farmers to use 
briquettes and clean cooking 
stoves, such as biogas from 
biodigesters supplied by 
animals. 
  Encourage out grower schemes 
  Encourage soil sample analysis 
  Encourage the adoption of 
improved varieties 
  Encourage ring application at 
6cm-10cm depth 
  Encourage minimum or zero 
 
tillage 
the use of organic crop 
protection solutions like neem 
oil or bio-nutrients 
  Encourage carbon sequestration 
activities 
  Value chain to be created 
around waste conversion to 
animal feed 
  Wastewater to be properly 
channelled from to reduce 
odour 
  Farmers to be encourage to sign 
on to agric insurance for no 
regrets and risk transfer 
mechanism  
  Strengthen collaboration to 
ensure Farming activities is 
guided by agro-climatic 
information for better timing 
Vegetables 
(Not a VC 
but a HH 
level 
Activitty) 
  Use of spent and low-quality stems 
  Wrong application of soil 
amendments and agrochemicals  
  Use of low-yield varieties and long 
gestation  
  Fertilizer spreading 
  Tillage operations remove all trees  
  Use     of     inorganic    crop     
protection chemicals 
  Waste poorly managed and 
constitute nuisance in environment  
  No risk transfer mechanism 
  Production activities not guided by 
agroclimatic information  
  Trees and woods on land totally 
removed 
  Poor application of technology for 
erosion and flooding control 
108 
Predominant Practice 
Climate Smart Agriculture practices 
Commodity  
Value 
chain 
Shea and 
Cashew 
Trees 
Poultry 
  Encourage agroforestry to 
maintain tree on farms, and 
replant trees along farm borders 
  Adopt techniques including 
terracing, bunding and 
contouring to control erosion 
and flooding in inland areas 
  Encourage conservation 
agriculture to reduce soils 
erosions and infertility 
  Use of endemic seed with low 
  Adoption of climate smart and 
productive varieties  
  Bio fertilizer for greater 
productivity 
  Climate smart processing of 
trees and growth monitoring; 
  Use of shorter productivity 
cycle 
  Sustainable waste management 
  Use of biogas to de-shell and 
process 
  Use of shells as animal feeding 
supplements 
  Well-rounded VC practices  
  Provision of quality water 
services 
  Good feeding stations and 
grains 
  Use of proper stockage system 
  Good ventilation to reduce HS. 
Appropriate slaughtering stations 
Adequate waste management yield to 
transfer into agriculture fields (bio-
fertilizer) 
productivity 
  Poor management of plants 
  Untimely replantation of plants 
  Poor usage of agrochemicals 
  Waste poorly managed and 
constitute nuisance in environment  
  No risk transfer mechanism 
  Production activities not guided by 
agroclimatic information  
  Unrationalized cutting of tree for 
wood fuel or de-shelving  
  Heat Stress (HS) 
  Poor management of facilities 
  Untimely replenishment of 
stocks/rupture 
  Poor usage of feeding ratios 
  Poor waste management and 
constitute likely nuisance to the 
environment  
  Unwelcoming/unbearable smell on 
site and in the vicinity of poultry 
farming 
  GHG production 
  Production activities not guided by 
scientific information  
  Water Pollution 
  Poor poultry farming with negative 
impact on the ecosystem 
109 
5.7   The Without Project Scenario: 
 As stated above, the overall vision of this project is to sustainably improve the livelihood and 
living conditions of Ghanaians farmers active in the participating districts of the NMB 
regions faced with growing and constraining climate change factors.  The project area context 
speaks volumes of the difficult conditions farmers are currently faced with in the project 
intervention areas. PROSPER contribution is foreseen to bring way more positive benefits 
than adverse risks and impacts, which, as determined by its moderate to low safeguards risk 
rating and category B stance as mostly site specific and easily manageable, albeit its high-
risk climate change vulnerability. Consequently, the without project contribution will most 
likely further increase the current constraining factors in a context of impactful climate 
change regime and hinder more the future of theses beneficiary farmers livelihoods and living 
conditions. Moreover, this will add more difficulties on the Government’s efforts to alleviate 
rural poverty, especially in this NMB regions; which altogether will result in more rural 
exodus and immigration, especially from the working forces (youth); transformational 
changes from farmers to other more affordable work skills (mechanics, trader, security 
agents, porters, informal income generating businessmen/women, etc.); hence, further and 
further depleting the Agricultural wide-sector from its main workforce. As for the biophysical 
environment, available arable land, scattered natural resources, as well as quality of water and 
grassland will be further shrunk and depleted; thus, adding more burden on remaining rural 
households; increase land ownership and natural resources co-sharing more problematic with 
an exponential rise of transhuman-driven conflicts and detrimental consequences 
(malnourishment, poor nutrition diet, weak health conditions, etc.). 
This is to, simply further justify, the timeliness, and overall relevance of  the PROSPER 
project in supporting Government of Ghana’s efforts and recipient communities’ vision to 
foster a better future for their lives and that of their future generations. 
110 
6 - ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN (ESMP)  
For moderate risk projects, IFAD requires the development of an environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP) to set out the core measures and actions required for the project to 
manage and effectively mitigate environmental, climate and social risks and achieve 
compliance with SECAP.  
The environmental, climate and social management plans (ESMPs) presented below are 
relevant to the entire PROSPER project, including the agri-enterprise and related 
socioeconomic infrastructure sub-projects whose locations are not yet known, and will not be 
prior to project appraisal. However, for these subprojects, a separate screening as outlined 
herein is still required. The outcome of this screening and subsequent review may lead to the 
likely development of more detailed, site-specific ESMPs. In this case, the ESMP will list the 
commitments and actions PROSPER will undertake to achieve compliance with the relevant 
SECAP policies/standards throughout the entire project lifecycle.  
In case of a change management that leads to a reclassification of the project during the 
implementation stage of this project, and new risks are identified then, the ESMP will be 
reviewed accordingly. 
6.1 Mitigation Measures Checklist 
By design, PROSPER is expected to have far greater environmental, climate and social 
benefits than its foreseen adverse impacts. These potential adverse impacts from the project 
are likely to be small in scale and limited in size. Spatial and temporal distribution of impacts 
that would result from the project activities, as well as the sub-projects requires specific 
attention particularly during project screening.  
However, it is recognized that such impacts, if they are not identified early enough during the 
planning and preparation stages, and their mitigation measures adequately integrated into the 
project planning and implementation, they can most likely accrue into larger impacts. Given 
the fact that minimum impact sub-projects are eligible and the level of available fund for each 
district, such impacts could be easily mitigated using sensible site selection criteria, good 
construction practices in harmony with the local culture and diligent management practices in 
the operational phase129.  
This section discusses the impacts and mitigation measures for component 1 activities 
mainly. The 
following table describes the impacts and mitigation measures from the agricultural 
production activities, mainly driven from foreseen activities in component 1. 
129
-As mitigation measures must be taken into account as part of the sub-project design and costs, the ESMP does not need a separate budget 
allocation. However, it is imperative that activities’ costs reflect the resources needed to fully implement the ESMP.  
111 
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
Table 9: Environmental (incl. Climate Change) and Social Management Plan  
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
Component 1: Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic 
Subcomponent 1.2 Development of socioeconomic infrastructure. 
ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE & SOCIAL MONITORING 
Socioeconomic 
Infrastructure  
(Moderate) 
Feasibility study for 
feeder/track roads and 
causeways, dykes 
Recommended Monitoring 
Indicator 
Baseline on status of the 
environmental climate and 
social conditions in the 
selected communities 
PCU / contractor/ 
Ministry of 
infrastructure 
(MOI) 
Site-specific 
ESMP reports 
Adherence to 
laid legal and 
policy 
requirements 
(Category B) 
Field survey  
Once, at the 
beginning of 
project 
Baseline, once at 
beginning of 
project 
See environmental, climate 
and social indicators 
mentioned below 
PCU/ National 
Environment 
Agency (EPA) 
Soil micro-organism count 
Soil organic matter count 
Adopt use of climate 
friendly technics 
Water quality 
PCU (Safeguards 
and climate team) 
PCU 
PCU 
Field 
measurement, 
incl. soil sample 
analysis 
Field 
measurement 
and Laboratory 
test 
Remote sensing 
and field 
assessment 
Annual (or after 
cropping cycle) 
Annual (or after 
cropping cycle) 
Baseline, Mid-
Term, End- Term 
Conduct a baseline 
assessment to obtain 
baseline values of key 
environmental. Climate and 
social parameters in 
concerned communities 
Monitor quality of soil and 
other biological conditions 
Monitor sample quality of 
surface and subsurface 
water at random sites 
Environmental and 
social baseline 
(Moderate) 
Land and soil 
degradation 
(Moderate) 
Surface and 
subsurface water 
quality 
(Moderate) 
Degradation of 
Forest and wetland 
(Moderate) 
Monitor quality of forest 
and wetlands 
Changes in forest and 
wetland area 
112 
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
Erosion and gully 
(Moderate) 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
Monitor quality of land 
Recommended Monitoring 
Indicator 
Changes in area of bare 
surfaces  
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
PCU 
Bush and pipeline 
fire 
Monitor quality of 
vegetation 
Changes in vegetal cover 
PCU 
Monitor quality of 
biodiversity   
Changes in abundance of 
biodiversity 
Monitor quality of land, 
water, and air 
Changes in soil, air, and 
water quality 
PCU 
PCU 
Monitor quality of plant, 
soil, and water 
Changes in quality of plant, 
soil, and water 
PCU 
Monitor quality of land 
Extent of land inundation  
PCU 
Monitor quality of air 
Preponderance of GHG in 
the air 
PCU/ National 
Environment 
Agency (EPA) 
Loss of 
biodiversity 
(Moderate) 
Waste 
proliferation 
(High) 
Use of 
agrochemicals 
(Moderate) 
Flooding 
(High) 
GHG emissions 
(High) 
Socio-economic 
conditions 
(Moderate) 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
Remote sensing 
and field 
assessment 
Remote sensing 
and field 
assessment 
Field survey 
Field 
measurement 
and laboratory 
test 
Laboratory test 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Baseline, Mid-
Term, End- Term 
Annual 
Annual  
Annual  
Annual  
Field survey and 
remote sensing 
Field 
measurement  
Quarterly  
Annually 
Conduct a combined 
sustainable livelihood 
analysis (SLA) / resilience 
assessment, providing 
baseline status of key 
socio-economic conditions 
in selected communities  
Food security, assets, 
employment, income, 
production methods and 
volumes, access to markets 
and finance, social 
inclusion, disaster 
preparedness 
113 
PCU 
Field survey 
Field 
measurement 
(update) 
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
Community 
conflict (internal) 
(Moderate) 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
Monitor  the effectiveness 
of grievance redress 
mechanism  
Youth violence 
(militancy and 
cultism) 
(Moderate) 
Resource-based 
conflict (farmers – 
pastoralists) 
(High) 
Loss of (access to) 
agricultural land 
(Moderate) 
Social exclusion 
(Moderate) 
Elite capture 
(High) 
Unsafe and non-
healthy working 
conditions 
(Moderate) 
Monitor youth violence 
situation 
Monitor conflict situation 
Monitor land access and 
ownership 
Monitor inclusion of 
women, PWD, and youth in 
decision-making 
Monitor (political) 
interference, conflicts of 
interest, corruption 
Monitor health impacts and 
child labour 
Recommended Monitoring 
Indicator 
Occurrence of violent 
conflicts within selected 
communities 
Occurrence of youth 
violence within selected 
communities 
Occurrence of violent 
conflicts between selected 
communities and external 
parties 
Change in land access and 
ownership for women and 
youth 
Percentage of women. PWD 
and youth represented in 
community-level decision-
making committees, 
associations and meetings 
PCU 
Number of cases reported 
and suspected of health 
impact due to use of agro-
chemicals, accidents due to 
use of production and 
processing machinery and 
114 
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
PCU/ Ministry of 
social affairs and 
local development  
PCU/Ministry of 
Justice 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
Community visit 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Community visit  Quarterly 
PCU 
Community visit  Quarterly 
PCU 
Community visit  Annually 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Justice 
Community visit  Annually 
PCU/ ministry of 
agriculture 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Heath  
Community visit  Annually 
Community visit  Annually 
Parameter 
(Activity & 
Significance) 
Activity 
(Proposed Mitigation 
Means) 
Recommended Monitoring 
Indicator 
Responsibility for 
Implementation 
monitoring 
Indicators and 
Monitoring 
means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Gender-based 
Violence including 
Sexual 
Exploitation, 
Abuse (High) 
Financing  
(Moderate) 
raise awareness or 
interventions on SEA 
related faulty wiring and, 
use of child labour.  
Percentage of people 
sensitized  
Number of MFIs partners 
that have integrated 
sustainability into their 
financing (ESMS of Fis 
such as RCBs) 
Subscribe to the principles 
of  
sustainable 
environmental, climate 
and social management 
in the financing of 
business plans (ESMS of 
FIs such as RCBs) 
PCU/ Ministry of 
Justice/ Gender and 
women 
Community visit  Annually  
PCU 
Community visit  Annually 
Socioeconomic 
Infrastructures 
(Moderate) 
Business Plan 
Development per 
activity 
(Moderate) 
Source: CATS-August 2021 
Feasibility studies  
Screening of sub-activity + 
Site specific E&S impacts 
Assessment (ESMP) 
Reports 
Reports 
PCU/ Ministry of 
infrastructures  
PCU 
Community visit   First year 
Community visit  At the beginning 
prior to activity 
implementation 
115 
Summary of Environmental and Climate Mitigation Measures: Indirect, increased use of pesticides will 
be mitigated against be proactively offering training on IPM. In instances where pesticides use is 
unavoidable, training on the safe handling of pesticides will be provided and bio-pesticides and biofertilizer 
will be promoted in the BPs over other varieties. There will be no pesticides procurement under this project, 
and highly hazardous pesticides (HHP) would not be used in the project areas. Both the PCU and LPIU 
Safeguards specialists will work closely with recipient communities to ensure systematic compliance with 
these safeguards measures. 
Summary of Social Mitigation Measures: Risks associated with decent rural employment, GBV/SEAH, 
occupational health and safety, and land tenure will be mitigated with application of: (i) the Voluntary 
Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests (VGGT); (ii) 
sensitization training on safe, decent rural employment and age-appropriate work, given that youth often 
assist with the farming work of their respective families, including GBV and SEAH; and (iii) safe and 
secured use of pesticides. To further ensure social inclusion of vulnerable groups and citizen/stakeholders’ 
engagement, ongoing consultations, and participatory M&E will continue throughout the project lifecycle as 
a means of providing a feedback loop to foster stakeholders’ ownership and social accountability. The 
established grievance redress mechanism (GRM) will be conducted in line with the requests from 
community consultations and will be sensitive to the needs of vulnerable groups, especially widows, 
disadvantaged and disables. 
6.2  Approach to Enhance Project Implementation 
This ESMF, along with the Gender Action Plan (GAP), is not being used solely as a compliance process: it 
goes beyond compliance and takes a proactive approach in design. Similarly, the grievance redress 
mechanism included in this document is not just about being a last-resort mechanism; rather, the GRM is 
about creating a project culture of transparency with built-in feedback systems. Both the ESMF and the 
Gender Action Plan are taken as positive aspects that help the project implementation units (at central and 
local levels) in identifying and developing activities for greater environmental and social co-benefits. To 
ensure, that the social, climate and environmental issues are addressed properly in accordance and in 
compliance with the IFAD’s SECAP, all project activities shall systematically undergo a thorough 
screening, assessment, review, and clearance process before the physical execution of project activities. 
This chapter describes the process for ensuring that environmental, climate and social safeguards concerns 
are adequately addressed through the proposed institutional arrangements and procedures used by the 
project for managing the identification, preparation, approval, implementation and reporting of sub-
activities. The detailed environmental and social safeguard process is listed below:  
6.2.1 Screening and Review 
PROSPER Environment and Social Safeguards Risk Category is ‘B’ which means that ‘some adverse 
impacts can be readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation130. However, to remain 
a ‘B’ Category Project serious attention must be paid to land development (i.e., likely potential for 
deforestation and related secondary effects), and development of socioeconomic infrastructure including 
construction of feeder roads and small earth dams and irrigation schemes development. Loss of investments 
to floods, other natural hazards including drought is also very high across the participating 8 regions of the 
middle and north belts. By far the most important social risk is the resource-induced clashes between 
farmers and pastoralists given the rich livestock capital both natural regions are endowed with. All the 
project areas have the potential of being impacted by this risk.  
130
 Source: IFAD (2016) Managing Risks to Create Opportunities. IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) (IFAD: Rome), p.18  
116 
During implementation, it is essential that all sub-project proposals be screened, first on eligibility on the 
basis of the ‘letter of interest’ / application form (see Annex 1), and secondly on the basis of environmental, 
climate and social impacts using the more detailed screening forms (see Annex 2)). Project Screening for 
Project Screening for environmental, climate and social impacts will ensure that sub-projects with high and 
irreversible impacts on the environment or people that cannot be readily mitigated are not eligible for 
support by PROSPER . It is very important to ensure that before land is developed for any cluster or farmer 
organization, they should take the responsibility of planting trees at the perimeter of the land area and 
nurturing them. 
Sub-project proposals with medium (manageable) environmental and social impacts should include the 
following basic elements in the application and contain in the project-specific ESMP:  
a.  A summary and description of the possible adverse effects that specific sub-project activities may 
occur;  
b.  A description of any planned measures to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts, and how and when they 
will be implemented;  
c.  A system for monitoring the environmental and social effects of the project;  
d.  A description of who will be responsible for implementing and monitoring the mitigation measures; 
and  
e.  A cost estimate of the mitigation measures, which should be included in the sub-project proposal.  
The scope of any environmental and/or social review and related mitigation measures will be determined by 
the relevant PIU Environmental, Climate, Social Specialist (PIU- 1ECSS) in consultation with each of the 
two Zonal Officers (Northern Belt & Middle Belt – 2 ZECSO) and each of the 8 Regional Safeguards and 
Climate Focal Points (8 RSCFP) and involved technical experts where needed, via the sub-project screening 
and approval process. Sub-project proposals with only minor or no adverse impacts do not need a separate 
review (or ESMP).  
  Screening for Eligibility  
Thus far, PROSPER’s PDR provides a detailed description of the targeting and selection process for project 
beneficiaries. Annex 1 provides the proposed format for the letter of interest/application form, which should 
be completed by each intended beneficiary and will be used as the primary tool for screening for eligibility.  
  Screening for Environmental, Climate and Social Impacts  
Based on relevant SECAP guidelines, two separate environmental and social screening forms have been 
developed: for agri-enterprise (Annex 2) and related socioeconomic infrastructure subprojects (Annex 3), 
and climate screening form for sub-projects (Annex 4).The intended beneficiaries are only required to 
complete the intention/application form in Annex 1 while the screening is done using the form in Annex 2, 
3 and 4 by the PIU Environmental, Climate and Social Specialist (ECSS, assisted by the corresponding 
zonal ZECSO and corresponding RSCFP).  
Annex 5 provides an environmental and social guideline for contractors, especially those handling the 
construction of socioeconomic infrastructure such as the construction/rehabilitation of market-connected 
rural feeder roads, irrigation facilities, dam’s construction, production platforms, etc. Sound environmental 
and social management of construction projects can be achieved only with adequate site selection and 
project design. As such, the ESMP for projects involving any new construction, or any rehabilitation or 
reconstruction for existing projects, should provide information as to screening criteria for site selection and 
design. The guidelines include the site selection, prohibitions, construction management measures, safety 
during construction, community relations, chance finds procedures and environmental supervision during 
construction. 
117 
  Impact Significance Rating 
To determine the significance of impacts, the likelihood of an impact occurring is considered against the 
consequence or magnitude of the impact if it was to occur. Likelihood is defined as the frequency of an 
impact occurring.  
Table 10 Definitions of Consequence  
Consequence 
No Impact / No 
change 
Negligible 
Intermediate 
Severe 
Unknown 
Definition 
•  No impacts on biophysical and social environments / livelihood / 
health / gender  
•  No public concerns  
•  No legal issues  
•  Low/minor impact on environment / livelihood / health / gender  
•  Minor social impacts  
•  No legal issues  
•  Some level of impact on environment / livelihood / health / gender  
•  Social issues apparent  
•  May have legal implications  
•  High level impacts on environment / livelihood / health / gender  
•  High public concerns or perceptions  
•  Legal non- compliance  
•  Extent of the impact cannot be determined at this point  
•  Apply precautionary principle  
  Projects that have low significance impacts may not require a new ESMP; in that case the standard 
ESMP in the ESMF report will suffice.  
  In the case of project with medium significance, the development of appropriate plans, in addition to 
the standard ESMP in this ESMF may suffice to manage the severity of the impacts.  
  In the case of projects with impacts of high significance, a separate ESIA is almost always required. 
6.2.2 Safeguards and Climate Implementation Arrangements (SCIA) 
Project Implementation Arrangement for Safeguards and Climate 
For safeguards implementation, the Project Coordinator leading the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will 
have the overall responsibility and accountability for the implementation of the project, including 
environmental and social safeguards and climate change compliance. More specifically, a Safeguards and 
Climate Specialist as well as Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will be included in the PCU. They both 
will be the recipient of all project-related grievances at both the central and local levels, as detailed within 
the Grievance Redress Mechanism process in the below pages (i.e. section 9) of this ESMF. The roles and 
responsibilities of some of the PCU staffs are described in more details in both the project description in this 
document and in the Project Document Report (PDR). 
 Project Coordination Unit (PCU): A Project Coordination Unit, led and hosted by the MOFA, will be 
established in the project area (potentially in Tamale) to ensure political anchorage within the overarching 
decision-making structures, SECAP and strategies.  The Project Steering Committee (SC) will include EPA. 
A National Project Coordinator (NPC) will be responsible for the physical operational and administrative 
project implementation and coordination with all project stakeholders, and operational leadership of the 
PCU. Under the overall leadership of the NPC, and in close coordination with the PCU Senior Safeguards 
and Climate Specialist (SSCS), the Senior Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (SGSIS) and likewise, 
financial intermediaries like APEX Bank will have both a Safeguards and Climate Specialist (SSCS), the 
Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (SGSIS)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
118 
the Executing Entity (MOFA), the PROSPER-PCU will be responsible for providing support to the 
implementation of the day-to-day activities at the national/central level  
Both the Senior SCS and the Senior GSIS will be hired by the PCU to spearhead the different Safeguards 
and Climate, as well as Gender and Social Inclusion compliance with the ESMF and ESMP core 
requirements, its implementation, and its regular reporting across all project activities. In order to retain 
close proximity to the project intervention areas, the SSCS and the GSIS will be based out at the PCU in the 
field and ensure that the staff on-the-ground in the project areas conduct a screening for sub-activities prior 
to implementation, and then mitigate for any medium-risk activities using site-specific ESMPs developed 
during project implementation, based on that very screening checklist, once project activities footprints are 
known and clearer.  
At local level, the BFF at the APEX Bank will include a Safeguards and Climate Specialist (SCS) and 
Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (GSIS)  who will ensure that the BPs are implemented in accordance 
with this ESMF/ESMP and IFAD SECAP guidelines. These two specialists will work in tandem with and 
report to the PCU’s Specialists.  
IFAD will have a designated Lead Safeguards and Climate Expert (LSCE) who will liaise with both PCU 
and APEX specialists to ensure constant brainstorming on the way the safeguards and climate as well as 
Gender and Social Inclusion dimensions agenda of PROSPER to ensure SECAP procedures are fully and 
adequately complied with. S/He will work in tandem with both the PCU and APEX Specialists. 
6.3 Integrated Pests and Pesticides Management Plan (IPPM) 
As stated in the tables above and some of the listed national laws and regulations, procurement of pest and 
pesticides is not envisaged under this project. However, the project could include sub-projects relating to 
enhancement of agricultural productivity and introduction of high value crops, support seed banks and 
beekeeping. These activities could result in the use of pesticides. The ESMF has included a screening tool to 
identify subprojects that would need to prepare a simple integrated pest management plan (IPPMP). Such 
subprojects will prepare and publicly disclose an IPPMP before they are approved for physical 
implementation. The Project will include relevant training at the field level such as in pest management 
(PM), selecting disease free seeds, bee keeping, etc. A mechanism will be put in place to demonstrate 
Integrated Pest Management procedures and to develop a farmer education program that stresses good and 
safe practices for storage and application of pesticides.  
The project will use the Guidance document provided in Annex 11 for identifying the need to prepare an 
IPPMP for a sub-project. A separate IPPMP is needed if expected quantities of pesticides to be used are 
significant from health and environment (biophysical & human) standpoint; or if pesticides use or other 
non-indigenous biological control into an area will be introduced; or if hazardous products (WHO Class la 
& lb) will be financed. The IPPMP consists of the following components:  
  Activities  
  Actors and partners  
  Institutional arrangements for implementation  
  Phasing plan  
  Cost estimates  
The activities of the PMP are designed to ensure that implementation of PROSPER project in the selected 5 
districts in each of the 8 regions of PROSPER intervention areas complies with both IFAD and 
corresponding national regulation. 
  Activity 1 – If feasible, study tours will be organized to similar programs/agency where farmers 
participatory Pest Management (PM) programs have been successfully implemented. The study tour 
119 
will be organized for representatives of selected project district areas. A regional PM workshop (within 
the NMB) will be organized to cross fertilize and share experiences gained during the study tour and to 
facilitate the implementation of the IPMPs.  
  Activity 2 - Promoting the adoption of climate-smart PM practices  
  Supporting activities of the Community PM Action Committees  
  Developing PM training capacity in the extension services  
  Developing PM capacities amongst PIU and farmer Groups  
  Production of field brochures, PM posters, field guides and other IPM promotional materials; 
purchase of various PM Extension Guides publications.  
  Public awareness programs and PM networking amongst the project stakeholders  
  Activity 3 - Training in pesticides management; safe and secure use of pesticides  
  Making decisions to use pesticides  
  Transport, storage, handling, and distribution of pesticides  
  Safe application of pesticides  
  Risks in the handling and use of pesticides  
  Managing risks and pesticide poisoning  
  Protective gear; use and maintenance  
  Public awareness raising on the safe use of pesticides; radio talks, social medias, etc.  
  Activity 4 - Strengthening national regulatory frameworks and institutional capacities  
  Support PCU to assist with national coordination of PMP activities of PROSPER project.  
  Support teams and beneficiaries to participate effectively in the implementation of the PMP  
  Activity 5 - Integrated Vector Management: surveillance of disease vector populations in the 
environment of small irrigation schemes. 
  Surveillance teams to be set up in villages around the water sources and irrigation sites to conduct 
regular surveys on the incidence of waterborne diseases.  
  Training in environment and social management for the control of waterborne diseases  
6.4 ESMF Monitoring and Evaluation  
The overall objective of environmental and social monitoring is to ensure that recommended mitigation 
measures are incorporated, and that activities carried out during sensitization (i.e., training and awareness-
raising) and infrastructure construction/maintenance are environmentally and socially acceptable, and 
therefore sustainable. 
6.4.1 Project Monitoring & Evaluation 
Currently IFAD M&E conducts multiple impact assessment studies for the projects they implement: 
Baseline Surveys, Post-Distribution Assessments, and Impact Assessments, etc. The Baseline Surveys, 
conducted regularly, will employ a hybrid approach that uses IFAD Field Monitors. An Impact Assessment 
to evaluate the project performance and achievements will be conducted once all data have been analyzed, 
activities implemented, and results validated by IFAD-Ghana.  
6.4.2 Sub-Project Monitoring and Evaluation  
Monitoring and reporting will be supervised by IFAD staff. Associated Government agencies and members 
of the community, through their representatives, should be trained to undertake both compliance monitoring 
and impact monitoring. This will be done throughout the sub-project cycle namely:  
  During the planning phase, communities will participate in the identification of indicators for 
monitoring the mitigating measures;  
120 
  During the implementation phase, monitoring the execution of any works with respect to 
environmental and social aspects,  
  During the operation and maintenance phase, the overall environmental, climate and social 
monitoring (including monitoring human-natural resources conflict) and alerting on any emerging 
environmental/climate hazards in conjunction with the ongoing sub-project activities. Communities 
will pass on their observations and concerns through the local Ghana-IFAD Project staff.  
Key Performance Indicators 
The key impact indicators for PROSPER are that: 
  Estimated corresponding total number of household members  
  Corresponding number of households reached  
  Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project (out of which 10% are PWD)  
  Number of people with greater resilience (including PWD) 
  Number of women and youth with access to good nutrition services   
  Percentage of households reporting an improved access to markets and a 30% income increase) 
, 
The key monitoring indicators/variables include:  
  Number of persons/households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs, technologies, or 
practices  
  Number of hectares of farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated  
  Number of upgraded women/youth-led vegetable gardens 
  Number of integrated market-oriented vegetable garden financed through matching grants 
  Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies  
  Number of rural producers accessing production inputs  
  Number of Jobs created (100% youth-led agricultural service businesses)  
  Number of financial service providers supported in delivering outreach strategies, financial products 
and services to rural areas  
  Number of farmers’ organizations engaged in formal partnerships/agreements or contracts with 
public or private entities  
  Number of effective agricultural value chain interaction platforms (AVIP) 
  Number of rural farmers’ organizations supported  
  Number of 4P businesses supported 
  Number of feeder road/track roads (Km) rehabilitated/construction per districts 
  Number of feeder road/track-roads maintained per year in districts, 
  Number occupational health and safety sessions per RI organized per district 
  Number of market or storage facilities (warehouse, workshop, silos) constructed or rehabilitated  
  Number of agribusiness policy-dialogue (meetings, roundtables) between public, private and 
producers’ stakeholders conducted 
Various project impacts and aspects relate to these overall performance targets. When the activities and 
indicators are established, baseline data needs to be collected to serve as a benchmark and against which 
changes in the identified indicators can be measured. The types of parameters that can be monitored may 
include mitigation measures or design features, or actual impacts. In some cases, such as drainage structures 
and soil conservation interventions, monitoring is straightforward and can be done as part of routine or 
periodic maintenance.  However, other parameters, particularly those related to social, ecological and 
climate change issues can only be effectively assessed over a period of 2 to 3 years. 
121 
ESMF Implementation Timeline and Budget  
6.5 
As outlined in the ESMF, the day-to-day implementation of the ESMF for the PROSPER project, will be 
led by two full-time project-recruited staffs, namely (i) a Senior Environmental, Climate and Social 
Safeguards Specialist (SECSSS) and a (ii) Senior Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (SGSIS) at the 
PCU level in Tamale (indicatively), and supplemented by a Focal Point (FP) in each of the participating 
85 districts of PROSPER in the 8 regions. These FPs will be hosted at the Local Authorities level with 
whom PROSPER management will sign an MOU (Memorandum of Understanding) to spearhead project 
implementation at local levels The foreseen duration of PROSPER is eight (08) years (2022-2029).. The 
total hiring of the proposed Safeguards et Climate + Gender and Social Inclusion team (1 SECSSS & 1 
SGSIS), so to properly integrate gender and social inclusion mainstreaming in the safeguards management, 
especially at local level during the 8-years project duration, along with their provision for personal capacity 
strengthening each year is estimated to be $910,000 USD. This cost will be included in the project overall 
cost, notably in Component 3. 
At local level, the BFF at the APEX Bank will include a Safeguards and Climate Specialist (SCS) and 
Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (GSIS) who will ensure that the BPs are implemented in accordance 
with this ESMF/ESMP and IFAD SECAP guidelines. These two specialists will work in tandem with and 
report to the PCU’s Specialists.  
IFAD will have a designated Lead Safeguards and Climate Expert (LSCE) who will work as counterpart 
with all 4 specialists (2 for the PCU and 2 for APEX). To ensure safeguards and climate as well as Gender 
and Social Inclusion compliance agenda of PROSPER to ensure SECAP procedures are fully and 
adequately complied with. S/He will work in tandem with both the PCU and APEX Specialists. 
The monitoring plan in Table 12- lists the parameters to be monitored, activity that will generate the 
parameters, monitoring indicators, and responsibility, monitoring means, frequency and the estimated cost.  
Parameter 
Table 11-  ESMF Timeline & Budget for PROSPER Implementation  
Monitori
ng means 
Activity 
Monitorin
g 
Indicator 
Responsibili
ty for 
monitoring 
Baseline 
on the 
status of 
the 
environme
ntal, 
climate 
and social 
conditions 
Environment
al, Climate et 
Social 
Screening 
and impact 
assessment 
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING  
Site-specific ESMPs 
and Environmental, 
Climate and Social 
Screening for roads 
(feeder and/or track) 
construction/rehabilit
ation,   
processing facilities 
construction, 
irrigation schemes 
development, 
commodity 
warehouse or 
workshop 
construction, and 
borehole/drinking 
water points 
C-ESMP 
reports 
Adherenc
e to laid 
legal and 
policy 
requireme
nts 
(Category 
B) 
PCUs  FP, 
EPA, 
MOFA, 
DDA, 
MOW, 
Infrastructur
e/ Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
122 
Recommend
ed frequency 
of 
monitoring 
Estimate
d 
Monitori
ng Costs 
(USD) 
Once (project 
specific – At 
least once 
each year, 
depending 
also on the 
needs on the 
ground) 
1,000,000 
($125,000 
x 8) 
Parameter 
Activity 
Monitorin
g 
Indicator 
Responsibili
ty for 
monitoring 
Monitori
ng means 
Recommend
ed frequency 
of 
monitoring 
Estimate
d 
Monitori
ng Costs 
(USD) 
construction/rehabilit
ation 
Environmental, 
Climate and Social 
Monitoring – include 
- baseline and end 
term survey, 
biodiversity surveys; 
monitoring of land, 
water, and soil 
degradation and 
agrochemicals; 
climate, flooding and 
erosion prediction; 
pest infestation 
prediction and 
management 
Risk Transfer - Agric 
insurance 
Environment
al, Climate 
and Social 
Screening 
and risk & 
impact 
assessment 
Baseline 
on status 
of the 
social, 
environme
nt and 
climate 
conditions, 
risks, and 
vulnerabili
ties  
Climate and 
conflicts risk 
transfer 
Farmers 
sign on to 
agriculture 
insurance 
Technical support and 
backstopping - 
includes support for 
GHANA Agrimet for 
agroclimatic weather 
production and 
dissemination and 
setting up mini 
weather station; seed 
labs/sillos; and bio 
waste valorization ( 
Biogas et/ou bio-
fertilizers production 
Support for 
the GHANA 
Agrimet 
to install 
weather 
station and 
produce 
agroclimatic 
data for 
periodic 
climate 
monitoring  
Number of 
mini 
weather 
stations 
installed 
Periodic 
production 
and 
disseminati
on of 
agroclimati
c 
Baseline 
reports,  
Biodiversi
ty surveys 
report 
Climate 
risk and 
flooding 
and 
erosion 
risk 
reports 
Pest 
infestation 
prediction 
report  
Number 
of RIs that 
sign onto 
agric-
insurance   
Field 
observatio
n 
PCUs & FP, 
EPA, 
MOFA, 
DDA, 
MOW, 
Infrastructur
e/ Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
PCUs & 
FPs, EPA, 
MOFA, 
DDA, 
MOW, 
Infrastructur
e/ Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
PCUs & 
PFPs, EPA, 
MOFA, 
DDA, 
MOW, 
Infrastructur
e/ Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
123 
Baseline and 
end term  
Once for 
specialized 
reports 
(incremental, 
based on 
needs on the 
ground) 
200,000 
($25,000x
8) 
Annual  
Twice a year 
and on a 
random basis 
to ensure 
consistency  
350,000 
This is 
part of 
the 
original 
project 
activities 
600,000 
($75,000x
8) 
 Only 
AGRIME
T 
included 
in the 
costabs 
explicitly, 
the rest 
are 
mainstrea
Parameter 
Activity 
Monitorin
g 
Indicator 
Responsibili
ty for 
monitoring 
Monitori
ng means 
Recommend
ed frequency 
of 
monitoring 
Estimate
d 
Monitori
ng Costs 
(USD) 
med in 
the BP. 
informatio
n 
Number of 
equipped 
seed lab 
Number of 
rice and 
vegetable 
waste 
valorizatio
n 
initiatives 
Number of 
those 
trained 
Support seed 
lab 
development 
Support rice 
and 
vegetable 
waste 
valorization 
Training of 
spraying 
gangs 
integrated 
pest and 
agrochemica
l 
management 
Training of 
farmers on 
water 
harvesting 
for dry 
season 
farming 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
Field 
observatio
n 
PCUs & 
FPs, EPA, 
MOFA, 
DDA, 
MOW, 
Infrastructur
e/ Transport/ 
Irrigation 
Engineer, 
ECS Officer, 
Service 
Providers; 
RI, CRBs, 
District. 
Training-includes 
training of spraying 
gangs, draining of 
rice paddies; and 
construction of water 
harvesting structure 
for both dry season 
irrigation and animal 
drinking point and 
fishfarming 
Twice a year, 
on a random 
basis. 
200,000 
SOCIAL MONITORING  
Support for conflict 
resolution -  include 
support for 
stakeholders dialogue 
on conflict 
management and land 
governance 
Conflict 
resolution 
stakeholders 
support and 
land 
governance 
dialogue 
Other Social 
monitoring (GBV, 
SEAH vulnerability,  
Include 
gender and 
People living 
with 
disabilities 
(PLWD) 
mainstreami
ng  
Activities 
of conflict 
resolution 
committee 
Organize 
land 
governanc
e dialogue 
Activities 
of 
Targeting 
committee  
PCU/FP, 
MOFA, 
EPA, 
Environment
al Officer, 
Conflict 
resolution 
and land 
governanc
e dialogue 
reports  
Once (more 
precisely the 
need is put 
forth  
300,000 
Annual 
PCU/FP, 
MOFA, 
EPA, 
MOWA 
Environment
al Officer, 
Social 
Surveys, 
Beneficiar
ies 
assessmen
t  
100,000 
Health and Safety 
Number of 
farmers 
PCU/FP, 
MOFA, 
DHS 
Reports  
Annual 
100,000 
124 
Parameter 
Activity 
Monitorin
g 
Indicator 
Responsibili
ty for 
monitoring 
Monitori
ng means 
Recommend
ed frequency 
of 
monitoring 
Estimate
d 
Monitori
ng Costs 
(USD) 
Health 
Insurance 
and outreach  
with health 
insurance 
contracts 
EPA, 
MOWA, 
MOH, 
Environment
al Officer, 
GRAND TOTAL 
2,850,000 
NOTE: Most of these costs are already included in the project costab and already mainstreamed altogether 
with other related activities, carefully distributed between among sub-component 1-2 ($700K), Matching 
Grants Scheme of sub-component 2-2 ($100K) and Blended Finance Facility of sub-component 2-2 (200K).  
125 
7.  CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND 
SOCIAL MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING PLANS  
7.1 Strengthening Capacity and Improving Resilience  
A successful mainstreaming of climate change and the ESMF into implementation of the project requires 
the strengthening of institutional capacities, in particular those, of the Agricultural Development Program 
by setting up mini weather station, Farmers Organization and Women Organizations. Moreover, there is a 
strong need for context-specific, in-situ training sessions for farmers, and others in the value chain, for 
example on climate-smart agriculture and climate change adaptation, to improve their resilience to deal 
more effectively with climate-related weather events. The same is also true for the economic, social and 
environmental literacy of RI, especially women, youth, PLWDs and RCBs. 
7.1.1 Training Topics  
Proposed training topics include, at the very least:  
a.  Screening and rating as prescribed in the ESMF;  
b.  Requirements of IFAD’s SECAP and NRM, Gender/GBV/SEAH/VAC, Climate, Land, policies ;  
c.  ESMF processes, procedures and institutional arrangements to develop and implement required 
management plans;  
d.  Stakeholder consultation, participation, and public disclosure policies 
e.  Agroclimatic data and early warning (including pest infestation) capacity building 
f.  Environmental, social and climate risks and impacts assessment, and requirements ;  
g.  Preparation, implementation, monitoring and reporting of ESMPs ;  
h.  Community, RIs and agro-SMEs sensitization – including insurance and risk transfer mechanisms 
i.  RIs training on climate smart agriculture, environmental and social best practices, including: 
Sustainable land preparations, agrochemical application and pest and disease management, 
sustainable agronomic practices,                                                                                                                   
soil fertility management, low-impact farming methods,  
j.  Conflict resolution and grievance management mechanisms;  
k.  Sustainable agriculture waste management ; 
l.  Environmental (EMS-ISO.14001), social audit, and report writing  
7.1.2 Target Audience and Approach  
The target groups for training should include, at least:  
a.  Project Coordination Units Staffs (PCU+ SGIS + FP)    
b.  MOFA, EPA, DDAs, MOW/MOSF staff, and EAs 
c.  Service providers  
d.  Beneficiaries (i.e., incubators and apprentices)  
e.  Farmers Organizations  
f.  Economists 
The training topics will be delivered based on the needs of each training target group. As much as possible, 
Training the Trainers (TOT) will be encouraged, where applicable, to manage resources and effectively 
reach the target audiences. 
Table 12: Training Activity and Estimated Cost 
N
B  Activity 
1 
Global Stakeholders and District 
Communities sensitization 
workshops 
This is already factored in the 
project design under sub-
component 1-1 
Year 
(2022-2029) 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8   
Budget 
(USD) 
Remarks 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  X  X 
X 
350,000 
Local media stream (recurrent) 
+:  
126 
N
B  Activity 
Year 
(2022-2029) 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8   
Budget 
(USD) 
Remarks 
ToT Capacity building for uptake 
of agroclimatic information and 
early warming   DDAs including 
safeguards 
X 
X 
X 
  X   
120,000 
X 
X    X 
  X    X 
75,000 
2-day -Training of ECS 
Officers and Focal Points and 
selected implementation staff, 
to downscale to farmers ,( 
Included in ToT under 
subcomponent 1.1) – This is 
already mainstreamed in the 
costable. 
1day workshop ( In the policy 
dialogue sub-component 3-2 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
Stakeholders dialogue on green 
financing and climate smart 
agriculture 
Capacity building in IFADs & 
EPA  ESMPs processes, 
procedures, implementation, and 
monitoring  
RIs training on climate smart 
agriculture, environmental and 
social best practices,  
Stakeholders’ capacity building on 
Conflict resolution and grievance 
redress mechanism 
Environmental, Climate and Social 
Audit and report writing 
GRAND TOTAL 
X  X    X 
X 
X  100,000 
3 days training (refresher 
courses) each other year 
X    X 
X 
125,000 
X 
X 
2day per each of the 8 regions 
Under component 1-1 
85,000 
2day per each of the 8 regions 
X 
X     X 
  X    X 
75,000 
3day workshop for ECS 
officers led by IFAD’s LSCS 
920,000 
Note: Generally, training is already mainstreamed across the different components131. Given the fact that 
PROSPER is a climate focused project and has a strong focus on the environment and the social, many of 
the training and ESMP measures are already mainstreamed in project activities. However, the 
abovementioned cost are just for safeguards purposes. The total training cost for the whole project duration 
is estimated at USD $920,000 of the project cost. The total cost of the 2 Specialists at the PCU level and the 
two from APEX offices. 
More specifically, a conservative estimate is that both the Environmental and Social Monitoring (including 
safeguards and Gender provision for the MOU with the Government, especially for the 85 Focal Points 
pour les 8 années de fonctionnement du PROSPER, costs and Training cost accounts for USD $ 3 million.. 
Tableau 13: Key PCU, Safeguards and Climate Staffs estimated Budget. 
131 - These are distributed among sub-component 1-2 ($700K), Matching Grants Scheme of sub-component 2-2 ($100K) and Blended Finance Facility of sub-
component 2-2 (200K) 
127 
Designation 
Duration  Unit 
Total Cost 
Senior Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards 
Specialist – PCU (Temale) 
Senior Gender (GBV/SEAHVAC) Mainstreaming Officer 
(Temale) 
 Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Specialist –
(APEX) 
 Gender (GBV/SEAHVAC) Mainstreaming Officer (APEX) 
Capacity Building to enhance their technical performances 
Broader Miscellaneous (5%) 
Grand Total  
96 
96 
96 
96 
FF 
FF 
--- 
Cost/Year 
36,000 
36,000 
32,000 
32,000 
1,700 
10,000 
---- 
550,000 
500,000 
450,000 
430,000 
65, 000 
80,000 
2,080,000 
Note: We opted for a rather more inclusive approach. Therefore, the above estimate is for both the 
Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Specialist and the Gender and Social Inclusion at the PCU 
level in Tamalé (Most likely). . There will Safeguards focal point identified at the district level.  
To make it rather more inclusive and constructive, as it will surely yield more sustainable results, it is 
suggestable to:  
  (i) have both the (a) Senior Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Specialist (SECSSS) and the 
Senior Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist (SGSIS) at the PCU level in the main office in Temale; 
and (b) an Environmental, Climate and Social Safeguards Specialist (ECSSS) and the Gender and 
Social Inclusion Specialist (APEX level) to facilitate GSIS) at to oversee both Safeguards and Climate, 
and the Gender and Social Inclusion mainstreaming compliance. To that effect, for their hiring, the 
respective TORs will include that candidates have some solid/proven background and expertise in 
properly handling safeguards/climate and gender mainstreaming issues in development operations ; 
  (ii) have the District Focal Point (DFP) working to spearhead both safeguards and gender dimensions, 
and report directly to both the SECSSS and SGSIS at the PCU levels, together with the IFAD Lead 
International ECSS. 
128 
8. PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS, PARTICIPATION, AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE  
8.1 Stakeholder Consultations and Participation  
Experience with previous IFAD and other economic and social investment projects indicate that stakeholder 
engagement and sensitization are of critical importance to project success. In the absence of clear 
communication with relevant stakeholders and appropriate sensitization of local communities, rumors, 
misinformation and speculation thrive, and accusations and tensions easily boil over into (violent) conflict 
within and between communities. Therefore, for many of the potential environmental, climate and social 
impacts, the ESMF preparation included extensive stakeholder consultations and participation. Key project 
stakeholders were identified for consultations and these included Government Ministries, State Agencies / 
Organizations/and Departments, Project offices, academia, research institutions, Non-governmental 
organization and local communities, both the affected and host communities, including women, the poor and 
most vulnerable groups.  
Stakeholder consultations and participation is an iterative process that goes throughout the project lifespan. 
Thus, community sensitization (i.e., awareness-raising and training) activities need to be clear, timely and 
culturally appropriate; this means that key messages need to be communicated in a format and language that 
is easy to understand, preferably by someone who speaks the local language and is familiar with local 
customs and sensitivities, and during a time that is convenient and sufficient for all key community groups, 
particularly women, youth, people living with disabilities (PLWD). To ensure appropriate community entry 
and reach target groups most effectively and efficiently, it is advisable to also involve civil society 
organizations that are already active in and trusted by the selected communities. 
Henceforth, during the field mission in Kumasi and Tamale regions, meetings were held with key officials 
and opinion leaders to gauge level of awareness and involvement with the project, concerns of project 
implementation, and to obtain relevant documents or baseline information. The consultations and 
participation also served to gather information on the mandates and permitting requirements to inform the 
development of the Program. The list of stakeholders contacted and issues discussed are presented in the 
Stakeholder Meetings and Public Consultation annex here below. 
8.2 ESMF Disclosure  
As many international development agencies, IFAD policies require that environmental, climate and social 
reports for projects are made available to project affected groups, local NGOs, and the public at large. Public 
disclosure of environmental, climate and social information is also a requirement of the Ghana EPA’s 
procedures. However, there is no limitation as to the extent and scope of disclosure. IFAD, in collaboration 
with the Government line agencies and EPA will make available copies of the ESMF in selected public 
places as required by law for information and comments. Public notice in the media should be served for that 
purpose as well to ensure broader transparency in the design, preparation, and implementation of PROSPER 
intended activities. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the notification will be done through all 
available means of communication, a newspaper, radio announcement, internet and broader social medias.  
The notification should provide:  
  a brief description of the Project;  
  a list of venues where the ESMF report is on display and available for viewing;  
  duration of the display period; and  
  Contact information for comments.  
The EPA will assist to select display venues upon consultation with MoFA. These would be project sites 
specific and very much informative to beneficiaries  
9. GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM  
9.1 Rationale of Grievances: 
Grievance redress mechanisms (GRM) provide a formal avenue for affected groups or stakeholders to engage 
with the project implementers or owners on issues of concern or unaddressed impacts. Grievances are any 
129 
complaints or suggestions about the way a project is being implemented. They may take the form of specific 
complaints for damages/injury, concerns about routine project activities, or perceived incidents or impacts. 
Identifying and responding to grievances supports the development of positive relationships between projects 
and affected groups/communities, and other stakeholders.  
Like many international development agencies, the IFAD’s SECAP procedures outline requirements for 
grievance redress mechanisms for some projects. GRM should receive and facilitate resolution of the 
affected institutional or communities’ concerns and grievances. These concerns should be addressed 
promptly using an understandable and transparent process that is culturally appropriate and readily 
acceptable to all segments of project affected communities, at no cost and without retribution nor fear. 
Mechanisms should be appropriate to the scale of impacts and risks presented by a project.  
Grievances can be an indication of growing stakeholder concerns (real and perceived) and can escalate if not 
identified and resolved. The management of grievances is therefore a vital component of stakeholder 
management and an important aspect of risk management for a project.  
9.2 Managing Grievances: 
Projects may have a range of potential adverse impacts to people and the environment in general, identifying 
grievances ahead of time and ensuring their timely resolution in an amicable way is therefore very necessary. 
As such the ESMF has developed a grievance management process to serve as a guide during project 
implementation. This Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) builds pretty much on the one provided in the 
table below.  
Process 
Table 14. Grievance Management Guide 
Ste
p 
1 
Description 
Identification of 
grievance  
Face to face; phone; letter, e-
mail; recorded during 
public/community 
interaction; others 
Significance assessed and 
grievance recorded or logged 
(i.e. in a log book)  
2 
Grievance 
assessed and 
logged  
3 
4 
Grievance is 
acknowledged  
Development of 
response  
5 
Response signed 
off  
Acknowledgement of 
grievance through 
appropriate medium  
- Grievance assigned to 
appropriate party for 
resolution  
-Response development with 
input from 
management/relevant 
stakeholders.  
Redress action approved at 
appropriate levels  
130 
Timefra
me 
1 Day  
Other information 
Email address; hotline 
number  
Significance criteria  
* Level 1 – one off event;  
* Level 2 – complaint is 
widespread or repeated;  
* Level 3- any complaint 
(one off or repeated) that 
indicates breach of law or 
policy or this ESMF 
provisions  
3-7 
Days  
7-14 
Days  
3-7 
Days  
10-14 
Days  
3-7 
Days  
IFAD/PCU/PIU should 
sign off  
Ste
p 
6 
Process 
Description 
Implementation 
and 
communication of 
response  
Redress action implemented 
and update of progress on 
resolution  
Other information 
Timefra
me 
10-14 
Days  
Experience with previous IFAD and other economic and social investment projects indicate that stakeholder 
engagement and sensitization are of critical importance to project success. In the absence of clear 
communication with relevant stakeholders and appropriate sensitization of local communities, rumors, 
misinformation and speculation thrive, and accusations and tensions easily boil over into (violent) conflict 
within and between communities. Therefore, for many of the potential environmental and social impacts, the 
management plans recommend the development of a stakeholder engagement plan with a clear 
communication strategy and the organization of community sensitization activities on a regular basis. 
A stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) when the exact location are known for ESIA  should include at least 
the following components132: 
a)  Principles, objectives and scope of engagement    
b)  Regulations and (institutional) requirements 
c)    Summary of previous stakeholder engagement activities 
d)   Stakeholder mapping and analysis 
e)    Strategies of engagement 
f)    Key messages and communication channels 
g)   Grievance mechanism (see also section 9.6 below) 
h)   Resources and responsibilities 
 i)    Monitoring and evaluation 
Community sensitization (i.e., awareness-raising and training) activities need to be clear, timely and 
culturally appropriate; this means that key messages need to be communicated in a format and language that 
is easy to understand, preferably by someone who speaks the local language and is familiar with local 
customs and sensitivities, and during a time that is convenient and sufficient for all key community groups, 
particularly women and youth. To ensure appropriate community entry and reach target groups most 
effectively and efficiently, it is advisable to also involve those civil society organizations that are already 
active in and trusted by the selected communities. 
Grievance Management 
Whenever a project causes negative environmental or social impacts there will be grievances (complaints) 
from people who are affected. “Having a good overall community engagement process in place and 
providing access to information on a regular basis can substantially help to prevent grievances from arising 
in the first place, or from escalating to a level that can potentially undermine project performance .In order to 
reduce conflicts, a robust grievance / complaints mechanism that meets at least the following ‘effectiveness’ 
criteria should be instituted:  
a) Legitimate: enabling trust from the stakeholder groups for whose use they are intended, and being 
accountable for the fair conduct of grievance processes;  
b) Accessible: being known to all stakeholder groups for whose use they are intended, and providing 
adequate assistance for those who may face particular barriers to access;  
132 Adapted from IFC (2007) Stakeholder Engagement: A Good Practice Handbook for Companies Doing Business in Emerging Markets (IFC: Washington, D.C.), pp.164-168 
131 
c) Predictable: providing a clear and known procedure with an indicative time frame for each stage, and 
clarity on the types of process and outcome available and means of monitoring implementation; d) Equitable: 
seeking to ensure that aggrieved parties have reasonable access to sources of information, advice and 
expertise necessary to engage in a grievance process on fair, informed and respectful terms;  
e) Transparent: keeping parties to a grievance informed about its progress, and providing sufficient 
information about the mechanism’s performance to build confidence in its effectiveness and meet any public 
interest at stake;  
f) Rights-compatible: ensuring that outcomes and remedies accord with internationally recognized human 
rights;  
g) A source of continuous learning: drawing on relevant measures to identify lessons for improving the 
mechanism and preventing future grievances and harms; 
 h) Based on engagement and dialogue: consulting the stakeholder groups for whose use they are intended on 
their design and performance, and focusing on dialogue as the means to address and resolve grievances.  
 IFAD has established a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints 
with respect to alleged non-compliance of its environmental and social policies and the mandatory aspects of 
its Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures in the context of IFAD-supported projects. 
Complaints must concern environmental, social and climate issues only and should not be accusations of 
fraudulent or corrupt activities in relation to project implementation – these are dealt with by IFAD's Office 
of Audit and Oversight. 
  Eligibility criteria  
To file a complaint for alleged non-compliance with IFAD's social and environmental policies and 
mandatory aspects of its SECAP, IFAD will consider only complaints meeting the following criteria: 
  The complainants claim that IFAD has failed to apply its social and environmental policies and/or the 
mandatory provisions set out in SECAP. 
  The complainants claim that they have been or will be adversely affected by IFAD's failure to apply 
these policies. 
  Complaints must be put forward by at least two people who are both nationals of the country 
concerned and/or living in the project area. Complaints from foreign locations or anonymous 
complaints will not be taken into account. 
  Complaints must concern projects/programmes currently under design or implementation. 
Complaints concerning closed projects, or those that are more than 95 per cent disbursed, will not be 
considered. 
  The process 
The complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the government or non-governmental 
organisation responsible for planning or executing the project or programme (the Lead Agency), or to any 
governmental body with the responsibility for overseeing the Lead Agency. If the Lead Agency does not 
adequately respond, then the matter may be brought to the attention of IFAD. The issue may be brought 
straight to IFAD if the complainants feel they might be subject to retaliation if they went to the Lead Agency 
directly. 
The Regional Division will examine the complaint and, if necessary, will contact the Lead Agency, or the 
governmental body with the responsibility for overseeing the Lead Agency, to decide if the complaints are 
justified. If the complainants request that their identities be protected, IFAD will not disclose this information 
to the Lead Agency or anyone else in government. 
If the complaint is not justified, the Regional Division will inform the complainants in writing. 
If the Regional Division finds the complaint is justified and there is proof of actual or likely harm through 
IFAD's failure to follow its policies and procedures, IFAD will take action. This may consist of making 
changes to the project/programme, or requiring that the government observes its obligations under the 
Financing Agreement. IFAD's response will focus bringing the project/programme into compliance and no 
monetary damages will be available or paid in response to such complaints. The complainants will be 
informed of the outcome of the issue by the Regional Division.  
132 
In all cases, if the complainants disagree with IFAD's response, they may submit a request 
to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org and request that an impartial review be carried out by the Office of the Vice-
President. 
The Office of the Vice-President will decide on the steps to be taken to examine such complaints, including, 
if necessary, contracting external experts to review the matter. The complainants will be informed of the 
results of the review. 
IFAD will include in its Annual Report a list of received complaints and a summary of actions taken to 
address them. 
  How to submit a complaint 
A complaint relating to  non-compliance with IFAD’s Social and Environmental Policies and mandatory 
aspects of its SECAP can be submitted in any of the following ways: 
  Download the complaints form (Word) 
  Send an email to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org 
 If you email or mail your complaint, please include the following information: 
  Name, address, telephone number and other contact information 
  Whether the complainants wish to keep their identity confidential, and if so, why 
  Name, location, and nature of the IFAD project/programme (if known) 
  How the Complainants believe they have been, or are likely to be, adversely affected by the IFAD-
supported project or programme 
Complaints sent by mail should be addressed to: 
IFAD 
SECAP Complaints (PMD) 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
9.3 Closing the Loop and Fostering Sustainability 
While grievances are inevitable in sustainable development operations, and they are meant to weight the 
checks and balances as to how well the project is doing in terms of making beneficiaries lives “better-off”; 
however, one core lessons to be learnt is to always avoid triggering such grievances. Though there is never a 
better way to avoiding such triggering; inclusive and systematic stakeholder consultation not only at the very 
early stages of project formulation, and thereafter throughout the project lifespan, has always proven to avoid 
or minimize their occurrence. Therefore, one common sense is to always keep in mind that the earliest 
inclusive and participatory stakeholder consultation is started earliest enough in a project life cycle, the better 
beneficiaries ownership such project activities (i.e. feeling part and partial of the whole process), and foster 
social accountability behaviour towards that very project. Experience has shown that triggering these two 
pillars (i.e. Community Ownership & Social Accountability) often leads to fostering project Sustainability. 
Therefore, each grievance needs to be processed in due diligence; and once the process is satisfactorily 
completed, steps should be taken to properly close the loop by recording the whole process and ensuring that 
all issues at stakes are therefore taken car of in an amicably fashion, and that nothing is left behind.  
133 
10. CONCLUSION 
The field mission in the PROSPER intervention areas, precisely in Kumasi and Tamale enabled to clearly 
hear the collective voices of all farmers in the participating two regional zones, namely the Northern Belt and 
the Middle Belt. The teams was able to equally weight the welcoming and highly committed and capable-
hands desperately waiting for the PROSPER project to materialize. It undoubtedly speaks volumes about 
both its timeliness and relevance for thousands of poor rural farmers in the participating 8 regions.  It’s truly 
clear from them that this project will bring them the needed support to sustain their livelihoods.  
The Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience (PROSPER) 
development objective is “to strengthen the integration, climate resilience and environmental sustainability 
of smallholders and businesses in priority value chains in the Northern and Middle Ecological Belts taking 
advantage of the increased demand created by the national agro-processing strategy.”, by reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions and improving the resilience and sustainable adaptation of vulnerable 
agroecosystems and of rural communities in the two concomitant belts in a context of climate change, aiming 
towards food, nutrition and water security.  
As stated from the onset, the initial screening of proposed PROSPER activities reveals that the potential 
environmental and social risks rating is moderate to low. Despite its high climate risk rating, the main risks 
associated with the implementation of project foreseen activities in component 1 are small in scale, very 
limited, mostly site-specific, and readily avoidable if not considerably reduced with appropriate mitigation 
plans (ESMP), as stated in the project’s ESMF. 
As a Category B operation133, a formal Environmental and Social Impact Assessment is required. Further 
analysis of the conflict dimensions and site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) 
will be mainstreamed throughout PROSPER implementation lifecycle. Moreover, to ensure safeguards 
compliance and project sustainability, a Safeguards and Climate Change Specialist and a Gender and 
Vulnerability Specialist (GBV/EASH/VAC) will be part of the PCU. Quarterly safeguards and climate 
compliance reports summarizing the level of compliance and performance of project activities 
implementation will be prepared and shared to inform IFAD and stakeholders. 
Overall, the cumulative project environmental and social impacts are expected to be positive, and generate 
series of opportunities for beneficiary communities, as the end objective of PROSPER is to increase climate 
resiliency of the most vulnerable farmers in the targeted northern and middle belts of Ghana. Besides the 
inequality in the labour market and presence of landless farmers in the project area who will be included in 
project activities; the project is expected to improve agricultural land and the natural resources upon which 
NMB communities farmers work is based, and on improved climate-resilient agricultural practices as well as 
improved natural resources management, specifically water management technics. More specifically, better 
functioning ecosystems, controlled transhumance practices, and a greater and collaborative stakeholders’ 
engagement and participation, will positively affect human health, nutrition and well-being in the long run.  
During project implementation stage, once the physical footprints of subproject activities are known, to 
ensure, that the identified social, climate and environmental issues are properly addressed in accordance and 
compliance with the IFAD SECAP Policies, all project activities will systematically undergo (i) a thorough 
screening, assessment, review, and clearance process, and (ii) elaborate site-specific Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) prior to the physical execution of project activities in each of the selected  
districts of the  regions of PROSPER. Hence, the elaboration of the ESMF allowed to identify series of 
environmental and social risks and impacts, and the elaboration of an environmental and social management 
plan (ESMP) that includes a comprehensive implementation arrangement scheme to help implement the 
identified series of safeguards mitigation measures.  
133 The project will not invest in any category A subproject activities. 
134 
The estimated total budget for safeguards and climate change compliance and gender and social inclusion 
mainstreaming, including staffing the project over the foreseen eight (8) years duration of PROSPER is: 
three million ($3,000,000 USD). This cost is included in the project overall cost, notably in component 3.  
135 
11. REFERENCE & BIBLIOGRAPHY 
MoFA, (2007). Food and Agricultural Sector Development Policy (FASDEP II) First Draft-Second Revision. 
Ministry of Food and Agricultural, Government of Ghana, pp. 1-56.  
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), (2004). Ghana State of Environment Report. Republic of Ghana  
Government of Ghana, (2004). Environmental and Social Management Framework, Ghana Community 
Based Rural Development Project. Republic of Ghana  
Acheampong, A. B., (2001). Environmental Assessment of Northern Savanna Biodiversity Conservation 
Project (NSBCP)-Draft Report. Ministry of Lands and Forestry, Republic of Ghana.  
NDPC/ EPA (2002). Strategic Environmental Assessment of the Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy. 
Handbook for District Development Plan Sustainability Appraisals  
Centre for Environmental and Health Research and Training (CEHRT), (2010). Environmental and Social 
Management Framework, Social Opportunity Project-Draft Report. MLGRD, Republic of Ghana.  
MoFA and FAO, 2007. Draft Irrigation Policy, Strategies and Regulatory Measures. Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture and Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations, pp. 1- 27.  
STUDI International et al (2009). Environmental Impact Assessment, Draft Report. Feasibility Study of the 
Accra Plains Irrigation Project. 
IFAD (2016) Managing Risks to Create Opportunities. IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedures (SECAP) (IFAD: Rome), p.18  
UNDP (2019). Climate Change Adaptation Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.adaptation-
undp.org/explore/western-africa/ghana 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ 
ghanc3.pdf 
World Bank (2019). Internal Climate Migration Profile – Ghana. 
World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: Population Estimates and Projections, 
Ghana. URL: https://databank. 
worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=health-nutrition-and-population-statistics:-population-estimates-
and-projections 
World Bank Open Data, Data Retrieved March 2021. Data Bank: World Development Indicators, Ghana. 
URL: https://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&country 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk
%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
UNDP (2019). Climate Change Adaptation Profile – Ghana. URL: https://www.adaptation-
undp.org/explore/western-africa/ghana 
World Bank (2021). DataBank – World Development Indicators. URL: 
https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-developmentindicators 
University of Notre Dame (2020). Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative. URL: https://gain.nd.edu/our-
work/country-index/ 
Republic of Ghana (2016). Nationally-Determined Contributions. URL: 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Ghana%20First/GH_INDC_2392015.pdf 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk
%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk
%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-data-historical 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-data-historical 
136 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana. URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk
%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
WB Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-data-historical 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk
%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
UNISDR (2018). Disaster Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: http://africa.cimafoundation.org/documents/869 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Ghana Water Dashboard. Data Description. URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-sector-water 
WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Climate Data-Projections. Ghana. URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ghana/climate-sector-water 
Republic of Ghana (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. URL: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc3.pdf 
GFDRR (2019). Ghana, Country Context. URL: https://www.gfdrr.org/en/ghana 
UNISDR (2018). Disaster Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: http://africa.cimafoundation.org/documents/869 
EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database - Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL) - CRED, D. Guha–
Sapir, Brussels, Belgium. 
URL: http://emdat.be/emdat_db/ 
UNDP (2017). Advocacy and Capacity Building for Disaster Risk Reduction and Preparedness in Ghana 
Project. Final Project Report. 
URL: https://www.undp.org/content/dam/ghana/docs/Doc/Susdev/Final%20Project%20Report.pdf 
USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile – Ghana. URL: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_Climate%20Change%20Risk
%20Profile%20-%20Ghana.pdf 
https://minorityrights.org/   
GoTG. 2009. Agriculture and Natural Resources (ANR) Policy (2009-2015). 
Urquhart, P. 2016. National Climate Change Policy of the Gambia Final Report: Final Draft Policy 
Yaffa, S. 2011. Assessment of the Impacts of Climate Change on Gambian Smallholder Food Crop 
Production and Livelihood Conditions, ActionAid the Gambia. 
GNAIP. 2015. Republic of the Gambia National Agricultural Investment Plan (GNAIP). Banjul, the Gambia. 
See disaggregation of beneficiaries in the results framework. 
Based on the average of 8 persons per household. 
Adapted from IFC (2007) Stakeholder Engagement: A Good Practice Handbook for Companies Doing 
Business in Emerging Markets (IFC: Washington, D.C.), pp.164-168 
http://www.fao.org/giews/countrybrief/country.jsp?code=GHA 
12. ANNEXES 
Annex 1 – Eligibility Screening Form 
Annex 2 - Environmental and Social Screening Forms for PROSPER Subprojects 81 
Annex 3 - Environmental and Social Guidelines for contractors 
90 
86 
137 
Annex 4 – Checklist for Construction Works 89 
Annex 5 - Social Inclusion Strategy  90 
Annex 6 – List of Stakeholders Consulted  95                                                                                                                                                                                  
138 
Annex 1 – Eligibility Screening Form 
PROSPER PROJECT 
Letter of Interest (Eligibility Screening Form) 
Please complete all the required spaces in this form 
1. Name: Surname -------------------------------------------------Other Names:--------------------------------------
Maiden name (for married women):------------------------------------------------------ 
2. Sex: (a) Male {      }         (b)  Female {       } 
3. Date of birth: ---------------------------------------------------- 
4. Highest Education Level: (a) No formal education {    }      (b) Primary School {    }   (c) Secondary 
School {   } (d) Vocational school   (e) Tertiary Education {    } 
5. Which community do you belong to: -------------------------------------------------------------- 
6. How long have you lived in this community: -------------------------------------------------------- 
7. How do you belong to this community: (a) by birth {    }    (b) by marriage {   } (c) other (specify):---------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
8. Local Government Area (LGA): ----------------------------------------------- State: ------------------------------- 
9. What enterprise are you interested in (see list of selected enterprises for the LGA): ----------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
10. Do you have any experience in this enterprise: (a) Yes  {   }     (b) No {   }. If yes, how many years: ------
-------------------------------------------------------------------- 
11. Do you belong to any youth or women organization: (a) Yes {   }   (b) No  {  }. If yes, what is the name: -
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
12. Do you belong to any cooperative society: (a) Yes {  }   (b) No {  }. If yes, what is the name: --------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
13. Do you have access to any land for the enterprise: (a) Yes  {  }  (b) No  {  }.  
14. If yes to question 13, where is the land located-------------------------------------------------------; and what is 
the area size of the land? ----------------------------------------------------- 
15. What kind of title to you have to the land: (a) Government paper {  }  (b) Inheritance from parent {  }   
(c) husband or wife’s consent {    }  (d) family allocation {  }  (e) community’s allocation {  } (f) Others 
(specify):------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Endorsements: 
Applicant: I certify that the information provided here is correct  
Name: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Signature: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Date: --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Community/traditional leader:  
Name: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Sign: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Verifications:  
139 
Comments by the Local Government Liaison Office:----------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----- 
Name of Officer: ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Designation: ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Sign and date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Comments by the RCU Office:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Name of Officer: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Designation: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Sign and date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Screening:   
Comments by service providers:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----Categorical comments (a) Applicant Eligible {    }  (b) Applicant Ineligible  {   } 
140 
Annex 2 - Environmental and Social Screening Forms for PROSPER Subprojects 
A: Screening Form for SME/Socio-economic Infrastructure Projects 
General Information 
Project Name: 
Name of incubator / applicant: 
Name of Cooperative: 
Contact person’s details:  
Name of Apex Group: 
Contact person’s details: 
Project Location: 
Project sector (e.g. rice farming, 
vegetable processing, etc.) 
Estimated Cost: 
Proposed Date of Commencement:  
Expected Project duration: 
Site (estimated area in ha): 
Any equity/contribution brought into 
the project: 
Any plan for new construction: 
A1. Screening for Environmental and Social Issues 
Question 
1.  Will the sub-project develop any wetlands? 
2.  Would the sub-project result in economic displacement134 (loss of assets or access to 
resources) or physical resettlement  
3.  Would the sub-project result in conversion and/or loss of physical cultural resources? 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of ‘Yes’ 
response  
134 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or means of livelihoods (see SECAP Procedure Guidance Statement 13) 
141 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of ‘Yes’ 
response  
4.  Will the sub-project have significant social adverse impacts (affecting access to and/use rights 
to land, access to potable water and water for other uses) on local communities or other 
project-affected parties? 
5.  Will the project trigger unsustainable natural resource management practices (fisheries, 
forestry, livestock, and significant increase in use of agrochemicals) that exceed the carrying 
capacity? 
6.  Does the sub-project include conversion of significant areas (above 50 ha) of natural 
forests/other wild lands? 
7.  Would the project potentially cause significant adverse impacts to habitats and/or ecosystems 
and their services (e.g. habitat loss, erosion/ other form of land degradation, fragmentation, 
hydrological changes)? 
8.  Does the proposed project target area include ecologically sensitive areas135; areas of global 
significance for biodiversity conservation and/or biodiversity-rich area; habitats depended on 
by endangered species? 
9.  Does the project involve fisheries development in situations where little information exists on 
sustainable yield? 
10. Could the project pose a risk of introducing invasive alien species? 
11. Does the project involve the transfer, handling or use of genetically modified organisms/living 
modified organisms that may have an adverse effect on threatened biodiversity? 
12. Is the project site close to any oil and gas installation such as flow stations, oil terminal, oil or 
gas pipeline right of way? 
13. Has oil spill/ or pipeline fire ever been recorded around project site? 
14. Does the project involve land use changes (agricultural intensification and/or expansion of the 
cropping area) and resources that may have adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems, and/or 
livelihoods? 
15. Will the project result in increased use of agrochemicals which may affect the natural 
environment/human health? 
16. Does the project include small-scale irrigation and drainage projects, and water impoundment 
including small dams (except in wetlands)? 
135 ‘Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere  reserves); areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; 
coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas 
that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
142 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of ‘Yes’ 
response  
17. Does the project involve agricultural intensification and/or expansion of cropping area in non-
sensitive areas? 
18. Do the project activities include rangeland and livestock development? 
19. Does the project involve artisanal fisheries where there is information on sustainable yield? 
20. Do the project activities include aquaculture and/or mariculture? 
21. Do the project activities include watershed management or rehabilitation? 
22. Does the project include large-scale soil and water conservation measures? 
23. Does the project include small and micro enterprise development sub-projects? 
24. Does the project involve credit operations through financial service providers, including credit 
for pesticide/other agrochemicals, livestock purchasing, irrigation, etc.? 
25. Do the project activities include natural resources-based value chain development? 
26. Would any of the project activities have minor adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
27. Would the project have low probability to have physical resettlement or economic 
displacement? 
28. Does the project include development of agro-processing facilities?  
29. Will the project require a migrant workforce during construction? 
30. Will the project require seasonal workers to plant and/or harvest produce? 
31. Will the construction or operation of the project cause an increase in traffic on rural roads? 
Guidance for sub-project categorization 
"Yes" response to any 
of questions 1-13 
"Yes” response to 
questions 14-31 
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
Sub-project 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
Sub-project 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Subproject 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
The project will not invest in Catgery A sub 
project and the screening is not required 
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the general 
ESMF 
No further analysis is required 
143 
B: Screening Form for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-Projects 
Name of market infrastructure: 
Infrastructure type: 
Location: 
Proposed Date of Commencement:  
Expected Project duration: 
Estimated cost: 
Estimate number of communities to be 
served: 
Estimated number of entrepreneur to be 
served:  
B1: Screening for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-projects 
Question 
1.  Will the project activities include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads or other rural infrastructure in 
protected/sensitive areas136? 
Yes 
No 
All road length 
< 10 km  
2.  Does the project include construction of roads or other infrastructure that entail the total area being cleared of 50 ha or 
above? 
3.  Does the project include construction of dam (s)/reservoir (between 5-15 m high with a reservoir exceeding 2 million 
m3)? 
4.  Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes rehabilitation/ development (above 100 ha)? 
5.  Does the project involve significant extraction of ground water (significantly above recharge capacity)? 
6.  Does the project include water-based (ground or surface) development where it is believed that significant depletion due 
to climate change or overutilization has occurred? 
7.  Does the project involve significant extraction, diversion or containment of surface water? 
136 ‘Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere  reserves); areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; 
coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas 
that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
144 
8.  Does the project include drainage or correction of natural water bodies (e.g. river draining)? 
9.  Will the project include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads that pass through oil infrastructure locations such as 
flow stations, tank farms or oil and gas pipelines? 
10. Would any of the project activities have minor adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
11. Does the project include development of agro-processing facilities?  
12. Will the project require a migrant workforce during construction? 
13. Will the construction or operation of the project cause an increase in traffic on rural roads? 
14. Has the government or community guaranteed the lease of the land for the (market) infrastructure? 
15. Is there any plan in place for sustainability of the infrastructure during the project life time? 
16. Does the project include specific measures to protect against dust (such as dust masks and water spraying)? 
17. Has arrangement been made to pay adequate compensation for private property that may be affected by the construction 
of the project? 
18. Will construction equipment with moderate decibels be used and the timing of use be so that people will experience less 
discomfort? 
19. Will tree and vegetation replanting be carried out to stabilize slopes and re-green road sides? 
Guidance for categorization 
"Yes" response to any 
of questions 1-9 
"Yes" response to 
questions 10-13 
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
1-13 and ‘Yes’ to 
questions 14-19 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
The project will not invest in Catgery A sub 
project and the screening is not required 
Sub-project to adopt the general ESMP in the 
ESMF  
No further analysis is required 
145 
Yes 
No 
Additional Explanation of 'Yes' 
response* 
C: Climate Screening Form for Sub-Projects 
To be used with the environmental and social screening forms. 
Screening for Climate Issues   
Question 
1.  Is the project area subject to extreme climatic events such as flooding, drought, tropical 
storms, or heat waves?  
2.  Do climate scenarios for the project area foresee changes in temperature, rainfall or extreme 
weather that will adversely affect the project impact, sustainability or cost over its lifetime? 
3.  Will the project make investments in low-lying coastal areas/ zones exposed to river 
flooding and coastal storm surge? 
4.  Will the project promote agricultural activity in marginal and/or highly degraded areas that 
have increased sensitivity to climatic events (such as on hillsides, deforested slopes or 
floodplains)? 
5.    Is the project located in areas where rural development projects have experienced 
significant weather- related losses and damages in the past?  
6.  Will the project develop/ install infrastructure in areas with a track record of extreme 
weather events? 
7.  Is the project target group entirely dependent on natural resources (such as seasonal crops, 
rain-fed agricultural plots, and migratory fish stocks) that have been affected by in the last 
decade by climate trends or specific climatic events? 
8.  Will climate variability likely affect agricultural productivity (crops/ livestock/fisheries) or 
the associated incidence of pests and diseases for the project target groups?   
9.  Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes likely adversely impact upon key stages of 
identified value chains in the project (from production to markets)? 
10. Is the project investing in climate-sensitive livelihoods that are diversified?  
11. Is the project investing in infrastructure that is exposed to infrequent extreme weather 
events? 
12. Is the project investing in institutional development and capacity building for rural 
institutions (such as farmer groups, cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous areas? 
146 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional Explanation of 'Yes' 
response* 
13. Does the project have the potential to become more resilient through the adoption green 
technologies at a reasonable cost? 
14. Does the project intervention have opportunities to strengthen indigenous climate risk 
management capabilities? 
15. Does the project have opportunities to integrate climate resilience aspects through policy 
dialogue to improve agricultural sector strategies/policies?   
16. Does the project have potential to integrate climate resilience measures without extensive 
additional costs (e.g. improved crop variety, capacity building; or including climate risk 
issues in policy processes) 
17. Based on the information available would the project benefit from a more thorough climate 
risk and vulnerability analysis to identify additional complementary investment actions to 
manage climate risks? 
Guidance for categorization 
"Yes" response to any of 
questions 1-9 
"No" response to almost all 
questions 
Sub-project Climate risk 
is High  
Sub-project climate risk 
is moderate 
Climate risk Analysis is required for sub-
project  
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the 
general ESMF 
147 
Annex 3 - Environmental and Social Guidelines for contractors137 
(for reference in contractor agreements/contracts) 
Sound environmental and social management of construction projects can be achieved only 
with adequate site selection and project design. As such, the ESMP for projects involving any 
new construction, or any rehabilitation or reconstruction for existing projects, should provide 
information as to screening criteria for site selection and design including the following:  
Site Selection  
Sites should be chosen based on community needs for additional projects, with specific lots 
chosen based on geographic and topographic characteristics. The site selection process 
involves site visits and studies to analyze: (i) the site’s, sub-urban, or rural characteristics; (ii) 
national, regional, or municipal regulations affecting the proposed sites; (iii) accessibility and 
distance from inhabited areas; (iv) land ownership, including verification of absence of 
squatters and/or other potential legal problems with land acquisition; (v) determination of site 
vulnerability to natural hazards, (i.e. intensity and frequency of floods, landslides, etc.); (vi) 
suitability of soils and sub-soils for construction; (vii) site contamination; (viii) flora and 
fauna characteristics; (ix) presence or absence of natural habitats and/or ecologically 
important habitats on site or in vicinity (e.g. forests, wetlands, rare or endangered species); 
and (ix) historic and community characteristics.  
The rules (including specific prohibitions and construction management measures) should be 
incorporated into all relevant bidding documents, contracts, and work orders.  
Prohibitions  
The following activities are prohibited on or near the project site:  
  Cutting of trees for any reason outside the approved construction area;  
  Hunting, fishing, wildlife capture, or plant collection;  
  Use of unapproved toxic materials, including lead-based paints, asbestos, etc.  
  Disturbance to anything with architectural or historical value;  
  Building of fires;  
  Use of firearms (except by authorized security guards); 
  Use of alcohol by workers.  
  Use of all forms of forced labor and child labor 
  Unfair treatment and discrimination of workers 
Construction Management Measures  
Solid, sanitation, and hazardous wastes must be properly controlled, through the 
implementation of the following measures:  
Waste Management:  
  Minimize the production of waste that must be treated or eliminated; 
 
Identify and classify the type of waste generated. If hazardous wastes (including health 
care wastes) are generated, proper procedures must be taken regarding their storage, 
collection, transportation and disposal;  
Identify and demarcate disposal areas clearly indicating the specific materials that can be 
deposited in each;  
 
  Control placement of all construction waste (including earth cuts) to approved disposal 
sites (>300 m from rivers, streams, lakes, or wetlands). All garbage, metals, used oils, and 
137  Adapted  from  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Irrigation  and  Water  Development,  Republic  of  Malawi  (2015) 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  for  Programme  for  Rural  Irrigation  Development  in  Malawi, 
pp.76-80. 
excess material generated during construction should only be dispose in authorized areas, 
incorporating recycling systems and the separation of materials.  
Maintenance:  
 
Identify and demarcate equipment maintenance areas (>15m from rivers, streams, lakes or 
wetlands); 
 
  Ensure that all equipment maintenance activities, including oil changes, are conducted 
within demarcated maintenance areas; never dispose spent oils on the ground, in water 
courses, drainage canals or in sewer systems; 
Identify, demarcate and enforce the use of within-site access routes to limit impact on site 
vegetation; 
Install and maintain an adequate drainage system to prevent erosion on the site during and 
after construction.  
 
Erosion Control  
  Erect erosion control barriers around perimeter of cuts, disposal pits, and roadways; 
  Spray water on dirt roads, cuts, fill material and stockpiled soil to reduce wind-induced 
erosion, as needed; 
  Maintain vehicle speeds at or below 10mph within the work area, 15mph or below within 
200m of the site, and abide by the relevant speed limits at all times to / from the work 
area.  
Stockpiles and Borrow Pits  
 
Identify and demarcate locations for stockpiles and borrow pits, ensuring that they are 15 
meters away from critical areas such as steep slopes, erosion-prone soils, and areas that 
drain directly into sensitive water bodies; 
  Limit extraction of material to approved and demarcated borrow pits.  
Site Cleanup  
  Establish and enforce daily site clean-up procedures, including maintenance of adequate 
disposal facilities for construction debris.  
Safety during Construction  
The Contractor’s responsibilities include the protection of every person and nearby property 
from construction accidents. The Contractor shall be responsible for complying with all 
national and local safety requirements and any other measures necessary to avoid accidents, 
including the following:  
  Carefully and clearly mark pedestrian-safe access routes; 
 
If school children are in the vicinity, include traffic safety personnel to direct traffic; 
  Maintain supply of supplies for traffic signs (including paint, easel, sign material, etc.), 
road marking, and guard rails to maintain pedestrian safety during construction; 
  Conduct safety training for construction workers prior to beginning work; 
  Provide personal protective equipment (PPE) and clothing (such as goggles, gloves, 
respirators, dust masks, hard hats, steel-toed and –shanked boots, etc.,) for construction 
workers and enforce their use; 
  Post Material Safety Data Sheets for each chemical present on the worksite; 
  Require that all workers read, or have read, all Material Safety Data Sheets. Clearly 
explain the risks to them and their partners, especially when pregnant or planning to start a 
family. Encourage workers to share the information with their physicians, when relevant; 
  Ensure that the removal of asbestos-containing materials or other toxic substances be 
performed and disposed of by specially trained workers; 
  During heavy rains or emergencies of any kind, apply construction safeguards guidelines; 
  Brace electrical and mechanical equipment to withstand unexpected events during 
construction.  
Nuisance and Dust Control  
To control nuisance and dust the Contractor should:  
  Maintain all construction-related traffic at or below 15 mph on streets within 200 m of the 
site; 
  Maintain all on-site vehicle speeds at or below 10 mph; 
  To the extent possible, maintain noise levels associated with all machinery and equipment 
 
at or below 90db;  
In sensitive areas (including residential neighborhoods, health centers, schools, etc.) more 
strict measures may need to be implemented to prevent undesirable noise levels; 
  Minimize production of dust and particulate materials at all times, to avoid impacts on 
surrounding families and businesses, and especially to vulnerable people (children, 
elderly); 
  Phase removal of vegetation to prevent large areas from becoming exposed to wind; 
  Place dust screens around construction areas, paying particular attention to areas close to 
housing, commercial areas, and recreational areas; 
  Spray water as needed on dirt roads, cut areas and soil stockpiles or fill material; 
  Apply proper measures to minimize disruptions from vibration or noise coming from 
construction activities.  
Community Relations  
To maintain cordial community relations, the Contractor should:  
  Following the country and ESMP requirements, inform the population about construction 
and work schedules, interruption of services, traffic detour routes, as appropriate; 
  Limit construction activities at night. When necessary ensure that night work is carefully 
scheduled and the community is properly informed so they can take necessary measures; 
  At least five days in advance of any service interruption (including water, electricity) the 
community must be advised through clearly visible posters at the project site and at 
central community locations; 
  Where possible, particularly for tasks that can also be performed through low-skilled 
manual labor (such as digging of shallow trenches, etc.), make use of labor from the local 
community. 
Chance Find Procedures for Culturally Significant Artifacts  
In case culturally valuable materials (incl. shrines, graves, etc.) are uncovered during 
excavation:  
  Stop work immediately following the discovery of any materials with possible 
archeological, historical, paleontological, or other cultural value, announce findings to 
project manager and notify relevant authorities;  
  Protect artifacts as well as possible using plastic covers, and implement measures to 
stabilize the area, if necessary, to properly protect artifacts; 
  Prevent and penalize any unauthorized access to the artifacts; 
  Restart construction works only upon the authorization of the relevant authorities.  
Environmental Supervision during Construction  
The bidding documents should indicate how compliance with environmental rules and design 
specifications would be supervised, along with the penalties for non-compliance by 
contractors or workers. Construction supervision requires oversight of compliance with the 
manual and environmental specifications by the contractor or his designated environmental 
supervisor. Contractors are also required to comply with national and state regulations 
governing labour, the environment, public health and safety. 
Annex 4 – Checklist for Construction Works  
Based on the National Environmental (Construction Sector) Regulations (2011), at every 
construction facility the following checklist should be implemented:138 
(1) Every facility shall implement programmes on best practices as set out in Schedule I of the 
Regulations while taking recognition of workers organizations 
(2) Every facility shall provide base for ancillary equipment and bund wall for containment of 
waste oil in the event of any unanticipated discharge or spillage. 
(3) Every operator of construction facility/site shall ensure: 
(a) it has a functional, adequate and appropriate drainage system for the project; 
(b) the separation or diversion of clean water runoff to prevent it from mixing with water 
containing high solid particle content; 
(c) it minimizes the volume of water to be treated prior to release (same as storm water 
control system); 
(d) the use of color coding for the drainage system such as blue for surface water drains and 
red for foul water drains; 
(e) safe movement of materials and fuel to and from site; 
(f) tanks are clearly labelled with their contents and storage capacity; 
(g) workers are trained to carry out the outlined procedures in the Emergency Response Plan 
as specified in Schedule II to the Regulations; 
(h) absorbent materials and other containment equipment (e.g. spill kits) suitable for the 
construction type, are available in adequate quantity on site; and 
(i) all tanks are properly covered. 
(4) The operator shall ensure: 
(a) high standard of housekeeping; 
(b) that dust/particulate matter arising from loaded trucks entering or leaving the site is kept to 
a minimum level by the use of tarpaulin materials as cover and that water sprays or other dust 
suppression or collection methods are used at every dusty place where work is carried out; 
(c) appropriate use of Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) by all persons at construction 
site as in Schedule VI to the Regulations; 
 (5) Every facility shall have an Emergency Response Plan in accordance with the guide 
template specified in Schedule II to these Regulations. 
138 National Environmental (Construction Sector) Regulations (2011). S.I. No.19. 
Annex 5 - Social Inclusion Strategy  
“In every country, certain groups (..) Confront barriers that prevent them from fully 
participating in their nation’s political, economic, and social life. These groups are branded 
by stereotypes, stigmas, and superstitions. They often live with insecurity. And such 
disadvantages not only preclude them from capitalizing on opportunities to lead a better life, 
they also rob them of dignity.”139 
Social inclusion means different things to different people. In its flagship publication on the 
topic, the World Bank defines social inclusion as “the process of improving the ability, 
opportunity, and dignity of people, disadvantaged on the basis of their identity, to take part in 
society.”140 A strategy for social inclusion should therefore both address the above-mentioned 
‘barriers’ as well as strengthen the capacities that disadvantaged groups in society require to 
make the most of development opportunities and realize their full potential. 
The PROSPER will directly contribute to social inclusion by actively focusing on 
unemployed youth and women, which together with people with disabilities and widows 
remain among the most disadvantaged groups in The society.141 To ensure fragile areas are 
eas are not entirely excluded from project activities and left marginalized, PROSPER is 
advised to develop tailor-made solutions in those locations where there is at least a 
commitment to safe access for the project so that youth and women in such areas will still be 
able to participate in different value chain components.  
Using the World Bank’s advice to focus on three critical ‘inclusion domains’ of markets, 
services and spaces, PROSPER can help promote social inclusion in the project area through 
the following instruments and policies: 
1.  Markets (Land, Regulatory Framework) 
  Negotiate with traditional authorities in local communities for long-term land access 
by women and youth for agri-enterprise activities; 
  Negotiate with state governments to allocate larger plots of unused (but suitable) 
farmland and provide security of tenure for women and youth associations for agri-
enterprise activities; 
  Support legislative reform establishing gender parity in land ownership and 
inheritance; 
  Closely monitor project progress, hold regular meetings with leaders/representatives 
of women and youth organizations to discuss project challenges, and provide 
additional (technical) support where needed. 
2.  Services (Training, Financial, Labour, ICT) 
  Provide refresher, advanced and/or top-up skills training on-site for women and youth 
(on any relevant topic that hinders progress in their agri-enterprises) in combination 
with intensive mentoring support; 
  Support opportunities for information sharing, whereby women and youth who are 
currently not part of the project can visit the agri-enterprise sites and whereby 
entrepreneurs can share their experiences (including reasons for failure and success); 
  Negotiate with agricultural banks to provide preferential credit arrangements for high-
potential women or youth agri-entrepreneurs; 
139 World Bank (2013) Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity (WB: Washington, D.C.), p.xv. 
140 Idem, p.4. 
141
 Widows are often dispossessed of their late spouses’ property including land by the spouse’s kinsmen. Special consideration and protection 
needs to be given to this category of vulnerable people to make sure they have access to land and other productive bases. 
  Encourage contractors / service providers to give employment preference to local 
community members (e.g. via ‘code of conduct’); 
  Organize a ‘hackathon’ together with a technology-oriented innovation centre to 
develop a special app for rural youth in the project area to promote farming and 
facilitate market access as well as create an online platform that allows women and 
youth to showcase their achievements and experiences with wider society and other 
relevant actors (e.g. government and donor agencies). 
3.  Spaces (Physical, Cultural, Social) 
  Liaise with local police to ensure security in farming areas, markets and access routes; 
  Organize public awareness-raising campaigns in consultation with local CSOs to 
promote farming, encourage inclusive community-level decision-making, prevent 
intra-community conflict and reduce gender-based violence; 
In general, ensure that initial screening, selection and support to project beneficiaries 
by community leaders and others at the grassroots level is based on merit and need 
rather than lingering primordial considerations; 
 
  To prevent climate-induced exclusion, recommended climate change adaptation and 
mitigation measures should be given priority. Many beneficiaries may not be able to 
bounce back once they are affected by hydro-meteorological disasters such as flooding 
and erosion. 
Annex 6 –Stakeholders Consultations  (evidence  from various locations – Design mission 
August 10-15, 2021- Kumasi & Tamale)  
B.  Guiding questions for environment and social 
Yes/No  Comments/explanation 
screening 
Category A project: The project will not invest in Category A sub project and the screening is not 
required 
Project location 
32.  Would the project develop any wetlands? (Guidance 
No 
statement GS1) 
33.  Would the project cause significant adverse impacts 
to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services (e.g. 
conversion of more than 50 hectares of natural 
forest, loss of habitat, erosion/other form of land 
degradation, fragmentation, and hydrological 
changes)? (GS 1, 2 & 5) 
No 
34.  Does the proposed project target area include 
No 
ecologically sensitive areas,142 areas of 
global/national significance for biodiversity 
conservation and/or biodiversity-rich areas and 
habitats depended on by endangered species? (GS1) 
35.  Is the project location subjected to major destruction 
as a result geophysical hazards (tsunamis, landslides, 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions)? 
No 
Natural resources 
36.  Would the project lead to unsustainable natural 
No 
resource management practices (fisheries, forestry, 
livestock) and/or result in exceeding carrying 
capacity. For example, is their development 
happening in areas where little up-to-date 
information exists on sustainable yield/carrying 
capacity? (GS 4, 5 and 6) 
37.  Would the project develop large-scale143 aquaculture 
or mariculture projects, or where their development 
involves significant alteration of ecologically 
sensitive areas? 
No 
38.  Would the project result in significant use of 
No 
agrochemicals which may lead to life-threatening 
illness and long-term public health and safety 
concerns? (GS 14) 
39.  Does the project rely on water-based (ground and/or 
No 
surface) development where there is reason to 
believe that significant depletion and/or reduced 
flow has occurred from the effects of climate change 
or from overutilization? (GS7) 
40.  Does the project pose a risk of introducing 
No 
potentially invasive species or GMOs which might 
142 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global 
significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral 
reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, 
erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural 
significance) and areas with high social vulnerability. 
143 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and fragility of 
specific locations. Some countries have regulations on minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be 
adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as an aquaculture unit size to trigger ESIA. 
Rehabilitation/construction 
of feeder roads and/or 
track roads will vary 
between 7 km to 9.50 km 
just to link villages to 
farming areas. 
alter genetic traits of indigenous species or have an 
adverse effect on local biodiversity? (GS1) 
41.  Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. 
industrial, mining, sewage effluent)? (GS7) 
Infrastructure development 
42.  Does the project include the construction/ 
rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s)/reservoir(s) 
meeting at least one of the following criteria? (GS8) 
-  more than 15 metre high wall or  
-  more than 500 meter long crest or  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity or  
incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
- 
43.  Does the project involve large-scale irrigation 
schemes rehabilitation/development (above 100 
hectares per scheme)?144 (GS7) 
44.  Does the project include 
construction/rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that 
entail a total area being cleared above 10 km long, or 
any farmer with more than 10 per cent of his or her 
private land taken? (GS10) 
45.  Does the project include drainage or correction of 
natural water bodies (e.g. river training)? (GS7) 
46.  Does the project involve significant 
extraction/diversion/containment of surface water, 
leaving the river flow below 20 per cent 
environmental flow plus downstream user 
requirements? (GS7) 
Social 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
47.  Would the project result in economic displacement145 
or physical resettlement of more than 20 people, or 
impacting more than 10 per cent of an individual 
household’s assets? (GS13) 
No 
48.  Would the project result in conversion and/or loss of 
No 
physical cultural resources? (GS9) 
49.  Would the project generate significant social adverse 
No 
impacts to local communities (including 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and 
indigenous people) or other project-affected parties? 
(GS13) 
Other 
50.  Does the project include manufacture and 
transportation of hazardous and toxic materials 
which may affect the environment? (GS2) 
51.  Does the project include the construction of a large 
or medium-scale industrial plant? 
52.   Does the project include the development of large-
No 
No 
No 
scale production forestry? (GS5) 
Rural finance 
144 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and fragility of 
specific locations. Some countries have regulations determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted 
where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation development unit size to trigger an 
ESIA. 
145 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or means of livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
53.  Does the project support any of the above (Q1 to 
No 
Q22) through the provision of a line of credit to 
financial service providers? (GS12) 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications 
which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
54.  Does the project involve agricultural intensification 
and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive 
areas that may have adverse impacts on habitats, 
ecosystems and/or livelihoods? (GS1, 2 and 12) 
No 
Natural resource management 
55.  Do the project activities include rangeland and 
TBD 
livestock development? (GS6) 
56.  Does the project involve fisheries where there is 
No 
information on stocks, fishing effort and sustainable 
yield? Is there any risk of overfishing, habitat 
damage and knowledge of fishing zones and seasons? 
(GS4) 
57.  Would the project activities include aquaculture 
No 
and/or agriculture in newly introduced or intensively 
practiced areas? Do project activities include 
conversion of wetlands and clearing of coastal 
vegetation, change in hydrology or introduction of 
exotic species? (GS4) 
58.  Do the project activities include natural resources-
based value chain development? (GS 1, 6 and 12) 
Yes 
59.  Do the project activities include watershed 
Yes 
management or rehabilitation? 
60.  Does the project include large-scale soil and water 
No 
conservation measures? (GS 1 and 5)  
Infrastructure 
61.  Does the project include small-scale irrigation and 
drainage, and small and medium (capacity < 3 
million m3) dam subprojects? (GS 7 and 8) 
Yes 
62.  Does the project include small and microenterprise 
Yes 
development subprojects? (GS 12 and 13) 
63.  Does the project include the development of agro 
processing facilities? (GS 2, 6 and 12) 
64.  Would the construction or operation of the project 
cause an increase in traffic on rural roads? (GS10) 
Yes 
No 
Social 
For nutrition and health 
improvement with small 
ruminant as IGA. 
Yes but only eligible 
activities under Category 
B criteria considered see 
(PDR and ESMF) with key 
mitigation measures 
Yes but only eligible 
activities under Category 
B criteria considered see 
(PDR and ESMF) with key 
mitigation measures 
Yes, mostly small scale 
socioeconomic 
infrastructure to support 
RIs and local farmers 
Yes but only eligible 
activities under Category 
B criteria considered see 
(PDR and ESMF) with key 
mitigation measures 
65.  Would any of the project activities have minor 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
(GS9) 
66.  Would the project result in physical resettlement of 
less than 20 people, or impacting less than 10 per 
cent of an individual household’s assets (GS13)? 
67.  Would the project result in short-term public health 
and safety concerns? (GS14) 
68.  Would the project require a migrant workforce or 
seasonal workers (for construction, planting and/or 
harvesting)? (GS13) 
Rural finance 
69.  Does the project support any of the above (Q24 to 
Q37) through the provision of a line of credit to 
financial service providers? (GS12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes but only eligible 
activities under Category 
B criteria considered see 
(PDR and ESMF) with key 
mitigation measures 
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
1/15
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
High
High
Substantial
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
High
Substantial
High
Substantial
Moderate
High
High
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
High
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Moderate
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Moderate
High
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
2/15
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
A change of Government and Ministers in the relevant Ministries during the project
cycle may result in implementation delays, lack of interest from a new elected
Government, or even civil unrest. While the overall system is stable and in the past
democratic elections have seen peaceful transitions, the change in Government or
priorities could lead to issues. This is magnified in the significant risks related to
counterpart funding, corruption perception index and quality of public
administration.
Mitigations:
PROSPER will maintain a regular engagement with relevant Government officials
to address issues on project management (communication, information sharing,
reporting) throughout the entire project cycle. Political environment will be
continuously monitored, and appropriate measures will be developed in case the
need to deal with political changes arises, including re-alignment of project with
Government agenda.
Governance
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that the country exhibits governance failures that may undermine project
implementation and achievement of project development objectives. Another risk is
project level governance failure. Despite the fact that Ghana has a well-established
democracy and institutions and Ghana Audit Services is a capable institution and
annual budgets are discussed by the Parliament, these risks are judged to be
substantial. For example risks related to corruption perception index and quality of
public administration are substantial.
Mitigations:
Supervisions missions and other implementation support / follow up measures will
be conducted minimum twice a year. Missions and follow up efforts will include FM
and procurement specialists. The ICO will ensure that audits are conducted on
time. External and internal audit findings will be assessed and followed up
proactively with the project, implementing ministry and borrower representative.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Macroeconomic and global difficulties such as inflation, fuel and energy challenges,
local and foreign market failures, fiscal and monetary policies affecting access to
finance, government inability to provide counterpart funding, inadequate imports of
hybrid seeds and fertilizers can represent a risk to PROSPER implementation.
Major currency fluctuations would affect prices, demand and availability imported
inputs and export markets.
Mitigations:
Following actions are expected to lead to addressing the above risks:
3/15
(i) Strengthening community institutions and developing their internal capital and
physical assets to develop resilience to external shocks. 
(ii) Obtaining high level government support from the early stages of project design;
thus increasing potential of GoG support in case of adverse macroeconomic
conditions and reducing probability of constraining inputs or any other necessary
elements on PROSPER’s beneficiaries. 
(iii) PROSPER will develop market linkages and strengthen RIs access to financial
services to facilitate their access credit from financial institutions. This will contribute
to building the beneficiaries resilience to shocks. 
(iv) Government contribution will be mostly in the form of in-kind contribution; thus
reducing any potential impact of non-ability of the Government to provide cash
contributions. 
(v) IFAD operational policy regarding re-structuring will be applied in case of
evolving macro-economic situation that would require revisiting costs.
Fragility and Security
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic might result in mid-to-longer term economic
difficulties or even civil unrest. Some of the response measures adopted by
governments in the peak of each wave to prevent transmission of the disease,
such as movement and gathering restrictions, may impact employment, rural-urban
movements and have some economic impact. The duration and strength of COVID
in Ghana is still uncertain. 
Development of vaccines and new medical protocols are contributing to reducing
these risks. Despite the conflict and socio-political turmoil in a handful of
neighbouring countries, (i.e. Burkina Faso, Niger, Nigeria), Ghana's global
environment remains relatively calm. Nevertheless, the risk of welcoming influxes of
unexpected climate and conflict related internally displaced people should not be
discarded.
Mitigations:
IFAD is actively participating in COVID-19 response dialogues, both at the UN
Country Team level and in implementing its emergency operation (ESRF) with the
government, to prevent and support mitigating negative impacts of the outbreak on
the population (cash transfer, support Government programs). ESRF is working
closely with other DPs and the Government to support measures that would help
cope with post COVID realities, such as e-platforms for extension and marketing. 
PROSPER will continue working with the GoG and monitor these growing threats
at the outskirts of its frontiers, throughout implementation. Systematic reporting on
the handling of security and conflict issues will enable IFAD and PROSPER to
anticipate accordingly. During project implementation, special attention will be given
to such issues so the project can adequately monitor this potential exogenous risk
that could hinder IFAD and PROSPER efforts, should it occur.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
While national policies and strategies are generally in line with IFAD policies, some
weakness in sector strategies and policies still exist, especially on subsidies and
short-term focused political programmes over long-term agriculture development.
This is namely related to blanket subsidies or unfavourable exports/imports
policies, especially on agro-inputs. This could increase difficulty to deliver project
expected outcomes.
Mitigations:
These risks are managed through a continuous policy dialogue engagement and
development partners coordination during the entire project cycle.
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
4/15
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The development and implementation of agricultural sector policies could provide a
challenging environment in some of PROSPER's critical areas e.g. matching
grants, access by PROSPER's target group to inclusive finance, enterprise
development and climate finance.
Mitigations:
From the onset, promoting inclusive policy dialogue, integrating perspectives of
different stakeholders since design, proper coordination between different
stakeholders, and building institutional capacities, are elements that will contribute
to the desired support for the sector, leading to PROSPER’s success. From the
second year of implementation, PROSPER will support the preparation of policy-
relevant knowledge products based on project evidence.
PROSPER’s policy dialogue sub-component will address key policy areas that are
relevant to the Project’s objectives and implementation such as green agriculture,
climate change, inclusive finance, etc. 
Ghana ICO will continue to participate actively in the ASWG and the private sector
platform, contribute to advocate for supportive policy formulation, and will liaise with
Development Partners to develop position papers aiming for increasingly effective
policies in the agriculture sector during the entire project cycle.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
High
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Possible environmental and climate shocks or extreme events (e.g. earthquakes,
land erosion, siltation) would have significant adverse risks and/or impacts on food
and nutrition security, agricultural productivity, access to markets, value-chains and
infrastructure and local development perspectives. While the above mentioned
natural environmental risks are not posing major threats (with the exception of
occasional earthquakes), illegal mining is leading to noticeable water pollution and
environmental degradation. Deforestation is another environmental risk. Climate
related risks such as floods, droughts, unusual climate conditions are more
probable. The potential incidence of pests and diseases would result in increased
vulnerability or deterioration of the target populations’ livelihoods and ecosystems.
Mitigations:
Where these exist, special measures will be taken to adequately protect project’s
interventions throughout the project cycle. The project has developed an ESMF /
ESMP which will contribute to address any unintended project impact, as well as
externalities. PROSPER’s aims at improving NR management and addressing
climate risks. This will help address some of the above mentioned potential risks.
With regard to climate related risks, the project will promote climate insurance.
Project interventions will not lead to any tree clearing but on the contrary it will
promote afforestation and forests preservation through promotion of alternative
livelihoods.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Unreliable and erratic rainfall, floods, long dry spells and destruction of
infrastructure and productive assets due to extreme weather conditions could
delay/ affect project implementation. Climate change could impact production
negatively, thus affecting PROSPER’s beneficiaries and reducing the potential of
achieving PROSPER’s objectives. Project's environmental and social category is B
and the climate risk assessment is moderate to high.
Mitigations:
5/15
PROSPER’s design is focused on improving NRM and introducing intensive
climate adaptation and mitigation measures to support PROSPER’s beneficiaries. 
This will be achieved through a range of Project’s interventions such as capacity
building on climate resilient agricultural practices (details and expected timeframe
are referenced in the PDR); promotion of technically feasible and financially
affordable soil and water management practices with farmers; facilitation of
provision of weather information for decision making to farmers; provision of crop
insurance to farmers. Lastly, the MG scheme and the BFF loan facility will support
a wide spectrum of adaptation and mitigation measures.
Additionally, foreseen socioeconomic infrastructures and other agriculture activities
financed under PROSPER (small sections of feeder roads 7-9.5 km long) linking
two villages, and/or agricultural land, which are mostly community owned, are
expected to be small, low risks, mostly site specific and easily manageable.
Consistent with IFAD Safeguards standards/policies the initial project
environmental, social and climate screening, and PROSPER being a category B
operation, an environment and social management framework (ESMF) has been
prepared to help mitigate the Project induced impacts and external shocks in an
adequate manner. The preparation was done adopting a consultative and inclusive
approach. Moreover, a Gender, Social Inclusion and Vulnerability Specialist as well
as Safeguards and Climate Specialist will be part of the PCU to ensure timely
project compliance on safeguards, social inclusion and climate change. The GCF
unit in the ARB-APEX bank will include safeguards, climate, Social Inclusion, and
Vulnerability Specialists as well. 
A crucial part of PROSPER’s intervention aims at helping beneficiaries in targeted
areas to cope with climate change impacts to achieve improved and more
sustainable livelihoods while participating in selected VCs schemes.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
PROSPER becomes less relevant if it is not aligned with IFAD and government
priorities.
Mitigations:
The objectives and interventions of the project are fully aligned with national
development policies and IFAD priorities and are deemed responsive to the needs
and challenges of the target groups.
Project relevance and the needs of the target group will continue to be confirmed
further during project start-up, baseline surveys, and supervision and follow up
missions. Corrective measures/adjustments such as restructuring will be taken if
appropriate (even during early stages of implementation), to ensure project
relevance is maintained. The M&E system will play an important role for continuous
flow of information within the project and with key stakeholders, for early detection
of potential difficulties.
Technical Soundness
High
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
6/15
Complexities; such as 
- time consuming VC surveys and situation assessments at the beginning of the
project may delay project implementation 
- MoUs for implementation are not signed on time or project implementation does
not progress according to plan 
- cofinancing from the Government does not materialize 
- FIs remains risk averse and delay implementation of the BFF 
- limited agribusiness expertise in the implementing agency results in priority to
production (supply) aspects and supply driven implementation 
- the lack of participation of agribusinesses, particularly of those which are new to
the concept of partnering with community institutions, might cause delay in market
linkage development; and 
- capacity of the extension services
Mitigations:
PROSPER will mitigate these risks by building on prior IFAD projects experiences
from the onset and through actions like: i) building on the experiences of successful
VC and microenterprise development projects such as a GASIP and REP, as well
as coordination with AAFORD, especially on financial linkages to formal financial
institutions and micro-insurance services; ii) prioritizing the presence of
agribusiness and commercial agriculture expertise in the team from the start (REP
and GASIP, which are about to be completed, have experienced staff in the areas
of commercial VC and microenterprise development); iii) drawing upon
agribusinesses which already proven to partner successfully with other projects
such as GASIP, other non-IFAD projects and scale up their outreach to the
PROSPER target group, as well as by developing marketing linkages through
government supported initiatives such as 1D1F and PERD; (iv) capacity building of
AEAs and provision of TA to backstop BRCs during implementation; (v) phasing
approach is developed to allow addressing any potential issues with
implementation arrangements; (vi) Government funding is mostly in form of in-kind
contribution; (vii) Key project staff ToRs include follow up on meeting the triggers
and follow up / timely recording of Government in-kind contribution; (viii)
Institutional support will be provided to Government services including AEAs. .
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
- Management unit located far away from project communities 
- Overburdened project management unit due to limited staff 
- Delays in replacement/recruitment of key staff and limited field presence might
result in management constraints 
- Complex implementation arrangements that have several parties 
- Presence of several partners and service providers might result in complex
implementation arrangements 
- MoUs delayed with Project Partners; such as APEX-Bank, BRCs, GIRSAL, etc
Mitigations:
(i) The PCU will be located centrally in the Project areas, close to the beneficiaries 
(ii) Implementation will be phased thus allowing the Project team to build their
capacity and experience 
(iii) Phased implementation will allow taking corrective measures at an early stage
through restructuring and / or any other corrective measures 
(iv) Introducing clarity on the roles of different parties of the implementation
structure as well as roles of different partners, thus reducing complexity 
(v) Ensuring strong support by the implementing ministry through project
implementation to allow filling any gaps and addressing any staffing constraints 
(vi) Once implementation commences, PROSPER will recruit TA to support
implementation.
High
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
7/15
Non-effective Market Linkages for Project Beneficiaries: 
Risk: 
-The risk that PROSPER’s efforts to create marketing linkages for RIs and MSMEs
does not succeed due to lack of interest by agribusinesses 
- Failure of smallholders producers to meet market requirements with regard to
quantity and quality
Mitigations:
Since the beginning of the project activities will focus on building capacity of RIs
and MSMEs not only on climate risks and NR degradation but also with regard to
FAB and improved production and financial literacy. It will also strengthen the
extension teams to ensure state of the art knowledge is accessible to the
beneficiaries. The RIs and MSMEs will also have access to financial services such
as VSLAs, matching grants and BFF. This will help farmers to continue credit
worthy and credible partners to agribusinesses under formal market linkages
arrangements.
Consciousness efforts will be made to link farmers’ groups and MSMEs to VC
actors. In addition to incentives such as increased opportunities for expanding their
businesses, incentives such as access to know how and concessional BFF loans is
expected to encourage agribusinesses to have strong links to the target groups.
Risk:
High
Moderate
Poor farmers Performance due to Climate Impacts 
Risks 
High climate high risks would lead to sub-optimal production and failure of the
smallholders to meet their commitments to the partnering agribusinesses and
financial institutions.
Mitigations:
Since start-up, the project will raise smallholders' awareness on climate risks and
how to climate proof their farming operations. Under component 2, farmers will be
supported to develop green and climate resilient business plans to access MGs and
the BFF facility. The project will make arrangements to link the farmers to GIRSAL
(agricultural risk mechanism) and GAIP (agricultural climate insurance) to mitigate
any loss due to climate risks or any other shocks.
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
PFIs are Risk Averse and not Willing to lend to PROSPER’s Target Group 
Risks: 
PFIs consider PROPSER’s target group high risk and does not agree to engage in
business relationship with most of them.
Mitigations:
Since its start-up, the project will build the organisational capacity of the
beneficiaries groups and take them through a gradual graduation approach,
starting with financial literacy, saving mobilisation, matching grant support for the
poorest groups, and access to low interest rate BFF. These actions, coupled with
intensive efforts to create market linkages, introduce Ag risk mechanism and
climate insurance as well as building the capacity to the PFIs through training and
developing products suitable for PROSPER’s target group, are expected to
address possible risks for the PFIs.
Risk:
High
Moderate
- The risk that the investments under the MG fund and BFF does not comply with
green financing requirements 
- The risk that project implementation does not focus sufficiently on nutrition
activities
Mitigations:
8/15
- IGREENFIN Operational Manual for green investments will be included in
PROSPER PIM. 
- Project staff ToRs will include specific focus on ensuring green investments and
compliance with the IGREENFIN Operational Manual 
- Project design include significant focus on nutrition including farmers training,
specific MG category for nutrition 
- Specific TA for nutrition is included in the design 
- Partnerships with line Government departments to support implementation of
nutrition activities
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Weak M&E processes and systems could lead to inadequate Project’s capacity to
deal with complexity, monitor, validate, analyse and communicate results, capture
lessons, and adjust implementation to seize opportunities and take corrective
actions in a timely manner. 
Risk of inadequate flow of information from the districts, APEX Bank to the PCU.
Mitigations:
M&E risks are mitigated by a clear structure from the onset, by leveraging existing
M&E expertise within host agency, and by maintaining a participative-collaborative
approach for the definition of specific tools with main stakeholders. 
The project will have a dedicated M&E team, who will derive the M&E plan
collaboratively with the line ministry, district staff and with relevant stakeholders,
farmers organisations and agribusinesses. M&E focal points at regional, district
levels and in APEX Bank will be established. 
The key responsibilities of the M&E system will rely on the M&E Unit at the PCU,
composed of an M&E manager and M&E officers. All other implementation
agencies at regional level will play important roles in collecting and analysing data
to assess outcomes and impact of project activities. The M&E unit will set up a
monitoring-evaluation manual and a computerized monitoring-evaluation data
system to provide periodic, GIS based system, complete and reliable data. Several
M&E tools and guidelines will be incorporated in the M&E system along with the
Core Outcome Indicators (COI) Survey, which would allow for effective monitoring
of the project situation at baseline, mid-term and completion. 
PROSPER’s M&E system aims for continuous information flow among relevant
stakeholders and will allow the development of corrective measures as soon as
issues are identified, from the beginning of implementation. PROSPER also feeds
from other IFAD operations’ experiences, lessons, knowledge and products (REP,
GASIP, AAFORD), including what regards to project evaluation and monitoring. 
The institutional arrangement for implementation will ensure that PROSPER's M&E
is fully integrated into the MoFA planning, M&E, and policy formulation processes,
which turns the PROSPER’s M&E system into an important element of project’s
sustainability and exit strategy.
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
The implementing entity has excess number of qualified and experienced financial
management staff thereby increasing cost significantly.
Mitigations:
The entity has three chartered Accountants and one finalist. All have experience in
managing IFAD project. Two junior Accounts Assistants will be engaged to replace
two senior accountants on completion of GASIP. PROSPER will make complete
and appropriate staffing a condition precedent to disbursement and throughout
project cycle
Project Budgeting
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
1) IFAD disbursement cap may result in funds not being available when needed 
2) Disbursement cap Information may not be readily available at the time of AWPB
preparation 
3) The use of GIFMIS implies that the AWPB is integrated in the national budget,
which could cause delays in budget approval
9/15
Mitigations:
1) Project must obtain disbursement cap before completion of AWPB. 
2) Project must liaise with FMD and PMD through the Country Director 
3) The PMU will work toward an early submission of the AWPB. Any setback
caused by the use of national systems will be discussed and mitigated by
negotiating with government authorities.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Delays in justifying prior advances, particularly, MoFA Directorates of District
Agriculture due to the use of the revolving fund mechanism
Mitigations:
Programme Accountants and Technical Specialists shall constantly remind
implementing partners to justify advances at least once a month. Restriction rule of
minimum 80% of advances justified before the release of any new advance shall be
applied. The amount of the advances should be kept low. 
.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
1) Internal control systems will not allow for an effective control system to be put in
place. 
2) Low capacity and performance of government and private implementing partners
Mitigations:
1) The arrangement proposed for staffing will guarantee proper segregation of
duties. The Internal Auditors of the lead implementing agency shall conduct ex-post
review of PROSPER at least twice a year, and each expenditure will be validated
by the internal audit system of GIFMIS 
2) Contractual arrangements and reporting templates and guidelines for project
finances shall be spelt out in MOUs/MOAs with implementing partners and service
providers. Quarterly reports shall be required of implementing partners to feed into
the Project IFRs.
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
1) Lack of experience in using the national accounting platform – GIFMIS resulting
in late submission and poor quality of the financial reports 
2) Difficulties to meet the reporting requirement of all co-financiers
Mitigations:
1) Sensitization and migration is planned for the staff to use in the current
programme before PROSPER start-up to enhance experience before
implementation of the new project 
2) Careful definition of reporting requirement per financier at project start-up phase
Project External Audit
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
No major risk is identified for external audit given the good track record of the GAS
in auditing IFAD financed projects
10/15
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Mitigations:
,
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
The procurement regulations are out of tune with the Amended PPA Act 914 of
2016 which can make the interpretation of the law difficult. 
Procurement monitoring received a “D” rating from PEFA, due to the incomplete
nature of the procurement information published by the Public Procurement
Authority (PPA). Specifically, the information from the PPA database is provisional
for FY2016 and FY2017, has not updated regularly and had not been
independently verified by PPA or the Auditor General.
Mitigations:
IFAD prior review thresholds will take into account the CPI score for Ghana.
Additionally, all procurement entities, as well as bidders, suppliers, contractors,
consultants and service providers, shall observe the highest standard of ethics
during the procurement and execution of contracts financed under IFAD funded
Projects, in accordance with paragraph 69 of the Procurement Guidelines. The
Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and
Operations shall apply to all projects, vendors and third parties, in addition to the
relevant national anticorruption and fraud laws. 
The Procuring Entity should establish a review panel at the level of the
implementing agency, which will provide the first level of review for procurement
complaints before eventually submitting them to the PPA. 
All NCB documents should have a Notice of Intention to Award provision/template
and should be used. 
Use of standard bidding documents, use of procurement plan, and clear
procurement arrangements from the onset.
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Transparency International assigned a corruption perception index (CPI) score of
43/100 to Ghana, thus falling within the “medium” bracket. 
There is only a single level system to handle procurement complaints. In fact,
although an appeals authority (ACB) exists at national level, it is not independent
and there is no appeals review panel at the level of the implementing agency. 
The absence of Notice of Intention to Award and standstill period in Bidding
documents/Request for Proposals do not enable bidders know when a contract is
to be awarded so they should decide whether to complain or not. 
No debarment system. PPA's list of debarred suppliers refers to the World Bank
debarred list. 
Ghana's Commission of Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) is an
independent anti-corruption agency.
Ghana has a one level system to handle complaints. PPA is responsible for the
administrative review process and inaugurates a 7-member Appeals and
Complaints Panel that reports back to PPA. 
No debarment system. PPA's list of debarred suppliers refers to the World Bank
debarred list. 
Ghana's Commission of Human Rights and Administrative Justive (CHRAJ) is
independent anti-corruption agency
Mitigations:
11/15
IFAD prior review thresholds will take into account the CPI score for Ghana.
Additionally, all procurement entities, as well as bidders, suppliers, contractors,
consultants and service providers, shall observe the highest standard of ethics
during the procurement and execution of contracts financed under IFAD funded
Projects, in accordance with paragraph 69 of the Procurement Guidelines. The
Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and
Operations shall apply to all projects, vendors and third parties, in addition to the
relevant national anticorruption and fraud laws. 
The Procuring Entity should establish a review panel at the level of the
implementing agency, which will provide the first level of review for procurement
complaints before eventually submitting them to the PPA. 
All NCB documents should have a Notice of Intention to Award provision/template
and should be used. 
Use of standard bidding documents, use of procurement plan, and clear
procurement arrangements from the onset.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The current implementation arrangement provides that the PCU of PROSPER will
be embedded within the existing structures of the GASIP. GASIP has a
Procurement Unit with1 staff member, which could result in procurement delays
and hamper project implementation. 
There is room for improving the quality of the bidding document. 
Procurement staff have full access to the PPA website. 
Procurement and financial management functions are separated.
Mitigations:
Strengthen the procurement unit through the recruitment of an additional
procurement staff (Procurement Officer) and training in IFAD procurement
guidelines during the first year of implementation. S/He will be monitored to ensure
adherence to IFAD procurement procedures and processes while at the same time
serves as a back up to the PROSPER Procurement Manager. 
GASIP’s staff member has about 13 years general procurement experience, and 8
years specific donor-funded procurement experience.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
-The PPA stipulates 2 - 6 weeks of Bidding for NCB contracts. There is the
likelihood that Bidders may not have sufficient time to submit competent bids which
could results in either adverse selection of retendering with attendant delays to
project implementation. 
-The NCB document for works procurement and the Bidding document does not
include a template for Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS)
Performance Security. There is the risk that ESHS procedures may not be followed
during implementation, which could cause delays if the rights of individuals are
violated. 
-Procurement plans are not updated regularly. This could make procurement
process monitoring difficult. 
-Contract registers at MoFA and GASIP are not updated regularly. 
The country procurement methods for goods, works and services are consistent
and congruent with IFAD's 
Access by foreign firms to bidding documents is not known.
Mitigations:
12/15
-PROSPER will ensure that the Procurement Plan includes the minimum bidding
period, suitable for the different procurement methods, from the onset. 
-The Works Procurement methods should be strengthened to include a template in
the Bidding documents for Environmental, Social, Health and Safety Performance
Security so as to ensure compliance of Contractors' C-ESMP plans during
construction. 
-PROPSPER will ensure that all procurement plans and contracts register are
updated regularly throughout project implementation in the required format and
submitted regularly to IFAD.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
The risk that the project may cause significant threats to or the loss of biodiversity,
availability of diversified nutritious food, ecosystems and ecosystem services,
territories of the indigenous peoples, or the unsustainable use/production of living
natural resources. 
These risks are limited, as the project will promote use of best farming practices as
well as promote agricultural intensification.
Mitigations:
SECAP procedures will be applied, which will lead to working closely with the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of Ghana to address any adverse impacts,
throughout the entire project cycle. An ESMF is developed as part of the project
design. All the above risks are assessed as not significant. All necessary measures
are incorporated in the design to address unintended limited impacts as well as
externalities. No deforestation or agriculture in forested areas. Use of chemicals
will be monitored and necessary measures will be applied to address any potential
impacts.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that the project may cause significant pollution to air, water, and land, and
inefficient use of finite resources that may threaten people, ecosystem services and
the environment at the local, regional, and global levels.
Mitigations:
SECAP procedures will be applied, thus reducing any such likelihood.
Arrangements and monitoring to ensure construction works, agriculture or any
other project interventions will not lead to harm to the environment or the
communities.
Cultural Heritage
That the project will be implemented in areas of cultural heritage or lead to harming
any such assets.
Indigenous People
There are no Indigenous Peoples in Ghana as per the UN definition; therefore, no
such risk is envisioned particularly in project interventions areas.
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Labour and Working Conditions
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Though PROSPER interventions are foreseen to be small in scale and mostly
localized, the size of agriculture plots are very limited, therefore, during ploughing
and/or harvesting, and/or construction of community infrastructure there is a
likelihood to use labour forces during a short period of time.
13/15
Mitigations:
Provision is made in the ESMF to adequately cope with the likelihood of engaging
labour forces or the presence of labour influx in the project intervention areas.
During supervision and follow up missions, close follow up will be made to ensure
appropriate use of labour.
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Child labour is forcefully prohibited in Ghana, however there is likelihood that this
could happen. However, in case of presence of children in tree crops production
practices, resulting in Child labour, practical measure will be taken to immediately
mitigate such a behaviour.
Mitigations:
Strict adherence to government policies to prevent child labour. Facility for
reporting any violation followed by prompt investigation of any reported case. The
ESMF is prepared to address child labour issues.
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
During project implementation, although most activities will be done using manual
tractions, it is likely the tools and other material used could harm or threaten the
safety and security of farmers, and/or workers or even visitors. Furthermore, the
risk that the project may cause moderate to low adverse impacts on the physical,
mental, nutritional or social health/safety status of an individual, group, or
population, including as a result of gender based violence is also very unlikely and
thus, significantly unexpected.
Mitigations:
The project will be nutrition sensitive, will ensure gender and youth mainstreaming,
as described in PDR. The project interventions are designed to improve income,
livelihoods, and nutrition status of the target groups. It is not envisioned that there
will be significant environmental, social, or physical impacts and SECAP provisions,
especially ESMF recommendations, will be applied from the onset to ensure that
any such impacts are addressed as part of project interventions.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The risk that the project may cause significant adverse physical, social, cultural, or
economic impacts (especially for marginalized groups), from land acquisition, and
involuntary loss of land, assets, and restriction to access to assets, income
sources, or means of livelihoods is limited simply because (i) all agriculture lands
will occur on community owned lands; (ii) feeder/truck roads connecting two
villages and/or agricultural fields are very short (7-9.50 Km of length); (iii)
construction of socioeconomic community infrastructure will occur on communally
owned pieces of land.
Mitigations:
The project is not envisioned to pose such risk. SECAP policies, and specifically
ESMF recommendations will be applied to ensure that any such impacts are
addressed as part of the project interventions.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
14/15
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Ecological damage might occur through mono-cropping, deforestation, and/or the
processing/transformation of some VC crops, etc. in the process of promoting tree
crop production.
Mitigations:
Strict adherence to government environmental and natural resources management
policies, throughout project cycle. The programme will focus on rehabilitation of
existing planting areas, plantations in denuded land and intercropping with staple
crops and planting in farmland instead of fresh plantations, unless properly
evaluated.
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
As indicated above, the rural smallholder population in the target areas (Northern
and Middle belts), typically engaged in rainfed agriculture, is subject to various
impacts of climate and ecosystem variability (dry spells, delayed/short rainfall,
droughts, floods, pests and locusts invasion, etc.) which affects their productivity,
livelihoods, and infrastructure.
Mitigations:
Project interventions are designed with the goal of building resilience of target
groups to climate change impacts and effects, as well as reducing greenhouse
gases emissions in project’s value chains. Intensive trainings and capacity
buildings with regard to climate risks, adaptation and mitigation. The BPs will
integrate climate adaptation and mitigation measures. 
A key element to deal with climate variability and help mitigating this type of risk is
the climate-related financing, including providing access to agricultural insurance
schemes. GAIP, the GoG’s entity in charge of crop insurance, is among AAFORD
partners which will be linked to PROSPER’s interventions from the onset, as
previously indicated.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
- Failure to create linkages with other IFAD projects offering complementary
services 
- Inadequate stakeholder engagement/coordination 
- Gaps in roles definition 
- Inadequate/insufficient information disclosure 
- Misunderstandings or duplication/inconsistencies between partners working in the
same target area might dilute project effectiveness 
- Smallholders’ lack of access to financial resources beyond project’s one time
start-up support might cause lack of continuity of marketing linkages between
smallholders and agribusinesses
Mitigations:
15/15
PROSPER will be implemented in a consultative, participatory and inclusive
manner. PROSPER will therefore mitigate these risks through the following key
actions: 
i) Strong linkages with AAFORD, GASIP and REP from the earliest stages of
implementation. PROSPER will be building on the on-going IFAD projects to
complement its activities where possible: working with AAFORD to provide
affordable credit supply to target households; building on REP achievements such
as use of BRCs for creating market linkages, business planning, capacity building
of groups and micro enterprises, leveraging on the demand by 1D1F; and with
GASIP for linkages to agribusiness partners. 
ii) PROSPER is building on ongoing and future interventions by other donors such
as the World Bank, AfDB, Canada. Continuous coordination and interactions with
all DPs supported programs (since start-up) will be ensured. The project
implementation arrangements contain strong coordination mechanisms such as
Project Steering Committees and use of existing experienced PCU. Preparation of
AWPB will be done in a participatory manner, etc. Strong coordination will take
place both and central level and in the field. 
iii) The project design addresses key gaps such as value chains weaknesses, NR
degradation, lack of access to financial resources, etc. 
iv) The project design include sound M&E, KM and communication arrangements
which will contribute to information gathering and dissemination; thus leading to
better information sharing and coordination. 
v) As project cycle advances, development of bankable BPs that receive
continuous financial support through affordable bank loans will allow target
households to gradually increase acreage and profitability over successive
agricultural seasons and sustain their agribusiness linkages.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
As stated in the PDR and above, all participating land sites will be communally
owned, small in size and free of any claim. Nevertheless, land tenure issues can
de-incentivise participation of farmers -including youth and women- in PROSPER.
Moreover, agriculture, construction of community activities may result in harming
some people who might rightfully seek ways of claiming their rights.
Mitigations:
The ESMF includes a participatory Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that
enables project beneficiaries and/or affected persons to freely and easily lodge their
claims and seek for a peaceful reparation, throughout project implementation. On
the land acquisition issues, throughout implementation PROSPER will further
engage with GOG’s departments responsible for land tenure policy to promote
solutions to securing land access on longer-term basis or ownership transfer to
those who want to farm.
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy and Sustainability 
1.  The exit strategy designed for the project comes as a natural and sequential 
phasing out from supported activities, where high level of participation from the 
host agency, beneficiaries and partner institutions is planned from the onset of 
implementation, to ensure effectiveness and progressive leadership from local 
stakeholders who will be able to continue, scale-up and/or guide and monitor 
planned activities after project completion. 
2.  Important aspects designed to guarantee PROSPER’s success and sustainability 
and the continuation of its benefits after completion, include institutional 
arrangements such as embedding the PCU in the host Government agency, to 
build capacity on project scope matters, favour collaborative problem-solving and 
contribute to project ownership throughout PROSPER’s entire lifecycle. 
3.  The PROSPER design took a consultative and collaborative approach with a high 
level of participation from all relevant stakeholders, aiming for a tailored planning 
of activities, flexibility and continued sustainability. Capacity building is a key 
aspect in all planned activities under the three PROSPER components, including 
project management and policy engagement. 
4.  First stages of implementation will rely on key situation analysis, a strong 
targeting strategy and beneficiaries’ differentiation according to their level of 
capitalization and professionalization. This gradual and differentiated approach to 
be adopted from the beginning of implementation gives strength to the design by 
providing PROSPER with the capacity to address the developmental challenges of 
diverse groups in the target areas. The project will cater for distinct levels of 
competence and ability and build necessary interventions accordingly, allowing 
beneficiaries classified in the lower tiers in terms of capital and professionalization 
to access more complex services and support tools as they progress. 
5.  PROSPER has the benefit of the experiences and important lessons from previous 
and ongoing IFAD-funded operations in Ghana, which encourages increased and 
faster maturity. 
6.  The table below presents PROSPER’s Exit Strategy, indicating the activities that 
are expected to continue after closure, by being taken over gradually by relevant 
organizations and stakeholders or through scaling-up. This information is 
organized by project component as a reference. Details on the expected timeline, 
mechanism for handover, national-level commitment, justifications and necessary 
evaluation processes are shown. 
7.  During project implementation, this Exit Strategy will be revisited regularly to test 
the underlying assumptions and continuing validity in the light of progress. If 
major restructuring is required, such as reduced size of the replication phase, 
changing implementation arrangements, reducing and/or increase of scope of 
components, cancellation, the Exit Strategy will be redesigned in line of the 
changing context 
1 
Annex 10 Table 1: PROSPER Exit Strategy and Sustainability 
Reference to 
PROSPER 
activity or 
outcome 
Activity to 
continue post- 
project 
IFAD 
Support 
end date 
Who will 
take up 
the 
activity 
Mechanis
ms for 
handover 
Commitme
nts from 
national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, 
trainings, seeds, 
etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Component 1:  Development of rural institutions and socioeconomic infrastructure 
Can this activity reach 
greater scale? How? 
Comments 
After MTR Beneficiar
y RIs. 
phasing 
over 
MoFA, DAs, 
Cluster 
Committees. 
Beneficiary RIs will 
count with the 
material and capacity 
received from 
PROSPER to continue 
the task when new 
members decide to 
join, and to share 
their experience with 
other groups. MoFA 
and DAs remain as 
links with IFAD for 
any necessary 
updates. 
1.1 
Strengthenin
g of rural 
institutions 
and 
enterprises 
& Climate 
proofing 
smallholder 
production 
technologies. 
RIs can increase 
their own capacity 
by training new 
members on 
agronomical 
practices and 
farming as a 
business on their 
own, including 
efforts to adopt 
climate-friendly 
practices and 
natural resource 
remediation. RIs 
take  ownership to 
scale-up the 
capacity building 
experience to non-
beneficiaries. 
2 
Scaling-up. 
Requirements: 
Identification of 
"champions"/most 
successful cases - 
Resources to be 
provided by PROSPER, 
MoFA/DAs. 
These arrangements 
and partners will be 
updated regularly. If 
restructuring is needed, 
new Exit Strategy will 
be developed. 
After MTR/towards project 
completion beneficiary RIs 
can organize knowledge 
and experience sharing 
events with other groups 
working on similar value 
chains in former project 
areas. This will be 
evaluated/ planned 
together with the PCU 
during PROSPER last years 
of implementation. Cluster-
level surveys will serve as 
an asset to identify 
scaling-up potential. These 
knowledge  sharing events 
will also include a specific 
module on promotion of 
nutrition-sensitive farming 
and vegetable cultivation. 
Reference to 
PROSPER 
activity or 
outcome 
Activity to 
continue post- 
project 
IFAD 
Support 
end date 
Who will 
take up 
the 
activity 
Mechanis
ms for 
handover 
After MTR Beneficiar
phasing 
over 
y 
Economic 
Interest 
Groups 
and 
MSMEs. 
Beneficiary 
Economic interest 
groups and MSMEs 
can share their 
increased capacity 
learning curve on 
enterprise 
development (e.g. 
Value addition and 
support services), 
including efforts to 
adopt climate-
friendly practices 
and natural 
resource 
remediation, with 
new members and 
non-beneficiary 
groups. 
Commitme
nts from 
national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
MoFA, BRCs, 
BACs, DAs, 
Cluster 
Committees 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, 
trainings, seeds, 
etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Beneficiary economic 
groups will use the 
material and capacity 
received from 
PROSPER to continue 
the task when new 
members  decide to 
join, and to share 
their experience with 
other non-beneficiary 
groups. MoFA and 
DAs remain as links 
with IFAD for any 
necessary updates 
and support. 
Can this activity reach 
greater scale? How? 
Comments 
After MTR/towards project 
completion beneficiary 
economic groups will be 
incentivized to share 
knowledge and experience 
gained through PROSPER 
with other groups working 
on similar value chains in 
former project areas. This 
will be evaluated and 
planned together with the 
PCU during PROSPER last 
years of implementation. 
Cluster-level surveys will 
serve as an asset to 
identify potential for 
scaling-up. 
Scaling-up. 
Requirements: 
Identification of 
"champions"/most 
successful cases - 
Resources to be 
provided by PROSPER, 
MoFA/DAs. 
These arrangements 
and partners will be 
updated regularly. If 
restructuring is needed, 
new Exit Strategy will 
be developed. 
3 
After 
Completio
n 
DAs, 
MoFA 
phasing 
over 
MoFA, 
DAs/local 
communities 
1.2 
Development 
of 
socioeconom
ic 
infrastructur
e. 
PROSPER's 
Natural Resources 
(NR) remediation 
infrastructures will 
be sustained by 
local authorities. 
These also will 
continue to 
identify the need 
for new 
infrastructure 
developments. 
Towards project 
completion, local capacity to 
sustain  the socioeconomic 
infrastructures will be 
assessed by the project, 
along with their capacity 
to identify the need  for 
further infrastructure 
developments. In case 
support is needed in this 
area, specific sensitization 
activities will be organized 
by the PCU during 
PROSPER last 2 years of 
implementation. 
Each capital 
investment plan will 
include appropriate 
management, 
operation, 
maintenance and 
ongoing financing 
arrangements, with 
overall responsibility 
resting with the 
community. 
Agreements will be 
reached between the 
DAs and the cluster 
leadership for the 
post- construction 
management of 
infrastructure by 
various community 
gender-balanced 
committees. 
Resources for 
infrastructure 
maintenance and  new 
developments might 
be needed. Possible 
sources include: GoG, 
local communities, 
development 
partners, and IFAD 
additional financing. 
Maintenance and 
scaling-up. NR 
remediation 
infrastructures may 
comprise soil and water 
conservation structures, 
as well as climate change 
mitigation measures in 
line with local conditions. 
The District Assembly will 
undertake all procedures 
to acquire/lease any 
land needed for 
construction. 
PROSPER envisages 
expanding and 
rehabilitating strategic 
road networks (feeder 
roads and farm tracks, 
culverts and small 
bridges), as well as 
shared domestic water 
supply structures 
(boreholes with hand or 
solar pumps), sanitation 
facilities and waste 
management systems, 
and alternative/green 
energy schemes 
(including resource and 
energy recovery from 
waste). 
Component 2: Strengthening the economic benefits for smallholders and small operators around selected agricultural value chains. 
4 
These arrangements 
and partners will be 
updated regularly. If 
restructuring is needed, 
new Exit Strategy will 
be developed. 
Phasing 
down 
After 
Completio
n 
Target 
communit
ies/ 
project 
beneficiar
ies. 
MOFA, DAs, 
Partner 
entities & 
institutions, 
Private 
Sector 
2.1 
Creation of 
sustainable 
marketing 
linkages and 
business 
development 
RIs remain 
engaged in formal 
partnerships and 
agreements with 
public/private 
entities after 
PROSPER's 
comprehensive 
financial, capacity 
and marketing 
support. 
To be evaluated after MTR 
and regular updates. 
The deep analysis to 
be commissioned by 
PROSPER of each VC 
at the beginning of 
implementation, 
together with the 
interventions on 
financial literacy, 
capacity and 
marketing support to 
target groups, and the 
follow up activities, 
are designed to 
ensure mutually 
beneficial and 
enduring 
partnerships. 
The Promotion of 
linkages between 
producers and VC actors 
aims for lasting 
partnerships between 
producers engaged in 
climate-resilient farming 
and larger-scale 
agribusinesses. This will 
concentrate on those RIs 
and MSMEs that 
demonstrated interest 
and potential in the 
Component 1 capacity 
building interventions. 
PROSPER will not enter 
business relations with 
the parties at any stage. 
With the support of the 
Business Advisory 
Centres/Business 
Resource Centres and 
District Directorates of 
Agriculture, the project 
will engage with VC 
actors in each 
participating district 
with an information- 
gathering and analysis 
exercise. 
These arrangements 
and partners will be 
updated regularly. If 
restructuring is needed, 
new Exit Strategy will 
be developed. 
5 
Reference to 
PROSPER 
activity or 
outcome 
Activity to 
continue post- 
project 
IFAD 
Support 
end date 
Who will 
take up 
the 
activity 
Mechanis
ms for 
handover 
After 
Completio
n 
SMEs and Rural 
enterprises 
continue to access 
business 
development 
services. 
Marketing linkages 
remain active and 
profitable. 
Phasing 
down & 
phasing 
out 
Target 
communit
ies/ 
project 
beneficiar
ies 
Commitme
nts from 
national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
MOFA, DAs, 
Partner 
Financial 
Institutions, 
Private 
Sector 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, 
trainings, seeds, 
etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Can this activity reach 
greater scale? How? 
Comments 
To be evaluated after MTR 
and regular updates. 
Capital and capacity 
conditions are 
required to access 
each type of 
supported service, to 
cater to various levels 
of capacities and 
professionalization, 
ensuring each type of 
enterprise is catered 
for accordingly. 
PROSPER design includes 
key elements that will 
contribute to the 
sustainability of project 
interventions: a 
sequencing approach, 
high level of involvement 
of partner institutions 
from the onset, a 
consultative and 
participatory process 
and a tailored targeting 
strategy, allowing a 
gradual and 
differentiated access to 
financial services 
depending on the 
capacity and maturity 
level of beneficiary 
groups. Development of 
Business Plans are also 
differentiated according 
to beneficiary maturity 
and capitalization. 
These arrangements 
and partners will be 
updated regularly. If 
restructuring is needed, 
new Exit Strategy will 
be developed. 
6 
2.2 
Access to 
rural 
financial 
services. 
After 
Completio
n 
Rural households 
continue using 
rural financial 
services (savings 
and credit 
facilities). After 
PROSPER's 
capacity and 
financial support, a 
portion of the MG 
beneficiaries will 
have graduated to 
be eligible for more 
complex 
instruments. 
Phasing 
down & 
phasing 
out 
Target 
communit
ies/ 
project 
beneficiar
ies 
MoFA, DAs, 
Partner 
Financial 
Institutions, 
Private 
Sector 
PROSPER PCU can evaluate 
the possibility of scaling up 
during the last years of 
implementation, using 
success stories and 
knowledge sharing within 
the project areas. 
PROSPER will support 
the creation and 
strengthening of 
savings and credit 
groups (based on the 
proven successful 
VSLA model). The 
revolving nature of 
the BFF guarantees 
sustainability in the 
access to its financial 
services after project 
completion. 
An initial assessment of 
the maturity of the 
targeted groups will be 
conducted from 
inception: Groups  will be 
evaluated against their 
level of capitalization, 
skills in financial 
management and ability 
to establish business 
agreements with VC 
actors such as traders 
and processors. They will 
be categorized  into three 
tiers depending on their 
maturity level for proper 
targeting and 
sequencing to access 
the different financial 
services (being able to be 
re-assessed and 
graduated to be eligible 
for more 
demanding/complex 
financial tools). 
After 
Completio
n 
The successful 
operation of the 
BFF is expected to 
incentivise the 
APEX Bank and its 
network to 
provide more 
resources and to 
crowd in 
additional 
resources from 
Participati
ng 
Financial 
Institutio
ns 
Phasing 
down & 
Phasing 
out 
ARB APEX 
Bank, RCBs 
and private 
sector 
Increased demand by 
smallholders for green 
financial services will lead 
to increased supply from 
private sector and FIs    
The BFF will increase 
in size due to more 
funds provided by the 
bank and private 
sector. Demand from 
the smallholders will 
continue to grow 
despite the decreased 
level of 
concessionality  
7 
Reference to 
PROSPER 
activity or 
outcome 
Activity to 
continue post- 
project 
IFAD 
Support 
end date 
Who will 
take up 
the 
activity 
Mechanis
ms for 
handover 
Commitme
nts from 
national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, 
trainings, seeds, 
etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Can this activity reach 
greater scale? How? 
Comments 
the private sector. 
Follow up will be 
made during 
implementation to 
secure more 
contribution from 
PFIs.  
These arrangements 
and partners will be 
updated regularly. If 
restructuring is needed, 
new Exit Strategy will 
be developed. 
8 
Reference to 
PROSPER 
activity or 
outcome 
Activity to 
continue post- 
project 
IFAD 
Support 
end date 
Who will 
take up 
the 
activity 
Mechanis
ms for 
handover 
Commitme
nts from 
national 
actors to 
continue 
activity 
Are further inputs 
required (funds, 
trainings, seeds, 
etc)? Who will 
provide them? 
Component 3. Project management and Policy engagement 
Can this activity reach 
greater scale? How? 
Comments 
9 
MoFA, 
Partner 
Institutions, 
ICO 
3.2 
Policy 
Engagement 
Phasing 
down 
MoFA, 
leading 
agency, 
in 
permane
nt 
dialogue 
with IFAD 
and 
partner 
organizati
ons. 
After 
Completio
n 
A conducive policy 
environment to 
address the 
developmental 
challenges 
targeted by 
PROSPER will 
ideally be 
maintained after 
project 
completion, 
increasing project 
interventions' 
sustainability and 
allowing scaling up 
of certain 
activities. 
10 
Financial partner 
institutions and the 
Government will 
provide necessary 
resources in case 
further developments 
in Green/Climate 
finance are deemed to 
be planned for after 
PROSPER ends. 
There is potential for 
scaling-up through policy 
ramifications of the new 
financial sector product 
“climate/green finance” as 
a development instrument 
in Ghana in coping with 
climate change. PROSPER 
identifies from Design 
potential policy alternatives 
for public-private 
partnerships to invest in 
an ambitious Natural 
Resources recovery and 
reconstruction 
programme, which could 
provide employment for 
large numbers of people. 
Climate/ green finance 
could leverage massive 
public investment in 
adaptation and mitigation 
if a conducive policy 
framework were devised. 
This will start to be 
evaluated together with 
the PCU and MoFA from 
the beginning of 
implementation of 
Component 2. 
- After project completion 
Ghana ICO will continue 
to participate in policy 
dialogue activities, as 
previewed in the COSOP, 
where contributions to 
and  advocacy for the 
harmonisation of the 
sectoral policy will always 
be salient aspects of the 
agenda. - PROSPER 
implementation support 
structure embedded in 
the host Government 
agency aims for 
permanent involvement 
in sectoral policy issues 
identified during 
implementation, 
increased  capacity to 
address project scope 
matters, ownership and 
solutions finding in 
collaboration with the 
PCU. 
This is continuation of 
ICO activities. 
In any case, these 
arrangements and 
partners will be updated 
regularly. If 
restructuring is needed, 
new Exit Strategy will 
be developed. 
11 
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
1/1
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies, strategies and
 National youth policies, strategies and
 National nutrition policies, strategies and
actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
actors
actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and opportunities by youth
 Key nutrition problems and underlying
causes, by group
 Key livelihood problems and
group
opportunities, by gender
 Nutritionally vulnerable beneficiaries, by
group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives (empowerment,
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
voice, workload)
empowerment
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Policy engagement on GEWE
 Youth employment included in project
outcomes and impacts
objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Women are > 40% of outreach
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
youth
youth, and IPs (if appropriate)
beneficiaries
IFAD empowerment index (IE.2.1)
Output level CIs
CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
Outcome level CIs (at least one of
below)
CI 1.2.8
CI 1.2.9
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for IFAD empowerment index in
M&E budget
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth activities
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition activities
IFAD Adaptation Finance
$14,964,000
IFAD Mitigation Finance
N/A
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$14,964,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Nutrition
PROSPER will select nutrition sensitive VCs, increase production of highly nutritious crops and animal sourced foods, promote food conservation, post-harvest processing and value
addition, and promote better dietary patterns by providing nutrition education and Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC).
Youth
PROSPER will target male and female youth (each group with a minimum of 50% eligible youth), adding their access to land as a precondition for community participation in the project.
PROSPER will support the establishment of youth-led enterprises along the selected VCs and will provide targeted financial inclusion, skills development and capacity building.
☐ No social inclusion themes
Ghana
Promoting Rural Opportunities Sustainable Profits and Environmental Resilience
(PROSPER)
Project Design Report
Annex 12: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS
Mission Dates:
02/08/2021 to 20/09/2021
Document Date:
22/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002673
5864-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 12. List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS 
No activities to be financed by FIPS are foreseen. 
