Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
1D1F
One district One factory
AA
Accounts Assistant
AAFORD
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
ABC Fund
Agri Business Capital Fund
AfDB
African Development Bank
AOS
APC
ARB
Annual Outcome Survey
AAFORD Procurement Committee
Association of Rural Banks
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
BAC
BFF
BoG
BRC
CA
CBO
CES
Business Advisory Centre
Blended Finance Facility
Bank of Ghana
Business Resource Centres
Conservation Agriculture
Community-Based Organisations
Climate and Environment Specialist
CGS
Community Development, Livelihood and Gender Specialist
CI
Community Institutions
CODP
Community Outreach Development Plan
CPC
Central Project Coordinator
CSCG
Community Savings and Credit Groups
DFS
FBO
FIS
FIs
Digital Financial Services
Farmer-Based Organisations
Field Implementation Supervisor
Financial Institutions
GAIP
Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool
GAP
GCF
GCX
GDP
Gender Action Plan
Green Climate Fund
Ghana Commodity Exchange
Gross Domestic Product
GHAMFIN
Ghana Microfinance Institutions Network
GHG
Greenhouse Gases
GIRSAL
Ghana Incentive-based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending
GMA
Ghana Meteorological Agency
IBP
IBP
ICB
ICO
ICT
ISU
IFAD
KM
LPIA
LTR
MCC
MDG
MEF
MFC
MFIs
MIS
Institutional Business Plans
Institutional Business Plans
International Competitive Bidding
IFAD Country Office
Information and Communications Technology
Implementation Support Unit
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Knowledge Management
Lead Project Implementation Agency
Letter to the Recipient
Micro Credit Company
Millennium Development Goal
Monitoring and Evaluation Focal Point
Micro Finance Company
Microfinance Institutions
Management Information System
MNDPF
Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework
MoF
Ministry of Finance
MoFA
Ministry of Food and Agriculture
MoMo
Mobile Money
MoTI
Ministry of Trade and Industry
MSME
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
MTR
NCS
Mid-term Review
Non-consulting Services
NFIDS
National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy
NGO
Non Governmental Organisation
ORMS
Operational and Results Management System
OVCF
Outgrower and Value Chain Fund
PA
PFI
PIM
PO
PrA
Project Accountant
Participating Financial Institution
Project Implementation Manual
Procurement Officer
Procurement Assistant
PSC
PTC
Project Steering Committee
PSC Technical Committee
RADUs
Regional Agricultural Development Units
RCBs
Rural and Community Banks
RDF
Rural Development Fund
REDF
Rural Enterprise Development Fund
REP
RMFI
S&L
SEA
Rural Enterprises Programme
Rural Microfinance Institutions
Savings and Loan Company
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SECAP
Social, Environmental and Climate Change Assessment Procedures
SFM
Senior Finance Manager
SMES
Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist
SP
Service Providers
SRFS
Senior Rural Finance Specialist
TA
ToT
Technical Assistance
Training of Trainers
USD
YCF
YII
ZPC
ZCU
ZP
ZTC
United States Dollars
Youth Community Facilitator
Youth Institutional Intern
ZPCU Project Coordinator
Zonal Coordination Unit
Zonal Platform
ZSC Technical Committee
Executive Summary
1/36
Overview[1]: The Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development (AAFORD) project aims to support the food
security and improved living standards of smallholder farmers, poor and vulnerable women and youth. These objectives will be
achieved through improved marketing linkages, sustainable and climate change adapted agricultural intensification, skills and
enterprise development in agricultural value chains, increasing access to affordable finance, supporting inclusive policy engagement
and building on women and youth potentials as untapped resources for family resilience. The programme duration is six years. The
target outreach is 75,000 households (540,000 household members) comprising 75,000 households who will directly benefit from the
full range of AAFORD’s interventions and in addition, 15 000 households, located in communities outside the AAFORD clusters, who
will indirectly benefit from the specialised financial and marketing services of the AAFORD supported financial and marketing
intermediaries (financial institution and off-takers). AAFORD will reach the target households across 350 villages in 30 pro-poor value-
chain based community clusters.
Benefits: The key benefits of AAFORD include: i) 5 per cent reduction in the number of rural households living below the poverty line
in the AAFORD supported districts; ii) 60 per cent of target households reporting an increase in income; iii) 60 per cent of target
households reporting yield improvement and decrease in food insecurity; iv) 30 per cent reduction in 0-5 year child malnutrition in the
AAFORD communities; v) 50 per cent of women reporting improved quality diet; vi) At least 25 per cent of the targeted households
reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate resilient technologies; vii) Approximately 45,000 households benefitting
from a combination of concessional loans, warehouse receipts and microinsurance services; viii) At least 1,500 full time equivalent
youth jobs created in expanded agricultural production, offtakers and value chain enterprises; ix) Approximately 12,500 households
engaged in rural income-generating activities; and x) Two policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or
amendment.
Project area: AAFORD will implement its activities in two geographical zones: i) the Northern zone in the Northern belt of Ghana
corresponding to the erstwhile Northern region which currently comprises the Northern, Savannah and North-east regions; and ii) the
Middle zone, which currently consists of the Bono, Bono East and Ahafo regions. The geographic area is identified based on high
rural population (3 million people), high poverty levels (46 per cent), the prevalence of food insecurity (16 per cent) and
malnourishment, high inequality levels, high impact of climate change and climate variability, gender and youth gaps in agriculture,
alongside the prevalence of economic opportunities and presence of participating financial intermediaries (PFIs) and offtakers relevant
to AAFORD’s implementation. The two zones are adjacent and offer AAFORD with a contiguous project area for ease of project
management and coordination.
Value chain partnership approach: AAFORD will follow a value chain partnership approach focusing on developing profitable
linkages between producers, offtakers and PFIs. It will support business models that: i) target households to develop profitable
marketing linkages with offtakers (typically nucleus farmers, processors and aggregators) and increase their income; and ii) facilitate
PFIs to finance the implementation of these business models at affordable terms. AAFORD will integrate target households in the
offtaker marketing linkages by: i) supporting the capacity building of the farmers to improve their production practices, productivity and
quality according to the needs of the offtakers; ii) strengthening Farmer-Based Organisations (FBO) and increasing target households’
membership in the FBOs; iii) brokering marketing linkages between the FBOs and offtakers based on a business plan (BP) approach;
and iv) supporting PFIs to partner with agricultural credit guarantee and agricultural insurance initiatives, improve agricultural lending
capacities, and access concessional credit funds and incentives from the AAFORD-supported Blended Finance Facility (BFF) in order
to reduce the interest rates on agricultural loans.
Pro-poor value chain based community cluster selection: AAFORD will follow a pro-poor value chain based approach for
clustering communities, focusing project interventions on a group of 10-15 communities that serve as a recognised production base of
one or more pro-poor commodities such as sorghum, maize and cassava and are located in areas served by an existing financial
institution and Business Advisory or Resource Centre (BAC/BRC). Crops with high nutritional value will receive higher priority. A
higher concentration of poverty will be considered while selecting the clusters. Preliminary mapping and identification of the clusters of
communities will be carried out with the support of existing IFAD projects (GASIP and REP) active in the AAFORD project areas. The
cluster selection process will also consider that the selected clusters are distributed across the poorer districts and not concentrated
in just 1-2 districts.
Target group: AAFORD direct beneficiaries are classified into five target groups mainly based on poverty level, land ownership and
access to markets. These are i) smallholder semi-subsistence households (80 per cent of direct outreach) who have up to 2 Ha
cultivable land and suffer from low production/productivity, weak bargaining power, income uncertainties, periodic food shortages and
nutrition deficiencies; ii) market-oriented smallholder households (18 per cent of direct outreach) who own 2-10 Ha of cultivable land
and are more likely to be lead farmers, members of FBOs or part of a contractual outgrower arrangement; iii) large farming
households (2 per cent of direct outreach) who own more than 10 Ha cultivable land, are literate and influential in their communities
and serve as transformation drivers and essential channels for finance, marketing and services to the smallholders; iv) youth, ages 18-
35 (40 per cent of direct outreach) currently engaged full time or part-time in agricultural production, unemployed or seasonal workers
and young graduates interested in applying their skills in the agriculture sector; and v) women (50 per cent of direct outreach) with
limited opportunities for economic engagement.
AAFORD Components: AAFORD has two inter-related technical components, namely: Component 1: Technical Assistance for the
Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural Value Chains; and Component 2: Expanding and Directing Affordable
Finance in a Conducive Environment. Component 3 focuses on Project Implementation Support.
Component 1 provides technical assistance (TA) for the development of sustainable and climate-resilient agricultural value chains.
The expected outcome is enhanced capacity for target groups to access affordable financing, which will lead to increases in
smallholder farmers’ marketed surpluses and household welfare and increased business for financial institutions. This component
focuses on TA to: (a) smallholder farmers and their associations, to introduce Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and access
financial and marketing services compatible with their needs in order to raise productivity and surpluses; (b) rural households
(especially women and youth) to improve their livelihoods, health and financial inclusion; (c) nucleus farmers, aggregators and
processors, to intermediate between smallholders and the input, product and financial markets that enable them to expand production;
and (d) financial intermediaries and market-enhancing institutions that provide instruments to help mitigate financial risks. It also
supports the outreach of institutions to the target groups and their intermediaries to meet the conditions for market transactions to take
place and utilise the funds available through Component 2.
2/36
Component 1 has three subcomponents. Subcomponent 1.1 works to build up demand by identifying the potential, constraints and
needs of key target groups (smallholders, women, youth) at the community level, providing TA that increases their knowledge of
improved agricultural practices to raise productivity, financial and business skills, and by working through groups to access markets
and finance. Subcomponent 1.2 similarly identifies opportunities at the level of intermediary institutions in both marketing (offtakers,
such as nucleus farmers, processors and aggregators) and finance, building their capacity and adapting their products to serve the
key targeted groups. Subcomponent 1.3 bridges the gap by supporting institutions to reach out and market their products to the key
target groups and intermediaries.
Component 2 is for expanding and directing affordable finance in a conducive environment. The expected outcomes are increased
outreach and uptake of affordable finance and supporting instruments (especially by smallholder producers); enhanced knowledge
enabling the replication of good practices, and an improved policy framework. Acting as a multi-stakeholder platform, this component
will support the availability of affordable finance for selected agricultural value chains through blended finance, to make credit and risk
mitigation instruments available on concessional or blended terms. Together with capacity-building of both the demand and the supply
sides in Component 1, this component is expected to bridge the gap that has excluded smallholder producers and their intermediaries
from access to affordable finance. In addition, studies will be undertaken to document good practices and lessons learned, to support
replication and help improve the enabling environment.
Component 2 has two subcomponents. Subcomponent 2.1 establishes a Blended Finance Facility (BFF) through the Bank of Ghana
and ARB Apex Bank to make concessional credit and results-based grants available for loans and supporting risk mitigation
instruments (such as guarantees and insurance) for AAFORD-targeted beneficiaries. The expected outcome is expanded availability
of affordable finance and market-enhancing instruments directed to smallholder production and key intermediaries in selected
agricultural value chains, to realize the benefits of capacity-building on the demand side (Subcomponent 1.1) and on the supply side
(Subcomponent 1.2). The BFF will be estimated based on a demand survey and supported through business planning referred to in
Subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2 and by outreach activities referred to in Subcomponent 1.3. Interest rates at the wholesale and retail
levels will be negotiated through the multi-stakeholder platform established in Subcomponent 2.2, taking into consideration the
supply-side sustainability and the demand-side producers' reasonable returns on investment for poverty reduction, with the grant
window available to help close gaps and incentivize the use of risk-mitigating instruments (especially agricultural insurance) needed to
support loan portfolios for agricultural production.
Subcomponent 2.2 is intended to enhance the environment for market access. The expected outcomes are the replication of success
cases based on lessons learned, by engaging stakeholders in a learning process and sustainable policy dialogue, enabling
improvements in the overall framework to address the current weaknesses that inhibit public and private investment in agricultural
value chains. Conducive policy dialogue, forums and stakeholder engagement and coordination are needed to improve the quality and
efficiency of regulatory and institutional systems that govern access to key agricultural factors, particularly for smallholder farmers.
The use of evidence from studies and key lessons learned will provide a basis for replicating and scaling up successful models and
will help support improvement of the policy and legal framework.
Component 3 deals with project implementation support. The Government’s lead agency will be the Ministry of Finance (MoF) in close
collaboration with the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA), and, the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI). These ministries will
form the core of an inter-ministerial platform by ministers to provide policy guidance and consistency with government’s development
agenda. It shall have an annual meeting cycle. In ddition, a high-ranking Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be set up for overall
policy decisions and guidance at the central level. A Zonal Platform (ZP) will be formed in each AAFORD implementation zone to
oversee planning, review progress, facilitate linkages between project stakeholders and remove bottlenecks affecting smooth
implementation. A two-level organisational structure will be established. The Implementation Support Unit (ISU) located in Sunyani
and two Zonal Coordination Units (ZCU); one in Sunyani and the other in Tamale. Each ZCU will be roughly anchored in the
jurisdiction of the former Brong-Ahafo and Northern regions. The ISU will provide oversight for the implementation of AAFORD with all
staff members competitively recruited from the professional labour market to work on a full-time basis. A Central Project Coordinator
(CPC) will head the ISU’s day to day operations. The CPC will be assisted by a central technical support team and a central
operations support team The ZCUs will carry out project implementation at the zonal and community levels with the support of
capacity building service providers assisted by Community Institutions (CIs), Young Community Facilitators (YCFs) and Youth
Institutional Interns (YIIs).
Project costs and returns: The total project costs of US$69.7 million will be financed by i) IFAD US$15 million (IFAD Loan of US$
11.5 million and IFAD Grant of US$ 3.5 million) ; ii) AGRA (US$1 million parallel financing); iii) GCF (US$9.9 million); iv) GoG
(US$25.9 million of which US$7.9 million as taxes and duties exemptions, US$11.4 million as contribution through GIRSAL risk-
sharing facility, US$6 million as REP revolving funds contribution and GoG project management contribution of US$0.6 million); (v)
Partnering Financial Institutions (US$4.3 million); (vi) ABC Fund (US$4.3 million); (vii) AfDB (US$3.5 million); and (viii) Beneficiaries
(US$5.8 million cash, casual labour, in-kind contributions, inputs and equipment). The Net Present Value (NPV) is positive (US$8.9
Million; GHS 53.5 Million). The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is 28 per cent.
Environmental and social category: In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Change Assessment Procedures
(SECAP), AFFORD remains classified as a Category B program, implying that AFFORD is likely to cause minimal adverse
environmental effects. Two key risks to environmental and social management are: (i) poor environmental governance of the loan
products, which can be mitigated through capacity building of multiple actors in technical, management and governance aspects, and
strengthening the financial institutions environmental and climate risks tools and governance; and (ii) low productivity and degraded
natural resources to be mitigated through promotion of sustainable land and water management practices. AFFORD will not invest in
high risk projects and will ensure the women and youth are included.
Climate risk classification: In line with the climate risk categorization guidelines, AFFORD is rated 'high’.The climate-smart
activities introduced by AFFORD will ensure that greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are further reduced. Capacity building of key
actors along the agricultural value chains on climate change and awareness will help end beneficiaries' and financial institutions to
reduce key risks.  Given the fact that 2 regions have different level of climate exposure, AFFORD will ensure that an Environmental
and Social Management Plan in the SECAP is implemented  in line with IFAD guidelines to ensure that the overall logic intervention of
the Project and its components /activities are aiming not only to mitigate/alleviate any of the existing and future  negative
environmental and  impacts within the total project's area but additionally to produce substantive positive impacts on beneficiaries
through the mainstreaming.
3/36
Synergies and Partnerships: AAFORD will partner with the African Development Bank (AfBD) supported Ghana Incentive Based
Risk Sharing for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) to support de-risking agricultural loans, Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool (GAIP) to
enable target households’ access to agricultural insurance services, Ghana Commodity Exchange (GCX) for enabling target
households access certified warehouse and warehouse receipt linkages and the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) for
policy engagement support. AFFORD will also develop complementarities with other relevant projects such as the Savannah
Investment Programme (SIP) of the African Development Bank, the KFW supported OVCF and the DANIDA supported Rural
Development Fund (RDF) for developing value chain financing linkages in the project areas. Similarly, it will develop
complementarities with other Government of Ghana (GoG) initiatives such as the Planting for Food and Jobs (PfJ) and One district
One factory. 
Innovation and scaling up: AAFORD will introduce a set of process innovations, technical innovations, and partnership innovations
to overcome past challenges, increase employment, and support scaling-up and replication. Process innovations will focus project
implementation on clusters of communities in a manageable geographical area to ensure outreach of benefits to the intended target
groups, deploy cluster facilitators and youth interns to support target households from close range, develop cluster outreach
development plans (CODP) for harmonised implementation of different components at the community level; Technical innovations will
support the BFF to address the void in affordable agricultural finance for smallholder farmers, increase the affordability and outreach
of agricultural microinsurance services to smallholder farmers, link smallholder farmers to certified warehouse facilities and introduce
warehouse receipts to benefit target households; Partnership innovations will include coordination with other ministries, donor
initiatives and investment funds.
Exit strategy and sustainability: AAFORD’s exit strategy and sustainability is built on: i) Developing profitable and sustainable
marketing linkages between private-sector buyers/offtakers and target households which will generate profits both for the target
households and the offtakers – once the administrative bottlenecks in these linkages are removed through AAFORD support, their
business relationships will continue based on market demand and supply principles; ii) Successful engagement of PFIs in supporting
the pro-poor business linkages between offtakers and producers, which will develop the pathway for AAFORD to make a smooth exit;
iii) Arrangements to continue revolving funds repaid into the BFF; (iv) Policy dialogue and suitable policy engagement to strengthen
the enabling environment and facilitate smooth continuation of the AAFORD brokered partnerships; v) Strengthened community
institutions and human capacities achieved through their institutional capacity, financial capacity and technical capacity development
so that they can continue providing services to target households even after AAFORD; vi) Developing a network of commercial
service providers who will continue supporting and replicating AAFORD’s achievements and vii) Widely disseminating the AAFORD
success stories and their implementation mechanisms.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
Economic and political context: Ghana became a lower middle-income country in 2011, with an annual income per capita of
US$1,490. In 2015, Ghana achieved the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 1: to halve the proportion of people living in
extreme poverty[2]. GDP per capita reached US$2,260 in 2019. Annual GDP growth averaged 6.6 per cent from 2000 to 2013
and then increased to 14 per cent in 2014 driven by oil, followed by a few years of an economic slowdown from the sharp drop in
oil prices. The economy started recovering in 2017 with the growth of 8.1 per cent and the growth in 2019 is projected to be 8.8
per cent, the highest in the world.[3] However, the economy is highly dependent on the export of a limited number of
commodities, in particular, gold, cocoa and oil, and consequently remains vulnerable to commodity price shocks. The inflation
rate is around 9.2 per cent; unemployment is about 2.4 per cent. Ghana's political environment continues to be stable with the
new president elected in 2017. Ghana is ranked 114 among 190 economies in the ease of doing business, according to the latest
World Bank annual ratings. The rank of Ghana improved to 114 in 2018 from 120 in 2017 and the country attract investors
particularly in the agricultural sector.
Poverty: The Ghana Living Standard Survey (2012) defines a lower poverty line as 792 GHS per adult per year, focusing on
what's necessary to meet the nutritional requirements. The Upper poverty line is set as 1,314 GHS per adult per year,
incorporating both essential food and non-food consumptions. Out of the total population of 28.8 million about 23 per cent,
equivalent of 6.8 million people, is poor. The percentage of the people in poverty has declined by 8.5 per cent since 2006, but the
rate of poverty reduction has been slow for the last four years - it has fallen only 0.8 per cent. This impressive economic growth
has not been sufficient to accelerate growth and poverty reduction and growing inequalities. Disparities in poverty follow
geographic and gender lines. Geographically, rural poverty is almost five times high when compared to urban poverty. The rural
population is around 45 per cent out of the total population of 28.8 million. However, without considering the Greater Accra and
Ashanti regions, which have significantly higher urban people, the rural population reaches up to 60 per cent in the rest of the
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
country. Approximately 40 per cent of the population is in poverty in rural areas, while 7.8 per cent is in the urban areas.
4/36
The rural areas of Northern Ghana have a higher incidence of poverty with 71 per cent poverty reported in the Upper West
Region, 61 per cent in the Northern Region and 55 per cent in the Upper East Region.[4] In the central regions of Ghana, referred
to as the middle belt, poverty has shown declining trends, but the rate of people in extreme poverty remains higher than the
national average. For example, 27 per cent of the population live in poverty in the Brong Ahafo region, 13 per cent in the Eastern
region and 12 per cent in the Ashanti region[5]. Fewer opportunities for intensifying and commercialising agriculture, poor access
to credit, input and output markets and advisory services drive poverty in the rural areas. The literacy rate remains high and is as
low as 35 per cent in the Northern regions. Limited access to power also inhibits commercial agricultural activities. Post-harvest
losses are high and are attributed partly to the lack of access to storage and drying facilities.
About 62 per cent of female-headed households fall in the poorest wealth quintiles compared to 39 per cent of male-headed
households. The gender gap exists as women have limited access to credit, extension services, new technologies, inputs and
output markets. Unemployment of youth is a growing concern in Ghana caused by qualification and skills gaps and shortage of
economic engagement opportunities. Youth unemployment reached 13.7 per cent in 2018 after increasing 4.4 per cent from the
lowest rate of around 9.3 per cent attained in 2006. Women and youth’s economic dependency on the family has increased due
to these factors and have contributed to poverty. Persons with disabilities are among the most vulnerable groups in Ghana. The
2010 Population and Household Census determined that there were 737,743 persons with some form of disability, representing 3
per cent of the total population (2010 Population and Household Census).
Agriculture Development: The agricultural sector accounts for one-fifth of Ghana’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The sector
is an essential contributor to Ghana’s export earnings, and a significant source of inputs for the manufacturing industry with two-
thirds of non-oil manufacturing depending on agriculture for raw materials. Agriculture contributes 21.2 per cent of the GDP. In
2017, Ghana exported US$17.1 billion in agricultural products resulting in a positive trade balance of US$3.9 billion.[6] The top
export destinations are India, China, Switzerland, South Africa and the Netherlands[7] and the principal agricultural exports are
cocoa, timber, horticultural products and fish.[8] Around 71 per cent of formal employment in rural areas is in the farming sector,
indicating the importance of increasing agrarian incomes as a means of lowering rural poverty.[9] Agribusiness has a very high
multiplier effect on employment, creating over 750 jobs for every additional US$1 million of output[10]. Yet, agricultural growth is
affected by low productivity and competitiveness. Rainfed agriculture is practised in around 96 per cent of the farming area,
informal private small-scale irrigation is prevalent in 3 per cent of the area and formal irrigation covers 0.4 per cent of the
agricultural lands. Agricultural imports are substantial, reaching US$13.2 billion in 2017 mainly through the imports of wheat, rice,
chicken (frozen), milk and fish.
Smallholder agriculture: Approximately 85 per cent of farming households own less than 10 Ha of land and are considered
smallholders. More than two-thirds of these smallholders own less than 2 Ha cultivable land, resulting in a large group of poor
semi-subsistence smallholder farmers. In the northern part of the country, the poor semi-subsistence farmers produce mainly
soya, maize, sorghum, millets, groundnuts and rainfed rice; while those in the middle portion rely more on cassava, plantain,
maize and cashew nut production. In both areas, these farmers produce vegetables such as tomato, pepper, cabbage, carrots
and eggplants for subsistence and supplementary income. The semi-subsistence smallholders primarily practice rain-fed,
subsistence-oriented and manual-labour intensive farming practices and depend mainly on family labour. They often suffer from
inadequate and uncertain income resulting from low crop productivity, weak farmers’ institutions, limited market linkages, gaps in
access to market infrastructure and limited post-harvest support, as elaborated below. Smallholders are the most vulnerable to
climate change with the capacity to adapt. In addition, rural livelihoods are undermined by poor water and sanitation supply, as
well as poor and limited infrastructure (rural roads, electricity, schools, health facilities and communication infrastructure),
inadequate access to land and land tenure insecurity constrain agricultural development, and limit private sector investment and
credit financing,[11] mostly affecting women and youth.
Low crop productivity is a significant challenge with actual yields of most crops recorded at 50-60 per cent below their potential
Low productivity arises from limited access to good quality agricultural inputs, outdated technologies, lack of access to
mechanised services, inadequate pest and disease management, limited access to rural advisory services and gap in the access
to affordable rural finance[12]. Other factors such as land degradation, climate change and variability (drought, floods) and soil
nutrient depletion also affect production more prominently in the Northern regions. Due to the low crop production and
productivity, the semi-subsistence smallholders suffer from low bargaining power and depend mainly on low prices offered by
traders and local markets resulting in low and uncertain levels of income. Weak marketing linkages has developed smallholders’
dependence on selling small quantities of produce (such as processed cassava, plantain and vegetables) in the local retail
markets on an individual basis and on traders who visit the villages occasionally to purchase commodities at low prices.
Smallholders linkage to high-value offtakers is generally missing though in some places they have linkages to local processors.
The Ghana Commodity Exchange (GCX) which provides farmers with access to certified warehouses require minimum one-ton
produce and has strict quality requirements to avail the facility which is beyond the immediate capacity of most smallholders.
Weak farmers organisations have resulted in the limited presence of collaborative and remunerative models for access to inputs
and markets through Farmer-based Organisations (FBO)s. FBOs’ presence in rural communities is variable from a few to many.
Less than 50 per cent of them are considered active, and relatively larger farmers usually dominate the functional FBOs. Often
FBOs with successful linkages to offtakers have limited outreach and typically exclude the smallholders. Gaps in access to
market infrastructure have led to the inability of the smallholders to store their commodities and wait for prices to improve.
Consequently, they are compelled to sell their produce to traders even when the offered prices are much lower than those in the
previous seasons. Limited post-harvest assistance has created gaps in processing and value addition capabilities at the local
level and sometimes high incidence of post-harvest losses.
8.
Rural financial services: The Bank of Ghana (BoG) leads the formal banking There are 23 Commercial Banks (CB), 144 Rural
and Community Banks (RCBs), 25 Savings and Loan Companies (SLC), 132 Microfinance Companies (MC), 31 Microcredit
Companies (MCC), 12 Financial NGOs (FNGO) and numerous individual money lenders and susu collectors. Village Savings and
Loan Associations (VSLAs) are widespread, and function as member-managed, women-oriented, savings led groups. The ARB
9.
10.
11.
12.
Apex Bank functions as an apex body serving and monitoring the network of RCBs. Ghana Microfinance Institutions Network
(GHAMFIN) is the umbrella association for the associations of the different types of financial institutions (FI). Mobile money
(“MoMo”) is primarily used for transferring funds and payments. However, MoMo and other digital financial services (DFS) is an
important entry point to accessing a range of services such as saving, banking, small loans and weather and price information as
most household now has access to a mobile phone. Despite the diversity of FIs only 37 per cent of the rural population has
access to accounts in formal FIs. Overall, loans and advances designated as “agricultural” account for only about 5 per cent of
the credit to the private sector by the banking system.
5/36
The gap in the flow of financial services, particularly to smallholders in the agricultural sector, has resulted from both demand and
supply constraints. On the demand side, semi-subsistence smallholders are reluctant to borrow to increase production due to
marketing and income uncertainties and fearing the consequences of their inability to repay the loans. They are further deterred
from borrowing due to high interest rates (on the order of 3-4 per cent per month offered by some microfinance institutions [MFIs]
and 30-36 per cent per annum flat offered by RCBs), lengthy procedures for borrowing even small sums, and the fear of default
due to crop losses from weather-related events. There is little awareness of prevailing agricultural insurance services and low
demand for such products, considering the high premiums of 5-8 per cent. Other constraints include collateral requirements and
the lack of financial literacy and knowledge to utilise appropriate financial instruments. On the supply side, the high monetary
policy rate, inflation and lack of effective regulation in Ghana has led to some banks and microfinance institutions charging
between 35 per cent and 40 per cent on short term loans. All types of FIs in Ghana remain averse to lending to agricultural
production because of the high risks and uncertainty involved. Often the FIs’ portfolios are already exposed to a high level of risk
with PAR (> 30 days) ranging from 15-20 per cent and have little appetite for risky agricultural loans. Although the availability of
“de-risking” instruments such as insurance (through Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool [GAIP]), guarantees (through Ghana
Incentive-Based Risk Sharing for Agricultural Lending [GIRSAL]) and warehousing (through Ghana Commodity Exchange [GCX])
is increasing, there is limited awareness about their features, the capacity needed to partner, and partnership mechanisms. Also,
most FIs currently do not have the specialised products and the capabilities required to address the specific requirements of the
agricultural sector effectively. In general, interest rates charged across different loan products offered by the intermediary FIs
range between 30-36 per cent (often applied on a flat basis, which raises the effective yield on non-agricultural loans with
monthly repayment). The primary factors contributing to the high interest rates are the high cost of funds at 20 to 24 per cent (for
RCBs), operations costs of 7-8 per cent for efficient FIs and higher for smaller less efficient ones, loan losses of 3 to 5 per cent,
and a profit margin of 3 to 5 per cent.
AAFORD’s interventions will be geared to increase the flow and outreach of formal financial resources to the target households
by addressing both demand- and supply-side constraints. The key demand-side issues will be addressed by improving
production and productivity, strengthening farmers’ organisations, developing competitive marketing linkages, increasing financial
literacy and savings, and supporting the adoption of microinsurance services. Supply side issues will be addressed through de-
risking agricultural loan portfolios through collateral guarantee partnership, capacity building of FIs to enable effective
administration of agricultural loan portfolios, and lowering the cost of capital and interest rates on agricultural loans by supporting
PFIs to access to concessional credit through a Blended Finance Facility (BFF). The support from the BFF in combination with
measures for de-risking agricultural loan portfolios will allow the FIs to diversify and operate in a new market segment
(smallholders agricultural production), which will help to align them with their development objective of serving the rural
communities. The success of the BFF will crowd in development funds from the government and other development partners and
support AAFORD’s nationwide scaling up in the future. (Refer PIM, Annex 4, an overview of RF environment.)
National strategies policies and lead institutions:The President’s office has issued the Medium-Term National Development
Policy Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021) which recognises the growth of agriculture as the main driving force for rural
development and transformation. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) has set a target to increase financial inclusion in Ghana from 58
per cent to 75 per cent by 2023[13]" and has established a Development Finance Unit (DFU) under the Financial Sector Division
(FSD) to promote financial inclusion and rural financial services and support them with oversight and policy guidance. The DFU,
in close coordination with development partners such as the World Bank (WB) and the African Development Bank (AfDB), has
championed initiatives such as Ghana Commodities Exchange (GCX), Ghana Incentive-based Risk Sharing System for
Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) and the Ghana Financial Sector Development Project (GFSDP). The DFU hosted the ISU for the
IFAD supported Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme (RAFIP) which was completed in 2016. Ghana is committed to
implement its National Climate Adaption Policy and implementation of activities highlighted in the National Climate Change
Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Ghana submitted its first Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDC) to the UNFCCC in September 2016. The NDC is embed on (i) Ghana’s National Climate
Change Master Plan (2015-2020), (ii) its national medium-term development plans (Ghana Shared Growth Development Agenda
II -GSGDA2), (iii) the anticipated 40-year socioeconomic transformational plan and (iv) the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). AFFORD will contribute to achieving the country commitment to the Paris Climate Agreement.
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA), has developed a Ghana Agricultural Development Plan (GAIP), focusing on the
development of the agricultural sector in Ghana from 2018 to 2021 through modernisation and transformation efforts. MoFA has
started the nationwide Planting for Food and Jobs initiative (PFJ), focusing on smallholders with 2-3 acres land to access
improved seeds and fertilisers at 50 per cent subsidy, extension services and marketing opportunities. The MoFA leads the
Planting for Exports and Development (PERD) initiative focusing on improving the productivity of export-oriented tree crops such
as cashew, coffee, cotton and coconut. The MoFA also chairs the Agricultural Working Sector Group (AWSG) established
between the Government of Ghana (GoG) and the development partners such as UN agencies and donors. The Ministry of
Industry and Trade (MoTI) has started the One district One Factory (1d1f) programme that focuses on establishing at least one
medium-to-large-scale industrial enterprise in every district to create quality jobs and achieve a balanced spread of industries.
The MoTI also leads the Strategic Anchor Industries (SAI) development programme, the Small and Medium-scale Enterprises
(SMEs) Development programme and the Exports Development Programme (EDP), focusing on job creation, export
development, and public-private partnerships. Regarding Climate change, Food Security and Nutrition, the key actors and
coordination mechanisms at the national level will be the Ministry of Environment (MoE), the Environment protection agency
(EPA), Ministry of Health (MoH).
13.
6/36
Initiatives of development partners (DP): In response to the challenges limiting smallholder access to finance, the GoG and
DPs have recently launched several initiatives with the objective of de-risking agricultural production loans, lowering interest
rates, and smoothing the incomes of smallholder farmers. GIRSAL: GIRSAL is structured as a company limited by shares aiming
to de-risk agricultural lending and promote investment in agriculture. GIRSAL comprises a guarantee fund of GHS 400 million
(US$72 million) to provide credit guarantees to cover upto 80 per cent of agricultural sector loans delivered by formal FI to
farmers directly or indirectly through offtakers. The AfDB has approved US$14 million and the GoG has provided US$57 million
for creating the credit guarantee fund. GIRSAL also supports technical assistance to FIs to improve their capacity and
performance on agricultural loan portfolios and crop production insurance for smallholders through the Ghana Agricultural
Insurance Pool (GAIP). The Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) has contributed around US$0.35 million to support
GIRSAL’s technical assistance activities GCX: The GCX is structured as a limited liability company providing commodity storage
and trading services to farmers. GCX operates a network of certified warehouses linked to farmer cooperatives cultivating
commodities traded in a GCX platform. The GCX supports an electronic warehouse receipts system that enables farmers to
access cash credit to meet their livelihood needs during the period when their commodities are stored in the warehouse waiting
for a sale at a better price. However, at present, the warehouse receipt system has very limited outreach to smallholder due to
limited awareness and readiness amongst rural FIs about this product. GAIP: The leading insurance companies in Ghana have
partnered to form GAIP as an arm to design and offer crop insurance products to farmers either directly or through marketing
partners. GAIP’s, outreach is limited to less than 10,000 farmers (not necessarily smallholders) mainly due to high premiums
ranging from 5-7 per cent, limited awareness of its products, limited partnerships and capacity constraints. (refer PIM Annex 5,6,7
for an overview of GIRSAL, GCX and GAIP).
14.
Other donor initiatives include the KfW supported Outgrower and Value Chain Fund (OVCF), a refinancing facility for PFIs to help
off-takers/aggregators (bank to offtaker interest rate 18 per cent) that are contractually linked to groups of smallholders growing
rubber, oil palm, rice, pineapple, cassava cocoa and maize. The Rural Development Fund (RDF) has been set up with $20
million of funds from Danida to provide concessional credit and guarantees for agricultural value chains. The World Bank has
approved the Ghana Financial Sector Development Project (GFSDP) to establish a domestic credit rating agency, design a
financial data centre, develop an asset registry for traditional/physical collateral, and increase the outreach of FIs by linking
Village Saving and Loans Associations (VSLAs) to the formal financial sector. AFFORD will also develop complementarities with
the Savannah Investment Programme (SIP) of the African Development Bank, and other Government of Ghana (GoG) initiatives
such as the Planting for Food and Jobs (PfJ) and One district One factory. (Refer PIM, Annex 9 for an overview of rural finance
programmes of other development partners.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
15.
16.
17.
Gender and social inclusion: Ghana is ranked second in the Gender Inequality Index for Sub-Saharan Africa in 2018.
However, globally, its position is number 140. Women represent roughly 51 per cent of the population and constitute 58 per cent
of the rural labour force. Women have a critical role in agriculture and other livelihood activities such as artisanal and trading
activities. In the north, women are also engaged in collecting shea nuts and fruits from the surrounding environment. There is a
division of labour between men and women when conducting family farming. Male gender roles are associated with tasks that
involve control over agricultural assets, mobility and decision making. Female gender roles are related to manual work in
agriculture such as planting and weeding as well as basic post-harvest actions, e.g. drying and processing. Women are also
involved in activities such as livestock rearing.
Gender inequality is prevalent across several socio-economic areas. For example, the average hourly earnings of women are 57
per cent of that of men regardless of the type of employment and other factors. Women far outnumber men in non-farm self-
employment and private informal work where earnings are relatively low. The key factors contributing to gender inequalities are
low literacy rates with 42 per cent female literacy compared to 60 per cent male, lower exposure of women to education and skills
development training, higher involvement of women as family workers compared to men who have five times more wage
employment, unequal access to land, 50 per cent smaller landholding size for women and limited access to credit as collateral
assets are often registered in the husbands name. A National Gender Policy was developed by the Ministry of Gender, Children
and Social protection for gender mainstreaming across all Ministries. The ministries, departments and agencies do not strictly
adhere to 40 per cent disbursement of budget to gender issues, although this is mandated by the National Development Planning
Commission (NDPC). In 2016, MOFA developed the Gender and Agricultural Development Strategy (GADS II) to support gender
mainstreaming processes in the sector.
Youth: Youth in Ghana is defined as those between 15-35 years of age. The country has a youth bulge with 57 per cent of the
total population below the age of 25. The rural community consists of 56 per cent youth while the urban population has 44 per
cent. The youth often contribute to family labour for agricultural production. They also engage in activities outside of production
such as processing, warehousing, transportation, small enterprises and marketing. Youth unemployment is a growing concern in
Ghana and reached 13.7 per cent in 2018. The formal sector can engage only 2 per cent young people entering the labour
market annually, leaving about 98 per cent to survive in the informal sector or remain unemployed. Inadequate or inappropriate
training for the job market as well as an opportunity to access such a job is also another challenge faced by youth. Illiteracy is
also a significant impediment to getting quality jobs. Approximately 77 per cent of youth has an only essential educational
qualification or less, which prevents them from finding a decent job. Literacy rate in Northern region is 41 per cent (32 per cent
girls, 52 per cent boys) and 62 per cent (57 per cent girls, 79 per cent boys) in the Brong Ahafo region. Ironically, the
unemployment rate is the highest for youth who attained secondary education in the Brong Ahafo and the Northern regions as
they do not have the appropriate skills and entrepreneurial orientation matching the economic opportunities in these regions. The
youth are often unable to pursue farming independently due to limited access to credit, quality inputs and markets. Some of the
ongoing programmes for youth entrepreneurship, skills training and job creation are the IFAD supported Rural Enterprise
Program and the Youth Agri-preneurship Development program, jointly run by AGRA and Nestle. Nevertheless, the outreach of
these programmes to the youth from the semi-subsistence smallholder families is relatively limited. Policy environment
surrounding the youth has been revamped. The Youth Employment Agency (YEA) established under the 2015 Ghana Youth
Employment Act is mandated to create youth jobs. The National Youth Policy was revised in 2018 to align to SDG and aims to
make the agricultural sector more attractive to young people.
7/36
Nutrition[14]: Overall levels of undernourishment and malnutrition in Ghana have decreased significantly over the last decade.
However, the improved status is not uniform across the country. The levels of malnourishment, undernourishment and other
nutrition-related deficiencies in the relatively poor northern regions are up to three times higher than in the rest of the country.
The overall percentage of the undernourished population was 6.1 per cent in 2017 (FAO, 2017). Malnutrition is another growing
public health concern, leading to high rates of stunting of children under five (19 per cent), child wasting (5 per cent), and anemia
in women of reproductive age (46 per cent).[15] Also, there is an increasing prevalence of children being overweight and obese
(UNICEF, FAO 2016/17).[16] About 10 per cent of adults is obese.
FAO reports[17] Ghanaian’s diet mainly relying on starchy roots (cassava, yams), fruit (plantain) and cereals (maize, rice).
Starchy roots and cereals are estimated to supply almost three-quarters of the dietary energy, but the diversity of the diet remains
low. It is reported that the dietary supply meets population energy requirements, but the share of protein and lipids in the dietary
energy supply is lower than recommendations. For infants (from conceptions to 24 years old), adequate intake of micronutrients,
particularly iron, vitamin A, iodine and zinc are essential for their growth. The World Bank reports[18] that about three-fourths of
preschool-aged children are deficient in vitamin A and iron. One-fifth of pregnant women are deficient in vitamin A, and two-thirds
of pregnant women suffer from anaemia. Provision of supplements, especially for infants, dietary diversification and fortification of
staple foods are effective strategies to improve the micronutrients intake.
Climate and environment: The mean annual temperature in Ghana has risen by 1.0 °C since 1960. The number of 'hot' days
per year has increased by 13.2 per cent, while the number of 'hot' nights per year has increased by 20 per cent. Only 2-4 per
cent of the country’s irrigation potential is tapped. Most agricultural production in Ghana relies on small, rainfed plots that are
highly vulnerable to erratic precipitation patterns and the impacts of climate change. Rising temperatures are projected to lower
yields in major staple crops, e.g. cassava yields are projected to fall by 29.6 per cent by 2080 and maize yields by 7 per cent by
2050.[19] In Ghana’s northern areas total crop failure is expected to occur approximately once every five years due to delayed or
diminished rains. Smallholder and subsistence farmers are particularly vulnerable to any climatic or economic shock owing to
their high dependence on local natural resources for their livelihoods, their chronic food insecurity, physical isolation and lack of
access to formal safety nets (e.g., insurance). These households are also more exposed to pest and disease outbreaks,
droughts and extreme weather events (particularly droughts in the Northern part of Ghana), which cause significant crop and
income losses and exacerbate food insecurity. Although smallholders use a variety of informal risk-coping strategies (storing
water, seeds and food, replanting crops, etc.) these are insufficient to address their food insecurity and vulnerability. MoFA’s has
limited resources and technical capacity to assist farmers in adjusting their farming strategies in response to climate change
which has a significant impact on their access to finance and markets. Land degradation et erosion , and land quality reduction
are significant. Combined, these factors are serious threats to agricultural productivity and national food security. Urgent
technical, financial and institutional support is needed to improve smallholder’s agricultural production, food security and
resilience to the effects of climate change. Women and youth are more affected by the effects of climate change. Ghana has
signed the Paris Climate agreement and envisages to unconditionally lower its GHG emissions by 15 percent relative to a
business-as-usual (BAU) scenario emission of 73.95 Mt CO2 by 2030 and AFFORD intends to contribute to achieving this target.
The total amount of IFAD Climate finance for the AAFORD is calculated at US$ 2 006 617, which represents 13% of IFAD
investment. Components 1 Technical Assistance for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural Value
chains and Component 2: Expanding and Directing Affordable Finance in a Conducive Environment have been partially counted
as climate adaptation finance.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
24.
25.
High levels of poverty in the project area: The project areas located in the northern and middle belt of Ghana suffer from high
levels of rural poverty arising from relatively small cultivable areas, limited production, low yield, weak bargaining power and weak
community institutions (CIs). They have little incentive to borrow funds to increase their investment in agricultural production
fearing that the uncertainties of markets and income can cause losses leading to loan repayment problems and adverse
consequences related to it. Further, smallholders in the project areas are also vulnerable to the effects of climate change such as
droughts, changes in rainfall patterns and high temperatures. Currently, they have little resilience to these adversities due to
inadequate technical knowledge, limited incentives to borrow and invest in adaptation measures and limited access to affordable
agricultural insurance services. Periodic droughts also affect the availability of nutritious food and the health of children and
young mothers.
Additionally, youth and women unemployment in the rural areas remain high due to the lack of employment and skills, mismatch
of education and industry, inability of the economy to create new jobs and limited access to capital for youth. The AAFORD
intervention is needed to assist smallholders and their associations in developing secured market linkages that can incentivise
and stimulate these households to borrow and invest in increasing agricultural production, improving food security and nutrition
and building resilience against the effects of climate change. AAFORD is also needed to develop the skills of youth and women
entrepreneurs and increase their access to finance including green finance to support a range of microenterprises along the
sustainable and climate resilient agricultural value chains that can sustain increased production, productivity, value addition and
income to the target households and withstand to the climate events.
26.
Long experience of IFAD in Ghana: Since 1980, IFAD has accumulated a long experience of rural development programmes in
Ghana focusing on a range of areas relevant to AAFORD such as productivity improvement, developing rural institutions,
marketing improvement through offtaker linkages, supporting access to finance, enhancing youth skill development and youth
8/36
microenterprises and developing resilient livelihoods. In the past one decade, IFAD supported five projects; The Northern Rural
Growth Programme (NRGP) and the Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (GASIP) focused on developing value
chains, the Rural Enterprises Programme (REP) focused on promoting rural enterprises; and the Rural and Agricultural Finance
Programme (RAFIP) supported rural and agricultural finance development. IFAD funded projects have supported 66 partner
financial institutions mainly Rural Community Banks (RCB) credit unions, Financial NGOs, and savings and loan companies.
Past experiences have familiarised IFAD with the agricultural sector, Micro Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) sector, and the
financial sector and developed its readiness for implementing AAFORD. Additionally, IFAD has developed a solid relationship
with the government, particularly the MoAF, MOF and MoTI, each of which has served as the lead ministry for an IFAD project
within the last decade. The strong relationship with these ministries has developed IFAD’s advantage to establish adequate
coordination mechanisms to ensure AAFORD’s success through agricultural production initiatives supported by MoFA, youth
entrepreneurship and value chain based enterprise development initiatives supported by MoTI and financial services initiatives
supported by MoF. Moreover, IFAD is also recognised for rural finance, value chain and agricultural production-oriented
innovations within the WCA region and elsewhere and has also contributed to improved nutrition and resilient livelihoods. (Refer
PIM, Annex 8, for an overview of rural finance activities of ongoing IFAD supported projects in Ghana)
Support the successful implementation of the COSOP 2019-2024: AAFORD will contribute to the successful implementation of
the COSOP (2019-2024) for Ghana as AAFORD’s goals and development objectives are aligned to the COSOP. The COSOP
recognises the need for geographical targeting, developing the marketing capacity of the FBOs, increasing the role private sector,
and improving access to finance and focuses on three interrelated strategic objectives (SOs). SO1 is oriented to promoting
financially sustainable and inclusive rural transformation, SO2 aims to Strengthen productivity in inclusive value chain
development, and SO3 seeks to Strengthen capacities and economic opportunities of target households. AAFORD is also in line
with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and relevant IFAD policies. In particular, it is in line with the SO1 of the Strategic
Framework ‘Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities’ through improved access to agricultural technology, rural finance
and capacity building and SO2 ‘Increase poor rural people’s market participation’ through strengthening of farmers organisations,
marketing infrastructure and strengthening of the rural investment environment. The design of AAFORD activities,
implementation arrangements and M&E system complies with IFAD Targeting Policy, the Rural Youth Action Plan 2019-21, IFAD
rural finance policy and IFAD policy on gender equality and women’s empowerment. AAFORD is also aligned to the IFAD
mainstreaming priorities of climate and environment, gender, youth inclusion and nutrition. 
Convene development partners working on similar themes: AAFORD will benefit from IFAD’s country presence and convening
capacity to network with other relevant government ministries and development partners such as AfDB and AGRA. For example,
these partnerships can support policy dialogue based on evidences generated from AAFORD’s implementation and also invest
jointly in scaling up good practices nationwide in Ghana. Although donor programmes have several success stories, many of
them focus on the supply-side factors while others deal with demand related issues. Sometimes the outreach of the individual
initiatives is limited by the resources available with each donor. AAFORD will address both the demand agricultural credit as well
as the supply of agricultural finance simultaneously through the engagement of FBOs, offtakers, FIs and apex institutions. Thus,
based on its success in a limited geographical area AAFORD will provide a single platform for multiple development partners
working on similar themes to convene and collaborate towards achieving a unified objective for triggering rural transformation and
achieving sustainable and scalable results in the future.
Capitalise on existing opportunities: The AAFORD interventions will capitalise on the current opportunities created by other IFAD
supported, donor and government projects to address the critical challenges. The IFAD supported GASIP, which is a nationwide
project, partners with strong offtakers and links them to newly formed FBOs. AAFORD will capitalise on the presence of these
FBOs and offtakers in the project area and focus on increasing their outreach to the target group. Similarly, wherever possible
AAFORD will partner with the Business Advisory or Resource Centre (BAC/BRC) developed by the IFAD supported REP for
enterprise training and capacity building of youth and women entrepreneurs. Although the financial intermediaries consider
agriculture to be risky, they are willing to consider agricultural lending at affordable rates if backed by risk-sharing and interest
lowering mechanisms. The GoG, in partnership with AfDB has recently established GIRSAL as a risk-sharing mechanism which
will enable AAFORD to promote agricultural lending at affordable rates. Similarly, GCX has recently rolled out certified
warehousing facility and warehouse receipts. These recent developments, along with MoTI’s 1D1F initiative, has created new
marketing opportunities for smallholders. Under normal conditions, the implementation of the initiatives as mentioned above can
take several years before reaching poor smallholder farmers located in the more impoverished geographical areas. AAFORD will
enable the faster outreach of these initiatives to the intended target group.
27.
28.
29.
B. Lessons learned
30.
The AAFORD design has incorporated the following lessons learned from the implementation of RAFIP, GASIP and REP:
31.
32.
Geographical targeting to enable pro-poor orientation: National programmes such as RAFIP, REP and GASIP have proved to be
beneficial since it has promoted countrywide institutional development. It has brought about pro-poor orientation within PFIs,
private-sector offtakers and microenterprise support services. However, the national scope of these programs, with a relatively
limited budget, has resulted in a wide spread of project resources over a large area and limited project presence at the
community level. Learning from these experiences AAFORD will concentrate its operations in two regions, one in the northern
belt in the other in the middle belt of the country to realise the pro-poor targeting policy of IFAD given the concentration of
poverty in these regions.
Well resourced ISUs with a degree of autonomy from host Ministries: The RAFIP Project Completion Report (PCR) concluded
that one of the main bottlenecks that limited the RAFIP achievements during the first 2 to 3 years was its implementation
structure comprising a very small Project Coordination Office (PCO) within MOF in Accra that was designed to mainstream the
project in the permanent institutional structure of MOF using normal civil service protocols. The experiences of other projects
centralised in Accra, such as GASIP, also indicate the need for stronger regional presence to facilitate and ensure the quality of
the pro-poor linkages between public and private sector project partners and the communities. AAFORD will address this
challenge by driving implementation through a well-resourced Implementation Support Unit (ISU) located close to the area of
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
implementation backed by Zonal Coordination Units (ZCU) overseeing the quality of implementation and pro-poor outreach in the
project communities.
9/36
Bottom-up demand-driven approach: The RAFIP Project Completion Report (PCR) concluded that RAFiP’s results were limited
by its efforts concentrating on supply-oriented measures in the upper parts of the pyramid based on the unstated assumption that
measures to build capacity in the upper parts of the pyramid would “trickle-down” to the beneficiaries at the base. Learning from
this experience, AAFORD will follow a bottom-up demand-driven approach to ensure that capable target households have
definite access to sustainable, affordable, financial support through their integration pro-poor value chains, instead of waiting with
uncertainty for such benefits to trickle down. (Refer section 2C, project approach).
Assured availability of specialised financing resources: Experience has shown that banks and other FSPs continue to charge
very high interest rates as perceived by the smallholder producers. Various risk mitigation and/or risk transfer schemes put in
place have not contributed to reducing the risk premium factored in the onlending interest rate; however, the schemes have
provided a certain comfort level for FSPs to consider lending to the smallholder sector, leading to a very limited portfolio in
agricultural lending. Previous studies have indicated that the gap in dedicated credit funds within the RAFIP design was another
critical limitation that restricted the final results of this project. As a result of this gap, the enhanced capacities of the FIs
developed through RAFIP did not necessarily result in the flow of financial resources from the FIs to the IFAD target group in the
communities. AAFORD will address this issue by setting up the BFF with a specific objective of addressing the gap in the
availability of affordable agricultural production loans for semi-subsistence smallholder farmers with less than 2 ha cultivable
land. The BFF will facilitate access to GIRSAL credit collateral support for financial intermediaries and GAIP agricultural
insurance protection to smallholders for financial intermediaries better manage risks and be able to respond to the increased
demands of agricultural production loans from the AAFORD clusters, expressed directly through FOs or indirectly through
offtakers. BFF's onlending rates will be negotiated through the stakeholder platforms to make sure the repayment burden on
production loans for semi-subsistence smallholder farmers is minimized and providing for reasonable returns on their production
activity.
Build Marketing Capacity of FBOs: The experience of providing support to FBOs is mixed. The FBOs, supported through the
Root and Tuber Improvement and Marketing Programme (RTIMP) and NRGP, have increased their productivity but they still
need further strengthening in the marketing of their products to ensure their transformation into viable business entities. REP
does not deal with FBOs. Though GASIP supports FBOs to develop and improve their marketing linkages, the project’s national
scope and limited community presence is not fully oriented to transform these CIs. In contrast, the AAFORD implementation
structure will include strong community presence aimed to develop the bonding between the communities and the project and
provide a robust platform for the FBOs to adopt long-term institutional changes from the perspective of self-help and sustainability
rather than for gaining opportunistic and immediate access to external project resources.
Strengthen the role of the private sector: Experience from NRGP, RTIMP, REP and other projects have shown the crucial role of
the private sector in supporting the smallholders and FBOs in providing inputs, marketing channels, and other services. The
primary lesson learned is that lack of access to finance in rural areas is one of the most significant factors in constraining private
sector growth. AAFORD recognises private sector offtakers as the primary vehicle for smallholder farmers to gain access to
credit external to their operations and local groups. Offtakers have both the regular cash flow and the collateral (financial and
physical assets, and eligibility for insurance and guarantees that can substitute for other collateral) needed to secure loans from
formal FIs.
Business plan-based approach: Several past IFAD projects, including the ongoing GASIP, has worked with CIs such as FBOs.
The main focus has been to prepare them to benefit from other project services such as matching grants for the members. There
was a limited emphasis on the long-term vision and financial sustainability of these institutions. AAFORD will follow a
participatory institutional and business plan development approach for engaging with the CIs (FBOs, VSLAs, youth enterprise
groups). The Institutional Business Plans (IBP) developed by CIs and the Outreach and Linkage Business Plans (OLBPs)
developed by PFIs will identify the future goals and objectives and provide a blueprint of activities for achieving these through the
successful AAFORD partnership. Investments will not be made before these plans are agreed to and endorsed by the assembly
in the CIs and the management of the PFIs. The institutional development and business plan approach will improve the capacity
of the CIs to sustain and further develop the achievements of AAFORD interventions.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
38.
Project goals and objectives
39.
The project goal is to support the food security and improved living standards of smallholder farmers, poor and vulnerable
women and youth.
40.
AAFORD’s development objective is to improve productivity, income and resilience of smallholder farmers, vulnerable women
and youth. The objective will be achieved through increased access to affordable finance in support of better marketing linkages,
sustainable and climate change adapted agricultural intensification, skills and enterprise development in agricultural value chains,
supporting inclusive policy engagement and building on women and youth potentials as untapped resources for family resilience.
41.
Project duration: The AAFORD project duration is six years.
42.
AAFORD outreach: AAFORD will provide services to 75,000 poor rural households (540,000 individuals with an average of 6
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
members per household), across 350 communities in 30 clusters in the erstwhile Northern region in North Ghana and the
erstwhile Brong Ahafo region in the Central Belt of the country. The target households are divided into ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’
categories. The direct target group consists of 75,000 smallholder households (450,000 individuals) who will receive the full set
of AAFORD services.
10/36
Approximately 80 per cent of the ‘direct’ smallholder category will be drawn from the semi-subsistence smallholder households
(less than 2 Ha cultivable land) and 20 per cent will be included from market-oriented (from 2 to 10 Ha cultivable land) and large
(more than 10 Ha cultivable land) farming households with special emphasis on the inclusion of women, women-headed
households and youth (aged 18-35). The ‘indirect’ target group comprises 15,000 households (90,000 individuals) located in
communities outside the AAFORD clusters but within the command area of AAFORD’s PFIs and offtakers. The ‘indirect’ target
group will also benefit from the AAFORD supported services of these PMIs and offtakers. However, initially, the PFIs are likely to
use traditional sources of finance bearing higher interest rates to support the ‘indirect’ target households. Consequently, many of
the indirect group will possibly be market-oriented and large farmers who enjoy higher economies of scale and have the capacity
to service relatively expensive loans.
Key outcomes and impact indicators: Key impacts/outcomes of the AAFORD project include: i) 5 per cent reduction in the
number of rural households living below the poverty line in the AAFORD supported districts; ii) 60 per cent of target households
reporting an increase in income; iii) 60 per cent of target households reporting yield improvement and decrease in food
insecurity; iv) 30 per cent reduction in 0-5 year child malnutrition in the AAFORD communities; v) 50 per cent of women reporting
improved quality diet; vi) At least 25 per cent of the targeted households reporting adoption on environmentally sustainable and
climate resilient technologies/practices; vii) Approximately 45,000 households benefitting from a combination of concessional
loans, warehouse receipts and microinsurance services; viii) At least 1,500 full time equivalent youth jobs created in expanded
agricultural production, offtakers and value chain enterprises; ix) Approximately 12,500 HH engaged in rural income-generating
activities; and x) Two policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment.
AAFORD supported commodities: In general, AAFORD will support pro-poor, outreach-oriented and profitable economic
opportunities relevant to the specific AAFORD clusters. Within this framework, investments will support value chain activities
concentrated on mainly pro-poor field crops such as cassava, sorghum, maize, soyabean, millets, and groundnuts. Depending
on the opportunities, it will also support vegetable value chains such as tomato, pepper, cabbage, carrots and eggplants relevant
to smallholders. The selection of crops and enterprises which support food security; nutrition; women, youth and vulnerable
groups engagement; value addition; suitability as raw material for industries; low inputs and ecological compliance (e.g. millet,
sorghum, maize, and groundnut for the northern zone); import substitution (e.g. rice) will be given high priority.
Geographic area of intervention: AAFORD will implement its activities in two geographical zones, the Northern Zone in the
northern part of Ghana and the Middle Zone in the portion of the country between southern coastal areas and northern
savannah. The Northern Zone will correspond to the erstwhile Northern region which currently comprises the Northern, Savannah
and North-east Regions. The Middle Zone will correspond to the erstwhile Brong-Ahafo Region which presently consists of the
Bono, Bono East and Ahafo Regions. The geographic area is identified based on high rural population (3 million people), high
poverty (46 per cent), high rural women (50 per cent and youth (34 per cent) composition, the prevalence of food insecurity (16
per cent), malnourishment, high inequality levels, alongside the presence of economic opportunities, potential PFIs and offtakers
relevant to AAFORD’s implementation.
The poverty levels for the two Zones are: Northern Zone (61 per cent) and Middle Zone (27 per cent). The Northern Zone is one
of the most deprived areas with more than two-thirds of the population featuring in the bottom 20 per cent income category. It
has the highest number of rural people who are poor amongst all the regions in Ghana. Moreover, it has the second-highest
poverty incidence amongst all the regions in the North. Cases of malnutrition and malnourishment are rampant. Up to 16 per cent
of the population is food insecure, and about 72 per cent of the land is arid, with smaller farm sizes and vulnerable to
desertification. The Middle Zone has 27 per cent poverty which is the second-highest amongst all the regions in the middle belt.
Cases of malnutrition and malnourishment are moderate with around 7 per cent children reporting as underweight. It has a
reasonable concentration of financial intermediaries with about 21 RCBs and a number of formal credit outlets. The Middle Zone
borders the Northern Zone and offers AAFORD with a contiguous project area for ease of project management and coordination.
Value chain partnership approach: AAFORD will follow a value chain partnership approach focusing on developing profitable
linkages between producers, offtakers and financial partners. It will support business models that i) increase the income of the
target households by developing profitable marketing linkages between them and offtakers and ii) facilitates PFIs to finance the
implementation of these business models at affordable terms. Offtakers are typically nucleus farmers; processors; and
aggregator. A nucleus farmer is a large, commercial operation with associated groups of smallholder outgrowers sometimes
organised as FBOs. The nucleus farmers access funds to purchase inputs in bulk and distribute to the outgrowers and also
provide the outgrowers with services on credit, which is deducted from the value of products delivered to the nucleus farmer at
harvest time. A processer is a business entity (private company, cooperative, NGO) that purchases raw materials for
transformation into a processed product for the market (e.g., gari from cassava, parboiled rice). Smallholders can sell their
produce to the processing company at market price or bring their crop for processing for a fee, then sell the product individually
(or through the company). Aggregators are traders who purchase (usually directly) from farmers and bulk up the quantities for
sale to the market. They may operate or utilise warehouses. Some traders (e.g. in tomatoes) may even provide inputs to their
suppliers as an advance, which then entitles them to purchase the crop, after deducting the value of the inputs. Big aggregators
provide a market (sometimes with semi-contractual relationships with FBOs, primarily through projects). They are in a good
position to obtain financing (on commercial terms). The big aggregators may also have a contractual agreement to take a
specified amount from farmers and may also be able to facilitate warehouse receipts for the FBOs.
49.
AAFORD will support the integration of target households in the above mentioned offtaker models by i) supporting the capacity
building of the farmers to increase their production and productivity according to the needs of the offtakers; ii) strengthening the
FBO and increasing the membership of target households in FBOs; iii) brokering marketing linkages between the FBOs and
offtakers based on business plan approach; and iv) enabling offtakers/FBOs to access sufficient funds at affordable terms
through PFIs to increase the outreach and secure the profitability of their partnerships with the AAFORD target households
AAFORD will integrate target households in the offtaker marketing linkages by i) supporting the capacity building of the farmers to
increase their production, productivity and quality according to the needs of the offtakers; ii) strengthening FBOs and increasing
target households’ memberships in the FBOs; iii) brokering marketing linkages between the FBOs and offtakers based on
business plan (BP) approach; and iv) supporting PFIs to partner with agricultural credit guarantee and agricultural insurance
initiatives; improve agricultural lending capacities and access concessional credit funds and incentives from the AAFORD
supported BFF and reduce the interest rates on agricultural loans.
11/36
50.
51.
 AAFORD’s demand and supply side experiences in the two zones can be scaled up at the national level through several
pathways. For example, future cycles of GASIP can be designed based on AAFORD experiences, whereby targeted households
benefiting from demand side interventions are graduated from matching grants to BFF supported concessional credit backed by
GIRSAL guarantees and GAIP microinsurance support. The scope of the BFF can be expanded to serve national needs.
Pro-poor value chains based community cluster selection: AAFORD will follow a pro-poor value chains based approach for
clustering communities, focusing project interventions on a group of 10-15 communities that serve as a recognised production
base of one or more pro-poor commodity such as sorghum, maize and cassava and are located in areas served by an existing
financial institution and Business Advisory or Resource Centre (BAC/BRC). AAFORD will select the clusters based on criteria
including (i) higher concentration of poverty; (ii) presence of formal financial institutions offering services to the communities in
the cluster; (iii) presence or willingness of offtakers to form linkages in the cluster communities; (iv) presence of active CIs; (v)
proximity to REP supported business resource centres (vi) readiness of the GAIP to provide agricultural insurance services in the
clusters and (vii) willingness by farmers to participate in the project including participation in FBOs and AAFORD brokered
marketing linkages and commitment to fulfil the contractual obligations related to the marketing partnerships.
52.
As a preparatory measure, IFAD supported GASIP and REP, which are familiar and active in the project area will carry out the
preliminary identification of the AAFORD clusters first by shortlisting the broad location of the clusters by superimposing the map
of the main poverty pockets in the AAFORD Zones on the map of the production bases of the main pro-poor commodities. Within
these locations, the relatively larger communities, with high or medium presence of poor population, which also meet the other
community selection criteria, will be selected. The cluster selection process will consider that the selected clusters are distributed
across the poorer districts and not concentrated in just 1-2 districts.
53.
Target groups
54.
Direct beneficiaries are classified into five target groups, described mainly based on poverty level, land ownership and
access to the market. These are i) smallholder semi-subsistence households; ii) market-oriented smallholder households; iii)
large farming households; iv) youth (age 18-35) and v) women. AAFORD will promote the inclusion of economically active
disabled people across all the beneficiary groups. The table below summarises the target group characteristics;
Direct
Target group
Outreach
 Per cent of
outreach
Cultivable land
ownership
Key characteristics
(HH)
-   Resource-poor with little or no access to credit;
-   Rely on savings to finance agricultural activities;
-   Revenue may fall below the upper poverty line of 1,341
GHS a year per adult;
-   Limited access to improved inputs, mechanisation services,
post-harvest management and marketing; Low bargaining
power;
·  Smallholder
semi-subsistence
households
60,000
80%
Up to 2 Ha
-   Family labour used for agricultural production with high
women’s involvement
-   Depend on individual sales to traders and in local markets;
-   Can suffer from periodic food insecurity and nutrition
deficiency mainly during dry months
-   Uncertain income from marketing agricultural produce;
-   Involved in labour work to supplement income;
-   Limited diversification of income.
12/36
-   Income from GHS 1,000 to 6,000 a month cash crop
production;
-   More diversified income, e.g. from off-farm activities and
remittances;
·  Market-oriented
smallholder
households
11,250
18%
2 to 10 Ha
-   Combination of family labour and hired labour used for
agricultural production
·  Large farming
households
3,750
2%
More than 10
Ha
-   Can be members in FBOs linked to offtakers;
-   May consider using credit to access improved seeds,
machinery for land preparation, harvesting, planting and
storage facilities if readily available.
-   Have ability (collateral) and access to financial resources
-   Use hired labour for farming activities
-   Likely to be food secure, literate and influential in their
communities
-   Sometimes serve as nucleus farmers linked to a group of
smallholders
-   Target one or two specific commodities for commercial
purposes and produce based on a contractual agreement
-   Has access to market information and market intelligence
Total
75,000
100%
● Rural youth
(18-35)
30,000
40%
-   High unemployment rate (especially between 20 to 29 years) old in Rural
Ghana.
-   Higher unemployment is female youth especially graduated individuals due to
mismatch between education and industry
-   Often unmarried due to unsteady income sources to support new families
-   Lack of employable skills, entrepreneurial training and opportunities
-   Limited access to capital due to lack of collateral and other guarantees
-   Less access to land and credit compared to men
● Women
37,500
50%
-   More than 70 per cent women above 35 are married and with children
-   Female-headed households suffer more from food insecurity and nutrition
deficiency, especially in the Northern region.
55.
Smallholder semi-subsistence households (up to 2 Ha): This group represent about 80 per cent of the target population of 75,000
(60 per cent women, 40 per cent youth). They may barely have up to 2 ha cultivable land and are dependent primarily on family
labour which is often limited. This group is resource-poor with little or no access to financial capital. Their yields are low due to
the inability to use improved practices, and they are invariably food insecure, particularly during the dry months. They are
distinguished by low income as they have little or no commodity for sale and their production is mainly for their own consumption.
Climate change also impacts their productivity negatively and exacerbate their precarious situation.
56.
Market-oriented smallholder households (more than 2 Ha and up to 10 Ha): This group represent about 18 per cent of the target
population of 75,000. These farmers cultivate between more than 2 up to 10 ha land and augment their family labour with hired
labour. They tend to target specific commodities for production for purely commercial purposes but diversify their production to
include other crops for consumption. They may keep some livestock and livestock products and be involved in trading in
agricultural produce. They are more likely to be lead farmers, members of FBOs or part of the contractual arrangement to pre-
finance production. They may still be vulnerable in terms of food security and have limited surplus for the market if the household
size is large and farm size and productivity is low. Their access to warehouses, machinery services for land preparation, planting
and harvesting may be limited.
13/36
57.
58.
Large farming households (more than 10 ha): They will constitute 2 per cent of the beneficiaries. This group cultivates more than
10 ha of land using mostly hired labour and generally specialising in one or two crops. They have better access to financial
capital, farm inputs, storage, and marketing facilities. They target specific commodities for commercial purposes and earn
substantial income from the sale of agricultural products and off-farm activities and are food secure. They are literate and
influential in their communities and serve as transformation drivers and channels for finance, marketing and services to the
smallholders.
Youth: AAFORD will be highly youth sensitive. Youth will comprise 40 per cent of total direct beneficiaries (20 per cent women
and 20 per cent men). The target group includes (i) youth (18-35 years) currently engaged (full time or part-time) in agricultural
production and other rural activities at subsistence level with an interest to further develop their farming activities as a business,
participate in marketing and financial linkages and increase their income, (ii) unemployed (or seasonal workers) youth interested
to explore, identify and engage in better employment and self-employment opportunities both in agricultural production and other
value chain related enterprises, including service provision, and allied sectors; and (iii) young graduates interested to apply their
skills in the agriculture sectors as professional service providers, outreach agents commissioned by marketing and financial
intermediaries to increase their outreach to the target households in the communities and as agribusiness entrepreneurs.
59.
Women: AAFORD will be highly gender sensitive. Women will comprise 50 per cent of total direct beneficiaries. ore details of
target groups, youth and women’s roles and responsibilities and opportunities are presented in the PIM.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
Youth mainstreaming strategy: Particular attention would be paid to the youth group who have attained secondary education,
as their unemployment rate is highest, as well as youth that has the potential to be economically active and start a new
enterprise. AAFORD will focus on three mechanisms for supporting youth employment and youth jobs (a) for youth already
engaged in agricultural production but at subsistence level: support exposure to production and productivity-enhancing training,
linkage to marketing and access to finance to upgrade and operate their production-related activities in business scale (b) for
youth currently unemployed: provide practical, employable and income-generating skills and support them to find employment in
the value chains promoted by the project and also to start up their enterprises; Develop youth technical capacities in these areas
by engaging them as AAFORD youth facilitators (b) for educated/graduated youth: increase access to innovation and new
technology and assist them to adapt to new approaches and become professional service providers and entrepreneurs. Engage
such youth in the AAFORD young institutional intern initiative to develop their orientation, skills and employability. At the early
stage of the project implementation, the service provider with the responsibility of recruiting the youth facilitators will develop a
detailed strategy for reaching youth through PFIs.
Gender mainstreaming strategy: Women will comprise 50 per cent and men 50 per cent of the total outreach. The project will
address gender disparities and the key constraints that limit women’s progress in agricultural activities and increase their access
to financial services up to 50 per cent by (a) creating enabling environment and seeking to ensure that women have equal access
to capacity building trainings;[21] (b) promoting productive opportunities that are suitable for women by ensuring that analysis is
done to capture women’s needs and priorities; (c) increasing women’s access to skills and knowledge in financial literacy, digital
literacy, savings and financial management as well as business development; (d) promoting women’s leadership and
representation in grassroots institutions and organizations; and (e) encouraging women’s participation in decision making within
the household. Furthermore, the project will select crops such as horticultural crops which intensively involve women.
As it would be difficult for individual poor rural households to gain access to financial services and other support services, FBOs
will be the main entry point for the project. AAFORD will legitimise the participation of rural women, the youth and other
vulnerable members of the communities in the project, guiding it along gender-sensitive lines and ensuring that rural elites are
not alienated. AAFORD will organise enlightenment campaigns, meetings and discussions with relevant people and groups to
ensure common understanding by all concerned of the principles behind the project gender approach, its objectives, strategy, and
how it would be operated. AAFORD will also adopt other measures to ensure a gender sensitive implementation approach such
as: i) selection of PFIs which have a corporate priority of reaching women; ii) considering the gender of the youth facilitators and
the youth interns to facilitate their engagement with women and youth; and iii) engaging a service provider to develop a youth and
gender mainstreaming strategy during the early stages of project implementation.
Climate mainstreaming strategy: AAFORD will promote greening financing by improving readiness and capacities of FIs to
seize market opportunities for lending to FOs, women and youth organizations, cooperatives, and MSMEs that invest in low
emission and climate resilient agriculture. Technical assistance on green lending and climate risk management, financing
sustainable water management and related energy technologies to mobilize water for sustain production will be promoted. In
addition, various capacity building measures on climate resilient value chains and awareness raising will be organised to support
communities to develop sustainable, climate resilient and bankable business plans.
Nutrition mainstreaming strategy: The nutrition related training will be embedded in the capacity building of AAFORD-
supported FBOs and farmers and will focus on i) promoting nutrition-sensitive agriculture and food-based approaches; ii)
promoting diversified farming: production and consumption of high-value crops and small livestock including small ruminants,
poultry and fish to increase dietary diversity and nutrition security; iii) promoting small irrigation schemes and household
production systems to support year-round production, especially vegetables and fruits; iv) promoting food safety along the
agricultural value chain: agro-processing, preservation, storage, distribution of food, and marketing; v) intensifying nutrition and
health behaviour change strategies in agricultural interventions; and vi) promoting and strengthening food fortification
interventions.
66.
67.
14/36
Targeting Strategy: AAFORD will apply a combination of geographical targeting, self-targeting and direct targeting mechanisms.
The project will apply geographical targeting right at the beginning to identify the AAFORD clusters and communities which have
higher incidence of poverty and greater potential for developing rewarding economic engagement activities along pro-poor crop
value chains. Self-targeting mechanisms will result in semi-subsistence smallholders participation in pro-poor value chains based
on crops which contribute to food security and family nutrition and in addition generate marketable surplus for selling through
project supported marketing channels, capacity building related to post-harvest crop handling to retain quality and some level of
homestead processing activities to support more extended food availability and nutrition; Market-oriented smallholders will
receive support to improve production systems, connect to certified warehouses, start microenterprises emerging from the
adoption of post-harvest technologies, and larger farmers will be more oriented to the demonstration of new technologies and
participation as nucleus farmers supporting a number of smaller outgrowers.
Financing activities will be aligned with the nature of the interventions mentioned above. Semi subsistence smallholders including
unemployed youth and women will be a focused target segment for receiving savings based approaches, financial management
training and in-kind support through offtakers. Market-oriented smallholders will upgrade their agricultural practices and
technologies through cashless credit mechanisms through offtakers as well as through strong FBOs. Large farmers who can
meet the collateral requirements of the financial institutions can borrow directly as individuals for adopting innovations. When
functioning as nucleus farmers they can access funds directly from banks or indirectly through FBOs for supporting a group of
outgrowers. (Refer to PIM for a detailed description of target groups and targeting strategies, youth and gender mainstreaming
strategies and implementation modalities.)
D. Components/outcomes and activities
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
AAFORD is designed with two inter-related technical components and project management: Component 1: Technical Assistance
for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural Value Chains; ii) Component 2: Expanding and directing
affordable finance in a conducive environment and iii) Component 3: Project management.
The Project is designed to identify and close the gaps between demand for and supply of financing to support increased
marketable surpluses and improved livelihoods in low-income smallholder farming communities in selected areas and value
chains. Component 1 addresses Technical Assistance (TA) needs at three levels: (a) ultimate beneficiaries and their
organizations at the community level; (b) intermediary market and financial institutions, through which smallholders typically
obtain financing (including cashless pre-financing) and sell their surpluses; and (c) market-enhancing institutions that provide
instruments such as warehouse receipts, insurance and guarantees to help mitigate risks that inhibit financial institutions from
lending to smallholder agriculture. Component 2 mobilises funds and risk-mitigating instruments on terms that are affordable to
the beneficiaries in the face of their limited returns on investment, and seeks to improve the environment in terms of coordination
of interventions, knowledge of successful models for scaling up, and the policy, strategic, legal and regulatory framework.
Component 3 provides for project management and implementation.
Component 1: Technical Assistance for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural Value
Chains: The expected outcome is enhanced capacity for target groups to access affordable financing which will lead to increases
in smallholder farmers’ marketed surpluses and household welfare and increased business for financial institutions. This
component focuses on TA to: (a) smallholder farmers and their associations, to introduce Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs)
and access financial and marketing services compatible with their needs in order to raise productivity and surpluses; (b) rural
households (especially women and youth) to improve their livelihoods, health and financial inclusion; (c) nucleus farmers,
aggregators and processors to intermediate between smallholders and input, product and financial markets; and (d) financial
intermediaries and market-enhancing institutions that provide instruments to help mitigate financial risks. It also supports outreach
of institutions to the target groups and their intermediaries to meet the conditions for market transactions to take place and utilize
the funds available through Component 2.
The component has three subcomponents: Subcomponent 1.1 works to build up demand by identifying the potentials,
constraints and needs of key target groups (smallholders, women, youth) at the community level, providing TA that increases
their knowledge of improved agricultural practices to raise productivity, financial and business skills, and by working through
groups to access markets and finance. Subcomponent 1.2 similarly identifies opportunities at the level of intermediary institutions
in both (i) marketing, building offtaker capacity to serve the key targeted groups and (ii) outreach (including market-enhancing
instruments) in Subcomponent 2. Subcomponent 1.3 bridges the gap by supporting institutions to reach out and market their
products to the key target groups and intermediaries.
Subcomponent 1.1: Develop capacities of target groups to expand marketable surpluses: The expected outcomes are that
targeted beneficiaries have a better understanding of and ability to access affordable financial and marketing services (whose
development is supported in Subcomponent 1.2 and outreach in Subcomponent 1.3); acquire skills for good agricultural practices
and for income-generating activities; and build social capital through community-based groups. The first step is to identify the
communities, beneficiaries, institutions and intermediaries in the project areas and assess their potentials and needs. The
second step is to package and deliver TA tailored to each community’s aspirations and needs. The third step is to facilitate
access to financing smallholders, primarily through offtakers and other marketing intermediaries. This will involve sensitizing and
training smallholder farmers and their associations about the features, benefits, risks, processes, rights and responsibilities of
offtakers, as well as about seeking direct credit from retail financial service providers. It will orient farmers’ organizations towards
the inclusion of poor smallholders with a focus on women and youth and toward GAPs and post-harvest mechanisms that
promote resilience to the effects of climate change, as well as food security and nutritional improvements. For specific target
groups such as women, youth and other vulnerable groups, it will involve sensitization and training on entry points for financial
inclusion (such as Community Savings and Credit Groups [CSCGs], use of Digital Financial Services [DFS] and other services
such as output product prices and weather information), green skills for climate-resilient agricultural practices and environmentally
sustainable livelihoods, and healthy nutritional practices.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
Identification of key technical partners and service providers: The ISU will engage technical partners that are actively supporting
smallholder agricultural value chains in Ghana, have complementary financial and technical resources and can use local service
providers as needed to implement the services indicated in the activities and other subcomponents below. The technical partners
and service providers will be selected according to criteria specified in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), including
capabilities with respect to climate change resilience and nutrition security factors.
15/36
Identification and needs assessment of community clusters: In order to focus limited project resources on piloting and achieving
results that can be scaled up, a Service Provider (SP) will be engaged, in conslutation with District Departments of Agiruclutre
and exisiting projects, to identify clusters of communities in the project area (specified in the PIM) that include concentrations of
smallholder farmers in selected value chains, economically active poor, presence of potential PFIs, presence of a BAC/BRC, and
the crops and practices relevant to income, climatic, food security and nutritional concerns. Particular attention will be paid to the
potential for increasing surplus through improved GAPs. Once the clusters and value chains to be targeted by the Project are
agreed, the SP will carry out a stakeholder identification survey which will identify the relevant stakeholders and their critical
challenges and needs, including existing CIs (such as FBOs, cooperatives, women and youth groups); input providers; offtakers;
financial institutions; BACs/BRCs; agricultural research stations and MoFA programs; and government development programs
where each District is provided with a factory, a dam, and/or warehouse. In addition, the survey will identify: (a) outreach and
institutional development needs of CIs; (b) measures to upgrade smallholders’ agricultural production technology and productivity;
(c) their sensitization and capacity building needs with respect to (i) outgrower models relevant to their main marketable crops;
(ii) accessing financial services through CSCGs, through intermediaries (offtakers and financial institutions), and via mobile
phones (DFSs); (iii) climate change vulnerability and scope for local resilience strategies; and (iv) cost-benefit analysis of
adopting climate resilient and nutrition sensitive production activities; and (d) key gaps in the awareness, understanding and
utilization of available financing mechanisms (direct and indirect) by smallholders and other target groups.
Based on the findings of the needs assessment survey, the SPs will structure capacity building packages tailored to the needs of
the different target groups (see Capacity building of target groups and their CIs, below). These will include identification and
development of the key messages to be delivered through awareness and sensitization sessions, contents of a range of training
modules, ToRs for technical assistance and scope for exposure visits.
Mobilization of Youth Community Facilitators: In order to ensure effective and sustained engagement at the community level and
facilitate transactions made possible through capacity-building, a pool of 4-5 Youth Community Facilitators (YCFs) (including one
to focus on climate change resilience) from the selected communities will be engaged for each cluster (discussed further under
Project Management) to facilitate community mobilization and interaction with AAFORD. The YCFs will comprise young women
and men from the communities with social skills for community mobilization, as well as educational background to understand
and interpret project objectives. Training will build their skills on strengthening CIs, gender mainstreaming, youth mobilization,
nutrition sensitivity and climate-resilient agricultural practices. They will be responsible for ensuring inclusion of target groups
(especially women and youth) in the relevant CIs; facilitating development of Community Outreach Development Plans (see next
activity) and outreach of the project-supported activities to the target groups; community-level data collection and reporting;
monitoring, identifying and reporting community-level implementation issues and assisting to solve these problems; and
facilitating the outreach of marketing and financial institutions, project SPs and other value chain actors and facilitators. They will
interact with the Youth Institutional Interns (YIIs) (see Subcomponent 1.2). The primary objectives are to provide a clear
community-level focal point of interaction for other project stakeholders such as input suppliers and other value chain actors,
financial intermediaries and project SPs, ensure smooth implementation at the cluster level and facilitate the ability of youth to
work in public service and development institutions.
Community Outreach Development Plan (CODP): A SP will be engaged to support and oversee the YCFs to develop a 7-10 page
CODP in each project cluster. The objective is to facilitate both implementation and sustainability of project interventions by
building community consensus around clear road maps for sustaining and scaling up good practices, strengthening CIs and
engaging with external ones, and enhancing access to product markets and financing. The desired social, economic and
productive changes envisioned in the community through AAFORD implementation will be presented in the CODPs along with
the specific project interventions, which will help to achieve these changes.
The CODP will define the specific project target groups in the community, the projected outreach of AAFORD activities to these
target groups over the project duration, the approach for reaching the target groups and an overall budget estimate for capacity
building (see below). It will include the scope for strengthening offtaker-outgrower models. It will also present needs for nutrition
awareness raising and how training on healthy diets can be included in capacity building activities for different groups. Similarly,
it will include specific climate-related risks to the community and mitigation measures to be integrated in project implementation
activities, in particular to complement TA for improved agricultural technologies and practices to raise productivity. Against the
framework of the CODPs, the ZCUs, in coordination with the SPs and YCFs, will prepare detailed annual cluster workplans and
budgets presenting the physical and financial targets to be achieved in each community cluster during the year. These targets
will be related to outreach of activities such as strengthening CIs, developing livelihood investment plans (see next activity),
training and technical assistance in areas such as production, marketing, business development, entrepreneurship, dietary
diversification and nutrition standards. AAFORD SPs and partners responsible for implementing each activity will be identified
along with the community-level coordination mechanisms between them. AAFORD will direct support to the communities based
on the activities identified in the CODPs.
79.
Capacity building of target groups: The expected outcomes of TA to target groups and their organizations are to increase
smallholders’ marketable surpluses in a sustainable way, strengthen their mutual support associations, build their relationships
with marketing and financial institutions, and improve their livelihoods, climate resilience and health. Training will utilize existing
groups to the extent possible (FBOs, CSCGs, youth groups), but may include group formation/management if a need is identified.
80.
TA will be adapted to the identified needs of each community cluster and detailed in the CODPs in the following modules: (a)
improved crop production technologies, including high yield varieties, Conservation Agriculture (CA) (such as minimum tillage),
awareness and utilization of climate-resilient agricultural practices, crop diversification and selection of varieties for home
16/36
consumption and nutrition, post-harvest management capacity through activities such as grading, drying and processing, and
marketing through offtaker-outgrower models; (b) increased entrepreneurial and business management capacity and livelihood
diversification, especially of youth and women, through capacity building, training (in particular, ‘green skills’ to take advantage of
environment-friendly income-generating opportunities) and exposure visits facilitated by the SPs in coordination with the
BACs/BRCs; and (c) improved financial literacy and access to financial and marketing services by exploring integration in
agricultural value chain offtaker-outgrower models (including the One District One Factory [1D1F] initiative), certified warehousing
and warehouse receipts models (through partnership with GCX), and linkages to other aggregators, processors and traders in
coordination with MoFA and MoTI, and by strengthening savings habits through financial literacy training and formation of CSCGs
for women. TA will also be provided (by a different SP) for formation and strengthening the governance of community
associations (such as FBOs and youth and women savings or enterprise groups) and promoting nutrition-sensitive or nutrition-
intensive agricultural production, processing, preservation, storage, distribution of food and marketing.
The project SPs together with the YCFs will coordinate the implementation of these activities and will engage MoFA’s extension
services for supporting relevant services as well as the exisitng projects. The project will also partner with the Rural Enterprises
Programme (REP) and its associated BACs/BRCs operating in AAFORD areas to facilitate business planning and access to
financing for promising microenterprises arising out of this activity (see Subcomponent 1.2, Capacity building of selected partner
intermediaries).
Support to Community Institutions (CIs): AAFORD will identify partner CIs (including offtaker-outgrower arrangements) in each
community with potential and express desire to develop marketing and financial linkages. Based on the needs assessment and
CODPs, partner CIs will be selected using criteria such as outreach orientation, current representation of AAFORD target groups
(especially women and youth), current level of activity and member involvement, governance and management status and
willingness to partner with AAFORD and adopt recommended institutional strengthening measures. AAFORD will consider
mobilizing new CIs if existing CIs do not qualify as partners. Partner CIs will comprise mainly FBOs dealing with crop production
and other value chain related activities; CSCGs, especially with women members involved in savings and credit activities, trading
and services; and value chain-based enterprises and rural youth enterprise groups engaged in a range of agricultural and non-
agricultural microenterprises.
The objective is to establish linkages between CIs and market and financial intermediaries (including offtakers and financial
institutions) as a basis for mobilizing their own funds (e.g. by establishing a CSCG; see below) or engaging BACs/BRCs to
facilitate their approach to financial institutions (if appropriate). TA will be tailored to assessed and expressed needs of the CIs,
and facilitated by the YCFs.
The AAFORD SPs will capacitate the YCFs, together with the Youth Institutional Interns (YIIs) (see Subcomponent 1.2) engaged
in the BACs/BRCs, to develop Institutional Business Plans (IBPs) for the CIs in each cluster having met the selection criteria and
expressed a desire for capacity-building or to seek financing (either individually or together). Each IBP will detail the areas of
investment chosen by the CIs for improving the knowledge, skills and livelihoods of the members. The first part of the IBP (3-5
pages) will detail how the CIs will strengthen their governance and management systems and address issues relating to inclusion
of women, youth and other vulnerable groups; climate change; nutrition; financing; and linkages with external market and
financial institutions. This will include how the CI intends to expand access to financial services, including savings mechanisms,
credit (in kind and/or cash), reinvesting earnings, agricultural insurance, and DFS. The second part (4-6 pages) will focus on the
details of the specific business area in which the CI members decide to collaborate, including: description of the business concept
or model; market opportunities; strategic, operational and financial details such as projected profitability, financing plan and
reinvestment plan; direct and indirect beneficiaries (particularly women and youth); outreach of benefits; measures to improve
productivity, meet required market standards and address the effects of climate change.
Community-based savings and credit groups (CSCGs) for women and youth: The objective is to get targeted project beneficiaries
that generally have been excluded from formal financial services onto the first rung of the ladder to access financial services.
Smallholders (women in particular), especially those with smaller farm sizes, prefer saving over credit but often lack convenient
and affordable means to save –which is also a precondition for eventually obtaining credit. Building on Ghana’s traditional daily
savings culture (susu), international and local NGOs have had considerable success training groups at the community level to
manage and fund their own CSCGs. When their financial needs exceed the capacity of the CSCG, it provides a stepping-stone to
linking them with formal financial institutions (an objective of Ghana’s Financial Inclusion Strategy). AAFORD will partner with
agencies that are already implementing CSCGs in Ghana to extend the model to women and youth groups in its targeted
clusters, in order to facilitate community-level mobilization and management of savings and credit to support their income-
generating activities and household financial needs. In addition to forming new CSCGs in communities that lack them, existing
CSCGs that prepare IBPs may be supported for strengthening and linking to formal financial institutions.
Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity building of institutional partners and intermediaries: The expected outcome is that products will be
adapted and developed to suit the needs of target beneficiaries (whose capacities are being built in Subcomponent 1.1 and
outreach in Component 2.1). This will involve the selection of partners that provide market-enhancing instruments (such as
offtaking, aggregation, warehousing/storage, electronic trading, digital information services for product markets and insurance,
guarantees, warehouse receipts and DFSs), as well as intermediary financial institutions such as commercial banks and
rural/micro finance institutions. Training and TA aimed at product enhancement relevant to AAFORD beneficiaries will be
available to these institutional partners and intermediaries based on capacity building needs assessment and innovative
proposals. Intermediaries that provide linkages between smallholder farmers and output product/financial markets will be trained
in models and management of these relationships.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
Activities:
88.
Mapping, needs assessment and selection of partner institutions: This exercise will engage a SP to map out the institutions (in
consultation with BACs/BRCs) providing marketing, storage, processing, financial, risk mitigation and digital services in the
project area, and assess their needs for capacity building to better serve the value chains, communities and beneficiaries being
targeted by AAFORD (The SP will also deliver the capacity-building activity; see below). In addition, national institutions providing
market-enhancing instruments (warehouses [GCX], insurance [GAIP], guarantees [GIRSAL, RDF], weather and price information
[GMA, Esoko], digital financial services, etc.), as well as relevant apex institutions (ARB Apex Bank, GHAMFIN), will be assessed
for their potential and interest in serving intermediaries in project areas. Candidate partner institutions will be invited to orientation
workshops on the potential business opportunities for increasing outreach to smallholder farmers (directly or through
intermediaries), women and youth, and the possibilities available through this subcomponent. The expected outcome are the
expressions of interest by and selection of institutional partners and intermediaries to receive the support indicated in the
activities below (as well as under Subcomponent 2.1), based on: their active presence in AAFORD areas; their expressed
commitment to serve AAFORD beneficiaries; licensing, regulatory and performance status (for PFIs); and sound governance
structures. Such institutions and intermediaries will be able to seek partnership with AAFORD at any time.
17/36
In 2018-19, the BoG undertook a number of measures to strengthen the financial system, including raising minimum capital
requirements across the board, liquidating or consolidating a number of universal banks, and de-licensing some 357 MFIs.
AAFORD expects to engage a number of universal banks that wish to build their loan portfolios for agricultural value chains, as
well as RCBs, which have a clear mission to serve rural communities. MFIs are less likely to be involved, except with respect to
rural MSMEs (currently being served through REP). The current landscape for agricultural lending will be assessed up front, and
implementation arrangements and the role of the ARB Apex Bank will also be reviewed, as part of establishing the BFF.
Development of Outreach and Linkage Business Plans (OLBP): Selected partners will be given TA through a SP engaged by
AAFORD to develop OLBPs, which will clearly indicate the outreach, profitability and other benefits they will achieve in the
project communities as a result of project support to increase their capabilities to: (a) reach AAFORD targeted beneficiaries and
intermediaries; (b) develop appropriate products and delivery mechanisms; (c) communicate relevant information through local
FM radio services and mobile phones; (d) develop physical or software uptake capacity; and (e) market products (supported
under 1.1.7). The OLBPs will specify how GCX, GIRSAL and GAIP can support financing to project beneficiaries through PFIs
and offtakers, and the gap between the costs of these instruments and the ability of potential borrowers to afford them. The
objectives are to provide: (i) a sound justification for the capacity-building to be provided (see below), ensure partner buy-in and
establish results indicators; and (ii) a basis for cost-sharing grants under the Blended Finance Facility (Subcomponent 2.1) to
close the affordability gap.
In the orientation workshops (see above), the project SP will assist the interested intermediaries to prepare and submit a short
concept note (1-2 pages). After the concept note is approved by the SPs and AAFORD ISU, the SPs will provide technical
assistance to the intermediaries to help them develop and submit the detailed OLBPs, which will support realization of the
CODPs and IBPs (subcomponent 1.1) by aligning services to the needs of targeted beneficiaries and CIs, and planning how to
deliver them to those groups and areas (supported under Subcomponent 2.1). The OLBP will also indicate how the partner
institution can make use of YIIs both with project support and subsequently (see below). The IBP review committee in AAFORD
will review and approve submitted OLBPs as a basis for delivery of TA and capacity-building and outreach support (see below
and Subcomponent 2.1).
Capacity-building of selected partner intermediaries: Partner institutions will receive TA support from the AAFORD partner SPs
for activities identified in their OLBP, including: (a) sensitization and skills training for staff, in particular on multidimensional risk
mitigation related to climate change and environment; (b) supporting the establishment of agricultural finance desks, training
agricultural finance officers, or special windows for agricultural production financing; (c) product and systems development to
enhance outreach, including rural/micro finance institutions (RMFIs) to adapt loan products to the seasonal nature of agricultural
activities and their cash flows; and (d) sensitization and training of RMFIs to understand and utilize risk mitigation instruments, to
finance business plans of intermediaries and FBOs, and to utilize available concessional and/or blended credit lines (in
collaboration with other IFAD projects). Training of RMFIs on risk mitigation instruments and relevant products (such as
warehouse receipts, agricultural loan portfolio guarantees, agricultural insurance) will include board members as well as
managers and credit officers/analysts, to facilitate policies to adopt such products. The BACs/BRCs working with REP in the
AAFORD areas will also be considered as AAFORD partners and receive training in evaluating and advising clients on the
creditworthiness of their MSMEs and options for financing. Regional workshops will bring together BAC/BRCs and PFIs to
promote mutual understanding and development of mutually suitable business planning and assessment tools.
Youth Institutional Internship (YII) Programme: In this capacity-building activity, up to 80 youth will be trained in skills identified by
partner marketing and financial institutions as relevant to increasing their outreach to smallholder farmers (especially women and
youth), offtakers and other agricultural value chain actors. They will be supported for up to three years (on a declining cost-
sharing basis) as interns to the requesting institutions and to BAC/BRCs in collaboration with REP. This will be targeted toward
graduates with a first degree in subjects relevant to finance, marketing, agriculture or environment, to give them practical skills
and experience that will benefit partner institutions and enhance their subsequent employment prospects. The primary objective
is to facilitate linkages with the YCFs (Activity 1.1.3) for effective outreach (Activity 2.1.2); a secondary objective is to give youth
practical skills and experience that will enhance their productivity and future employability prospects.
Cluster Linkage Problem-solving: Multi-stakeholder platforms meeting at the cluster level will be organized by the project in
collaboration with the Distrct Departments of Agriculture to identify critical bottlenecks and challenges to implementation in a
particular area and value chain, and to identify specific institutions and individuals to solve them. This process will facilitate
development of partnerships among AAFORD, offtakers, financial institutions, and other support programmes. YCFs (see
Subcomponent 1.1) will be assigned to help address issues at the cluster/beneficiary level, and YIIs may be tasked with
facilitating institutional responses.
Subcomponent 1.3: Marketing and ICTs for outreach of rural financial and agricultural services: The expected outcome is
the increased access to relevant information and services, including using mobile phones and adapted DFSs, needed to improve
agricultural production, access markets, mitigate risks and lower costs. This activity focuses on sensitization and outreach to
Project beneficiaries to implement OLBPs of partner agencies (Subcomponent 1.2), including those providing meteorological and
agricultural price information, taking advantage of support to develop products and channels of communication suitable for
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
smallholder farmers. Based on their Business Plans, institutions providing these services will be able to apply for project co-
funding of sensitization and outreach activities to target clusters and groups.
18/36
In particular, partnerships with key market-enhancing institutions will focus on marketing to intermediaries (financial and offtakers)
serving smallholder FBOs in AAFORD clusters, and on utilizing YIIs (Subcomponent2) and the BFF (Subcomponent 2.1). These
partnerships will be built on the assessments in Subcomponent 1.2 (and OLBPs if prepared), and fostered through forums in
Subcomponent 2.2. This may include outreach by GCX and other warehouse operators to increase awareness and use of
warehousing and receipts by FBOs and offtakers; development by GAIP of agreements with PFIs and BFF regarding how to
cover and recover the costs of agricultural insurance; sensitization of AAFORD PFIs by GIRSAL on how to utilize guarantees to
offset losses by clients as well as the PFIs, and to absorb the cost of guarantees while avoiding moral hazard concerns. It will also
include using the YIIs attached to these partner institutions to build and maintain relationships with PFIs and BACs/BRCs in
AAFORD areas.
Component 2: Expanding and Directing Affordable Finance in a Conducive Environment. The expected outcomes are
increased outreach and uptake of affordable finance and supporting instruments, especially by smallholder producers; enhanced
knowledge, enabling the replication of good practices; and an improved policy framework. Acting as a multi-stakeholder platform,
this component will support the availability of affordable finance for selected agricultural value chains through blended finance, to
make credit and risk mitigation instruments available on concessional or blended terms (Subcomponent 2.1). Together with
capacity-building of both the demand and the supply sides in Component 1, this component is expected to bridge the gap that
has excluded smallholder producers and their intermediaries from access to affordable finance. In addition, Subcomponent 2.2
will help to document good practices and lessons learned as a basis for replication and improvements in the policy and enabling
environment.
Subcomponent 2.1: Blended Finance Facility (BFF): The expected outcome is expanded availability of affordable finance and
market-enhancing instruments directed to smallholder production and its key intermediaries in selected agricultural value chains,
in order to realize the benefits of capacity-building on the demand side (Subcomponent 1.1) and on the supply side
(Subcomponent 1.2), including the application of risk-mitigation instruments to lending to smallholders and other agricultural
value chain actors.
Currently, the share of bank loans and advances flowing to smallholder producers is negligible and not readily accessible or
affordable to them. In order to develop this nascent market by ‘crowding in’ funds and risk mitigation instruments at rates
compatible with the returns to smallholder crop products, a BFF will be established to provide wholesale funds on concessional
or blended terms to PFIs to on-lend for smallholder agricultural production, and cost-sharing grants (premium subsidies) that
enable FBOs and their intermediaries to afford agricultural insurance, guarantees, warehouse receipts and other market-
enhancing instruments. The objective is to ‘crowd in’ funds that are presently not available to targeted agricultural value chains,
especially for the production end, into the BFF. The facility will also have a window to serve other value chain actors (offtakers,
MSMEs, input suppliers) that have different rates of return and risk profiles from those of primary producers in the same value
chains. This second window will also enable reflows from the Rural Enterprise Development Fund (REDF) to continue revolving
beyond the close of REP, to benefit and improve the livelihoods of households and groups operating micro and small enterprises.
100.
The BFF will be estimated based on a demand survey and it will be grounded on and supported through business planning
referred to in Subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2 and by outreach activities referred to in Subcomponent3, including FBOs, women and
youth groups. This will include demand for investments financing, inputs and labor for improved agricultural practices to enhance
climate change resilience. The BFF will seek to leverage commercial funds and risk mitigation instruments that are currently not
reaching AAFORD target groups. Compatibility and accessibility of other comparable funds will also be considered. Interest rates
at the wholesale and retail levels will be negotiated through the multi-stakeholder platform established in Subcomponent 2.2,
taking into consideration the supply-side sustainability and the demand-side producers' reasonable returns on investment for
poverty reduction, with the grant window available to help close gaps and incentivize the use of risk-mitigating instruments
(especially agricultural insurance) needed to support loan portfolios for agricultural production.
101.
The BFF will be capitalized with an initial contribution from IFAD with the expectation of mobilizing additional funds from other
external sources such as the Agri-Business Capital (ABC) Fund and the Green Climate Fund (GCF), expected to reach US$12-
15 million. It will also be compatible with the REDF and REP’s Matching Grant Fund in order to facilitate government contribution
of revolving reflows for the benefit of agricultural value chains and rural MSMEs on a sustained basis (about US$4-6 million
expected). The BFF will utilize the existing disbursement structure of the credit line from the BoG through ARB Apex Bank to
RCBs and non-bank PFIs, or directly to participating universal banks. The ARB Apex Bank shall manage the grant funds, as
under REP. These arrangements will be reviewed and administrative arrangements will be put in place to ensure that BoG and/or
ARB Apex Bank can continue to revolve the recovered funds beyond the end of the project, as an exit strategy (recognizing that
funds will periodically need to be replenished to maintain their real value, as a consequence of the subsidized-pricing
arrangements and loan losses). All PFIs must be licensed and meet minimum performance criteria (Refer to PIM for detailed
description of BFF).
102.
The first step will be for the ISU to develop operational manuals, including criteria for selecting PFIs, flow of funds, administrative
procedures, etc. These will be adapted from the operational manuals for REDF and REP Matching Grants. The second step will
be for the BOG and the ARB Apex Bank to open accounts to receive the funds mobilized for the BFF.
103.
Subcomponent 2.2: Enhancing the environment for market access: The expected outcomes are the replication of success
cases based on lessons learned, by engaging stakeholders in a learning process and a sustainable policy dialogue, enabling
improvements in the overall framework to address the current weaknesses that inhibit public and private investment in
agricultural value chains. Conducive policy dialogue, forums and stakeholder engagement are needed to improve the quality and
efficiency of regulatory systems that govern access to key agricultural factors, particularly for smallholder farmers. Studies of
lessons learned will provide a basis for replicating and scaling up successful models, and will help support improvement of the
policy and legal framework.
104.
Activities:
105.
19/36
Collaborationwith other IFAD programmes, Development Partners and Apex organizations for knowledge-sharing (informed by
studies; see below), policy dialogue and replication. Annual Policy Forums will address issues such as: affordability of agricultural
production financing and risk mitigation instruments; reducing production costs and enhancing productivity and returns on
investment for smallholder producers (especially women and youths); development of market-enhancing institutions;
development and status of FBOs, women and youth as clients of PFIs and intermediaries; warehouse receipts and their
acceptability as collateral; identification of policy gaps of green agricultural financing in Ghana; etc. This will be implemented in
partnership with an agency able to sustain the activity beyond AAFORD.
106.
Lessons learned for replication: Studies will be undertaken to document lessons learned with respect to directed concessional
and/or blended lines of credit to reduce producers’ repayment burden, risk mitigation instruments, climate-resilient practices, and
other lessons of experience to facilitate replication in other projects (e.g., with respect to making agricultural insurance more
affordable; ensuring that some of the benefits of portfolio guarantees and insurance are passed on to smallholder farmers;
minimizing adverse effects of climate change; inclusion of women and youth; etc.). The findings will feed into the other activities
of this Subcomponent2.
107.
Enabling policy environment: This activity will involve development of the overall policy and the strategic and legal framework for
expanding access of smallholders and other agricultural value chain actors to financial services. Drawing on the results of the
above stakeholder consultations and studies, AAFORD will facilitate the updating of the agricultural finance strategy and action
plan; implementation of the legal framework for warehouse receipts; and other relevant policy, regulatory and legal issues that
arise.
108.
The immediate policy issue to be addressed is legislation to formally recognize and specify the terms of warehouse receipts,
which at present come under general contract law and are not widely understood or utilized. AAFORD also proposes to take the
lead in engaging stakeholders to update the 2008 Agricultural Finance Strategy and Action Plan, recognizing that significant
developments have taken place in the last decade (especially regarding various risk mitigation instruments, FBOs, and District-
level coordinating mechanisms) and that there is a need for greater coordination of policies and approaches governing various
government and donor-supported projects. In addition, AAFORD would support an annual Policy Forum that would identify
additional policy and legal issues that need to be addressed, and could potentially be supported under Subcomponent 2.2, in
partnership with other programmes.
109.
Component 3: Project Implementation Support
110.
 Details of all implementation support aspects is presented in section 4.K.a
E. Theory of Change
111.
Development challenges: In Ghana, Agriculture is the main source of livelihood for rural population and contributes to 21.2 per
cent of the GDP. It provides employment to approximately 44.7 per cent of the population, particularly for youth and women. The
main development challenges in the project areas are high levels of poverty, youth and women unemployment, climate change,
food insecurity and malnutrition, particularly in the northern part of the country. Rural poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition in
Ghana are closely associated with low productivity, particularly in rain-fed systems impacted by climate change and climate
variability and degraded natural resources (soil erosion). Ghana’s recent impressive economic growth has not yet been sufficient
to reduce poverty meaningfully in those areas. Youth and women unemployment remain high due to the lack of employment and
skills, mismatch of education and industry, inability of the economy to create new jobs, and limited access to capital for youth.
The effects of climate change are visible in the forms of changes in rainfall patterns, high temperatures, land degradation, soil
nutrition depletion and periodic droughts which affect the availability of nutritious food and the health of children and young
mothers. In addition, weak bargaining power and individual selling cause low and uncertain income.
112.
Key constraints: Access to finance has a potential role to play in increasing farm productivity through improved inputs and
agricultural practices, which involve extra costs. However, it remains a key constraint for smallholder farmers, farmers’
organisations, and all actors along the agricultural value chains. This limits the opportunities to modernize production and add
value by upgrading production technologies/techniques and inputs. These challenges have continued to constrain sustainable
agricultural development in the country, resulting in general low productivity and little marketable surplus to generate income.
113.
Opportunities: AAFORD will address the above-mentioned causes driving high rural poverty rates and vulnerabilities among rural
families to achieve food security and improved living standards of smallholder farmers, women and youth. AAFORD will do so by
building on the important opportunities existing in the rural development and rural finance context: i) IFAD’s long accumulated
experience in Ghana, focusing on productivity improvement, developing rural institutions, marketing through offtaker linkages,
rural finance development, youth skills and microenterprise development, and resilient livelihoods development; ii) Presence of
ongoing interventions of current IFAD projects in the AAFORD project areas, e.g. presence of FBOs and offtakers developed by
GASIP and BACs/BRCs, developed by the REP; iii) Willingness of financial intermediaries to consider agricultural lending at
affordable rates if backed by risk-sharing and interest-lowering mechanisms; iv) Recent launch of the AfDB and GoG supported
GIRSAL as a risk sharing mechanism to promote agricultural lending at affordable rates, and the launch of the GoG-supported
GCX offering certified warehousing facility and warehouse receipts; v) Willingness of the GIZ-supported GAIP to offer agricultural
microinsurance services to AAFORD target groups at affordable rates; vi) presence of MoTI’s 1d1f initiative in the project area,
creating new market linkage opportunities for smallholders.
114.
Component 1 will build the capacities of target groups, intermediaries and market-enhancing institutions. It will focus on: i)
increasing crop production and agricultural productivity through adoption of improved technologies; ii) youth job creation and
livelihood diversification by increasing entrepreneurial, business management and job skills of youth and women; iii) reducing
wastage and improving storage through improved post-harvest handling and processing capacity primarily targeting youth and
women members; iv) increased access by target groups to financial and marketing services and their integration in agricultural
value chain outgrower models using business plans and business contracts; v) strengthening the savings habits of the target
households and institutions; vi) strengthening CIs; viii) improving child and family health by increasing awareness of nutrition-
enhancing foods (especially for women); ix) building awareness and utilization of climate-resilient agricultural practices for youth
and women; x) supporting ‘green skills’ for youth to engage in environmentally-friendly income-generating activities, xi)
supporting equal voice and increasing women’s representation in leadership positions in CIs and simultaneously promoting
balanced workloads through technology driven interventions; and xi) increasing the capacity of financial institutions to deliver
agricultural financing by creating agricultural finance desks, inducting agricultural finance officers and developing agricultural
products and delivery systems and utilising risk mitigation instruments (warehouse receipts, loan portfolio guarantees, agricultural
insurance).
20/36
115.
Component 2 will support financial institutions and marketing facilitators to deepen their outreach through measures such as: i)
providing intermediary financial institutions with access to BFF to help reduce their cost of capital and lending rates to
smallholders; ii) support for GIRSAL’s collateral guarantee, the GCX warehouses and GAIP agricultural insurance to increase
their outreach to target households through business plan based partnerships and cost incentives; and iii) developing a conducive
environment by supporting policy, strategic and legal framework to enable agricultural value chain actors to integrate smallholder
producers.
116.
109. These interventions will be implemented in an integrated manner within a coherent landscape to i) increase the production
and availability of food for household subsistence and overcome food insecurity and nutrition deficiency; and ii) increase the
marketable surplus and the marketing of produce to earn more income and increase the standards of target households. These
factors will lead to AAFORD’s development objective: to improve productivity, income and resilience of smallholder farmers,
vulnerable women and youth.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
117.
Alignment and ownership: i) Alignment: AAFORD is aligned with SDG 1 (end poverty) particularly 1.2 (reduce poverty by at
least 50 per cent) and 1.5 (build the resilience of the poor); SDG 2 (achieve food security) particularly 2.3 (double agricultural
productivity and incomes) and 2.4 (ensure sustainable food production systems); SDG 5 (gender equality) particularly indicator
5.5.a (women’s equal rights); and SDG 15 (sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems) particularly 15.3 (restore land affected by
desertification, drought and floods); ii) Country ownership: AAFORD is aligned with the development strategies set out in the
Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021). It is also aligned with the priorities set by the MoF
in the National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy (NFIDS 2017-23); and MoFA's Investing for Food and Jobs. The
approach and project concept were validated through a consultation process with the Development Finance Unit of Financial
Sector Division of MoF during which it was observed that the focus should be on enabling the rolling out of GIRSAL and
participation of smallholders in the GCX initiative. It was also discussed with GoG line ministries as well as development partners
during the COSOP consultation bi-lateral meetings.
118.
Synergies and partnerships: AAFORD’s partnerships with other development partners and their initiatives will be as follows; i)
African Development Bank: AAFORD will partner with AfDB and facilitate the AAFORD PFIs to benefit, in priority, from the AfDB’s
technical services to GIRSAL developed in the areas of i) developing a digital platform for the GIRSAL financial partners to
improve the design and delivery of agricultural value chain portfolios and ii) strengthening GIRSAL’s internal operations systems.
The funding from AFDB is expected to come from the AfDB project supporting GIRSAL. The proportion of the AfDB's contribution
to the credit guarantees extended to the AAFORD PFIs will be denoted in the partnership agreements between GIRSAL and the
AAFORD PFIs. These partnership agreements will also identify the specific capacity building needs of the AAFORD PFIs which
will be supported directly by GIRSAL through AfDB contributions. AAFORD can also share in the costs of TA to AAFORD PFIs as
an incentive for GIRSAL to focus on AAFORD activities and beneficiaries. AAFORD will facilitate, coordinate and provide quality
control support for these investments.
119.
ii) ABC fund: The IFAD supported ABC fund will enable the AAFORD PFIs to access additional financial resources needed to
expand their agricultural finance portfolios in the project areas. The ABC fund will partner in the AAFORD supported BFF and
follow a harmonised approach for supporting the AAFORD PFIs; The design mission had several rounds of teleconferencing with
the ABC Funds team where the objectives of the BFF, type of products and implementation mechanisms were discussed. The
ABC Fund also reviewed the draft write up on the BFF in the PDR and the PIM. Based on these consultations the ABC Fund
expressed interest to partner with US$4.3 million. The AAFORD project will be in the pipeline for the ABC Fund to be financed
from its current resources. Since AAFORD will begin the disbursement of the BFF only in year 3, there is sufficient time for the
ABC funds to make resources available.
120.
iii) Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa: AGRA is already an active player in the development policy space in Ghana. It has
served as a partner in the establishment of GIRSAL, GAIP and GCX and is pursuing a set of policy issues to smoothen the flow of
these benefits to the smallholders. AAFORD actively partner with AGRA to pursue evidence based policy dialogue with various
stakeholders at the macrolevel based on AAFORD’s field level implementation experiences. Intensive discussions have been
held with AGRA in Ghana. There is already strong collaboration under some of the ongoing programmes of both IFAD and
AGRA. AAFORD intends to build on IFAD’s cooperation with AGRA in ongoing and future programmes. The collaboration could
also be expanded in the future if AGRA is able to mobilize more resources to replicate experiences in Kenya under the PROFIT
project.
121.
iv) Green Climate Fund (GCF): GCF will support AAFORD to i) carry out climate risks analysis and to develop the capacity of CIs
to respond to these risks ii) support the outreach of climate adapted credit products to the target households and iii) enhance the
outreach of microinsurance services in the project areas. IFAD has developed a simplified accelerated process (SAP) on
inclusive green finance. The first SAP proposal, for Niger, has been approved by the GCF board. The business model of the SAP
for Niger is going to be replicated in the region under a regional program in which Ghana will be included. With this proven
model, the design process will be shorter than that of Niger which took seven months. The mechanism on how GCF will be
disbursed, accessed and implemented will be drawn from the Niger model.
122.
Participating Financial Institutions: About US$4.3 million is expected to be mobilised from PFIs. The modality of the PFI
contribution is well established through various IFAD and World Bank projects for agriculture, community-based rural
development, rural enterprises, and even solar home systems. The modality requires the client to put 10 per cent of the
investment cost in order to trigger a loan for the remaining 90 per cent, of which four-fifths (72 per cent of investment cost) comes
from a (concessional) line of credit and one-fifth (18 per cent of investment cost) from the resources of the PFI.
21/36
123.
GIRSAL: The Bank of Ghana (BoG) and the AfDB have supported GIRSAL’s credit guarantee services by contributing to the
GIRSAL guarantee fund (US$72 million). Investment income from this fund enables cross-subsidization of the cost charged for
portfolio guarantees. GIRSAL will contribute US$11.3 million. The contribution from GIRSAL pertains to the BoG resources in the
GIRSAL guarantee fund which will serve as 60-80 per cent collateral supporting BFF credit disbursement from AAFORD’s
Participating Financial Institutions (AAFORD PFIs) to offtakers and FBOs.
124.
The implementation arrangements for GIRSAL credit guarantee support will involve partnership agreements between GIRSAL
and the AAFORD PFIs. These agreements will define mainly the eligibility criteria of AAFORD PFIs, expected volume of
guarantee required, terms and conditions for GIRSAL support, capacity building needs of the AAFORD partners to be effective
partners, the implementation steps for obtaining GIRSAL guarantee and the settlement procedure in case of default faced by
PFIs. AAFORD will participate in these agreements as a partnership facilitator by i) assisting the PFIs to meet the GIRSAL terms
and conditions and ii) supporting the smooth and timely implementation of guarantee cover before BFF disbursement and
settlement (where relevant) after disbursement. Based on these agreements, the GIRSAL investments (collateral guarantee) will
be made directly at the product level connected to the volume of BFF funds disbursed by the AAFORD PFIs. The AAFORD PFIs
and GIRSAL will report to AAFORD about the volume of credit guarantee funds used to support the disbursement of the BFF.
125.
Other AAFORD partners will be; i) ARB Apex Bank: AAFORD, in coordination with the BoG will partner with the ARB Apex Bank
in the development and management of the BFF; ii) Other IFAD projects: AAFORD will develop partnerships with the institutions
developed by ongoing IFAD supported projects (e.g. BACs/BRCs developed by REP) and build on the track record of the
partnerships of value chain actors and financial intermediaries in the AAFORD areas with GASIP and REP; iii) Other
development programmes: During its implementation AAFORD will also explore partnerships with projects of other development
partners such as the Ghana Financial Sector Development Programme of the World Bank about the development of Village
Saving and Loans Associations (VSLAs) and their linkage to formal financial services. It will also explore linkages to the KFW
supported OVCF and the DANIDA supported Rural Development Fund (RDF) for developing value chain financing linkages in the
project areas. The CODPs will identify the presence of other donor and government supported projects in the clusters, mainly the
ones which are focused on strengthening extension services and capacity building of FBOs. AAFORD will partner will these
initiatives in a manner that allows AAFORD to focus more on the development of marketing linkages and access to finance for
the target groups.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
126.
Total Project costs including physical and price contingencies are estimated at US$69.7 million over a 6-year period. Component
2 on Expanding and Directing Affordable Finance in a Conducive Environment is the main investment and represents 52 per cent
of project costs. Component 1 on Technical Assistance for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural
Value Chains represents 41 per cent of total costs. The component 3 ‘Implementation Support’ represents 7 per cent of the total
costs. Table 1 shows total project costs by components and subcomponents across in foreign currency.
127.
Investment costs are US$60.4 million and represent 95 per cent of base costs. Taxes amount to US$ 9.4 million, equivalent to 13
per cent of total costs. Recurrent costs are valued at US$ 3.4 million or 5 per cent of base costs. The exchange rate used is
US$1.0 = GHS 5.5. The cost per direct beneficiary household is US$ 929 and cost per beneficiary is US$129.  The base costs
are calculated at October 2019 prices and include estimated duties and taxes. Total contingencies are US$3.4 million or 5 per
cent of total costs
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
128.
The total project costs of US$69.7 million will be financed by i) IFAD US$ 15 million ( IFAD loan of US$ 11.5 million and IFAD
Green Grant of US$ 3.5 million) ); ii) AGRA (US$1 million parallel financing); iii) GCF (US$ 9.9 million); iv) GoG (US$25.9 million
of which US$7.9 million as taxes and duties exemptions, US$11.4 million as contribution through GIRSAL risk sharing facility and
US$6 million as REP revolving funds contribution) and GoG project management contribution of US$0.6 million); v) Partnering
Financial Institutions (US$4.3 million); vi) ABC Fund (US$4.3 million); vii) AfDB (US$3.5 million); and viii) Beneficiaries (US$5.8
million) in cash, casual labour, inputs and equipment (refer to table 2).
129.
The domestic contribution is robust, for instance, for each US$1 IFAD investment; domestic contribution is US$2.4. Similarly, for
each US$1 IFAD investment, international contribution is US$1.3. Domestic contribution (US$36 million) accounts for a robust 52
per cent of the total project costs and includes (i) GoG (taxes and duties) in the amount of US$7.9 million, (ii) GoG (REP) in the
amount of US$6 million, (iii) GoG (GIRSAL) in the amount of US$11.4 million ;(iv) beneficiaries (cash & in-kind) in the amount of
US$5.8 million, (v) PFI in the amount of US$4.3 million and (vi) GoG (cash) in the amount of US$0.6 million. The international
contribution is contributing 48 per cent of the overall project costs (equivalent to US$33.7 million) comprising: (i) GCF (US$9.9
million), (ii) ABC fund (US$4.3 million), (iii) AfDB (US$3.5 million), (iv) AGRA (US$1 million) and (v) IFAD (US$15 million). 
130.
Table 1: Project costs by Components (subcomponents) and year (USD’000)
22/36
131.
Table 2: Project costs by Components (subcomponents) and financier (USD’000)
132.
Expenditure Category Overview Credit and Guarantee Funds is the major expenditure account, estimated at US$41.3 million, or
about 59.3 per cent of the total project costs. The other investment expenditure accounts are training and workshops for an
amount of US$9.1 million or 13.1 per cent of total costs, followed by grants and subsidies for an amount of US$8 million or 11.5
per cent of total costs, Consultancies for an amount of US$6.6 million or about 9.4 per cent of the total cost, equipment’s, goods
and services for an amount of US$0.6 million or 1 per cent of total costs. The recurrent costs represent 5.7 per cent of total costs
at US$4 million, comprising salaries and allowances for an amount of US$3 million or 4.2 per cent of total costs, operations and
maintenance for an amount of US$1 million (1.5 per cent of project costs). The breakdown of expenditure accounts by
component is reflected at the Annex 7.
133.
Disbursement flow: To enable easy monitoring of progress, the below graph forecast the expected disbursement per year. This
will allow continuously tracking progress during supervisor and following up mission. Around US$17 million (24 per cent) of
project resources will be disbursed till Year 3 and the remaining US$52.7 million (76 per cent) will be disbursed in the last three
years of the project. AAFORD disbursement pattern is represented below:
134.
Graph 1. AAFORD-Disbursement Plan (US$ 000)
c. Disbursement
135.
The proceeds of the financing will be used for eligible expenditures and in line with the disbursement allocations specified in the
relevant section of the Financing Agreement. IFAD funds will be disbursed into US Dollars Account at a commercial bank
acceptable by the Fund and will be operated by the Financial Services Department of MoF. The regular signatories to the
Designated Accounts will be the CPCU Director and the AFFORD Finance Manager as Cat A and B signatories respectively.
However, Chief Director of MoF and the Director of Finance (MoF) will be substitute Cat A and B signatories respectively in the
absence of the regular signatories.
136.
23/36
Designated Account (IFAD Loan). The funds will flow into a Designated Account in a commercial bank in Ghana acceptable to
the Fund. This is to avoid co-mingling of funds as well as ease bank reconciliations. The Designated Account will be managed
using Revolving Fund modalities. Following the opening of the Designated Account and upon request of the Borrower
(Withdrawal Application), funds will be transferred based on the expenditure forecast for the first six months. Under the Revolving
Fund modality the first advance withdrawal cannot exceed the reporting period of 6 months’ forecast amount of IFAD financed
expenditure approved in the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for the relevant Project Year. Further advances to the
Designated Account will be made for the next reporting period based on the AWPB or expenditure forecasts provided that at
least 75% of the immediately preceding advance and 100% of all prior advances have been fully justified. As the project will avail
itself of the Report Based Disbursement methodology Interim Financial Report (IFRs) will need to be submitted to IFAD at
quarterly intervals within 30 days after the period-end. IFRs submitted shall be subject to verification and audit by the Ghana
Audit Service (GAS) on a bi-annual basis. In case of delays in submission of the bi-annual verification and audit report, advance
withdrawals for the subsequent reporting periods will not be processed. IFR templates will be provided as annexes to the “Letter
to the Borrower”. The proceeds from the Designated Account shall be used exclusively to finance the Programme’s eligible
expenditures as will be stipulated in Schedule 2 of the Programme Loan Agreement. Funds shall be periodically transferred from
the Designated Account to the Programme Operational Account in Ghanaian cedi for the purpose of financing the Programme’s
eligible expenditures financed by IFAD.
137.
Government Public Financial Management procedures will be used. The methods of disbursement will include advances, direct
payments, and reimbursements. Training will be provided to accounts staff on IFAD procedures and all processes documented
as part of the PIM and outlined in MOUs with districts. Zonal offices to be responsible for close monitoring of implementing
entities, including submission of returns.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
138.
The project will benefit about 75,000 direct and 15,000 indirect households. The project has an expected adoption rate of 60 per
cent. The expected benefits are: i) At least 60 per cent of the households reporting increase in income; ii) at least 25 per cent of
the targeted households reporting adoption on environmentally sustainable and climate resilient technologies and practices; iii)
60 institutions and groups strengthened; iv) 30 clusters and 350 communities reached with Community Outreach and
Development Plan (CODP); iv) 50 new Village and Savings Loans Association formed to mobilize and lend savings within the
group; members’ total savings after 20 years period will be approximately US$351 thousand; v) At least 120 youth under
mobilization of youth community facilitators (YCF) are expected, and an additional 80 youth will be trained as youth institutional
interns; vi) 6,000 households will use warehouse receipts to leverage funds for household consumption for three months at
US$50 per month; vii) 1,500 households that will benefit directly from the CODP training; viii) 15,000 households will increase
their knowledge about effects of climate change, good agricultural practices (GAPs), financing mechanisms and institutions, and
potential business opportunities; ix) 60 Community Institutions such as FBOs, women and youth groups will receive TA to
prepare institutional business plans, which are expected to result in improved access to markets and financing; x) 60 new FBOs,
women and youth groups will be formed, benefitting 1,200 households so they can participate more effectively in value chains;;
xi) Almost 44,000 households (equivalent to the 60 per cent of the total targeted outreach) will get access to loans; xii) 24
offtakers and 300 MSMEs will be supported to obtain financing offtaker; xiii) and 12,500 HH (under REP support) will obtain
financing for their income-generating enterprises.
139.
Also, the preliminary results estimate total saving of CO2 emission due to the project intervention of approximately 78,000 metric
tonnes for the period of 20 years. The estimated monetary value of emission savings is approximately US$0.5 million for 20
years.
140.
The Net present value (NPV) of the project is positive (US$8.8 Million; GHS 53.5 Million). The Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) is estimated at the value of 28 per cent, which demonstrates profitability of the project. The economic analysis suggests
that AAFORD is feasible. All these worthiness indicators establish the economic feasibility of the project.
141.
Financial analysis: The BFF targets two groups: Window I is for agricultural production (i.e. SMFs, MoFs and LFs); and Window II
is focused on Enterprises (offtakers and MSMEs). For the purpose of the financial and economic analysis, six financial models
have been developed for the production window: (i) sorghum; (ii) cassava; (iii) soya bean; (iv) groundnut; (v) rice (paddy) and (vi)
maize. For Window II regarding enterprises, a gari processing activity has been taken as representative. Most models are
expected to provide farmers with physical outputs and financial returns that are attractive in relation to their extra labour and
other inputs and financial investment. The project is supposed to provide farmers with financial resources needed to cover
production costs (operational or working capital), training, capacity building and administrative support. The project intervention is
expected to increase the yield, quality and distribution of products. The loans for working capital will be used to buy seeds,
fertilizers, labour costs, bags, shelling, winnowing, ploughing-mechanization services, where applicable, dryer, planter etc.
142.
Individual production models (smallholder farmers) and enterprises (i.e. offtakers, MSMEs) have been used to calculate the value
of production net of inputs and labour costs. The individual production was estimated at the three different levels: (i) SMF, which
account for 80 per cent of the total target group, with an increase of working land size area for 0.5 acre; followed by (ii) market
oriented farmers (MOF) of 18 per cent, with an increase of land size by 1 acre; and (iii) large farmers, accounting for 2 per cent of
the total target ratio, with an increase of 5 acres. The Project is targeting 75,000 households (equivalent to 450,000
beneficiaries), and the adoption rate has been estimated at 60 per cent. Targeted groups are mostly women and youth,
accounting for 50 per cent and 40 per cent, respectively.
143.
Model 1 Rice (paddy) is focused on the semi-subsistence smallholder farmers (SHFs), market oriented farmers (MoFs) and large
farmers (LFs) that already have existing production and planning to expand acreages under crop production. Model assuming
that SHFs will expand for 0.5 acres of their crop production, MoFs with 1 acre and LFs with 5 acres land size. The same logic
applies for overall farmer’s production financial models (i.e. model 1 to 6). The average yield is 1.9 tonnes/acre compared to the
WoP scenario of modest 1 ton/acre. The production and investment costs including labour are US$697, which includes
investment, operational and labour cost. The average revenue is US$1,214 and average incremental income is $498. The
Benefit cost ratio estimated is 1.9:1 showing that for each US$1 spent the model will generate US$1.9 of benefits, which is in
favour of the model. The NPV is estimated at US$2,134.
24/36
144.
Model 2 Sorghum: The average yield is 0.6 tonnes/acre compared to the WoP scenario of modest 0.4 ton/acre. The production
and investment costs including labour are US$312, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The average
revenue is US$334 and average incremental income is US$43. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 1.1:1 showing that for each
US$1 spent the model will generate US$1.1 of benefits, which is in favour of the model. The NPV is estimated at US$198.
145.
Model 3 Cassava: The expected average yield is 6.8 tonnes/acre compared to the WoP scenario of 5 ton/acre. The production
and investment costs including labour are US$411, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The average
revenue is US$801 and average incremental income is US$148. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 2.4:1 showing that for each
US$1 spent the model will generate US$2.5 of benefits, which is in favour of the model. The NPV is estimated at US$739.
146.
Model 4 Soya bean: WP scenario includes the estimated yield of 0.7 tonnes/acre compared to the WoP scenario of 0.5 ton/acre.
The production and investment costs including labour are US$243, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The
average revenue is US$268 and average incremental income is US$194. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 1:1 showing that for
each US$1 spent the model will generate US$1 of benefits. The NPV is estimated at US$977.
147.
Model 5 Maize: The average yield is 2 tonnes/acre compared to the WoP scenario of 0.9 ton/acre. The production and
investment costs including labour are US$417, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The average revenue is
US$520 and average incremental income is US$71. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 1.2:1 showing that for each US$1 spent
the model will generate US$1.2 of benefits. The NPV is estimated at US$350.
148.
Model 6 Groundnut: The expected average yield is 0.6 tonnes/acre compared to the WoP scenario of 0.4 ton/acre. The
production and investment costs including labour are US$182, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The
average revenue is US$592 and average incremental income is US$104. This model demonstrates the highest profitability
considering that the benefit cost ratio estimated at 3.2:1 shows that for each US$1 spent the model will generate US$3.2 of
benefits. The NPV is estimated at US$466.
149.
Model 7 Gari processing: This model is Enterprises focused. The average production capacity is 198 tonnes compared to the
WoP scenario of 43 tonnes. The production and investment costs including labour are US$79,721, which includes investment,
operational and labour cost. The average incremental income is US$12,019. The benefit cost ratio estimated is 1.2:1 showing
that for each US$1 spent the model will generate US$1.2 of benefits. The NPV is estimated at US$57,613.
150.
The financial aspects of models are presented at the table 4 demonstrating estimated average yield before the project
intervention (WoP) and expected increase in yield due to the project intervention (referred here under WP). The average increase
in yield is approximately 60 per cent, the smallest for soya bean and the highest for rice (paddy).
151.
Table 4: Financial Analysis Models
Model
Average
Yield
WoP,
kg/acre*
Average
Yield,
WP,kg/acre*
Production
&
investment
cost,
including
labour 
(year 1)
GHS/acre
Production
&
investment
cost, before
labour 
(average)
GHS/acre
Average
Production
&
investment
cost,
including
labour 
GHS/acre
Average
Revenue
per year
GHS/acre
Average
Incremental
income
GHS/acre
 Incremental
income,
(year 5)
GHS/acre
Lowland
Rice /a
1.050
1.913
3.833
1.611
3.221
6.678
2.737
2.777
Sorghum
380
581
1.714
1.076
1.731
1.836
237
Cassava
5.000
6.800
2.259
1.679
2.116
4.408
812
314
742
Soyabean
525
669
1.335
764
1.437
1.474
1.069
1.076
Maize /a
930
2.067
2.293
1.709
2.405
2.862
390
555
Groundnut
400
550
1.002
529
25/36
1.012
3.258
572
607
Gari
processing
/b
43.000
198.143
438.466
477.905
477.905
552.560
66.105
64.336
152.
Table 4 shows production and investment costs with labour and without labour costs for the first year and the average value. The
average revenue per year, average incremental income and incremental income at year 4 are also available in the table. All
these seven models present a higher financial efficiency in terms of financial Net Present Value (NPV) and the financial benefits-
cost ratio (BCR). For instance, NPV is positive for the all seven models (US$2,134 for model 1 (rice paddy), US$739 for model 2
(cassava), US$198 for model 3 (sorghum), US$977 for model 4 (soya bean), US$466 for model 5 (groundnut), US$350 for model
6 (maize), and US$57,613 for model 7 (gari processing). Changes in financial indicators illustrate the predicted transformation in
agricultural practices in the project area. Analyses of the farm and enterprise models confirm that the impact of the project at the
farm level is financially attractive for family households and net farm incomes are expected to increase. For more details, refer to
table 5.
153.
The B/C ratio has been the highest for groundnut estimated at 3.2, followed by cassava (2.4), rice (1.9), rice (paddy) (1.2), gari
processing and maize (1.2), sorghum (1.1) and the lowest value 1.0 is for soya bean. The return to family labour per day is
between US$9 and US$27, with the smallest value for maize production and the highest for groundnut. For more details please
refer to table 5 below.
154.
Table 5. Financial Profitability Indicators
Model
Net present value
GHS/acre
B/C Ratio
Return to family labour
(US$/day)
Poverty line
Rice (paddy)
2.134
Sorghum
Cassava
Soyabean
Maize
Groundnut
198
739
977
350
466
Gari processing
57.613
1,9
1,1
2,4
1,0
1,2
3,2
1,2
Comment: Poverty line is US$1.9 per day (source: WB, Oct,2019)
20
16
24
16
9
27
n/a
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
155.
AAFORD’s exit strategy and sustainability is built on: i) Developing profitable and sustainable linkages between private-sector
buyers/offtakers and target households (producers); The target households’ (producer) success in meeting the quantity and
quality standards required by the offtakers through AAFORD support will establish win-win partnerships generating profits both
for the offtaker and the target household. Once the administrative bottlenecks in these linkages are removed through AAFORD
support, their business relationship will continue based on market demand and supply principles. With the growth in this business
relationship, the offtaker will increase its business volumes in the community to achieve economies of scale which will increase
the outreach of these linkages to new smallholder farmers; ii) Successful engagement of PFIs in supporting the pro-poor
business linkages between offtakers and producers: The successful engagement of PFIs in supporting the VC linkages between
AAFORD supported smallholders and offtakers will develop the pathway for AAFORD to make a smooth exit. Further, the
success of the business partnerships in the AAFORD clusters will motivate the PFIs to scale up this model even outside the
AAFORD supported clusters; iii) Arrangements to continue revolving funds repaid into the BFF; iv) Policy dialogue and suitable
policy engagement to strengthen the enabling environment and facilitate smooth continuation of the AAFORD brokered
partnerships; v) strengthened CIs and human capacities achieved through their institutional capacity, financial capacity and
technical capacity development so that they can continue providing services to target households even after AAFORD; vi)
developing anetwork of commercial service providers who will continue supporting and replicating AAFORD’s achievements and
vi) widely disseminating the AAFORD success stories and their implementation mechanisms (refer Annex 10).
26/36
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
156.
The key risks and mitigation measures are presented below. Refer to Annex 9 for more details.
Risk
Risk Mitigation
Rating
AAFORD will address these constraints by i) focusing on a
limited geographical area (two zones), ii) partnering with
other ongoing IFAD projects, e.g. REP supported
BAC/BRCs, GASIP supported Farmers Based
Organisations (FBOs) in the project areas; iii) enhancing
target groups’ access to rural finance by focusing on both
demand side interventions (increasing production,
productivity, value addition, post-harvest techniques,
institutional capacities) and supply side pathways e.g.
setting up the Blended Finance Facility (BFF) and
supporting the delivery of the BFF resources in partnership
with Ghana Incentive-based Risk Sharing System for
Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL), Ghana Agricultural
Insurance Pool (GAIP) and Ghana Commodities Exchange
(GCX).
Farmers tend to be risk-averse and to perceive borrowing
as an avoidable risk. The primary target, therefore, will be
semi-subsistence and market-oriented farmers who wish to
expand their marketable surplus, whether by adding some
additional acreage or through productivity-raising inputs.
AAFORD will also try to expand the use of available risk-
mitigation instruments, including insurance to offset
production risks, guarantees to offset PFIs’ default risks,
and warehouse receipts to permit taking advantage of
higher off-season prices.
Whereas farmers tend to avoid the risk of borrowing against
their existing land holdings and crops, they have proven
more willing to borrow for a marginal expansion, in
collaboration with an offtaker who can provide the market
as well as secure and manage the financing. Indirect
access to credit through the offtaker also helps insulate the
FBOs against risk of crop failure, as it is easier to
renegotiate terms with the offtakers (who are often paid in
kind rather than in cash) than with financial institutions. In
some cases, the offtaker may actually be a legally
constituted cooperative consisting of both producers and
processors, which can both represent their mutual interests
and satisfy the collateral requirements of the PFIs. The
model has also worked to enable larger nucleus farmers
(especially in the northern part of the country) to expand
with minimal direct investment by borrowing to provide
inputs and services (e.g., tractor) to outgrowers who can
expand the scale of production.
AAFORD will focus on a successful model that has
emerged both from RTIMP experience (as well as USAID
and other projects) and from recent observations in the
field:  building on an on-going relationship between an
offtaker (usually a processor or nucleus farmer; sometimes
an aggregator) and FBOs of outgrowers, and borrowing for
Medium
Technical aspects of programme: 
Diluted project effectiveness similar to previous
projects:
The effectiveness of previous IFAD projects was
diluted by i) very wide geographic spread of project
resources which limited community presence; ii)
limited partnership between concurrent IFAD projects;
iii) limited access to affordable finance and iv) focus
on supply driven pathways to increase rural outreach
of financial services.
Farmers’ unwillingness to access credit: Farmers
may not be willing to borrow even at concessional
rates since they are risk averse
Offtakers lack of participation: Offtakers may not be
willing to be serve as end of the line credit providers to
farmers.
Stiff lending criteria of PFIs: PFIs have differing
credit criteria and some may require collateral that
might be difficult for off-takers to provide
Risk of side selling: Farmers may resort to side-
selling their produce after having accepted inputs from
off-takers
27/36
an expansion of operations.
One reason that PFIs (especially RCBs) are interested in
working with FBOs is to gain their members as clients.
AAFORD will provide capacity-building in financial literacy
and VSLAs to encourage them to save in formal financial
institutions. Nevertheless, there is a risk that such savings,
and other assets held by smallholders, will be insufficient to
meet the security requirements for loans from those
institutions. This risk is mitigated in part by focusing on the
offtaker-FBO model, in which a nucleus farmer or processor
is much more likely to be able to provide the required
security to take a large loan that is then passed on in bits
(in-kind) to his farmers .
To help close any remaining gap between assets and
collateral requirements, working with GIRSAL is especially
important. A GIRSAL guarantee can serve as collateral for
50% of the investment amount.
When inputs are provided free or on credit, there is always
a risk that people will come forward to receive them in order
to sell at a profit, rather than utilize them directly for
production. This risk will be mitigated by (a) working with
existing FBOs that have an on-going relationship with
offtakers; and (b) focusing on expansion of existing
production. This will tend to exclude new entrants and ‘free
riders.’ The offtaker provides the inputs and associated
services (such as ploughing) in stages, not all at once.
Members of FBOs who divert the additional inputs may
jeopardize their on-going relationship with the buyer.
AAFORD will mitigate this risk by i) establishing the
Implementation Support Unit (ISU) in the project area itself
and strengthening the ISU’s implementation support and
monitoring capacity by establishing Zonal Project
Coordination Units (ZPCUs) in each of the two project
zones; ii) AAFORD will not rely solely on ISU and ZPCU
staff for implementation. The project will also partner with
implementation service providers (SPs), deploy community
facilitators and youth interns to support the partnerships
between the project communities and the local
private/public project partners. The ISU and ZPCU staff will
be responsible for capacity building, monitoring, quality
control and technical backstopping. Even in the case of
temporary delays in staff replacement, implementation will
not be delayed.
The clarity of the roles will facilitate reporting and flow of
information. The location of the ISU in the project area will
facilitate close coordination between different
implementation stakeholders and swift attention to
challenges. The physical proximity between the ISU and the
Zonal Steering Committee will develop regular
communication and strong relation between them and ZSCs
involvement in resolving local challenges which may be
impeding implementation. At the macro or national level, the
Development Finance Unit of Ministry of Finance’s Financial
Sector Division will coordinate AAFORD’s implementation
and ensure its consistency with wider national objectives
and synergies with GoG activities to increase and expedite
the flow of credit to the agricultural sector.
Medium
Institutional capacity for implementation and
sustainability
Project management constraints similar to
challenges of previous projects: The experiences of
past IFAD projects indicate that the PCUs (e.g.
GASIP, RAFIP) were located centrally in Accra, far
from the project communities. The centralised units
were directly responsible for mobilising the local
project partners and brokering their linkages to the
project communities. However, these units were over-
burdened due to limited staff, delays in
replacement/recruitment of key staff and limited field
presence which caused delay in implementation.
Complexity of implementation arrangements:
Implementation arrangement has many parts and
involves steering committees, Project Implementation
Units and Service providers. It can be too complex for
day to day management. 
28/36
The GoG is adopting austerity measures, leading to lower
spending and not meeting some elements of counterpart
commitments. Most counterpart funding will be from other
financial institutions / existing facilities and linked to project
activities and outputs; e,g, access of smallholders to
financial services from these partners. This will address the
issues related to availability of counterpart funding.
Financial management
Delay/default in counterpart funding (co-
financing): The substantial amount of co-financing
expected to be mobilised raises the level of risk to the
project if this financing does not materialise.
Complexity of financial management and funds
flow structure: Many co-financiers may create
complications in terms of coordination and
management of the funds.
Medium
To mitigate the risk associated with delay/default in
mobilising co-financing the IFAD contribution is spread
across all the components and supports the phased
implementation of the critical activities related to stimulating
credit demand (e.g. increase production, productivity,
capacity building of local institutions) and enabling
affordable credit supply (contribution of credit funds to the
BFF). Therefore, the ISU can start implementing the core
activities of the project with IFAD funds alone. If there is
delay in mobilising finance from other partners, the start up
of the project will not be affected. The BFF can continue by
revolving repayments of initial IFAD funds if other
contributions are delayed or do not materialise.
Nevertheless, it is recognised that the full package of
activities is needed to create sustainable change impact in
each cluster. Therefore, in case of further delay/default in
co-financing the Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPBs)
will be structured in a way that in case of one party
defaulting the geographical scale of implementation
(number of clusters, number of communities in a cluster) is
reduced instead of holding the activity in suspension or
creating gaps in activities implemented in the villages.
As in many other countries, MoF is the most advanced
public institution in terms of Public Financial Management
(PFM). Foreseen project team is very experienced and
funds flow arrangements (proposed by them based on their
previous experience) are more sophisticated than the ones
used for other projects.
The Finance Unit will use GIFMIS (the country PFM
software) to manage the project. GIFMIS can easily
accommodate multiple funding sources in terms of
accounting and reporting.
In addition, IFAD supervision will support the project team in
the set-up and management of different funding sources as
soon as these materialize.
Co-financing funds flow: The ISU will manage the flow of
funds from IFAD and GCF resources. It will coordinate all
investments from other financiers e.g. GIRSAL, AGRA,
AfDB, PFIs and ABC Funds. The GIRSAL and PFI
investments will be made directly at the product level
connected to volume of BFF funds disbursed from the
partner financial institutions to project partners (offtakers,
FBOs). The funds flow from the ABC Funds will be defined
between itself and its borrower (BoG/Apex Bank/Partner
financial institutions). Each financier has own reporting
requirements and AAFORD will make an effort to harmonise
timing.
AFORD will mitigate the risks through the following steps:
29/36
Procurement:
The Procurement Review Matrix(PRM) identified the
possible procurement risks at the project level,
including: i) allocation of points for shortlisting
consultants are not usually included in the request for
expression of interest, ii) for some contracts, there are
both cost and time overruns, iii) there are issues with
procurement filing. AAFORD will have procurement
team at the project level to ensure smooth flow of key
procurement functions.
i) Relevant training will be provided to the procurement staff
during project start-up workshops. The training will also
contribute to building up the procurement capacity of the
Project staff to follow the required procurement approach
and methodology, orient staff members to best practices
and train them to monitor the quality and timeliness of
documents submitted to IFAD for supervision missions and
for prior review; ii) s management and monitoring teams will
be formed, led by the Central Project Coordinator (CPC)
and including the technical and the procurement teams, and
beneficiaries (if necessary). These teams will be
responsible for contract supervision, monitoring, and
application of the conditions of contract. Close monitoring
will be done to prevent poor performance of service
providers by ensuring their adherence to contract
documents; iii) Procurement clinics on procurement record
keeping will be provided to AAFORD procurement staff to
ensure that the complete procurement documentation,
including a procurement filing checklist, is kept on
procurement files at the ISU; iv) Provide contract
management training to all AAFORD staff.
Medium
Climate Change: Extreme weather events mainly
heat waves, pests and diseases, water scarcity can
have an impact on agriculture productivity.
This risk is mitigated by a range of measures such as digital
early warning systems, introduction of heat and pest and
disease resistant varieties, early maturing varieties (details
in SECAP review note)
Medium
157.
Ghana’s Public Financial Management environment is considered largely adequate to satidfy IFAD fiduciary requirements. The
GoG has made progress in strengthening its public financial management (PFM) framework and systems. It has demonstrated its
commitment to continuing its PFM reforms by developing more efficient public FM systems, including the implementation of the
Ghana Integrated Financial Management Information System (GIFMIS) - which is an integrated computerised Financial
Management System that facilitates budget preparation and execution, accounting and financial reporting, cash management,
assets management, human resource and payroll management - and ensuring transparency by strengthening state oversight
institutions, including the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament, which holds public hearings on allegations of fraud and
corruption and instances of financial irregularities with public funds. It has enacted appropriate laws such as the Public Financial
Management Regulations (L.I. 2358 of 2019) and the Public Financial Management Law (Act 921 of 2016) to enforce the reforms.
Donor funds are budget but the reporting on utilization is very limited (PEFA 2018).
158.
Being the Mof the Lead Implementing Agency, the overall internal control environment is expected to satisfy IFAD requirements.
For AAFORD it is foreseen full utilization of GIFMIS; foreseen risks include inadequate set-up of the chart of accounts, cost
categories, components and sub-components, with the subsequent impact in the quality and reliability of financial reports. Audit
risk is mitigated by utilization of the services of the National Public Auditor "Ghana Audit Services", who apply ISSAIs standards.
At design the overall Financial Management risk is rated as Medium due to the lack of experince working with MoF. The risk will
be reassessed diring implementation.
I. Environment and Social category
159.
In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Change Assessment Procedures (SECAP), AAFORD remains classified as
a Category B program, implying that AAFORD is likely to cause minimal adverse environmental effects. Two key risks to
environmental and social management are: (i) poor environmental governance of the loan products, which can be mitigated
through capacity building of multiple actors in technical, management and governance aspects, and strengthening the financial
institutions environmental and climate risks tools and governance; and (ii) low productivity and degraded natural resources to be
mitigated through promotion of sustainable land and water management practices. AAFORD will not invest in high risk projects
and will ensure the women and youth are included. (Refer Annex 5, SECAP)
J. Climate Risk classification
160.
In line with the climate risk categorization guidelines, AAFORD is rated 'high’.The climate-smart activities introduced by
AAFORD will ensure that greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are further reduced. Capacity building of key actors along the
agricultural value chains on climate change and awareness will help end beneficiaries' and financial institutions to reduce key
risks.  Given the fact that 2 regions have different level of climate exposure, AAFORD will ensure that an Environmental and
Social Management Plan in the SECAP is implemented in line with IFAD guidelines to ensure that the overall logic intervention of
the Project and its components /activities are aiming not only to mitigate/alleviate any of the existing and future  negative
environmental and  impacts within the total project's area but additionally to produce substantive positive impacts on
beneficiaries through the mainstreaming.
30/36
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
161.
The Lead Project Implementation Agency (LPIA) will be Ministry of Finance (MoF) with close collaboration with the Ministry of
Food and Agriculture (MoFA), and also the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI). AAFORD’s implementation will rely on a mix of
community, public and private sector and technical service providers. These ministries will form the core of an inter-ministerial
platform by ministers to provide policy guidance and consistency with government’s development agenda. It shall have an annual
meeting cycle.Beneficiary households will play a lead role through CIs (farmer-based organizations, NGOs, women and youth
groups, savings and credit groups, among others).These ministries will form the core of an inter-ministerial platform by ministers
to provide policy guidance and consistency with government’s development agenda. It shall have an annual meeting cycle.
162.
Project Steering Committee (PSC): A high-ranking Project Steering Committee (PSC) to be chaired by teh chief directors of
Ministry of Finance and Minisitry of Food and Agriculture shall be set up for the overall overshight of the project. The Minister of
Finance will designate the Chair of the PSC and an alternate. The committee will include representatives of all relevant ministries
and agencies (MoF, MoFA, MoTI and representatives from the regions of implementation), and both public (representing financial
sector intermediaries and agricultural market intermediaries) and private institutions and non-state actors’ representatives (such
as NGOs) and representatives of youth and women who operate along the relevant agricultural value chains as practitioners or
advocates. The PSC will meet at least twice a year, and as necessary. The main responsibilities of the steering committee will
include: (i) providing strategic and policy guidance to the Implementation Support Unit (ISU) for implementation and coordination
of activities; (ii) ensuring overall conformity with government policies and strategies; (iii) reviewing project progress and
performance; (iv) approving the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB); (v) resolving implementation problems or conflicts; and
(iv) assisting the ISU in obtaining government assistance and contributions to the project when needed. A PSC Technical
Committee (PTC) will be constituted at the central level comprising members drawn from the PSC. The PTC will serve as a
standing committee empowered to meet whenever needed to resolve implementation bottlenecks that cannot be settled at the
zonal level and requires immediate attention.
163.
Zonal Platform: A Zonal Platform (ZP) will be formed in each AAFORD implementation zone to oversee planning, review
progress, facilitate linkages between project stakeholders and remove bottlenecks affecting smooth implementation. The ZP will
comprise representatives of MoFA (Regional Agricultural Development Units (RADUs), MoTI, district assembles, financial
institutions, agricultural market intermediaries such as offtakers (aggregators, processors and nucleus farmers), input suppliers
and representatives of farmer groups and civil society organisations, among others in the private sector. The ZP will meet at least
twice a year, and as necessary. The ZP will constitute a ZP Technical Committee (ZTC) from within the ZP members to meet
whenever needed to resolve any project implementation bottlenecks encountered within the Zones.
164.
Implementation structure: A two-level organisational structure will be established. The Implementation Support Unit (ISU)
located in Sunyani and two Zonal Coordination Units (ZCU); one in Sunyani and the other in Tamale. Each ZCU will be roughly
anchored in the jurisdiction of the former Brong-Ahafo and Northern regions. These zonal offices will represent the coordinating
centres for the operational areas of AAFORD. (Refer to PIM for organizational structure, implementation modalities and
procedures).
165.
ISU: The ISU will be established in an implementation area of AAFORD to ensure effective implementation. Within the current
targeting framework, the ISU is envisaged to be located in Sunyani. All ISU staff members will be competitively recruited from the
professional labour market and will work on a full-time basis for managing AAFORD. The coordination unit will operate within the
superision of the Financial Sector Division of MoF,[21] which will provide oversight and strategic direction to the ISU. A Central
Project Coordinator (CPC) will head the ISU’s day to day operations. The CPC will be assisted by a central technical support
team and a central operations support team as defined in the PIM.
166.
Central technical support team: The central technical support team will comprise the following officers: (i) Senior Monitoring and
Evaluation Specialist (SMES), (ii) Senior Rural Finance Specialist (SRFS), (iii) Community Development, Livelihood and Gender
Specialist (CGS), and (iv) Climate and Environment Specialist (CES). This team will carry out overall technical planning,
implementation oversight and technical guidance to the Zones for AAFORD implementation.
167.
Central operations support team: The team will consist of (i) Senior Finance Manager (SFM), (ii) Project Accountant (PA), (iii)
Accounts Assistant (AA) (iv) Procurement Officer (PO), and (v) Procurement Assistant (PrA). This team will perform financial
planning, management and control; project procurement, contracting and contract management and staff evaluation. It will
monitor, record and report community and government levels.
168.
Zonal Coordination Unit (ZCU): The ZCUs will be responsible for the zonal operations of AAFORD and will be staffed by
professionals competitively recruited to manage AAFORD at the ZCU level on a full-time basis. The zonal team will comprise (i)
ZCU Project Coordinator (ZPC), (ii) Field Implementation Supervisor (FIS), (iii) Monitoring and Evaluation Focal Point (MEF).
169.
IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints with respect to alleged sexual
exploitation and abuse (SEA). More information can be obtained from IFAD webpage: https://www.ifad.org/en/document-
detail/asset/40738506.
170.
31/36
Community level implementation: The ZCUs will carry out project implementation at the community level with the support of
partners in the public and private sectors, such as service providers and NGOs. AAFORD will train (through ToTs) a pool of
Youth Community Facilitators (YCFs) in each community cluster. Based on needs, the partner CIs will engage the YCFs to
support AAFORD implementation at the community level and pay allowances supported by AAFORD. Additionally, AAFORD will
train young graduates in skills identified by partner marketing and financial institutions as relevant to increasing their outreach to
smallholder farmers (especially women and youth), offtakers and other agricultural value chain actors. The trained graduates will
be supported as (Youth Institutional Interns) in the PFIs, offtaker institutions and in the BACs/BRCs in collaboration with REP.
AAFORD will then deploy one YIIs in each community cluster to support project implementation in coordination with the partner
CIs and the YCFs. The YIIs will be capacitated through training and technical assistance support, paid allowances, and provided
with YII certificate at the end of the project. The support to the YIIs will contribute to IFAD’s youth inclusion priority. After their
engagement with AAFORD the YIIs can join the CIs to continue community-level services, become independent service
providers, join agribusinesses and enterprises in the project area or be engaged as agents or full time staff of financial
intermediaries in their delivery of services to value chain actors. The ZCU with the support of SPs, YIIs and YCFs will facilitate the
development of CODPs in the community/clusters on an annual basis through participation of all the implementing partners. The
ZCU will monitor and ensure that implementation is coordinated in each community according to these plans leading to
harmonisation of resources and interconnectivity of the components.
171.
Institutional development and expected outcomes through the use of various service providers: Different types of service
providers will be used at various levels to develop targeted institutions. At the macro level, technical service providers will support
ministries, departments and agencies to engage in a constructive consultative process with stakeholders leading to the
development of agricultural sector policies and closing legal and regulatory gaps as necessary to advance an enabling
environment for efficient financial and agricultural markets. At this level, support might also be required for sensitization on the
new policies and regulations to promote their adoption and use in a sustainable manner. AGRA, as an AAFORD co-financing
partner will participate in the implementation of the policy related interventions in collaboration with service providers, preferably
partners and/or NGOs, with experience in policy development and advocacy and a history of practical engagement of
communities targeted by AAFORD
172.
The meso level has institutions such as agricultural market intermediaries and support services such as offtakers, input
suppliers, financial intermediaries (such as Rural and Community Banks), and market-enhancing institutions (such as GIRSAL,
GCX and GAIP). These institutions will be strengthened with capacity building interventions from technical and training services
providers to (i) develop and market the services of agricultural market intermediaries towards improving the production,
productivity, quality and market accessibility; and (ii) align the product offerings of financial intermediaries to improve access to
their services by target beneficiaries along the agricultural value chain, especially those involved in production and women, youth
and vulnerable groups. The service providers in this category include public institutions such as the business advisory and
resource centres (BACs/BRCs) and private sector operators, including NGOs.
173.
The community or micro level has the primary beneficiaries of AAFORD; the households and micro, small and medium
enterprises who are active participants along the agricultural value chain. AAFORD will engage competent service providers
which community development experiences (private sector, NGOs) to implement community level activities in coordination with
YCF and YIIs.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
Financial Management
174.
Staffing The Financial Services (FSD) Division of the Ministry of Finance will be responsible to ensuring accurate and
appropriate financial accounting and management of resources made available to the AAFORD for effective execution and
budget performance of the AWPB in accordance with IFAD policies and procedures. The operational day-to-day fiduciary
functions will be the responsibility of AAFORD Finance Manager. The PIU of the FSD will manage the project funds on behalf of
the executing agency (MoF), keep financial records according to international standards, implement internal controls, and ensure
annual external audits to be conducted by Ghana Audit Service as part of the overall project planning, coordination, and
implementation. The PIU will be responsible for preparation and submission of the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) every quarter
in compliance with the legal agreement, submitting audited annual reports and for all the FM activities of AAFORD to project
financiers and stakeholders. Based on an assessment done in October 2019, the capacity of the PIU for the proposed project
was found to be Moderately Satisfactory. The Finance department of the PIU is headed by a senior project accountant who holds
an advanced degree (MBA) in Finance and Accounting with 13 years’ experience in managing project finance and accounts. His
experience includes managing World Bank-funded projects. He is assisted by a project accountant who also holds an advanced
degree (MBA) in Finance with 10 years’ experience in working on IFAD-funded project (RAFIP), World Bank-funded projects. To
ensure adequate segregation of duties, the finance team of the PIU includes an Accounts / Finance Assistant. The finance team
composition of the PIU is capable of meeting the fiduciary requirements of IFAD, GoG, and other stakeholder. The PIU uses the
national financial management system, the Ghana Integrated Financial Management Information System (GIFMIS) in managing
all donor-funded projects. However, due to the geographical coverage of AAFORD, it is intended that the project’s central
coordination office will be sited in Sunyani in the Bono Region of Ghana. Consequently. The finance unit of AAFORD, which
comprise of (i) Finance Manager; (ii) Project Accountant; and (iii) Accounts Assistant, will be with the Central Programme
Coordinating Unit in Sunyani.
175.
Budgeting. CPCU will submit an annual work plan and budget to IFAD for no objection no later than two months before the
beginning of each fiscal year of the GoG. The annual work planning and budgeting will be prepared by the PIU in collaboration
with the Director of Finance. The CPCU will monitor the project’s implementation progress against the work plan/budget for the
planned project expenditures under each disbursement categories/components.
32/36
176.
Accounting and Reporting. The project will use report-based disbursements through the submission of quarterly Interim
Financial Report (IFRs) on the sources and uses of project funds. Template for the IFR shall be included in the PIM. A forecast of
the first 6 months’ expenditures will form the basis for the initial withdrawal of funds from the Loan and subsequent withdrawals
will equally be based on the net cash requirements. The default payment method shall be bank transfers with unique reference
numbers to aid bank reconciliations. The project will follow financial reporting under the cash basis of accounting (the Cash Basis
IPSAS) using the national financial management system, the Ghana Integrated Financial Management Information System
(GIFMIS) and will submit, within 30 days of each GoG’s fiscal quarter, quarterly IFRs of the project activities.
177.
Internal Controls and Audit. The PIU financial management manual and the provisions of the Public Financial Management
Regulations (2019) and the Public Financial Management Law (Act 921 of 2016) will govern the project’s internal controls.
Furthermore, the controls will follow authorisation and approval processes in the Government PFM system, the GIFMIS. The
internal auditors will undertake internal audit activities on a risks basis and they will submit the internal audit reports 45 days after
the end of the months of March and September of each calendar year. The project will maintain fixed assets for all material
assets that will be acquired or created using the project funds.
178.
External Audit. The annual audited financial statements of the project shall be submitted to IFAD within 6 months of the end of
the GoG’s fiscal year (i.e. by 30 June, each year). The external auditors will conduct annual audits of the project financial
statements on terms of reference agreed with IFAD. The project will be audited by GAS unless cleared otherwise by IFAD.
179.
GoG and Beneficiaries Contributions. The Finance team will be responsible in identifying, tracking and reporting on GOG’s
contributions to the project as well as that of the beneficiaries, even in-kind.
180.
Taxation. IFAD funds will NOT be used to pay VAT, duties or other taxes imposed on the project. The exemption of taxes will be
considered part of GoG’s contribution to the project.
181.
PIM. The PIM will describe in detail the:
182.
-  application of Ghanian PFM procedures to project's administration,
183.
- coordination arrangements with other co-financiers on all FM areas, including funds-flow and reporting arrangements,
184.
- anti-corruption arrangements and safeguards.  
185.
Procurement: A procurement risk assessment has been carried out as part of the design process and in accordance with the
IFAD procurement manual (May 2019). The assessment has identified pertinent risks, mitigation measures at AAFORD level and
rated risks before and after applying the suggested measures. The Procurement Review Matrix(PRM) identified the possible
procurement risks at the project level, including: i) allocation of points for shortlisting consultants are not usually included in the
request for expression of interest, ii) for some contracts, there are both cost and time overruns, iii) there are issues with
procurement filing. AAFORD will have procurement team at the project level to ensure smooth flow of key procurement functions.
186.
AAFORD will mitigate the above risks through the following steps: i) Relevant training will be provided to the procurement staff
during project start-up workshops. The training will also contribute to building up the procurement capacity of the Project staff to
follow the required procurement approach and methodology, orient staff members to best practices and train them to monitor the
quality and timeliness of documents submitted to IFAD for supervision missions and for prior review; ii) s management and
monitoring teams will be formed, led by the Central Project Coordinator (CPC) and including the technical and the procurement
teams, and beneficiaries (if necessary). These teams will be responsible for contract supervision, monitoring, and application of
the conditions of contract. Close monitoring will be done to prevent poor performance of service providers by ensuring their
adherence to contract documents; iii) Procurement clinics on procurement record keeping will be provided to AAFORD
procurement staff to ensure that the complete procurement documentation, including a procurement filing checklist, is kept on
procurement files at the ISU; and iv) Provide contract management training to all AAFORD staff.
187.
Procurement risks are rated medium to low after applying the mitigation appropriate risk mitigation measures. Based on the
assessment, the AAFORD procurement features will be; i) Organisational structure: The ISU will be established with dedicated
procurement team to ensure timely and effective implementation of procurement functions. This will minimize the reliance on ISU
structures with part-time seconded government procurement staff and ‘high risk’ procurement functions. The ISU will have a
Procurement Officer who will be supported by a Procurement Assistant. These positions will be hired from the open professional
jobs market at competitive salaries to ensure quality and prevent staff turnover. The procurement staff will receive training on
IFAD and other relevant procurement procedures. Procurement planning will be integrated during budgeting and AAFORD
Procurement Plan will be prepared using the IFAD new template; ii) An AAFORD procurement committee (APC) will be
established to support planning, fast tracking, monitoring, following up and take corrective action on the overall procurement
processes to assure accuracy and timely procurement; iii) Procurement Plan will be continuously updated and monitored for
quality control; A contract management and monitoring team will be led by the ISU PO, for contract supervision and monitoring; v)
A Third-Party Quality Assurance/Quality Control service provider (consultant) will be hired to provide independent assurance of
the quality of civil works, if any; vi) IFAD will undertake reviews to ensure that the procurement process is carried out in
conformity with IFAD procurement guidelines.
188.
Thresholds for Procurement Methods: While eventually the specific thresholds for procurement financed under the Project will be
stipulated in the Letter to the Recipient (LTR). The table below provides the following recommended thresholds:
Procurement Thresholds*
33/36
Currency: US$
GOODS/NCS
Shopping
<70,000
WORKS/NCS
Shopping
<190,000
CONSULTING SERVICES/NCS
CQS
<70,000
NCB
ICB
>70,000 to <200,000
>=200,000
NCB
ICB
>190,000 to <800,000
<800,000
QCBS
>100,000
189.
* Direct Contracting, Single Source Selection, Fixed Budget Selection, Quality-based Selection and Least-Cost Selection
methods will be selected on a case by case basis. ICS is to be used for all selection for individual consultants, regardless of
value. For Non-consulting Services (NCS), please use the thresholds for Goods, Works or Services, based on the procurement
or selection methodology being used. WB’s standard bidding documents will be used; Refer PIM for details
190.
Prior Review Thresholds (USD)
Goods
<= 70,000
Works
<= 150,000
Services
<=60,000
191.
Procurement Regulations applicable to AAFORD: AAFORD will adopt the Amended Ghana Public Procurement Act 2016 (Act
914), the Procurement Regulations (to be issued soon), and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines 2010. Procurement regulations
will be subject to further assessment by IFAD when it is issued. National systems will apply to all procurements except
international competitive bidding (ICB). ICB procurement will follow World Bank procedures. Ghana national procurement
systems will be followed for procurement below ICB thresholds. Further guidance regarding procurement arrangements can be
found in the procurement section of the PIM.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
192.
Planning: At inception, the Logical Framework (project strategy) will be reviewed and validated in a start-up workshop with the
participation of representatives from all stakeholder groups. The main planning tool for AAFORD will be the AWPB prepared
using a participatory bottom-up approach within the clusters. The AWPBs will specify a detailed description and schedule of
activities to be undertaken with implementation responsibilities, required inputs, expected outputs, performance indicators and
corresponding targets. The AWPB shall also include a procurement plan and a financing plan. Partners involved in the
implementation of the various components of the project will be responsible for preparing the required work plans and budget
according to an agreed format. The ISU and ZCUs will ensure overall coordination and efficiency of the planning process. The
PCU will also monitor efficiency of targeting, poverty focus, gender focus and youth focus. Once the priorities have been set at
the cluster level and activities defined, the AWPB will be compiled for each zone and the two ZCUs will combine the drafted
AWPBs for their respective zones and submit to the ISU. The ISU will consolidate and streamline the two AWPBs and submit it to
the PSC for review and approval. The PSC will insure the inclusion of AAFORD under the national budget. The draft AWPB will
be sent to IFAD for review and no-objection 60 days prior to start of each year of implementation. The AWPB will be in line with
the logical framework and guide implementation of activities in the clusters against benchmarks for measuring annual
implementation progress (refer PIM for contents of AWPB).
34/36
193.
M&E: The results-based approach will be adopted through the M&E system. AAFORD progress and performance will be
measured against AWPB targets; and periodic assessments of movement towards achievement of beneficiary impact. The key
responsibilities of the M&E system will rely on the M&E unit at the ISU. The service providers will be engaged to colelct and
analyse data to asssess outcomes and impact of the AAFORD activities with the support of youth interns and youth facilitators at
the cluster level. The Operational and Results Management System (ORMS) will be incorporated within the M&E system along
with the Annual Outcome Survey (AOS) tool which would allow for effective monitoring of the different project indicators. The
M&E activities will take into consideration the following: i) data disaggregated by sex, age category, region, and targeting groups;
ii) progress reporting will be in comparison with appraisal targets and the AWPB; iii) monthly meeting at the ISU with the
presence of ZCU M&E focal points to discuss implementation progress versus targets; iv) regular field visits from M&E specialist
and technical specialists in the ISU; v) documenting of stories from the field for different component beneficiaries; and vii)
reporting on lessons learned and best practices and working on scaling-up.
194.
Key M&E activities will comprise the i) the PIM; ii) a baseline survey, which will provide baseline data for the project M&E
indicators, covering both beneficiary and control communities, updated on an annual basis to track the different project indicators
over time and support analysis to ensure that AAFORD activities are in the right direction to achieve the target indicators, iii)
progress reports, involving physical and financial progress reporting tied to the AWPB targets[22], iv) development of an
electronic Management Information System (MIS) aligned to the information needs identified in the M&E plan; v) mid-term review;
vi) project completion survey (impact evaluation) using the same questionnaires used for the baseline to allow for comparison
against baseline results and enabling qualitative analysis (by beneficiary status, region and gender of household head) of
AAFORD impact by interviewing a panel of households; and vii) a project beneficiaries database, which will be established by
ISU with detailed information about each beneficiary. The database will be consolidated at the ISU by the M&E unit and utilized
for different purposes including sampling for the different surveys, tracking the beneficiaries’ outreach as well as selection of
beneficiaries to visit during the supervision missions.
195.
AAFORD’s PFIs will have their own information systems and AAFORD will take steps to ensure that PFIs systems are able to
support the AAFORD requirements. Towards this objective AAFORD will start by assessing the challenges encountered by
current projects (e.g. REP) which are partnering with PFIs for project implementation. This will be followed by an analysis of the
existing reporting systems operated by the PFIs. AAFORD’s M&E system will be designed to address challenges faced by
previous projects and harmonization of reporting protocols (in terms of content and direction of information flow) with the PFIs to
avoid unnecessary duplication. The alignment of the AAFORD reporting system with the reporting system of PFIs and other such
implementing partners is essential not only to limit the cost of the management information system, but also to make the burden
of data collection and reporting more acceptable to information providers.
196.
In the case of delay/default in cofinancing, the Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPBs) will be structured in a way that in case of
one party defaulting, the geographical scale of implementation (number of clusters, number of communities in a cluster) will be
reduced instead of holding the activity in suspension or creating gaps in activities implemented in the villages. This is to ensure
that the full package of activities is implemented in the project areas to create sustainable impacts in each cluster.
197.
Learning, KM and Communication: Building on lessons from IFAD country programme, AAFORD will ensure that: (i) project
launch has visibility (ii) KM indicators are included in the M&E system; (iii) solid information management systems (e.g. electronic
archives) are set up; (iv) KM related roles and responsibilities are clear in the ISU and ZCUs; (v) internal project learning and
cross-project exchanges are facilitated; and (vi) organising exchanges occur with other projects and agencies through targeted
workshops, and other activities to disseminate results, attract interest of other partners, replicate and scale up tested and
documented innovations. Knowledge management will play a central role in policy engagement, convening other donor partners
and facilitating investment in nationwide replication in the future. A KM and communication strategy will be developed and
integrated into AAFORD management. The strategy will identify the thematic areas of learning to be addressed (e.g.
effectiveness and cost of microinsurance, credit guarantee schemes, smallholder linkages to certified warehouse and warehouse
receipts, etc.) and outline how the knowledge generated will be disseminated through appropriate channels. AAFORD has the
potential to bring immense field experience into the policy discourse on agricultural insurance premiums, rural youth and women
agribusiness development, effectiveness of risk sharing mechanisms and disseminate these to a wider audience. Knowledge
generation will be the main scaling up pathway.
b. Innovation and scaling up
198.
AAFORD will introduce a set of process innovations, technical innovations, and partnership innovations to overcome past
challenges, increase employment, increase profitability and support scaling-up and replication. Process innovations will i) focus
project implementation on clusters of communities in a manageable geographical area to ensure outreach of benefits to the
intended target groups, ii) deploy cluster facilitators and youth interns to the clusters to develop project presence amongst target
households and motivate them from close range to adopt the project supported changes, iii) develop cluster outreach
development plans for harmonised implementation of different components at the community level, and iv) develop of IBPs and
OLBPs to serve as business plan’s for linking CIs and financial institutions through profitable partnerships. Technical innovations
will i) support the BFF to address the void in affordable agricultural finance for smallholder farmers, ii) increase the affordability
and outreach of agricultural microinsurance services to smallholder farmers, iii) link smallholder farmers to certified warehouse
facilities and iv) introduce warehouse receipts to benefit smallholder farmers in the project areas. Partnership innovations will
include i) coordination with other ministries such as MoAF, MoTI, ii) partnerships with other donor initiatives and iii) capacity
development of PFIs to partner with GIRSAL and access risk sharing collateral support for delivering agricultural loans.
M. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
199.
Implementation readiness and start-up plans:
35/36
200.
The IFAD country office (ICO) will take the following steps to ensure AAFORD readiness for implementation: i) Preliminary
mapping and identification of the clusters of communities will be carried out with the support of GASIP and REP; ii) Offtakers,
financial institutions, FBOs and BACs/BRCs (operating in the AAFORD project area) with good track record of partnership with
GASIP and REP will be identified and oriented and prepared to partner with AAFORD; iii) AGRA already involved with GIRSAL
and GAIP and will prepare the key policy issues to be addressed immediately when AAFORD is operational; iv) REP, with
already partners with the BoG and ARB Apex Bank will sensitise them about AAFORD and facilitate the swift initiation of the BFF;
v) the financial services department in MoF, which will host AAFORD, has experience of partnering with other donor projects
including IFAD, and is familiar with the processes needed for establishing the ISU and ZPCUs quickly; vi) sensitize the donor
community and prepare them for AAFORD partnership in relevant areas[23]; vii) continuously work with authorities (MoF) to fulfil
conditions prior to board approval; viii) engage the Parliamentary Committees and Solicitor General early for the ratification; and
ix) ensure that the budget for year one and procurement plan is available by the effectiveness date and set up the team prior to
the start up.
201.
Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans
202.
AAFORD supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD. One supervision mission and one follow-up mission will be undertaken
every year. Implementation support will fcus on planning, gender and targeting, procurement, financial management, M&E,
partnerships, integration of activities within the governance framework. Such support will be a continuous process with frequent
communication and engagement with the MOF, the ISU and other relevant stakeholders. The first implementation support
mission will occur soon after start-up. The frequency, composition of supervision and implementation support missions will be
based on implementation requirements and MOF requests. The MOF, as the lead project agency, IFAD and implementing
partners will jointly carry out the Mid-Term Review (MTR) at the end of year three. The MTR will be based on, inter-alia, the
PDR, SECAP, Procurement Plans, Reports of Supervision and Follow Up Missions, AWPBs, Progress Reports, Financing
Agreements, evolving government policies and strategies, and additional data from commissioned studies. The MTR findings will
be promptly communicated to the implementing agencies and in consultation with the GoG and partners to inform the necessary
design and financing agreements adjustments. If needed, amendments to the design will be made to remove constraints and
achieve the AAFORD objectives. The GoG will ensure that the MTR recommendations are implemented within the specified time
and to the satisfaction of IFAD. The MOF, as the lead project agency will be responsible for organizing the preparation of a
Project Completion Report (PCR) and submit to the Fund, after the Project Completion Date but in any event no later than the
Financing Closing Date. At AAFORD conclusion, a completion evaluation will be conducted as an input into the PCR through a
formal survey, preferably undertaken by a neutral agency with no previous involvement in project implementation. The PCR
should address AAFORD costs and benefits, achievement of objectives, impact on beneficiaries, partner performance and
lessons learned.
Footnotes
[1] The mission consisted of Mr. Jonathan Agwe (Project Technical Lead, Lead Regional Technical Specialist, Rural Finance, Market
and Value Chain, PMI/IFAD) Mr. Swandip Sinha (Team Leader and Rural Development Specialist); Mr. Theophilus Otchere Larbi
(Country Programme Officer, Policy, Program and Institutional Management, WCA/IFAD); Mr. Amathe Pathe Sene (Lead Regional
Environment and Climate Specialist, ECG/IFAD); Ms. Mariko Nakayama (Junior Professional Officer, Targeting, WCA/IFAD), Ms.
Luisina Solari (Consultant, rural finance team), Mr. Lawrence Ega (Gender and Targeting Specialist); Ms. Ngozi Finette Unuigbe
(Environment and Climate Consultant); Mr. Kwabena Owusu-Sekyere (M&E Specialist), Mr. William Steel (Rural Finance Specialist),
Mr. Yaw Brantuo (Rural Finance Specialist); Ms. Dajana Grandic (Economic and Financial Analysis Specialist); Mr. Fuseini Ahmed
Abu (Procurement Specialist); Mr. Daniel Pasos (Financial Management Specialist); Mr. Hani Abdelkader Elsadani Salem (Country
Director, IFAD Ghana Country Office, WCA/IFAD) supervised the mission and provided overall guidance to the design team.
[2] World Bank, November 2018
[3] IMF, World Economic Outlook Database April 2019
[4] World Bank, November 2018 
[5] GLSS 7
[6] Observatory of Economic Complexity https://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/gha/
[7] Observatory of Economic Complexity https://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/gha/
[8] IFPRI, 2018, post-harvest losses in Ghana
[9] World Bank 2016
[10] Ghana Economic Update, World bank, 2018
[11] The Government and the National Parliament are currently pursuing the amendment of the Land Use Act (1978) to address the
issue of land ownership and insecurity for smallholder farmers/producers, especially aimed at enhancing their land transactions,
mortgages/sub-leases and use of land as collateral for loans.
[12] Index database 2017
[13] NFIDS
[14] COSOP 2019-2024
36/36
[15] http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4644e.pdf
[16] https://www.unicef.org/egypt/nutrition
[17] http://www.fao.org/ag/agn/nutrition/gha_en.stm
[18] http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/270611468031495248/pdf/771660BRI0Box00IC00ghana0April02011.pdf
[19] Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (2011b): Ghana’s Second National Communication to the UNFCCC.
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc2.pdf
[20] For example, extension or training services would be conducted through female extension officers or follow the social norms in
the communities selected for intervention.
[21] Refer to PIM (Annex 10) for details
[22] Quarterly progress reports, which will serve as knowledge products, will be prepared by each ZCU and sent to the ISU for
consolidating the AAFORD quarterly progress report. The reports will compare actual achievements against planned, including
expenditures, and explain variations. Semi-annual physical progress will be record in tabular spreadsheet form activities, quantitative
inputs and outputs, number of beneficiaries disaggregated by sex and activities in which they have participated. The consolidated
progress report will identify the implementation constraints and corrective actions taken.
[23] The donors had already expressed their support for AAFORD during consultative sessions held with them during COSOP
preparation.
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
1/6
Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
Total number of persons receiving services promoted or
supported by AAFORD.
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Total number of persons
receiving services
Male
Female
Young
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed
households
Households
0
0
0
10000
37500
10000
37500
35000
75000
Project
reports
Semi annual
AAFORD
national/zonal
coordination
unit
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Project
reports
Semi annual
Household members
0 210000 450000
AAFORD
national / zonal
PCU
Effective and
thorough
stakeholders
identification,
mapping, needs
assessment and
gender/youth
targeting at the
cluster level.
Community leaders
are willing are
willing to include
women and youth in
project activities.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Project Goal 
Food secure smallholder farm households with improved
living standards and renumerative resilient agricultural
livelihoods.
Percentage reduction in the number of rural households living
below the poverty line in the Project supported districts
Reduction
0.8
2.5
5
Development Objective 
Improve the income, food security and resilience of
smallholder farmers through skill development, increased
access to finance, inputs, servicies and stronger farmers
organisations.
Percentage of target households in the project supported
districts reporting an increase in income as a result of services
provided by the project.
HHs
0
20
60
Percentage reduction in zero to five years old child
malnutrition in the project supported communities
Households
22
25
30
1.2.8 Women reporting improved quality of their diets
Women reporting improved
quality of their diets
Percentage
Young
Not Young
Political stability -
Marco-economic
conditions remain
stable or improve -
No major political
shocks in the region
Political stability -
Marco-economic
conditions remain
stable or improve -
No major political
shocks in the region
Ghana
statistical
services/
AAFORD
surveys
Baseline
survey,
project
reports
Ghana
Statistical
Services /
AFFORD
Surveys
AAFORD
surveys /
project
reports
AT MTR & AT
COMPLETION
AAFORD
national / zonal
PCU
MTR -
Completion
AAFORD desk
in GIRSAL
At MTR & At
Completion
AFFORD
national/zonal
PCU
MTR -
completion
AAFORD
national/zonal
PCU
Outcome 
Outcome 1 - Market linkages between smallholder farmers
and other value chain actors established (outreach of
market faciltators expanded and deepened to increase
smallholder access to market and finance).
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private
entities
Number of POs
0
70
324
Value of wholesale funds disbursed by financial institutions on
concessional terms.
US$ million
0
3.9
24.2
AAFORD
surveys /
project
reports
M&E data
and
component
reports
MTR -
completion
AAFORD
national / zonal
PCU
Annual
AAFORD
national / zonal
PCU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
1.2.5 Households reporting using rural financial services
Households
0
20
60
Number of financial institutions deploying risk mitigation
instruments (guarantees and insurance) to meet financial
needs of smallholder farmers
Number
0
5
10
Baseline
Survey,
Project
reports
Baseline
Survey,
Project
Reports
MTR and
completion
AAFORD,
National and
Zonal PCU
MTR and
completion
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Number of financial institutions deploying marketing services
(warehouses, warehouse receipts, electronic trading, digital
services) to meet financial needs of smallholder farmers
M&E data,
component
reports
annually
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Number
0
4
10
Number of financial institutions (commercial banks and micro
rural finance institutions) adapting affordable finance (BFF), to
meet financial neds of smallholder farmers
M&E data,
component
reports
annually
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
number
0
10
30
Jobs created for the youth as a result of the expansion of value
chain activities.
FTE
0
400
1500
M&E data,
component
reports
annually,
MTR,
completion
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
1.1.6 Financial service providers supported in delivering
outreach strategies, financial products and services to rural
areas
M&E Data,
Component
reports
Annually
AAFORD desk
in GIRSAL
Service providers
0
50
50
Number of households receiving market linkages, access to
inputs and services facilitated by other ongoing relevant IFAD
programmes
M&E data,
component
reports
annually
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
number
0
2000
12500
1.1.7 Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy and/or
use of financial products and services
annually
M&E data,
component
reports
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Coordination
between GIRSAL,
other partners and
the community level
technical service
provider
Output 
Output 1.1 - Capacity of smallholder farmers, institutional
partners and market intermidiaries (including women and
youth groups) enhanced.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Females
Males
Young
0
0
0
5000
22500
5000
22500
3000
18000
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
0
0
0
5000
22500
3000
18000
5000
22500
annually
M&E data,
component
reports
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Number of smallholder farmers sensitised about entry points
for financial inclusion (community savings and credit groups)
and digital financial services
M&E data,
component
reports
annually
Women and youth
0
200
1000
Number of offtakers accessing financial services to expand
operations in value chains involving smallholders
Numebr
0
6
24
Outcome 
Outcome 2 - Increases in farmers marketed surpluses and
household welfare.
Number of smallholder farmers implementing good agricultural
practices (GAPs)
Men, women and youth
0
7500
45000
Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable
and climate-resilient technologies and practices (core indicator
3.2.2)
Men, women and youth
0
10
25
M&E data,
component
reports
M&E data,
component
reports
Baseline
Survey,
Project
Reports
annually
annually
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
annually,
MTR,
completion
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Enabling policy,
regulatory and legal
environment for the
development of
agricultural value
chains
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Percentage of smallholder farmers reporting an increase in
crop yields
Men, women and youth
0
20
60
Output 
Output 2.1 - Productive capacity of smallholderfarmers
expanded.
Number of smallholder farmers supported to adopt GAPs
Men, women and youth
0
4000
19000
Baseline
Survey,
Project
Reports
M&E data,
component
reports
annually,
MTR,
completion
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
annually
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural
resources and climate-related risks
M&E data,
component
reports
annually,
MTR,
completion
Groups supported
Females
Young
0
0
0
80
50
50
324
250
250
Number of smallholder farmers trained in climate resilient
agricultural practices
Men, women and youth
0
12000
30000
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Hectares of land
0
4000
12000
Outcome 
Outcome 3 - The policy and legal framework for agricultural
value chains improved
Number of policy reforms related to agricultural value chains
Policy
0
0
2
Output 
Output 3.1 - Policy development supported.
Number of studies conducted to document lessons learnt with
respect to market enhancing instruments
studies
0
1
Number of knowledge sharing forums and stakeholder
engagements held
Forums
0
1
3
5
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Community leaders
are willing to
included women and
youth in programme
activities, Sufficient
implementation
capacity and
capable service
providers to facilitate
value chain linkages
and participation of
women and youth
annually
M&E data,
component
reports
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Annually
M&E data
compoenent
reports
M&E data,
component
reports
annually,
MTR,
completion
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
AAFORD
Nationa
annually
annually
M&E data,
component
reports
M&E data,
component
reports
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Willingness of policy
makers and other
key stakeholders to
improve the
business
environment
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Number of policy forums/dialogues on thematic issues held
Forums
0
1
2
annually
M&E data,
component
reports
AAFORD
National/Zonal
PCU
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2:  Theory of Change  
Limited access to financeMinimal access knowledge and technologies Limited skillsBaselineBarriersFinancial institutions reluctant to lend farmers moneyFarmers reluctant to borrow and invest, Limited knowledge and skills on sustainable agricultureLimited adoption of risk mitigation and risk transferlow affordable investmentsComponent 1:  Strengthened capacity for FBOs, Cooperatives, MSMEs, Off takers to access  to markets and financial services.Subcomponent 1.1: Develop capacities of target groups to obtain financing and markets in their agricultural value chains ( demand side )On the demand side :•Act.1. build the capacity of FBOs, Cooperatives and MSMEs•Act2. build the capacity of off takers ( nucleolus farmers and processors) Subcomponent 1.2:  Capacity building of of financial institutions and  market enabling institutions ( Supply side )•Act.3. capacity building of PFI/ agent•Act4. Capacity building of GIRSAL , market enabling institutions Output/ Activities Reduced obstacles to credit access for Cooperatives, MSMEs, Farmers Organizations and increased businesses for financial institutions Component 2:  Increased access to financial services and expanded   markets outreachSubcomponent 2.1: Increasing financial outreach and value chain collaborationAct 1.  Blended Finance Facility to enhance access to affordable credit Act 2. Market and Production Information Systems (MPIS)Subcomponent 2.2: Enhancing the environment for market access and financial services Act 1. support stakeholders and  dialogue Act 2. Develop policy, strategic and legal frameworkAct 3:  Knowledge management and sharing Unlocked  financial services and marketsEnhanced  capacity  for Cooperatives, MSMEs, Farmers Organizations to access financing tand increased businesses for financial institutions Greater access to markets and financial services Improve  poor smallholder farmer access to innovative rural finance servicesOverall impactDesired outcomesLow agricultural productivityClimate change and climate variability which affect productivityWeak bargaining power/low price Lack of information for decision making Limited access to finance FBOs, Cooperatives, MSMEsofftakersPFI/agent-GIRSAL High risks  perception of smallholdersHigh interest rate due to liquidityWeak capacity  on agricultural servicesno constant and  regular supplyLack of coordination and dialogueWeak regulatory frameworksWeak capacity  of  key stakeholdersgovernmentNo win-win deal for smallholdersAssymetricinformation on supply and demandNo bankable business plans Poor commercial linkages and  limited 4 PsSlow agricreforms and  siloedapproachPoverty Reduction, food security , nutrition and  livelihoods of rural households. 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3:  Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
1.  This  annex  covers  the  project  costs  and  financing  plan,  while  it  also  describes  the  assumptions 
underlying them and sets out the basis and details of the estimated project costs.  
Project costs and financing  
2.  Main assumptions. The project is financed over a six-year (6) period, and it is assumed to start in 
2020 year. Costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing during project design in 
October 2019.  
3.  Physical and price contingencies. Price contingencies have been applied on all costs, with the 
4. 
exception of grants. 
 Inflation. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, a high inflation of 9.6 per cent will remain in 
2019, given a weakening currency and strong growth in private consumption.  The rate is expected to 
remain between 6-10 per cent target range for the upcoming few years, for a similar reason1. For the 
purpose of this analysis; annual local inflation rates has been set at between 9 to 6 per cent throughout 
the six project years. For foreign inflation, an average inflation around 4 per cent has been retained. 
Below table 1 is providing more details in regards forecasted local and international inflation rate for 
each year.  
Table 1. Projected inflation rate 
Forecasted inflation Rate 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
Ghana 
Emerging market and developing economies 
9,1 
4,9 
8,4 
4,7 
7,5 
4,5 
6,8 
4,4 
6,3 
4,3 
6 
4,2 
Source: IMF, 2019 2 
5.  Exchange  rate.  The  exchange  rate  used  is  1  US$:  GHS  5.5,  which  is  calculated  as  the  prevailing 
exchange rate during design mission that occurred in October 2019. 3 
6.  Taxes and duties. Part of the Government co-financing of the project will be in form of waiving of all 
taxes and duties on goods and services procured under the project. The rates and amounts of the taxes 
and  duties  in  the  project’s  costs  presented  below  are  defined  only  to  determine  the  Government 
contribution and to value the total project cost.  
7.  The items to be imported for the project attract import and excise duties of varying proportions, and a 
value-added tax (VAT) levied on all imported goods. 4 
Project costs  
8.  The total project costs including physical and price contingencies are estimated at US$69.7 million over 
six  years  implementation  period.  Project  costs  by  components  are  summarized  in  table  1,  while  a 
complete set of project summary tables and detailed costs tables are presented in attachments 1 and 
2 of this appendix.  
9.  Project costs by components. Project investments are organized into three major components: (i) 
“Technical Assistance for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural Value 
Chains” (41 per cent of the total costs); (ii) “Expanding and Directing Affordable Finance in a 
Conducive Environment (52 per cent of the costs); (iii) “Implementation Support” (IS) (7 per cent of 
the costs). A summary breakdown of the project costs by components and financier is shown in table 
2 below.
1 Retrieved from Economist Intelligence Unit, on Sep, 2019. 
2 International Monetary Fund. Source retrieved from: IMF Inflation rate on Sep 21st, 2019, Inflation rate, average consumer prices (Annual percent 
change). Link retrieved from: https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/PCPIPCH@WEO/OEMDC/ 
3 Operational UN exchange rate, retrieved from: https://treasury.un.org/operationalrates/OperationalRates.php 
4 The VAT in Ghana is technically 18.125 per cent of which standard VAT is 12.5%, NHIS and GET Fund are 2.5% each totaling 5% of the VAT inclusive 
amount. Assuming the VAT amount is GHS 100, VAT shall be GHS 12.5 and NHIS + GET Fund (112.5*5%)= GHS 5.625. Total VAT shall than be 18.125%. 
Table 2: Project costs by component and Financier (US$’000) 
10.  Project financing/co-financing. The total project costs of US$69.7 million will be financed by i) IFAD 
(US$15 million), of which IFAD Loan is US$ 11.5 million and IFAD Green Grant is US$ 3.5 million; ii) 
AGRA (US$1 million parallel financing); iii) GCF (US$9.9 million); iv) GoG (US$25.9 millions of which 
US$7.9 million as most of the taxes and duties exemptions, US$11.4 million as contribution through 
GIRSAL risk sharing facility, US$6 million as REP revolving funds contribution and GoG (cash) 0.6 
million); (v) Partnering Financial Institutions (US$4.3 million); (vi) ABC Fund (US$4.3 million); (vii) 
AfDB (US$3.5 million); and (viii) Beneficiaries (US$5.8 million cash, casual labour, inputs and 
equipment).  
11.  The domestic contribution is robust, for instance, for each US$1 IFAD investment; domestic 
contribution is US$2.4. Similarly, for each US$1 IFAD investment, international contribution is 
US$1.3. Domestic contribution (US$36 million) accounts for a robust 52 per cent of the total project 
costs and includes (i) GoG (most of the taxies and duties) in the amount of US$7.9 million, (ii) GoG 
(REP) in the amount of US$6 million, (iii) GoG (GIRSAL) in the amount of US$11.4 million ;(iv) 
beneficiaries  (cash & in-kind) in the amount of US$5.8 million, (v) PFI in the amount of US$4.3 
million and (vi) GoG (cash) in the amount of US$0.6 million. The international contribution is 
contributing 48 per cent of the overall project costs (equivalent to US$33.7 million) comprising: (i) 
GCF (US$9.9 million), (ii) ABC fund (US$4.3 million), (iii) AfDB (US$3.5 million), (iv) AGRA (US$1 
million) and (v) IFAD (US$15 million), of which IFAD Loan is US$ 11.5 million and IFAD Green Grant 
is US$ 3.5 million. 
12.  Expenditure  and  disbursement  accounts.  The  project  will  be  rolled  out  through  the  project 
management unit -which will manage and coordinate the flow of funds and the expenditures incurred 
on account of the project activities. Financial management and procurement procedures are described 
in annex 7. A summary of the total costs by expenditure accounts and financier is shown in Table 3 
and  a  summary  of  expenditure  accounts  by  components  with  totals  including  contingencies  is 
presented in Table 4.  
13.  Expenditure Category Overview. Credit and Guarantee Funds is the major expenditure account, 
estimated at US$41.3 million, or about 59 per cent of the total project costs. The other investment 
expenditure accounts are training and workshops for an amount of US$9.1 million or 13.1 per cent of 
total costs, followed by grants and subsidies for an amount of US$8 million or 12 per cent of total 
costs, Consultancies for an amount of US$6.6 million or about 9.4 per cent of the total cost, 
equipment’s, goods and services for an amount of US$0.6 million or 1 per cent of total costs. The 
recurrent costs represent 5.7 per cent of total costs at US$4 million, comprising salaries and 
allowances for an amount of US$3 million or 4.2 per cent of total costs, operations and maintenance 
for an amount of US$1 million (1.5 per cent of project costs). The breakdown of expenditure accounts 
by component is reflected at the Annex 7. The breakdown of expenditure accounts by component is 
reflected at the table 3 and table 4. 
14.  Disbursement flow.  To enable easy monitoring of progress, the below graph forecast the expected 
disbursement per year. This will allow continuously tracking progress during supervisor and following 
up mission.  Around US$17 million (24 per cent) of project resources will be disbursed till Year 3 and 
the remaining US$52.7 million (76 per cent) will be disbursed in the last three years of the project. 
AAFORD disbursement pattern is represented below: 
Graph 1. Disbursement flow-AAFORD (US’000) 
Table 3: Project costs by expenditure account and financier (USD’000) 
Table 4: Expenditure accounts by Components-Totals including Contingencies (USD’000) 
15.  Total  Cost  per  Component:  Total  Project  Cost  including  physical  and  price  contingencies  are 
estimated  at  US$  69.7  million  over  a  6-year  period.  Component  2  on  “Expanding  and  Directing 
Affordable Finance in a Conducive Environment” is the main investment and represents 52 per cent 
of  the  total  project  costs,  while  Component  1  on  “Technical  Assistance  for  the  Development  of 
Sustainable  and  Climate-Resilient  Agricultural  Value  Chains”  representing  41  per  cent  of  total 
project costs. ‘Implementation Support represent 7 per cent of the total project costs.  
16.  Project Financing: The Financing Plan covers i) an IFAD of US$ 15 million , of which IFAD Loan 
is US$ 11.5 million and IFAD Green grant is US$ 3.5 million (in total 21.5 cent), ii) GoG (most of 
the taxies and duties) of US$ 7.9 million (11.3 per cent),  (iii) GCF of US$ 9.9 million (14.3 per cent), 
iv) contribution from GoG (REP) of US$ 6 million (8.6%), v) AGRA of US$ 1 million (1.4 per cent), 
(vi)  contribution  of  GoG  (GIRSAL)  of  US$  11.3  million  (16.3  per  cent),  (vii)  Partnering  Financial 
Institutions of US$ 4.3 million (6.1 per cent), (viii) ABC of US$ 4.3 million (6.2 per cent), (ix) AfDB 
of US$ 3.5 million ( 5.1 per cent), (x) beneficiaries contribution ( cash & in-kind) of US$ 5.8 million 
( 8.4 per cent) and (xi) GoG (cash) of US$ 0.6 million ( 0.8 per cent). 
17.  The base costs are calculated at October 2019 prices and include estimated duties and taxes. Total 
contingencies are respectively at US$ 3.4 million or 5 per cent of total costs.  
18.  Investment  costs  are  US$  65.7  million  and  represent  94  per  cent  of  total  costs.  The  foreign 
exchange component is at US$ 0.6 million or 1 per cent of the total Project costs. The recurrent 
cost accounts for US$ 4 million or equivalent to 6 per cent of the total costs.  The exchange rate 
used is USD 1.0 = GHS 5.5. The cost per direct beneficiary household amounts to about US$ 929 
or US$ 129 per beneficiary.  
19.  Below table 5 shows project components by year-total including contingencies in foreign currency 
respectively. 
Table 5:  Project Components by Year –Total including contingencies (USD’000) 
Detailed Project Costs for Component 1 (i.e. C1.1, C1.2. and C1.3):  
Unit 
20
20 
20
21 
20
22 
Quant
ities 
2023 
20
24 
20
25 
To
tal 
Unit 
Cost 
(US$) 
Totals Including 
Contingencies (US$ '000) 
Expenditu
re 
Other Accounts 
20
20 
202
1 
202
2 
2023 
202
4 
202
5 
Total 
Component 
Account 
Fin. Rule 
Summary 
Divisions 
 I. Investment Costs 
A. Develop capacities of target groups to expand marketable surpluses 
1. Identification of key technical partners and service providers /a 
Identification of key technical partners and service providers /b 
Identification and needs assesssment of community clusters /c 
Needs assessment of key stakeholders including community instittution , FOs, off-
takers, input providers, FIs, BAC/BRC, MoFA /d 
Assess climate change vulnerability resilience and nutrition security activities and 
cost benefit 
Design capacity building packages for community institutions 
Subtotal 
2. Support to  Community Institutions and target groups 
delivery of capacity building modules including agricultural/climate business and 
finance modules (field) /e 
delivery of capacity building models including agricultural/climate business and 
finance modules (office) 
Subtotal 
3. Mobilization of youth community facilitators (YCF) 
service provider to recruit and train YCF 
design of recruitment training and oversight 
recruitment of YCF in the cluster 
Training of YCF /f 
YCF Implementation /g 
Purchasing motorcycles /h 
Monitoring, reporting and managing turnover climate resilient activities 
Reporting to ISU 
Subtotal 
4. Community Outreach Development Plan ( CODP) 
Community Outreach Development Plan ( CODP) (field) /i 
Community Outreach Development Plan ( CODP) (office) /j 
Subtotal 
5. Support to Community Insitutions (CIs)and Target Groups 
Selection of Community Institutions /k 
Institutional Business Plan ( IBPs) for CIs ( field) 
Institutional Business Plan ( IBPs) for CIs ( office) 
Group formation /l 
Group strenghtening and monitoring 
lumpsum 
no.of days 
30 
20 
baseline 
baseline 
Study 
inst. and 
groups 
inst. and 
groups 
baseline/per 
cluster 
Study 
baseline 
baseline/per 
cluster 
people 
each 
per region 
quarterly 
per cluster 
plan 
baseline 
plan 
plan 
formation 
lumpsum 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10
0 
30 
30 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
75 
75 
- 
- 
6 
1 
6 
6 
- 
60 
- 
- 
8 
8 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
12
0 
- 
2 
4 
23 
23 
- 
16 
16 
30 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
120 
- 
2 
4 
- 
- 
- 
45 
45 
30 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
30 
12
0 
30 
30 
1,666.
727 
750 
21,000 
9,000 
1 
50,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
75 
75 
- 
- 
- 
- 
12
0 
- 
2 
4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15
0 
15
0 
6 
1 
6 
6 
36
0 
60 
8 
16 
31 
31 
1 
61 
61 
60 
70
0 
6,750 
1,000 
4,500 
20,000 
4,500 
4,500 
4,545.
455 
2,500 
9,000 
6,000 
6,000 
6,000 
3,000 
2,250 
1,500 
1,500 
1,500 
56,
3 
16,
9 
- 
- 
- 
73,
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
88,4 
742,
2 
318,
1 
58,9 
1.20
7,5 
596,
4 
- 
596,
4 
31,8 
23,6 
31,8 
31,8 
- 
176,
7 
- 
- 
295,
7 
56,5 
56,5 
113,
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
622,
9 
- 
622,
9 
- 
- 
- 
- 
671,
2 
- 
22,1 
29,5 
722,
8 
169,
8 
169,
8 
339,
6 
3,5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
44,3 
29,5 
55,4 
- 
175 
35
0 
17
5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100,
4 
100,
4 
104,
6 
104,
6 
56,3 
105,
2 
742,
2 
318,
1 
58,9 
1.28
0,7 
1.21
9,3 
205,
0 
1.42
4,3 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 20% ), GCF ( 80% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 20% ), GCF ( 80% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 20% ), GCF ( 80% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
GCF ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 20% ), GCF ( 80% ) 
COMP1.1 
T&W_EA 
IFAD ( 15% ), AGRA ( 50% ), GCF 
( 20% ), BEN ( 15% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 50% ), GCF ( 50% ) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
700,3 
730,
1 
- 
- 
23,1 
24,1 
25,1 
30,8 
754,3 
32,1 
786,
3 
33,5 
58,6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
130,0 
86,7 
57,8 
337,0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
702,
7 
366,
1 
31,8 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 100% ) 
23,6 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 100% ) 
31,8 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 100% ) 
31,8 
2.10
1,6 
176,
7 
94,5 
125,
9 
2.61
7,7 
226,
3 
226,
3 
452,
7 
3,5 
174,
3 
116,
2 
113,
1 
1.40
5,9 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
EQG&VEH
_EA 
GCF ( 20% ), 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 80% ) 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
T&W_EA 
GCF ( 50% ),  IFAD ( 50% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
GCF ( 50% ),  IFAD ( 50% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
GCF ( 50% ),  IFAD ( 50% ) 
COMP1.1 
T&W_EA 
GCF ( 30% ), IFAD ( 70% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
GCF ( 50% ), IFAD ( 50% ) 
COMP1.1 
T&W_EA 
GCF ( 50% ),  IFAD ( 50% ) 
COMP1.1 
T&W_EA 
GCF ( 50% ),  IFAD ( 50% ) 
Group training for women and youth 
per village 
- 
- 
88 
175 
87 
- 
Subtotal 
6. Community based savings and credit groups  (CSCGs) for women and youth /m 
Group formation 
Group strenghtening and monitoring /n 
Subtotal 
7. Support to  ISU/ZCU 
Senior Rural Finance Specialist 
Community Development, livelihood and Gender Specialist 
Climate and environment specialist 
Field Implementation Supervisor 
Subtotal 
Subtotal 
B. Capacity building of institutional partners and intermediaries 
formation 
lumpsum 
month 
month 
month 
month 
- 
- 
12 
12 
12 
24 
- 
- 
50 
- 
50 
50 
- 
10
0 
12 
12 
12 
24 
12 
12 
12 
24 
12 
12 
12 
24 
12 
12 
12 
24 
1. Mapping, needs assessment and selection of partner institutions 
institutions 
- 
50 
- 
2. Development of Outreach and Linkage Business Plan ( OLPB) /o 
Orientation workshops /p 
TA to develop OLBP /q 
Finalization, review and validation 
Subtotal 
3. Capacity building of selected partner intermediaries /r 
4. Youth Institutional Internship (YII) Programme 
Mobilize YIIs for strengthening institutions 
Train YIIs for supporting outreach /s 
YII Implementation /t 
Subtotal 
5. Cluster Linkage Problem Solving /u 
6. Value of Insurance Guarantees and Warehouse Receipts leveraged /v 
Subtotal 
C. Marketing and ICTs for outreach of rural financial and agricultural services 
1. Outreach of financial and agricultural services 
workshops 
workshops 
workshops 
- 
- 
- 
1 
50 
50 
per 
institutions 
- 
50 
per zone 
per zone 
people 
workshop 
p.y. 
- 
4 
- 
- 
- 
4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
80 
80 
80 
- 
0,1
8 
30 
0,26 
- 
0,2
6 
35
0 
10
0 
20
0 
72 
72 
72 
14
4 
3,000 
1,500 
1,500 
1,610 
1,610 
1,610 
1,610 
50 
4,000 
3 
15,000 
50 
50 
1,500 
1,500 
50 
3,000 
4 
10,000 
4 
24
0 
30 
1 
8,454.
545 
8,181.
818 
7,000 
14,200
,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
21,
8 
21,
8 
21,
8 
43,
5 
10
8,8 
18
2,0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
38,
1 
- 
38,
1 
- 
- 
38,
1 
- 
3,5 
- 
- 
- 
324,
8 
454,
0 
92,3 
- 
92,3 
22,8 
23,8 
22,8 
23,8 
22,8 
23,8 
45,5 
113,
8 
2.33
0,0 
235,
6 
47,5 
118,
9 
2.35
0,5 
- 
17,7 
36,9 
88,4 
88,4 
194,
4 
176,
7 
47,1 
- 
- 
47,1 
- 
- 
653,
8 
- 
- 
36,9 
- 
- 
- 
805,
4 
805,
4 
- 
2.55
6,0 
3.39
8,3 
674,1 
1.285,6 
96,3 
96,3 
192,6 
349,
4 
1.05
2,1 
- 
200,
8 
200,
8 
- 
366,
1 
- 
104,
6 
104,
6 
24,8 
25,9 
26,9 
24,8 
25,9 
26,9 
24,8 
25,9 
26,9 
49,6 
124,0 
2.356,5 
51,7 
129,
3 
2.26
8,9 
53,9 
134,
7 
768,
6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
840,4 
840,4 
269,6 
3.692,0 
4.802,0 
876,
1 
876,
1 
- 
3.69
2,0 
4.56
8,1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4.26
0,0 
4.26
0,0 
- 
50 
12 
12 
12 
24 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0,3 
Outreach of financial and agricultural services /w 
partner 
- 
- 
- 
7 
7 
7 
21 
20,000 
- 
22
0,1 
- 
2.98
3,8 
- 
5.74
8,8 
179,8 
7.338,3 
187,
4 
7.02
4,4 
195,
3 
5.22
3,9 
Footnotes:  
\a institutional partners 
\b institutional partners 
1.34
8,3 
3.16
1,3 
188,
6 
401,
7 
590,
3 
145,
9 
145,
9 
145,
9 
291,
8 
729,
5 
10.2
56,5 
235,
6 
COMP1.1 
T&W_EA 
GCF ( 50% ), 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 50% ) 
COMP1.1 
T&W_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
T&W_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.1 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.2 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
54,6 
COMP1.2 
T&W_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
88,4 
COMP1.2 
T&W_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
88,4 
231,
3 
176,
7 
COMP1.2 
T&W_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
COMP1.2 
CST_EA 
IFAD ( 90% ), GCF ( 10% ) 
47,1 
COMP1.2 
T&W_EA 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 100% ) 
COMP1.2 
T&W_EA 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 100% ) 
COMP1.2 
T&W_EA 
AFDB ( 33% ), 
IFAD_GREEN_GRANT ( 67% ) 
COMP1.2 
COMP1.2 
T&W_EA 
C&G_FUN
DS_EA 
IFAD ( 100% ) 
GOG_GIRSAL ( 80% ), AFDB ( 
20% ) 
COMP.1.3 
T&W_EA 
IFAD ( 80% ), BEN ( 20% ) 
38,1 
2.52
1,9 
2.60
7,1 
269,
6 
14.2
00,0 
17.7
20,4 
562,
4 
28.5
39,3 
\c 60 days, 2 people (per diem, transportation) 
\d Gender, climate, youth, nutrition specialist 
\e to prepare Institutional Business Plans (IBPs). Training will include nutrition and dietary diversity modules 
\f YCF training will include nutrition related inputs 
\g 4 YCF per cluster 
\h 2 per cluster, 20% of the total unit costs is related to the maintenance and operational costs 
\i IBPs will include strategy and activities for nutritional improvement 
\j IBPs will include strategy and activities for nutritional improvement 
\k 2 per cluster 
\l 2 per cluster 
\m service provider to form and monitor groups 
\n group strengthening inputs include nutrition related aspects 
\o which integrate climate variability and change 
\p Accra, Sunyani and Tamale. Orientation on nutrition improvement strategy and activities will be included 
\q OLBPs will include strategy and activities for nutritional improvement 
\r primarily in the field including Business Advisory Centers (BACs) 
\s YII training will include nutrition related inputs 
\t the cost sharing ratio is declining over the period 
\u organized by YCFs have supervised and reported by Service Provider (SP) 
\v Public sector includes GIRSAL, GCX. Private sector included GAIP 
\w sensitization and training of potential clients 
Detailed Project Costs for Component C2.1:  
Republic of Ghana 
Affordable agricultural financing for resilient rural 
development (AAFORD) 
Table 2.1. Expanding and Directing Affordable Finance in a 
Conducive Environment /a 
Detailed Costs 
 I. Investment Costs 
A. Blended Finance Facility (BFF) 
Unit 
20
20 
20
21 
20
22 
Quant
ities 
2023 
20
24 
20
25 
To
tal 
Unit Cost 
(US$) 
20
20 
Totals Including 
Contingencies (US$) 
Expenditu
re 
Other Accounts 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Total 
Account 
Fin. Rule 
Window I /b 
Window II /c 
Window-REP /d 
Grant Window /e 
Training on rural and agricultural 
finance /f 
loan
s 
loan
s 
loan
s 
gran
ts 
train
ing 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0,
3 
0,
16 
0,
16 
0,
16 
0,
16 
0,
4 
0,23 
0,23 
0,23 
0,23 
0,3 
0,
23 
0,
23 
0,
23 
0,
23 
- 
0,
38 
0,
38 
0,
38 
0,
38 
- 
13,545,45
4.545 
5,272,727
.273 
8,300,000 
8,000,000 
100,000 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
35.3
41,3 
35.3
41,3 
2.167.
272,7 
843.63
6,4 
1.328.
000,0 
1.280.
000,0 
49.218
,1 
5.668.
127,2 
3.115.454,5 
1.212.727,3 
1.909.000,0 
1.840.000,0 
38.518,9 
8.115.700,7 
3.115.
454,5 
1.212.
727,3 
1.909.
000,0 
1.840.
000,0 
- 
8.077.
181,8 
5.147.2
72,7 
2.003.6
36,4 
3.154.0
00,0 
3.040.0
00,0 
- 
13.344.
909,1 
13.545.
454,5 
5.272.7
27,3 
8.300.0
00,0 
8.000.0
00,0 
123.078
,3 
35.241.
260,1 
C&G_FUN
DS_EA 
C&G_FUN
DS_EA 
C&G_FUN
DS_EA 
GRA&SUB
_EA 
T&W_EA 
IFAD (19% ), ABC ( 27% ), GCF ( 26% ), 
BEN ( 10% ), PFI ( 18% ) 
IFAD (9% ), ABC ( 30% ), GCF ( 33% ), 
BEN ( 10% ), PFI ( 18% ) 
BEN ( 10% ), PFI ( 18% ), GOG_REP ( < 
100% >, FT ) 
IFAD (13% ), GCF ( 38% ), BEN ( 50% ) 
IFAD (100% ) 
Total 
Footnotes: 
_________________________________ 
\a PIM to process those funds will include climate scoring criteria’s 
\b including 3% of the total management fee 
\c including 3% of the total management fee 
\d including 3% of the total management fee 
\e Grants to leverage insurance, guarantees and loans. Including 3% of the total management fee 
Detailed Project Costs for Component 2.2: 
Republic of Ghana 
Affordable agricultural financing for resilient rural 
development (AAFORD) 
Table 2.2. Ehancing the environment for market access 
Detailed Costs 
 I. Investment Costs 
A. Collaboration with other programmes 
Annual policy forum 
Lessons learned for replication /a 
Implementation review /b 
Impact survey of target groups /c 
Lessons learned on financial instruments 
/d 
Lessons learned on climate resilient 
agricultural practices /e 
Subtotal 
B. Enabling environment 
Agricultural finance strategy and action 
plan 
Legal, regulatory and other issues 
Total 
_________________________________ 
Unit 
20
20 
20
21 
20
22 
Quanti
ties 
2023 
20
24 
20
25 
Tot
al 
Unit 
Cost 
Totals Including 
Contingencies (US$) 
Summary 
Divisions 
Other Accounts 
Expendi
ture 
(US$) 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Total 
Component 
Account 
Fin. Rule 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0,2
5 
0,2
5 
0,2
5 
- 
1 
- 
0,75 
0,75 
0,75 
- 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0,2
5 
- 
0,7
5 
5 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
25,000 
250,00
0 
250,00
0 
150,00
0 
150,00
0 
forum 
forum 
study 
ls/sur
vey 
study 
study 
lumps
um 
lumps
um 
29.45
1,1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
29.45
1,1 
30.761
,3 
- 
76.903
,3 
76.903
,3 
46.142
,0 
- 
230.70
9,8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
84.46
9,5 
11.26
2,6 
95.73
2,1 
- 
- 
- 
29.45
1,1 
- 
230.70
9,8 
33.46
3,0 
34.868
,4 
160.642
,9 
COMP.2.2 
T&W_E
A 
32.099,1 
- 
240.743,2 
240.743,2 
144.445,9 
- 
658.031,5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
50.19
4,5 
83.65
7,4 
- 
156.90
7,9 
191.77
6,3 
- 
- 
658.031,5 
- 
- 
- 
83.65
7,4 
- 
191.77
6,3 
- 
317.646
,5 
317.646
,5 
190.587
,9 
207.102
,3 
1.193.6
26,1 
84.469,
5 
11.262,
6 
1.289.3
58,3 
COMP.2.2 
CST_EA 
AGRA (100%) 
IFAD (50%), BEN 
( 50% ) 
COMP.2.2 
CST_EA 
IFAD (100% ) 
COMP.2.2 
CST_EA 
AGRA (100% ) 
COMP.2.2 
CST_EA 
IFAD (100% ) 
COMP.2.2 
CST_EA 
GCF (100% ) 
COMP.2.2 
CST_EA 
AGRA (100% ) 
COMP.2.2 
CST_EA 
IFAD (100% ) 
Footnotes:  
\a lesson learned, replication best practices purposes 
\b preparation for MTR 
\c preparation for MTR 
\d credit, insurance, guarantee, warehouse receipts 
\e credit, insurance, guarantee, warehouse receipts 
Detailed Project Costs for Component 3:  
Republic of Ghana 
Affordable agricultural financing for resilient rural 
development (AAFORD) 
Table 3. Implementation support 
Detailed Costs 
 I. Investment Costs 
A. Inv.Costs 
4x4 SUV Vehicle 
4x4 Pickups Vehicles 
Desktop computers 
Laptop computers 
Office furniture & fittings 
Miscellaneous equipment & 
replacements 
Subtotal 
B. M&E operational costs 
Audit Fees 
Training & Workshops 
Subtotal 
Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
A. Salaries and Allowances 
1. ISU 
Unit 
20
20 
20
21 
20
22 
Quan
tities 
2023 
20
24 
20
25 
To
tal 
each 
each 
each 
each 
per 
region 
lumpsu
m 
p.y. 
month/
region 
1 
- 
20 
20 
3 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7 
5 
5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
18 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
1 
7 
25 
25 
3 
1 
6 
19
8 
National Coordinator 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Senior M&E 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Finance Manager 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Project Accountant 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Account Assistant 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Procurement Assistant 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Unit 
Cost 
(US$
) 
50,0
00 
35,0
00 
1,00
0 
1,00
0 
10,0
00 
1,50
0 
5,00
0 
363.
636 
3,22
0.54
5 
1,61
0.36
4 
2,41
5.45
5 
966.
182 
966.
182 
966.
182 
Totals Including 
Contingencies (US$) 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Total 
56.3
13,0 
- 
22.5
25,2 
22.5
25,2 
33.7
87,8 
1.68
9,4 
136.
840,
6 
5.63
1,3 
7.37
1,9 
13.0
03,2 
149.
843,
8 
43.5
26,1 
21.7
64,3 
32.6
45,2 
13.0
58,1 
13.0
58,1 
13.0
58,1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5.89
0,2 
15.4
21,6 
21.3
11,9 
21.3
11,9 
45.5
27,3 
22.7
64,9 
34.1
46,1 
13.6
58,4 
13.6
58,4 
13.6
58,4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6.15
2,3 
16.1
07,7 
22.2
60,0 
22.2
60,0 
47.5
52,7 
23.7
77,7 
35.6
65,2 
14.2
66,1 
14.2
66,1 
14.2
66,1 
- 
314.571,2 
6.419,8 
6.419,8 
- 
- 
327.410,8 
6.419,8 
16.808,3 
23.228,1 
350.638,9 
49.620,8 
24.811,8 
37.216,3 
14.886,5 
14.886,5 
14.886,5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6.69
2,6 
17.5
22,4 
24.2
15,0 
24.2
15,0 
51.7
29,1 
25.8
66,0 
38.7
97,6 
15.5
19,0 
15.5
19,0 
15.5
19,0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6.97
3,7 
18.2
58,4 
25.2
32,1 
25.2
32,1 
53.9
01,8 
26.9
52,4 
40.4
27,1 
16.1
70,8 
16.1
70,8 
16.1
70,8 
56.31
3,0 
314.5
71,2 
28.94
5,0 
28.94
5,0 
33.78
7,8 
1.689,
4 
464.2
51,4 
37.75
9,9 
91.49
0,3 
129.2
50,2 
593.5
01,6 
291.8
57,7 
145.9
37,1 
218.8
97,4 
87.55
9,0 
87.55
9,0 
87.55
9,0 
Summary 
Divisions 
Compone
nt 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
Expend
iture 
Accoun
t 
Other 
Accounts 
Fin. Rule 
EQG&V
EH_EA 
EQG&V
EH_EA 
EQG&V
EH_EA 
EQG&V
EH_EA 
EQG&V
EH_EA 
EQG&V
EH_EA 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
CST_E
A 
T&W_E
A 
GOVT 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
Procurement Officer 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Secretary 
Driver/Office or Research 
Assistant 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
   month 
24 
24 
24 
24 
24 
24 
72 
14
4 
Subtotal 
2. ZCU - North 
Senior ZCU Project 
Coordinator 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
M&E Officer 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Secretary 
Driver 
Subtotal 
3. ZCU - Middle 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Senior ZCU Project 
Coordinator 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
M&E Officer 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Secretary 
Driver 
Subtotal 
4. Staff travel costs 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
   month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
Staff travel costs (int) /a 
Staff travel costs (local) /b 
Field visit (staff costs) /c 
lumpsu
m 
lumpsu
m 
lumpsu
m 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
18 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
18 
18 
19
8 
Subtotal 
5. GoG (cash contribution) 
   month 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Subtotal 
B. Operation and Maintenance 
Stationery 
Office rental 
   month 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
   month 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
Water and electricity 
   month 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
Office maintenance 
   month 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
21
6 
21
6 
21
6 
21
6 
1,61
0.36
4 
644.
182 
402.
727 
2,41
5.45
5 
1,61
0.36
4 
644.
182 
402.
727 
2,41
5.45
5 
1,61
0.36
4 
644.
182 
402.
727 
3,75
0 
2,50
0 
374.
909 
100,
000 
109.
091 
1,00
0 
163.
636 
50 
21.7
64,3 
8.70
6,2 
10.8
85,8 
178.
466,
0 
32.6
45,2 
21.7
64,3 
8.70
6,2 
5.44
2,9 
68.5
58,5 
32.6
45,2 
21.7
64,3 
8.70
6,2 
5.44
2,9 
68.5
58,5 
12.6
70,4 
8.44
7,0 
7.60
0,4 
28.7
17,8 
100.
000,
0 
444.
300,
9 
4.42
3,1 
40.5
45,4 
6.63
4,7 
2.02
7,3 
22.7
64,9 
9.10
6,5 
11.3
86,3 
186.
671,
3 
34.1
46,1 
22.7
64,9 
9.10
6,5 
5.69
3,2 
71.7
10,7 
34.1
46,1 
22.7
64,9 
9.10
6,5 
5.69
3,2 
71.7
10,7 
13.2
53,0 
8.83
5,3 
15.8
99,7 
37.9
88,0 
100.
000,
0 
468.
080,
7 
4.62
6,5 
42.4
09,5 
6.93
9,7 
2.12
0,5 
23.7
77,7 
9.51
1,6 
11.8
92,9 
194.
976,
2 
35.6
65,2 
23.7
77,7 
9.51
1,6 
5.94
6,4 
74.9
01,0 
35.6
65,2 
23.7
77,7 
9.51
1,6 
5.94
6,4 
74.9
01,0 
13.8
42,6 
9.22
8,4 
16.6
07,1 
39.6
78,1 
100.
000,
0 
484.
456,
2 
4.83
2,3 
44.2
96,3 
7.24
8,5 
2.21
4,8 
24.811,8 
9.925,3 
12.410,1 
203.455,5 
37.216,3 
24.811,8 
9.925,3 
6.205,0 
78.158,4 
37.216,3 
24.811,8 
9.925,3 
6.205,0 
78.158,4 
14.444,6 
9.629,7 
17.329,3 
41.403,6 
100.000,0 
501.175,9 
5.042,5 
46.222,7 
7.563,7 
2.311,1 
25.8
66,0 
10.3
47,0 
12.9
37,4 
212.
100,
2 
38.7
97,6 
25.8
66,0 
10.3
47,0 
6.46
8,7 
81.4
79,3 
38.7
97,6 
25.8
66,0 
10.3
47,0 
6.46
8,7 
81.4
79,3 
15.0
58,3 
10.0
38,9 
18.0
65,6 
43.1
62,9 
100.
000,
0 
518.
221,
7 
5.25
6,7 
48.1
86,7 
7.88
5,1 
2.40
9,3 
26.9
52,4 
10.7
81,6 
13.4
80,8 
221.
008,
4 
40.4
27,1 
26.9
52,4 
10.7
81,6 
6.74
0,4 
84.9
01,4 
40.4
27,1 
26.9
52,4 
10.7
81,6 
6.74
0,4 
84.9
01,4 
15.6
90,8 
10.4
60,5 
18.8
24,4 
44.9
75,7 
100.
000,
0 
535.
787,
0 
5.47
7,5 
50.2
10,5 
8.21
6,3 
2.51
0,5 
145.9
37,1 
58.37
8,1 
72.99
3,3 
1.196.
677,7 
218.8
97,4 
145.9
37,1 
58.37
8,1 
36.49
6,6 
459.7
09,3 
218.8
97,4 
145.9
37,1 
58.37
8,1 
36.49
6,6 
459.7
09,3 
84.95
9,7 
56.63
9,8 
94.32
6,5 
235.9
26,1 
600.0
00,0 
2.952.
022,4 
29.65
8,7 
271.8
71,1 
44.48
8,0 
13.59
3,6 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
S&A_E
A 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
COMP.3.1 
S&A_E
A 
GOG_CAS
H ( 100% ) 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
O&M_E
A 
O&M_E
A 
O&M_E
A 
O&M_E
A 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
13.1
51,3 
12.1
63,6 
22.1
15,7 
11.0
57,8 
112.
118,
9 
556.
419,
8 
706.
263,
6 
13.7
56,0 
12.7
22,9 
23.1
32,5 
11.5
66,2 
117.
273,
8 
585.
354,
4 
606.
666,
3 
14.3
67,9 
13.2
88,9 
24.1
61,6 
12.0
80,8 
122.
491,
2 
606.
947,
4 
629.
207,
4 
104.949,6 
13.866,8 
25.212,4 
12.606,2 
217.775,0 
718.950,9 
1.069.589,8 
117.
223,
7 
14.4
56,0 
26.2
83,6 
13.1
41,8 
234.
843,
0 
753.
064,
7 
777.
279,
7 
122.
147,
1 
15.0
63,2 
27.3
87,6 
13.6
93,8 
244.
706,
4 
780.
493,
4 
805.
725,
5 
385.5
95,6 
81.56
1,3 
148.2
93,3 
74.14
6,7 
1.049.
208,3 
4.001.
230,6 
4.594.
732,3 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
COMP.3.1 
O&M_E
A 
O&M_E
A 
O&M_E
A 
O&M_E
A 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
IFAD ( 
100% ) 
Vehicle fuel & maintenance /d 
   month 
0,
04 
0,
04 
0,
04 
0,28 
0,
3 
0,
3 
Communication /e 
   month 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
Meetings and conferences 
Accounting software & Other 
miscellaneous overhead costs 
   month 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
   month 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
291,
924 
300 
545.
455 
272.
727 
1 
21
6 
21
6 
21
6 
Subtotal 
Total Recurrent Costs 
Total 
Footnotes:  
\a per region 
\b per region 
\c per region 
\d 1 car for the first three years and 8 cars for the remaining three years 
\e i.e. cell phones etc. 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
1. 
The main sources of programme benefits are: (i) empowered local communities 
practicing  good  practices;  (ii)  capacitated  farmers  with  resilience  against  climate 
change and (iii) resilient incremental crop production; (iv) enhanced capacity for target 
groups  to  access  financing  and  increased  business  for  financial  institutions;  (v) 
improve agricultural production, mitigate risks and lower costs by increasing access to 
relevant information and service; (vi) support the availability of affordable finance for 
agricultural value chains through blended finance to make credit and risk mitigation 
instruments.  
About 450 000 direct beneficiaries will receive programme services equivalent 
2. 
to 75 000 households and additional 15 000 indirect households equivalent to 90 000 
indirect beneficiaries.  In total, programme aim is to target at least 50 per cent (37 
500 HH) women and 40 per cent youth (30 000 HH).  
3. 
The  Net  present  value  (NPV)  of  the  programme  is  positive  (USD  8.8  Million; 
GHS 53.5 Million). The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is estimated at the 
value of 26%, which demonstrates profitability of the project.  The economic analysis 
suggests  that  the  AAFORD  Programme  is  feasible.  All  these  worthiness  indicators 
establish the economic feasibility of the programme.  
4. 
Sensitivity  Analysis.  The  sensitivity  tests  of  the  programme  suggest  that  the 
programme  is  robust  and  worthwhile,  especially  considering  the  conservative 
assumptions made in the computation of the benefits. The programme promotes the 
inclusion of the poor households and has a positive impact on household welfare. The 
programme has low sensitivity on small changes in decrease of revenues and increase 
of costs. However, changes in project costs or revenues by 50% reflect negative values 
of the profitability indicators.  
Programme benefits 
Number of beneficiaries: The programme is expected to benefit about 450 
5. 
000  direct  and  90  000  indirect  beneficiaries  equivalent  to  75  000  direct  households 
and 15 00 indirect households. The programme has an expected adoption rate of 60%. 
6. 
The programme is expected to bring the following benefits: 
  At least 60% of the households reporting increase in income and production 
as a result of services provided by the programme 
  At  least  25%  of  the  targeted  households  reporting  adoption  on 
environmentally sustainable and climate resilient technologies and practices 
around 19 000 households.  
  60  institutions  and  groups  will  benefit  from  support  to  community 
institutions and target groups (~20 person per group). 
  30 clusters equivalent to 350 villages (~on average 11 villages per cluster) 
will  benefit  from  Community  Outreach  and  Development  Plan  (CODP). 
Overall,  60  FBOs  and  other  Community  institutions  will  benefit  from 
business plan as a basis to seeking financing (~2 per cluster).  
  50 new Village and Savings Loans Association  (VSLA) Community Savings 
and  Credit  Groups  formed  to  mobilize  and  lend  savings  within  member- 
 
managed groups. (~20 people per group in total 1000 persons). As a result 
total savings after 20 years period will be approximately US$ 351 thousand.  
  At least 120 youth under mobilization of youth community facilitators (YCF) 
are  expected  to  being  trained  (~  4  per  cluster).  In  addition,  at  least  80 
youth will be trained as youth institutional interns, give internship, enhance 
employability  through  development  outreach  and  linkage  business  plans 
(OLPBs). 
It  has  been  assumed  that  10  per  cent  of  targeted  semi-subsistence 
smallholder farmers equivalent to 6000 HH who are seeking finance will use 
warehouse receipts to leverage funds for household consumption for three 
month at US$ 50 per month.  
It  has  been  estimated  1500  HH  that  will  benefit  directly  from  the  CODP 
training (~ 50 HH per each cluster). As a result, it has been assumed that 
YCF together with the trained HH will involve another 15 000 HH as a result 
increase their knowledge about effects of climate change, good agricultural 
practices  (GAPs),  financing  mechanisms  and  institutions,  and  potential 
business opportunities.  
 
  60  Community  Institutions  (~  1200  HH,  average  of  20  people  per 
institution), such as FBOs, women and youth groups will be assisted with 
Technical Assistance (TA) to prepare institutional business plan which are 
expected to result in improved access to markets and financing.  
  60  new  FBOs,  women  and  youth  groups  will  be  formed  benefitting  1200 
households  so  they  can  participate  more  effectively  in  the  value  chain 
mechanism. 
  2 existing groups in each community, totalling 700 HH (~ 20 per group) will 
be given TA to strengthen Governance, cohesion and built social capital.  
  Almost 30 000 acres (equivalent to almost 12 000 hectares) of land will be 
monitored under project management.   
  Estimated  almost  45  000  households  equivalent  to  the  60%  of  the  total 
targeted outreach will get access to the credit loans.  
  300 MSMEs will be supported through value chain processors, 24 off-takers 
and  additional  12  500  HH  (under  REP  support)  for  the  purpose  of  food 
processing mechanism.  
Financial Analysis 
The  primary  objective  of  the  financial  analysis  is  to  determine  the  financial 
7. 
viability  and  incentives  of  the  target  group  (smallholder  farmers,  offtakers,  MSMEs 
etc.) for engaging in the programme activities, by examining the impact of programme 
interventions on family labour, cash flow and net incomes.  
8. 
The  estimated  incremental  production  of  the  farm  and  off  farm  models  is 
expecting  improvement  in  productivity  due  to  the  programme  interventions.  The 
analysis has been taken by taking into consideration the average October 2019 prices 
assuming similar condition in area region. A cash-flow analysis is finally carried out to 
present the “with” and “without” programme analysis. 
Crop production and processing enterprise Models.  
The  financial  sources  targeting  two  groups,  window  1  based  on  Production 
9. 
farmers (i.e. SMFs, MoFs and LFs) and Window II is focused on Enterprises (off-takers 
and on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)).  
10. 
For the purpose of the financial and economic analysis, it has been developed 
6  financial  models  for  the  production  window:  (i)  sorghum;  (ii)  cassava;  (iii)  soya 
bean: (iv) groundnut; (v) rice (paddy) and (vi) maize and for the Window II in regards 
enterprises it has been developed one model based on Gari processing activity.  
Most  models  are  expected  to  provide  farmers  with  physical  outputs  and 
11. 
financial returns that are attractive in relation to their extra labour and other inputs 
and  financial  investment.  The  project  is  supposed  to  provide  farmers  with  financial 
resources needed to cover production costs (operational or working capital), training, 
capacity  building  and  administrative  support.  Due  to  the  project  intervention  the 
increase in yield, quality and distribution of products. The loans for the working capital 
will  be  used  to  buy  seeds,  fertilizers,  labour  costs,  bags,  shelling,  winnowing, 
ploughing, mechanization services, where applicable, dryer, planter, sheller etc.    
Demand for labour provides opportunities for the poorest to gain employment. 
12. 
The cost of farm labour set at going market rate varies and it is estimated to be from 
GHS 20/day to GHS 50/day depending on the activity and region. Returns to labour 
as  well  as  net  farm  income  within  different  models  increases  by  a  rate  that  is 
substantial and much higher than the prevalent wage rate for inexperienced labour in 
the area. 
13. 
 Individual production models (smallholder farmers) and Enterprises (i.e. off-
takers, MSMEs) have been used to calculate the value of production net of inputs and 
labour costs. The individual production was estimated at the three different levels: (i) 
semi-subsistence farmers (SMF) which accounted for 80 per cent of the total target 
group and increase of working land size area for 0.5 acre, followed by market oriented 
farmers (MOF) of 15 per cent where increase on land size in 1 acre and large farmers 
accounts for 5 per cent of the total target ratio with increase on 5 acre of the land size. 
Project  is  targeting  75  000  households  (equivalent  to  450  000  beneficiaries)  and 
adoption group has been estimated at 60 per cent (45 000 HH equivalent to 270 000 
beneficiaries). Targeted groups are mostly women and youth, accounting for 50 per 
cent and 40 per cent respectively.  
Model 1 Rice (paddy) is focused on the semi-subsistence smallholder farmers 
1. 
(SHFs), market oriented farmers (MoFs) and large farmers (LFs) that already have 
existing production and planning to expand acreages under crop production. Model 
assuming that SHFs will expand for 0.5 acres of their crop production, MoFs with 1 
acre and LFs with 5 acres land size. The same logic applies for overall farmer’s 
production financial models (i.e. model 1 to 6). The average yield is 1.9 tonnes/acre 
compared to the WoP scenario of modest 1 ton/acre. The production and investment 
costs including labour are US$ 697, which includes investment, operational and 
labour cost. The average revenue is US$ 1 214 and average incremental income is $ 
498. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 1.9: 1 showing that for each US$ 1 spent in 
the model will generate a US$ 1.9 of benefits, which is in favour of the model. The 
NPV is estimated at US$ 2 134. 
Model 2 Sorghum: The average yield is 0.6 tonnes/acre compared to the WoP 
2. 
scenario of modest 0.4 ton/acre. The production and investment costs including 
labour are US$ 312, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The 
average revenue is US$ 334 and average incremental income is US$ 43. The Benefit 
cost ratio estimated is 1.1: 1 showing that for each US$ 1 spent in the model will 
generate a US$ 1.1 of benefits, which is in favour of the model. The NPV is estimated 
at US$ 198.  
Model 3 Cassava: The expected average yield is 6.8 tonnes/acre compared to 
3. 
the WoP scenario of 5 ton/acre. The production and investment costs including 
labour are US$ 411, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The 
average revenue is US$ 801 and average incremental income is US$ 148. The 
Benefit cost ratio estimated is 2.4: 1 showing that for each US$ 1 spent in the model 
will generate a US$ 2.5 of benefits, which is in favour of the model. The NPV is 
estimated at US$ 739.  
4. 
tonnes/acre compared to the WoP scenario of 0.5 ton/acre. The production and 
investment costs including labour are US$ 243, which includes investment, 
operational and labour cost. The average revenue is US$ 268 and average 
incremental income is US$ 194. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 1: 1 showing that 
for each US$ 1 spent in the model will generate a US$ 1 of benefits. The NPV is 
estimated at US$ 977. 
Model 4 Soya bean: WP scenario includes the estimated yield of 0.7 
Model 5 Maize: The average yield is 2 tonnes/acre compared to the WoP 
5. 
scenario of 0.9 ton/acre. The production and investment costs including labour are 
US$ 417, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The average 
revenue is US$ 520 and average incremental income is US$ 71. The Benefit cost 
ratio estimated is 1.2: 1 showing that for each US$ 1 spent in the model will 
generate a US$ 1.2 of benefits. The NPV is estimated at US$ 350. 
Model 6 Groundnut: The expected average yield is 0.6 tonnes/acre compared 
6. 
to the WoP scenario of 0.4 ton/acre. The production and investment costs including 
labour are US$ 182, which includes investment, operational and labour cost. The 
average revenue is US$ 592 and average incremental income is US$ 104. This model 
demonstrate highest profitability considering benefit cost ratio estimated is 3.2:1 
showing that for each US$ 1 spent in the model will generate a US$ 3.2 of benefits. 
The NPV is estimated at US$ 466. 
Model 7 Gari processing: This model is Enterprises focused. The average 
7. 
production capacity is 198 tonnes compared to the WoP scenario of 43 tonnes. The 
production and investment costs including labour are US$ 79 721, which includes 
investment, operational and labour cost. The average incremental income is US$ 12 
019. The benefit cost ratio estimated is 1.2:1 showing that for each US$ 1 spent in 
the model will generate a US$ 1.2 of benefits. The NPV is estimated at US$ 57,613  
The financial aspects of models are presented at the table 1 demonstrating 
8. 
estimated average yield before the project intervention (WoP) and expected increase 
in yield due to the project intervention (referred here under WP). The average 
increase in yield is approximately 60 per cent, the smallest for soya bean and the 
highest for rice (paddy).  
9. 
costs for the first year and the average value. The average revenue per year, 
average incremental income and incremental income at year 5 are also available in 
the table.   
Table shows production and investment costs with labour and without labour 
Table 1: Financial Analysis Models 
Model  
Average 
Yield 
WoP, 
kg/acre* 
Average Yield, 
WP,kg/acre* 
Production & 
investment 
cost, 
including 
labour  (year 
1) GHS/acre 
Production & 
investment 
cost, before 
labour  
(average) 
GHS/acre 
Average 
Production & 
investment 
cost, 
including 
labour  
GHS/acre 
Average  
Revenue 
per year 
GHS/acre 
Average 
Incremental 
income 
GHS/acre 
 Incremental 
income, (year 
5) GHS/acre 
Lowland 
Rice /a 
Sorghum 
Cassava 
Soya bean 
Maize /a 
Groundnut 
Gari 
processing 
/b 
1.050 
380 
5.000 
525 
930 
400 
1.913 
581 
6.800 
669 
2.067 
550 
3.833 
1.714 
2.259 
1.335 
2.293 
1.002 
1.611 
1.076 
1.679 
764 
1.709 
529 
3.221 
1.731 
2.116 
1.437 
2.405 
1.012 
6.678 
1.836 
4.408 
1.474 
2.862 
3.258 
2.737 
2.777 
237 
812 
314 
742 
1.069 
1.076 
390 
572 
555 
607 
43.000 
198.143 
438.466 
477.905 
477.905 
552.560 
66.105 
64.336 
10. 
Table 1 shows production and investment costs with labour and without 
labour costs for the first year and the average value. The average revenue per year, 
average incremental income and incremental income at year 4 are also available in 
the table. All these seven models present a higher financial efficiency in terms of 
financial Net Present Value (NPV) and the financial benefits-cost ratio (BCR). For 
instance, NPV is positive for the all seven models (US$ 2 134 for model 1 (rice 
paddy), US$ 739 for model 2 (cassava), US$ 198 for model 3 (sorghum), US$ 977   
for model 4 (soya bean), US$ 466 for model 5 (groundnut), US$ 350 for model 6 
(maize), and US$ 57 613 for model 7 (Gari processing). Changes in financial 
indicators illustrate the predicted transformation in agricultural practices in the 
project area. Analyses of the farm and enterprise models confirm that the impact of 
the project at the farm level is financially attractive for family households and net 
farm incomes are expected to increase. For more details, refer to table 1.  
11. 
by cassava (2.4), rice (1.9), rice (paddy) (1.2), gari processing and maize (1.2), 
sorghum (1.1) and the lowest value 1.0 is for soya bean. The return to family labour 
per day is among US $9 US$ and US$ 27, the smallest value is for maize production 
and the highest for groundnut. For more details please refer to the table 2 below.  
The B/C ratio has been the highest for groundnut estimated at 3.2, followed 
Table 2. Financial Profitability Indicators 
Model  
Net present 
value 
GHS/acre 
B/C Ratio 
Return to 
family labour 
(US$/day) 
Poverty line 
Rice (paddy) 
2.134 
Sorghum 
Cassava 
Soyabean 
Maize 
Groundnut 
198 
739 
977 
350 
466 
1,9 
1,1 
2,4 
1,0 
1,2 
3,2 
20 
16 
24 
16 
9 
27 
Gari processing  
57.613 
1,2 
n/a 
Comment: Poverty line is US$ 1.9 per day (source: WB, Oct,2019)  
Table 3. Outreach overview: type, land size and target group size 
Type 
Semi-subsistence (SMFs) 
Market oriented farmers (MoFs) 
Large farmers (LFs) 
Total  
/a assumed increased working land size area 
Land size (acre) /a 
0,5 
1 
5 
Ratio 
80% 
18% 
2% 
Target group 
60.000,00 
13.500,00 
1.500,00 
75.000,00 
Table 4. Technical Assistance activities and its estimated outreach 
Supported activity 
Community Outreach Development Plan (CODP) 
Community Outreach Development Plan (CODP), Sensitization of the 
other HH of the communities 
Community Savings and Credit Group (CSCG) 
Community Institutions  
New group formation  
Existing group strengthening 
Strengthening women and youth group 
Total  
Outreach, 
HH 
 1.500     
Indirect 
HH 
 15.00  
 1.500  
 1.000     
 1.200     
 1.200     
 14.000     
 7.000     
 27.400  
 15.000  
Table 5.  Financial Analysis of the Models 
PRODUCTION 
ENTERPRISES 
 Model net incremental benefits (GHS) 
Off-takers and MSME (GHS) 
 Rice (paddy)  
 Cassava   
 Sorghum  
Soya bean 
Groundnut 
 Maize  
 Gari processing  
I
F
I
N
A
N
C
A
L
A
N
A
L
Y
S
I
S
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
PY7 
PY8 
PY9.. 
PY10/PY20+ 
  320 
2.092 
2.777 
2.777 
2.777 
2.777 
2.777 
2.777 
2.777 
2.777 
  670 
  863 
  768 
  878 
  742 
  878 
  768 
  878 
  768 
  852 
   32 
  126 
  189 
  314 
  314 
  314 
  314 
  314 
  314 
  314 
  NPV (GHS)   
11.737 
4.064 
1.086 
  NPV (USD)   
 B/C  
2.134 
1,89 
739 
2,44 
198 
1,07 
  937 
1.076 
1.076 
1.076 
1.076 
1.076 
1.076 
1.076 
1.076 
1.076 
5.371 
977 
1,04 
  222 
  401 
  519 
  578 
  607 
  607 
  607 
  607 
  607 
  607 
   29 
   37 
  390 
  555 
  555 
  555 
  555 
  555 
  555 
  555 
33.801 
66.942 
68.476 
68.736 
64.336 
68.736 
68.476 
68.736 
68.476 
65.596 
2.562 
1.927 
316.873 
466 
3,23 
350 
1,16 
57.613 
1,15 
Table  6  provides  overall  project  costs  by  components  and  beneficiaries.  The 
14. 
total  project  costs  has  been  estimated  at  US$  69.1  million  over  6-year  project 
implementation period.  The cost per beneficiary has been estimated at modest US$ 
153  and  cost  per  household  has  been  estimated  at  US$  921.  Adoption  rate  of  the 
project is 60% and up to 75 thousand of direct households (in addition 2.5 thousand 
indirect  HH)  has  been  estimated  to  be  impacted  by  the  project  implementation 
(equivalent  to  450  thousand  beneficiaries,  plus  15  thousand  indirect  beneficiaries). 
Table  summarize  expected  outcomes  and  indicators  due  to  the  project  intervention 
that has been linked with Logframe targets. 
Table 6. Programme/project costs and logframe targets 
PROJECT COSTS AND INDICATORS FOR LOGFRAME 
TOTAL PROJECT COSTS (US$ million) 
              69.065  
 Base costs 
                   65.303  
Beneficiaries (direct) 
               450.000  
people 
75.000 
Households 
Indirect HH 
15.000 
Cost per beneficiary 
                      153  
 US$ person 
Adoption 
rates ~ 
60% 
Cost per household 
 921  
 US$ HHs 
Components and Cost (US$ million) 
Outcomes and Indicators 
A. Building capacities 
of target groups, 
intermediaries and 
market enhacning 
solutions 
B. Improve smallholder 
capacity to access 
agricultural loans and 
other rural financial 
services 
C. Implementation 
Support 
Total  
                 28.662  
up to 44 000 HH or 264  000 beneficiaries receiving  
financial services promoted or supported by project 
(50% women; 40% youth) 
 50 new Village and Savings Loans Association  (VSLA) 
Community Savings and Credit Groups formed to 
mobilize and lend savings within member- managed 
groups that might generate over 20 years the savings 
into amount of US$ 351 thousand  
 36.408  
 3.995  
 69.065  
At least 25% (equivalent to 18 750 HH) of the 
targeted households reporting adoption on 
environmentally sustainable and climate resilient 
technologies and practices and about 12 000 ha 
brought under climate resilient project monitoring  
At least 60% of the households reporting increase in 
income and production as a result of services 
provided by the programme 
30 clusters equivalent to 350 villages (on average 11 
villages per cluster estimated) will benefit from 
Community Outreach and Development Plan (CODP).   
60 FBOs and other Community institutions will 
benefit from business plan as a basis to seeking 
financing (~2 per cluster) 
Economic Analysis 
15. 
The  objectives  of  the  economic  analysis  are:  (i)  to  assess  the  overall 
programme viability; and (ii) to estimate the programme’s impact by calculating the 
economic rate of return. The computation of economic costs is derived from financial 
programme  costs,  by  excluding  transfers  such  as  duties,  taxes,  and  price 
contingencies.  Production  inputs  and  outputs,  labour,  and  other  items  have  been 
shadow priced to stand for market imperfections. Economic costs in border prices for 
major agricultural inputs and products were computed using the associated conversion 
factors to adjust the local content of costs and goods assumed to be non-traded. Prices 
requiring a different conversion factor are introduced. The related labour financial price 
is adjusted downward by using a standard conversion factor of 0.93; 0,95 for imported 
agricultural products and 1,14 for exported agricultural products.  Shadow conversion 
factor is 1.1 which changes shadow exchange rate to value of GHS 6.11 for 1 US$. 
More details can be found at the table 7 below.  
Table 7. Main assumptions and shadow prices 
16. 
Programme economic costs and benefits. The economic analyses include 
the investment and incremental recurrent costs of the programme components.  The 
programme  financial  costs  have  been  converted  to  economic  values  by  removal  of 
price  contingencies,  taxes  and  duties.  In  order  to  avoid  double  counting,  the  final 
aggregation considered only those costs that were not included in the financial models. 
Costs of replacing/maintaining of some specific equipment are considered. 
17. 
Benefits estimation: Incremental production was calculated by calibrating the 
incremental benefits by the standard conversion factors and then aggregating them, 
based  on  the  phasing  of  household  and  enterprises  uptake  during  the  Programme 
implementation period. 
Based  on  the  expected  farmers’  responsiveness  to  the  programme,  the 
18. 
assumption  on  farmers’  participation  is  smooth  the  first  years,  and  increases  from 
programme  activities  such  as  extension,  market  development,  technical  assistance, 
training  and  awareness,  and  easier  access  to  working  capital  through  the  loans. 
Incremental  aggregated  financial  and  economic  budgets,  production  and  inputs 
including labour, financial and economic efficiency measures, and other technical and 
economic indicators were then calculated. The phasing of beneficiaries participation to 
the Programme activities was based on the rate at which beneficiaries are projected 
to contribute to Programme output. The  estimated economic value of net benefit at 
full development is US$ 8.8 million (~GHS 53.5 million).  
Table 8. Beneficiaries, adoption rates and phasing 
Lowland Rice 
PY1 
694 
PY2 
694 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
Total  
2.082 
2.637 
2.914 
4.857 
13.878 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Cassava 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Sorghum 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
366 
366 
1.097 
1.389 
1.535 
2.559 
7.310 
879 
484 
879 
484 
2.637 
3.340 
3.691 
6.152 
17.578 
1.451 
1.837 
2.031 
3.385 
9.670 
391 
391 
1.173 
1.485 
1.642 
2.736 
7.818 
214 
214 
643 
814 
900 
1.500 
4.286 
Soya bean 
505 
505 
1.516 
1.920 
2.122 
3.537 
10.106 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Maize 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Groundnut 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Off-takers 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
MSME 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
REP Clients 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Nr of Targeted Beneficiaries 
Adopting Beneficiaries 
273 
273 
819 
1.037 
1.146 
1.910 
5.458 
474 
251 
474 
251 
1.422 
1.801 
1.990 
3.317 
9.478 
752 
952 
1.052 
1.754 
5.012 
161 
161 
482 
610 
674 
1.124 
3.211 
145 
145 
434 
549 
607 
1.012 
2.890 
2 
1 
2 
1 
30 
30 
15 
625 
500 
15 
625 
500 
5 
4 
90 
45 
6 
5 
6 
5 
11 
8 
30 
24 
114 
126 
210 
600 
57 
63 
105 
300 
1.875 
2.375 
2.625 
4.375 
12.500 
1.500 
1.900 
2.100 
3.500 
10.000 
75.000 
45.000 
Table 9. Incremental net economic benefit at the programme level (GHS) 
 NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITS  
Net Incremental 
Costs 
 Cash Flow   
 Lowland Rice  
 Cassava   
 Sorghum   
 Soybean  
 Maize  
 Groundnut  
 Off takers, 
MSME   
 Total Net Inc. 
Benefits  
Economic 
Investment + 
O&M Costs 
 Net Incremental 
benefits  
I
E
C
O
N
O
M
C
A
N
A
L
Y
S
S
I
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
PY7 
PY8 
PY9 
PY10 
PY11 
PY12 
PY13 
PY14 
PY15 
PY16 
PY17 
PY18 
PY19 
PY20 
 74.827  
 572.263  
 350.255  
 806.024  
 (4.051) 
 11.016  
 214.310  
 461.615  
 20.497  
 43.632  
 45.273  
 114.791  
 288.803  
 820.244  
 1.382.466  
 1.911.789  
 30.725  
 1.137.540  
 172.391  
 294.411  
 2.054.548  
 3.097.748  
 3.567.240  
 110.919  
 2.050.904  
 353.043  
 568.518  
 4.058.281  
 5.507.272  
 5.273.261  
 230.277  
 3.076.389  
 673.263  
 924.134  
 6.607.700  
 9.191.167  
 8.151.614  
 407.115  
 4.715.139  
 12.364.564  
 8.695.893  
 13.210.961  
 8.529.471  
 691.330  
 887.604  
 4.946.113  
 4.946.113  
 13.210.961  
 8.734.122  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 1.164.077  
 1.568.821  
 2.148.156  
 2.359.705  
 1.451.413  
 10.283.709  
 1.755.094  
 12.670.653  
 1.951.642  
 13.758.947  
 2.040.626  
 14.093.436  
 13.210.961  
 8.468.737  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 2.359.705  
 2.074.850  
 14.038.353  
 13.210.961  
 8.780.395  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 13.210.961  
 8.541.039  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 13.269.318  
 8.739.906  
 13.269.318  
 8.523.686  
 13.386.032  
 8.679.172  
 13.532.758  
 8.569.960  
 13.761.823  
 8.751.474  
 14.013.982  
 8.529.471  
 14.091.319  
 8.734.122  
 14.692.657  
 8.468.737  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
 1.066.034  
 4.946.113  
NPV@ 16% (GHS) 
NPV@ 16% (US$) 
EIRR 
 2.373.333  
 2.386.960  
 2.427.842  
 2.479.627  
 2.536.862  
 2.632.253  
 2.632.253  
 2.632.253  
 2.632.253  
 2.632.253  
 53.513.344,54  
 8.846.253,19  
28% 
 2.074.850  
 14.117.234  
 2.074.850  
 14.080.408  
 2.074.850  
 14.174.182  
 2.074.850  
 14.184.716  
 2.074.850  
 14.299.178  
 2.074.850  
 14.450.677  
 2.074.850  
 14.524.929  
 2.074.850  
 14.649.375  
 2.074.850  
 14.675.564  
 2.074.850  
 14.770.810  
 989.915  
 4.814.703  
-3.824.789  
 2.829.585  
 15.929.611  
-13.100.026  
 6.983.870  
 36.098.241  
-29.114.371  
 13.806.654  
 38.099.025  
-24.292.372  
 22.292.296  
 32.673.935  
-10.381.639  
 35.364.233  
 23.946.270  
 11.417.963  
 42.692.468  
 1.902.494  
 40.789.974  
 45.432.894  
 1.902.494  
 43.530.399  
 46.450.997  
 1.902.494  
 44.548.503  
 46.164.753  
 1.902.494  
 44.262.259  
 46.568.921  
 1.902.494  
 44.666.426  
 46.306.366  
 1.902.494  
 44.403.872  
 46.698.246  
 1.902.494  
 44.795.752  
 46.544.345  
 1.902.494  
 44.641.850  
 46.988.241  
 1.902.494  
 45.085.747  
 47.272.647  
 1.902.494  
 45.370.152  
 47.757.477  
 1.902.494  
 45.854.983  
 47.912.078  
 1.902.494  
 46.009.584  
 48.220.255  
 1.902.494  
 46.317.761  
 48.651.456  
 1.902.494  
 46.748.961  
Incremental  crop  production  will  either  be  consumed  by  the  households  in  the 
19. 
Programme  area  or  sold  to  local  and  external  traders  in  the  primary,  secondary  and 
terminal markets. Sales are made both for consumption in large cities such as Accra and 
for  the  export  market  and  the  trade  tend  to  be  dominated  by  a  small  number  of  large 
merchant buyers.  
Graph 1. Cash flow of incremental benefits, costs and net cash flow 
 120000000.0
 100000000.0
 80000000.0
 60000000.0
 40000000.0
 20000000.0
 -
NPV @ 16% :
53.5  (M GHS)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
20. 
Assumptions: Economic pricing has been based on the following assumptions: (i) 
the conversion of financial programme costs into economic costs have been undertaken 
by  multiplying  the  domestic  value  added  by  the  standard  conversion  factor  (SCF),  and 
adding-in the foreign exchange costs to convert financial values to economic values; (ii) A 
SCF equal to 1,1 has been applied when converting financial prices into economic prices 
and  the  opportunity  cost  of  labour  was  93%  which  represents  a  conversion  factor  from 
financial to economic costs; (iii) the exchange rate used in the economic analysis is fixed 
at  US$  1  equal  to  GHS  6,11  computed  exchange  rate  prevailing  in  October  2019  with 
taking into consideration standard conversion factor of 1,1; and (iv) an economic life time 
of 20 years have been taken to assess the improvement in capacity building, trainings and 
access to loans used. Please refer to the more details at the table 7 above.  
21. 
The  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  on  the  investments  in  the 
Programme area over 20 years is estimated at 28% and the Net present value (NPV) of 
the  programme  is  positive  (US$  8.8 Million).  The  economic  analysis  suggests  that  the 
AAFORD  Programme  is  feasible.  All  these  worthiness  indicators  establish  the  economic 
feasibility of the programme.  
22. 
Sensitivity Analysis: In order to include risk factors, a sensitivity analysis in terms 
of  “variable  by  variable”  and  “scenario”  analysis  was  done  to  test  changes  in  economic 
indicators in conjunction with aggregate costs, benefits, and delays in the realization of 
programme costs and benefits. The EIRR drops to 25 per cent with an increase in costs of 
10 per cent. With an increase of costs by 20 per cent, the programme is still worthy (EIRR 
of 23 per cent). However, with an increase of the aggregate costs by 50 per cent, the EIRR 
with 17 per cent.  A decrease of benefits by 10 per cent to 20 per cent still yields an EIRR 
greater than the 16 per cent. Project benefit decrease  of 50 per  cent  result in negative 
NPV and EIRR that is lower than economic cost of capital.  
23. 
The sensitivity tests of the programme suggest that the programme is robust and 
worthwhile  up  to  almost  50  per  cent  increase  in  costs,  especially  if  we  consider  the 
conservative  assumptions  made  in  the  computation  of  the  benefits.  The  programme 
therefore  has  a  positive  impact  on  household  financial  situation  and  allows  farmers  a 
higher propensity. 
11 
Table 10. Sensitivity analysis 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (SA) 
∆% 
Link with the risk matrix 
Base scenario 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
-10% 
-20% 
-50% 
Project costs 
   10% 
Project costs 
Project costs 
   20% 
   50% 
1 year lag in ben. 
2 years lag in ben. 
Combination of risks affecting output prices, yields 
and adoption rates 
Increase of working capital and operational prices 
Risks affecting adoption rates and low 
implementation capacity 
IRR  NPV (GHS) 
 53.513,34  
28% 
25% 
22% 
11% 
25% 
23% 
17% 
22% 
18% 
 39.180,84  
 24.848,33  
 (18.149,19) 
 44.532,17  
 35.551,00  
 8.607,48  
 31.589,22  
 12.708,21  
12 
13 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development 
 ( AFFORD) 
SECAP (Review) Note -  
1 
October 2019 
Introduction  
This  SECAP  sets out the procedures that will be used to help determine which environmental , 
climate and social  risks and potential impacts should be addressed in planning, implementation and 
operation of sub projects to be selected for funding under the Affordable Agricultural Financing for 
Resilient Rural Development. The SECAP describes how the country and IFAD intend to manage  all 
risks including selected subprojects and their  impacts. Though the IFAD investment and the SECAP, 
will generally target projects with environmental, social and climate risks that have limited 
2 
environmental, climate and social impacts that are few in number, location specific and largely 
reversible or readily minimized, the SECAP has been written to provide a comprehensive set of  
actions, which will be deployed to ensure that interventions  specific environmental, climate and 
social impacts  are identified and managed effectively throughout the entire project cycle.  SECAP  
also sets out the capacity building and strengthening programs that will be adopted as part of the 
implementation of AFFORD with support from IFAD and the Ghana Environmental Protection 
Agency.  
Situational analysis and potential project impacts  
Socio-economic and poverty assessment: AFFORD targets two regions; namely, Northern region and 
Brong Ahafo region are selected from the old definition of 10 regions for AAFORD. The regions  are 
targeted based on: (i) their level of production; (ii) the presence of other value chain programmes; 
and (iii) the existence of processors for value addition iii) high level of poverty iv) impact of climate 
change  and climate variability v) food insecurity and nutrition vi) presence of banking sector vii) 
gender and youth gap in agriculture.A snapshot of the situation in the Northern zone where the 
project interventions will be, which covers almost one-third of the territory of Ghana, provides an 
illustration of the extent of poverty in one of the country’s poorest regions.  70% of the residents are 
in the bottom 20% income group nationally. 47% of men have no education, only 27% of women are 
literate, almost a quarter of students do not complete primary school, 111 of every 1,000 children 
born die before the age of five, 82% of children are anaemic, one-third are stunted, and one-fifth are 
underweight. According to Ghana’s own figures, one person in five lives in poverty and one in eight 
lives in extreme poverty.  A person is deemed to be “poor” in Ghana if their income is less than 1,314 
GHC per adult per year (which was US$1.83 per day in 2013 when the relevant survey was 
undertaken, but was only 80 cents in April 2018),1 while the “extreme poor” live on less than 792 
GHC per adult per year (US$1.10 per day, in 2013, and 48 cents in April 2018).2 According to the 
UNDP, the poverty line is only 27.1% of the mean consumption level in 2012/13, while the extreme 
poverty line is 44.9%.3 At the national level, official estimates of income poverty show a reduction 
from between 51% and 56.5% in 1991-92, to 24% in 2012-13.4 
Child poverty rates are especially problematic with 3.65 million, or 28.3% of all children, living in 
poverty. A child is almost 40% more likely to live in poverty than an adult, compared to only 15% 
more likely in the 1990s. One child in ten lives in extreme poverty, meaning 1.2 million children live 
in households that are unable to provide even adequate food.5 Ghana’s poverty is increasingly rural, 
with 38.2% of people in rural areas being poor, compared to 10.4% in urban areas.  Poverty levels 
The “upper’ poverty line. 
The “lower” poverty line.  
UNDP (2015), Ghana Millennium Development Goals report . 
Ghana Living Standards Survey Round 6 (GLSS6), Main Report (Ghana Statistical 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Service, 2014). 
3 
are especially high in the agricultural sector which has shown significantly slower growth than other 
sectors and has been accorded a low priority by the government. The majority of persons living in 
poverty live in the north. The regions with the highest poverty rates are the Northern, Upper East 
and Upper West regions, but the Northern region is languishing.. Ghana is experiencing rapid 
urbanization, especially but not only in Accra. The growing urban population is often very poor and 
the cities are becoming increasingly segregated as inequality gaps grow ever larger. While people 
migrate to escape from rural unemployment, under-employment, poverty, and to search for better 
socio-economic opportunities, the reality they face in cities like Accra is very high unemployment 
rates, and lack of access to housing and basic services such as water and sanitation. 
Gender 
Ghana is among the champions of gender equality in ECOWAS. It ranks second in its Gender 
Inequality Index in 2018 (0.538, higher than Sub-Saharan African average of 0.569, 140th place 
globally). Such an indicator measures various dimensions of gender inequality in access to education, 
employment, health and political empowerment. Ghana ranked 4th for its gender development 
index of Sab-Saharan Africa that measures the gender gap between men and women in terms of 
Human Development Index.  
However, gender inequality remains high and gender is still an important dimension of poverty and 
food insecurity in Ghana. About 62% of female headed households fall into the two poorest wealth 
quintiles compared with 39% of male headed households. Similarly, only 11% of female headed 
households reach the wealthiest quintile in comparison with 21% of male headed households. 
Across the northern regions, 30% of female-headed households are food insecure compared with 
15% of male-headed households. About 84% of the Ghanaian active female population are engaged 
in vulnerable employment. Wage disparities also exists. Women earn 57% of men’s earnings 
regardless of the type of employment, education and the age etc. With regard to literacy, UNDP 
reports 43% of men are more likely to be literate in English than women; a significant gap is present 
in the older generations, but virtually disappears in the age group of 15-18 years old. 
Women represent 42% of people engaged in agriculture and agriculture is closely connected to 
poverty. Therefore, assessing gender inequality along agricultural value chains is key to addressing 
the gender dimensions of poverty. In Ghana, women have previously been found to achieve lower 
yields compared to men due to a lack of access to productive resources. Female headed households 
(FHH) also have less access to land for farming (89% in Northern Ghana vs a 96% national average). 
FHH are also more likely to be smallholders (farming five acres or less). 87% of FHH are smallholders 
compared with 60% of male. 4% of farms are more than 11 acres compared with 16% of men 
heading a household. 
Agricultural produce traders are mostly women. Their reproductive roles, which are usually defined 
by social norms, interfere with their productive roles in terms of time available for income-earning 
activities. A study also showed that gender and household size were the demographic variables that 
had a significant effect on post-harvest losses in tomato production. Female farmers had 
significantly higher levels of post-harvest losses than their male counterparts. All things being equal, 
women tend to use longer period for fruit harvesting, with high levels of post-harvest losses.  
Limited access of women to land (i.e. collateral) results in more limited access to financial services. 
In spite of a progressive land ownership system, customary land use systems prevail whereby 
property rights of the assets is normally with the household heads. Household heads are most often 
4 
men in Ghana and women have temporary usufruct rights that can be lost when they marry or lose 
their husband.  
Youth.  
Ghana has a very young population, with approximately 57% of the population under the age of 25. 
The National Youth Policy (2010) in Ghana defines youth as those between 15-35 years. Despite 
Ghana’s economic growth, unemployment rates remain relatively high especially among youth. 
Youth constitute 36 per cent of the population. The high rate of underutilized youth (42 per cent) 
and youth unemployment (16.9 per cent) is a growing concern.11 The unemployment rate is higher 
for young people with higher education. This is attributable to weak linkages between education and 
the productive sectors of the economy, a mismatch between skills and jobs, and inadequate support 
for entrepreneurship,12 which hinder the involvement of young people in agriculture ( source 
CEPSPD, 2018) 
The overall lack of opportunities, coupled with the occurrence of seasonal drought and flooding in 
rural areas is leading to an increasing exodus of mainly young men from rural to urban areas, 
especially from the five northern regions to the south. This results in an aging population in rural 
areas, high rates of youth unemployment and social inequality.  
The government identifies the following contributing factors to high youth unemployment: lack of 
employable skills; mismatch of education and industry; an inability of the economy to create new 
jobs; and limited access to start-up capital for youth. The levels of unemployment among Ghanaian 
youth vary across sexes as well as according to the area they live in. In urban areas, unemployment 
rates are significantly higher than in rural areas because young people are often attracted to cities to 
search for jobs. The agricultural sector is seen as having the most potential of catalysing economic 
growth and employment for young people, especially given the growing demand for food and raw 
materials. However, efforts to create jobs for these young people are often separated from efforts 
to accelerate agricultural growth and improve food security. At the same time, there is also a 
perception that agriculture and farming are for elderly, illiterate and rural people, not as a venture 
that could provide job security nor a stable income. This poses a challenge for efforts to attract 
youth into agriculture. The GSS from 2015 reports that about 14.3% of young people in agriculture 
have abandoned their farms and remain idle in their communities or have migrated to cities in 2015.  
Nutrition and health.  
Significant regional disparities exist concerning nutrition and food security in Ghana. The prevalence 
of stunting (chronic malnutrition or low height-for-age) is 19 per cent nationally, but rises to 33 per 
cent in the north. The prevalence of acute malnutrition (wasting or weight-for-height) is also much 
higher in the northern regions, and at 9 per cent, is highest in Upper East region. Central Region also 
has high levels of both stunting and wasting, at 22 per cent and 8 percent, respectively. 
Food insecurity is a major contributing factor to the poor nutritional status of the population in the 
northern regions of Ghana. Among the regions of greatest concern, which include Upper East, North 
Eastern, Savnnah, Upper West, Northern, Brong-Ahafo, Ahafo, Bono,Bono East and Ahafo, Oti and 
Volta, 16 per cent of households were considered food insecure. Food insecurity is linked to the 
inability of households to produce sufficient quantities of staples to meet their food needs. This can 
be attributes to poor soil quality, unfavourable weather conditions, constrained access to inputs, 
and limited financial resources to expand production. Also, food insecurity is a highly seasonal 
5 
phenomenon in the north, as there is only one rainy season and a long dry season. July is the peak of 
the lean season, with 90% of households experiencing issues of access to food which is more pricy 
and less available, while poor agricultural households have often exhausted their food stocks and 
need to buy food on the market at high prices (harvest around September-December). The situation 
is also observed in the central zone .  
Overweight and obesity are increasingly important issues in Ghana (33 to 40 per cent increase since 
2003 for overweight in ECOWAS) and affect women disproportionately. In Ghana, 41 per cent of 
women are overweight against 22 per cent of men. Gender disparity is stronger for obesity, with 4.5 
per cent of men being obese compared to 16 per cent of women being considered obese. 
Overweight and obesity are an indicator of poor nutrition due to the low availability and relatively 
high cost of more nutritious foods, such as legumes and proteins.  
People living with disabilities 
Persons with disabilities are among the most vulnerable groups in Ghana. The 2010 Population and 
Household Census determined that there were 737,743 persons with some form of disability, 
representing 3% of the total population (2010 Population and Household Census). It is believed 
though that the above figure is an underestimation with some sources estimate percentage of 
people with disability to be s hiiigh as 10% of the population.6  Socially, individuals. with disabilities 
are viewed negatively and often ostracized and denied opportunities that result in being 
marginalized. Condemnation as a “spirit child” leads to ostracism at best, and death at worst. 
Similarly, thousands of people with psychosocial disabilities have been reported to be forced to live 
in psychiatric hospitals and prayer camps, often against their will, where they are subject to 
involuntary and often abusive treatment. Persons with disabilities and families with a disabled child 
face a double burden of poverty. 
In 2011, the Ministry of Health discontinued the collection of data on persons with disabilities. 
Concrete disaggregated data as well as government policies or programmes targeting persons, and 
in particular children, with disabilities are lacking. Another significant problem affecting individuals 
with disabilities is structural and accommodation barriers to access to assets and  social inclusion.  
Although the Persons with Disabilities Act of 2006 guarantees access, in practice there are various 
aspects of buildings that often make them completely inaccessible to individuals with disabilities.7 
This inaccessibility reduces the ability of individuals with disabilities to participate in employment, 
social life, and civic affairs 
6 
See The Ghana Federation of Disability Organizations (estimating over 3 million 
people with disabilities in Ghana), available at http://www.gfdgh.org/; and a Government source 
estimating 10% of the population, “Promoting rights of persons with disabilities in Ghana,” 3 
December 2017, available at https://www.myjoyonline.com/opinion/2017/December-
3rd/promoting-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities-in-ghana.php. 
7 
Persons with Disability Act 2006 (Act No. 715), NatLex, International Labour 
Organization. Availanle from: 
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=en&p_isn=86287&p_country=GHA&p_count=
116 (last visited Mar 8, 2018); Hannah Awadzi, Ghanas disability act: serious gaps Global Disability 
Watch (2016), http://globaldisability.org/2016/04/28/ghana-disability-act (last visited Mar 8, 2018). 
6 
Environmental assessment  
Ghana has a warm, humid climate. Mean annual rainfall of the country is estimated at 1187 mm. 
Mean annual temperatures range from 26.1 °C near the coast to 28.9 °C in the extreme north (Figure 
3.2A). Annual potential open water evaporation has been estimated as ranging between 1350 mm in 
the south to about 2000 mm in the north. The actual amount of evaporation depends on a number 
of factors including water availability, vegetation cover and prevailing weather conditions among 
others. There are six agro-ecological zones defined on the basis of climate, reflected by the natural 
vegetation and influenced by the soils (Figure 3.2B). Rainfall distribution is bimodal in the forest, 
transitional and coastal zones, giving rise to a major and a minor growing season. In the remaining 
two agro-ecological zones, the unimodal rainfall distribution gives rise to only one growing season. 
Only in some parts of the country is the climate favourable for non-irrigated agriculture. Rainfall 
exceeds potential evaporation during relatively short periods. Even in the southern forest zone 
where rainfall is at its highest, irrigation is essential for short season crops during the dry period. The 
unreliability of rainfall is a cause of concern. Complete crop failures can be expected in most 
northern areas in about one in every five years. This risk can rise to one in every three years during 
low rainfall periods. The lean season would be targeted by the Project to engage the poor in the 
public works component. 
Figure 1. Typical vegetation zones (left) and average temperatures (right) in Ghana 
Natural resources 
7 
Biodiversity: Ghana is relatively rich in biodiversity, with 5429 plant species, 983 species of 
butterflies, 377 species of reptiles and amphibians, 794 bird species and 327 species of mammals. 
The flora includes 119 threatened species, three of which are critically endangered (CR), 20 
endangered (EN) and 96 Vulnerable (VU).  The Ghanaian fauna includes 56 species of threatened 
fish, comprising two CR, 18 EN and 36 VU; 11 species of threatened amphibians, comprising 2 CR, 5 
EN and 4 VU; 7 species of threatened reptiles, comprising 2 CR and 5 VU; 22 species of threatened 
birds, comprising 4 CRR, one EN and 17 VU and 20 threatened mammals, comprising 1 CR, 6 EN and 
13 VU. The country’s biodiversity is under threat from several human-induced pressures, including 
habitat loss and degradation resulting from farming, urbanisation and extractive industries as well as 
over-exploitation. Other threats include climate change, invasive species and pollution, particularly 
with regard to aquatic habitats. 8  There are indications that the populations of almost all animal 
species, including invertebrates such as snails, are on the decline and that rodents are now 
dominating the species exploited as bushmeat. Ghana has taken commendable steps to safeguard 
the country’s biodiversity through the establishment of protected areas which over about  16.5% of 
the country’s total land area; established agencies with responsibility to manage the country’s 
biological resources and is signatory to all the major international treaties that seek to protect 
biodiversity. 9  
Protected areas and Conservation 
Forest conservation in Ghana started in the early 1900s. Since then, relevant institutional and 
regulatory frameworks have been put in place to ensure that the 8.2 million ha. primary forest 
coverage for the country remained intact. The coming into force of various policies to regulate the 
management and utilisation of forest and wildlife resources resulted in the creation of protected 
areas. The purpose for their establishment, among other things, was to protect habitats, conserve 
biodiversity and regulate timber exploitation to achieve sustainability.10  Over the years, 
anthropogenic drivers have fuelled deforestation and forest degradation, with primary forest 
declining at the rate of 2% per annum. Currently only about 1.7 million hectares of the primary 
forests, mainly within government gazetted protected areas exists. The overall forest cover has, 
however, increased in size through plantation development. This has resulted in the expansion of 
forest cover from 8,627,402 ha in 1990 to 9,294,349 ha in 2015. 11 
Despite this gain, the loss of primary forest cover remains an issue of major concern as strategic 
habitats are being fragmented, remnant forest patches are getting isolated, biodiversity is eroding 
8 Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (note 1 above), 180 
9 Ibid. 
10 Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund (2019), Review of Ghana’s Legal Framework for Protected 
Areas, Agriculture and Environmental Assessment (Ghana Wildlife Society, Accra) 5 
11 Ibid. 
8 
and ecosystems services that the forest provide are being inhibited. More importantly, protected 
areas are coming under pressure due to  the increasing trends to exploit the protected forest areas.  
Invasive Species  
The intensity and frequency of the alien species invasive events and attendant socio-economic and 
environmental impacts are expected to increase as driving forces and pressures are projected to 
intensify in Ghana. This could significantly undermine the development agenda of the country that 
relies significantly on ecosystems services. Status and trends of invasiveness were determined based 
on indicators such as count of individual invasive alien species (IAS) and sub-species in the country, 
within taxonomic groups and habitats. The geographic distribution or pervasiveness is indicated by 
the presence of terrestrial IAS in different ecological zones, and presence of aquatic IAS in both 
natural and man-made water systems.12  Globalization and global environmental processes such as 
international travels, international trade, climate change and associated invasive pathways drive 
intentional and non-intentional IAS phenomenon in Ghana.  Proxy indicators of pressures are 
deforestation, intensification of land use, expansion of road network, high population densities etc.  
Efforts made to address IAS issues in Ghana include ratification of international and regional 
protocols, treaties and conventions, formulation of some sectoral regulations and implementation of 
some projects.  Yet, legislative, policy, regulatory, institutional weaknesses and information issues 
have hampered progress in managing IAS in a more comprehensive, coordinated and proactive 
manner. Institutional coordination, capacity building of relevant institutions in data gathering, 
research and critical management activities must form a core of future efforts to control IAS in 
Ghana.   
Arable Land 
One of Ghana's most vital natural resources is arable land which was estimated in 2014 to cover 
approximately 20.66% of the country's total land area. Since 2004, according to data from the World 
Bank, the size of arable land in Ghana has fluctuated significantly, mainly due to the fluctuating 
weather patterns around the globe. However, agriculture is still one of the country's most important 
economic activities. The Ghanaian labour department estimated that in 2013, more than 53% of the 
nation's labour force was employed in the agricultural sector. Ghanaian farmers grow a wide variety 
of crops such as yams, sweet potatoes (mainly grown for subsistence) cocoa, rubber, and sugarcane 
(for the export market).13 Due to the importance of agriculture to the Ghanaian economy, the 
government has invested heavily in improving the sector through providing training to farmers on 
modern agricultural techniques. Despite the efforts of the government, the country's agricultural 
sector faces numerous challenges such as the fluctuating prices of farm products in the global 
market and the country's poorly developed transport infrastructure. 
12 Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (note 1 above), 185 
13 See ‘Ghana Arable Land: 1961-2019’ 
https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/GHA/ghana/arable-land 
9 
Evolution of arable land as % of total area. Source: World Development Indicators (WDI), November 
2014 
Land Use as at 2012. Source: Resource Statistics - Land, December 2015 
Fisheries 
Seafood is an important part of the Ghanaian diet and economy, making up 40–60 percent of 
protein intake and contributing 4.5 percent to national GDP. The sector primarily comprises marine 
fisheries with some inland, freshwater fisheries in Lake Volta, Lake Botsumtwi and other reservoirs. 
Rising sea surface temperatures alter migratory patterns and reproductive cycles of key species such 
as anchovies, sardines, tilapia and catfish. The decline in fisheries sector productivity from climate 
variability and overfishing forces Ghana to spend over $200 million per year on seafood imports to 
satisfy domestic demand.14   
14 FAO AQUASTAT, 2014; FAO. 2016. Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles:  
10 
Water Resources 
Almost half of the water used in Ghana originates from three international rivers (Volta, Bia and 
Tano), which flow in from outside its borders, putting the country at risk of water insecurity if 
political tensions arise over declining water availability. Tension exists between Ghana and Burkina 
Faso as a result of Burkina Faso’s decision to withdraw water from the Volta Basin, reducing water 
levels required for hydropower generation in Ghana. A recent study projected flows in the Volta 
Basin could fall by 24 percent by 2050 and 45 percent by 2100 due to reduced rainfall and increased 
evaporation. About 25 percent of the population does not have access to clean water. Declining 
rainfall levels, drought and rising temperatures are straining available water resources amidst 
increased demand from high rates of urbanization and industrialization.15 
Climate Stressors and Climate Risks  
WATER RESOURCES 
Stressors 
Risks 
Rising  
temperatures 
Increased conflict and political tensions with 
surrounding countries over transboundary 
rivers 
Increased  
intensity and  
variability of  
rainfall 
Reduced river flows, particularly in the Volta 
Basin 
Reduced quantity and quality of water for 
human consumption, agriculture, industry and 
hydropower 
Contaminated water sources due to salinization 
and runoff 
Rising sea level 
Damaged water infrastructure due to storm 
surges 
Table: Climate Stressors and Risks – Water Resources (USAID 2017) 
Rare or Endangered Species  
The Republic of Ghana.  
15 University of Ghana. 2014. Managing Shoreline Change Under Increasing Sea-Level Rise in Ghana. 
11 
Populations of many wildlife species found in the savanna have dwindled as a result of human‐
induced interventions, mainly through over hunting, inappropriate agricultural practices and 
expansion of agricultural land, road construction and bush burning (Appendix IV). The demand for 
wild animal meat (popularly called bushmeat in Ghana) is ever increasing, resulting in widespread 
hunting. As human populations in the northern parts of the country increases, exerting enormous 
pressure on the finite good "land" and creating land hunger among mostly the rural people, intact 
savanna woodlands and secondary groves which provide wild animals refuge and source of food 
become fragmented and unable to hold large populations of animals (Acheampong, 2001).  
Wild Animal Migration  
Wild animal movement between reserves, groves and sanctuaries in the northern savanna may be 
limited because these are either fragmented or interspersed with farmlands. Studies have shown 
that wild animals move from Togo into Ghana and vice versa, using gallery forests along the Red 
Volta River. It is also on record that wild animals move from the GEF supported Nazinga Game Ranch 
in Burkina Faso to farms on the Ghana side of the Ghana‐Burkina Faso border. Communities outlying 
protected areas have occasionally had their farms and property destroyed by wild animals mainly 
elephants that move outside the reserves, particularly in the dry season, in search for water and 
food. In 1997 elephants invaded some villages including Widinaba, Zongoiri, Nangodi, Sekoti and 
Datoko, all at the fringes of the Red Volta Forest Reserve, which is a natural trail for elephants 
moving from Togo into Ghana. Where villages received no help from the staff of Wildlife Division in 
driving these animals back into the reserves (or gallery forests) they resorted to killing the rampaging 
animals (Acheampong, 2001). 
Climate trends and impacts 
Agriculture vulnerability to climate impacts and examples of potential past events: Historical data for 
Ghana from the year 1961 to 2000 clearly shows a progressive rise in temperature and decrease in 
mean annual rainfall in all the six agro-ecological zones in the country. Climate change is manifested 
in Ghana through: (i) rising temperatures, (ii) declining rainfall totals and increased variability, (iii) 
rising sea levels and (iv) high incidence of weather extremes and disasters. (UNDP, 2013) 
Approximately 72% of the whole land area of the country is considered vulnerable to desertification, 
which is already affecting 40 % of the territory. According to the National Action Programme to 
Combat Drought and Desertification, the land area prone to desertification has almost doubled in 
the last decades. The expected rise in population growth and food demand in the next decades will 
exacerbate this problem. Land degradation associated with the loss in the quality and quantity of 
vegetative biomass and with deforestation—one of the major direct causes of land degradation in 
Ghana— has a major impact on ecosystem services (i.e. reduction of provision of wood and non-
wood forest products for both for domestic consumption and for export; biodiversity loss; instability 
in hydrological regimes; reduction in the land’s resilience to natural climate variability and natural 
hazards). For example, the Volta River and Lake—which provide several ecosystem services that 
form the basis for a rich biodiversity and other environmental goods— have been increasingly 
12 
damaged by severe environmental degradation in the form of lake level fluctuations, water scarcity, 
nitrification, and siltation mainly from watershed erosion and deforestation. (GoG, 2011b) 
Already today, Ghana’s agriculture sector experiences a range of climate impacts, mainly caused 
through unreliable, irregular and unpredictable rainfall patterns. Indiscriminate deforestation 
reduces soil vegetation cover which reinforces the problem of poor or degraded soils from intensive 
or bad cultivation practices. Prolonged periods of drought increase the population of pests such as 
the variegated grasshoppers, which damage harvests (e.g. cassava) and threatens food security. In 
addition, higher temperatures lead to lower yields throughout the agriculture sector and puts 
livelihoods at risk. (GoG, 2011a) 
The agriculture sector is highly vulnerable because it is largely rain-fed with a very low-level of 
irrigation development. In fact, the predicted increased rainfall variability, and overall drop in rainfall 
will increase the chances of drought periods and probably reduce agricultural productivity. In the 
dryer transition zone above Kumasi, bushfires and overexploitation have eliminated several forest 
reserves. According to research, bush burning, a widely applied land management practice by many 
farmers with the intention to improve soil fertility, has demonstrated to have devastating effects on 
the environment. In livestock rearing areas bush burning often destroys livestock’s fodder for the dry 
season. (GoG, 2011b) 
Climate impacts on Ghana’s agriculture 
Historical data for Ghana from the year 1961 to 2000 clearly shows a progressive rise in temperature 
and decrease in mean annual rainfall in all the six agro-ecological zones of the country. Climate 
change is manifested in Ghana through: (i) rising temperatures, (ii) declining total rainfall and 
increased variability, (iii) rising sea levels and (iv) high incidence of weather extremes and disasters. 
(UNDP, 2013)  
Approximately 72% of the land area of the country is considered vulnerable to desertification, which 
is already affecting 40 % of the territory. According to the National Action Programme to Combat 
Drought and Desertification, the land area prone to desertification has almost doubled in the last 
decades. The expected rise in population growth and food demand in the next decades will 
exacerbate this problem. Land degradation associated with the loss in the quality and quantity of 
vegetative biomass and with deforestation—one of the major direct causes of land degradation in 
Ghana— has a major impact on ecosystem services (i.e. reduction of provision of wood and non-
wood forest products for both for domestic consumption and for export; biodiversity loss; instability 
in hydrological regimes; reduction in the land’s resilience to natural climate variability and natural 
hazards). For example, the Volta River and Lake—which provide several ecosystem services that 
form the basis for a rich biodiversity and other environmental goods— have been increasingly 
damaged by severe environmental degradation in the form of lake level fluctuations, water scarcity, 
nitrification, and siltation mainly from watershed erosion and deforestation. (GoG, 2011b) 
13 
Like most African countries, Ghana is particularly vulnerable because its economy relies heavily on 
climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture, forestry and hydro-energy. Agriculture in particular is 
the backbone of Ghana's economy, providing employment and subsistence to the majority of the 
population. With irrigation being almost nonexistent, Ghana's agriculture is highly vulnerable to 
climate variability. About 35% of Ghana's land mass is desert and desertification is already currently 
proceeding at an estimated 20,000 ha per year (EPA, 2009). Ghana's coastline has a length of 565km 
and the coastal regions of Ghana may be vulnerable to sea level rise. Sea level in this region is 
projected by climate models to rise by 18 to 56cm in the 2090s, relative to 1980-1999 under the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Emissions Scenario (SRES) A2. 
(Asafu-Adjaye, 2013) 
Even without climate change, agriculture in Ghana faces serious challenges such as low productivity 
due to low input usage (including fertilizers), water supply variability and high transactions costs. 
There are also market imperfections in the input markets and services including land, labor, credit 
and extension. The market failure in the agricultural sector therefore increases the vulnerability of 
resource-poor farmers and complicates the effects of climate-induced shocks, which in turn makes it 
more difficult for them to cope with climate change. (Asafu-Adjaye, 2013) 
Due to the high cost of such events, smallholders’ limited investment capacity is fully focused on 
recovery and purchase of inputs, thus preventing them from investing in assets and measures that 
would limit their exposure. As a result, the impacts of climatic events are more profound, and the 
recovery time is prolonged. This vulnerability is exacerbated by the poor market conditions for 
smallholder farming in Ghana. With their current assets, capacities, and connections to markets, 
smallholders are not equipped to deliver a regular supply of adequate volumes of quality produce 
required for sustainable market access 
Current and past climate impacts on yield 
Ghana is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Climate change in the country manifests 
itself through documented trends of increased droughts, flooding, and significant rainfall pattern 
variations. Climate change in Ghana is projected to affect its vital water resources, energy supplies, 
crop production and food security. With its five northern regions as the most vulnerable, Ghana is 
already experiencing increased extreme weather conditions with higher incidences and more 
prolonged periods of flooding and droughts. High temperatures will further increase, and rainfall 
patterns will be less predictable. More intense rainfall is expected to increase erosion, while less 
total rainfall may decrease the water flow. The country’s vulnerability is largely due to dependence 
on the production of crops that are sensitive to climate change, and by a lack of agricultural 
diversification. 
For Ghana, all recent projections made using GCMs agree that there will be an increase in air 
temperature for all agro-ecological zones which will decrease from the semi-arid Northern region to 
the coastal Southern regions but changes in precipitation will vary considerably both spatially and 
14 
temporally (EPA, 2000; World Bank, 2010; Stanturf, et al., 2011; McSweeney, New, & Lizcano, 2013). 
Increased air temperature will lead to increased evaporative demand thus altering atmospheric 
circulation patterns and contributing towards increased frequency of extreme events and drying. 
The frequency of days and nights that are considered 'hot' in the current climate is projected to 
increase, and the frequency of those considered 'cold' is expected to decrease (McSweeney, New, & 
Lizcano, 2013). Additionally, in most parts of Ghana, the onset of the rainy season is expected to 
shift to later periods of the year, but the end of the rainy season and the total amounts of rainfall 
will remain largely unchanged (Van de Giesen, Liebe, & Jung, 2010). Overall, even though there are 
huge uncertainties in future climatic conditions due to the limited number of studies on climate 
change projections and difficulties in representing convective systems (Cook & Vizy, 2006) all 
projections show warming with associated changes in rainfall patterns. (Olesen, Chirinda, & Adiku, 
2013).The resulting climate related hazards affecting the agricultural sector include: (i) water stress 
for crops with increasing dry spells, (ii) degradation and erosion of arable land (with compound 
effects across wider landscapes); and (iii) intermittent floods and the resulting damage to critical 
infrastructure. (IFAD, 2014) 
Schlenker and Lobell (2010) showed that compared to average yields over the period 1961-2006, 
mean yields of maize, sorghum, millet and groundnuts will decrease by about 20% towards the 
middle of the century (2046-2065). Using crop yields for 2000 as the base year, Nutsukpo et al. 
(2012) found that by 2050, climate change would cause an overall yield decrease of less than 25% 
for rainfed maize and rice and above 25% for groundnuts. However, regional variations in yield were 
observed with yield increases being projected in some areas (De Pinto, Demirag, Haruna, Koo, & 
Asamoah, 2012). With the 1990/1991 cropping season as the base year, cassava yields are expected 
to decrease by 3%, 13.5% and 53% in 2020, 2050, and 2080, and cocoyam yields are projected to 
decrease by 11.8%, 29.6% and 68% in 2020, 2050 and 2080, respectively (Armah, et al., 2011; 
Olesen, Chirinda, & Adiku, 2013). 
15 
Climate change mitigation 
For GHG emissions, Ghana ranks 151 of 188 countries for per capital emissions, contributing only 
0.07% of global emissions. However, Ghana is highly vulnerable to global climate change. Ghana 
ranks 101 out of 181 countries in the ND-GAIN index (2016) for climate vulnerability. Ghana is the 
68th most vulnerable country and the 85th least ready country– meaning that it is vulnerable to, and 
moderately ready to combat climate change effects. Vulnerability measures the country’s exposure, 
sensitivity, and ability to cope with the negative effects of climate change by considering 
vulnerability in six life-supporting sectors: food, water, ecosystem service, health, human habitat and 
infrastructure. Readiness measures a country’s ability to leverage investments and convert them to 
adaptation actions by considering economic, governance and social readiness.  
Ghana’s emissions of Green House Gases (GHG) have increased since 2004, in the 2014, which is the 
official latest reporting year to UNFCCC, Ghana’s total GHG emissions, excluding AFOLU sector, were 
estimated to be 16.51 MtCO2e.  Carbon dioxide has increased by 82%, Nitrous oxide by 22% and 
Methane by 16%.  The mean annual temperature has risen by 1.0 °C since 1960.  The number of 'hot' 
days per year has increased by 13.2 %, while the number of 'hot' nights per year has increased by 
20 %. ‘Cold' days and nights per year have decreased by 3.3 and 5.1 % respectively.  In the period 
2005 – 2010, the period between start and end of rains varied by as much as 30 % from year to year. 
Sea Surface temperatures are unstable.16  
Ghana aims to become a full-fledged middle-income country by 2020, but climate change is a serious 
threat to this ambition. It is already affecting economic output, livelihoods and, therefore, long-term 
development prospects, even though Ghana’s own contribution to global climate change has been 
negligible. The reason for Ghana’s vulnerability is the reliance on sectors that are sensitive to climate 
change, such as agriculture, forestry and energy production. Evidence already shows the impact of 
climate change on our national economy, with clear signs that the coastal zone, agriculture and 
16 Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (2011): Ghana’s Second National Communication to the 
UNFCCC. http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc2.pdf 
16 
water resources are all negatively affected, with consequent impacts on poverty, health and 
women’s livelihoods.17 
Biophysical Vulnerability 
Ghana has different ecological and climatic zones, from coastal savannah in the far south to humid 
rainforests in the southern half of the country and the dry, hot Sahel in the north. Total annual 
rainfall is over 2,000 mm in the extreme southwest, less than 1,100 mm in the north, and 750 mm in 
the south eastern coastal tip. Rainfall is characterized by strong inter-annual variations due to El 
Niño events causing drier than normal conditions. There is a strong rainfall seasonality differing per 
zone: 
North - Wet season: May – October (150-250 mm per month in peak months July-September); 
North - Dry season: November – April (with hot ‘Harmattan’ winds that blow from the Sahara 
Desert)6; 
South - Long dry season: November – March; 
South - Long wet season: April – July; 
South - Short dry season: August; 
South - Short wet season: September – October (20-25% of total annual rainfall). 
Monthly mean temperature is between 25 and 30°C throughout the year. Temperature variations 
are greater in the north than in the south, with highest temperatures at the onset of the dry season 
(April-June, 25-27°C) and lowest temperatures during the wet season (July-September 25-27 °C).18  
With most of the rain falling in intense storms of short duration, the country is vulnerable to 
extreme events such as heavy rainfall (with on average 44 mm per day) resulting in heavy runoff and 
erosion, especially at the beginning of the rainy season. At the same time, the long dry season in the 
north has led to serious droughts in the region. 
17https://www.weadapt.org/sites/weadapt.org/files/ghana_national_climate_change_master_plan
_2015_2020.pdf 
18 Akudugu, M.A.; Alhassan, A.R. (2012): The Climate Change Menace, Food Security, Livelihoods 
and Social Safety in Northern Ghana. International Journal of Sustainable Development & World 
Policy 1(3): 80-95. http://www.aessweb.com/pdf-files/1%20(3)%2080-95.pdf 
17 
Map 1: Ecological Zones of Ghana 
Over the last 30 years, a slight increase of total annual precipitation was observed. Ghanaian farmers 
have identified erratic rainfall patterns, longer periods of Harmattan (hot desert winds) and 
desertification as the main current effects of climate change. In the eastern Volta Basin, prolonged 
dry seasons have replaced shorter dry spells. No clear trend has been observed in the intensity or 
frequency of extreme rainfall events. There is evidence of a temperature increase over the past 
decades. Mean annual temperature has increased (reports range from +0.4 °C over 100 years13 to 
18 
+1 °C over 50 years), with the strongest increase between April and July (+0.27 °C per decade). The 
rate of increase has been more rapid in the north of the country than in the south. Moreover, the 
number of ‘hot days’ and ‘hot nights’ has increased significantly in all seasons (by 13.2% and 20% 
respectively between 1960 and 2003), while the number of ‘cold days’ and ‘cold nights’ has 
decreased (by 3.3% and 5.1% respectively over the same period).19 
The north of the country has repeatedly experienced incidences of droughts and floods. The 2007 
floods in the northern part of the country, immediately following a period of drought, affected more 
than 325,000 people. In 2015, days of torrential rain around Accra resulted in widespread flooding 
and left 159 dead.20 Projections for climate change show large uncertainty concerning the change in 
rainfall. For the future, precipitation estimates range between predicting a -3% to +7% change in 
precipitation. For total annual precipitation, projections for the year 2100 vary from -15% to +16% 
compared to current annual rainfall although a national decrease of 4% by 2040 is a commonly cited 
projection. Some models predict an initial increase of rainfall in some regions, followed by a 
decrease of rainfall in most regions over the longer term. Projections in seasonal differences are a bit 
more convergent: in general, rainfall increases are predicted for July – December, and decreases for 
March – June. For the northern regions, this suggests that the start of the wet season may be 
delayed and the growing season may shorten.21 
Map 2: Projected Precipitation Changes: 2030 (Left), 2050 (Right) Compared to 2010 
19 Ibid. 
20 USAID (2017). Climate Change Risk Profile: Ghana. 
https://www.climatelinks.org/resources/climate-change-risk-profile-ghana 
21 Ibid. 
19 
Map 3: Predicted temperature changes: 2030 (Left), 2050 (Right) Compared to 2010 
The temperature is expected to increase further, for the end of the century a warming ranging 
between 1.4 to 4.2°C is likely. The increase is expected to be most severe in the north of the country. 
It is expected that 25-90% of all days will count as ‘hot days’ by 2100 (compared to 10% under the 
current climate) – with the highest percentage (up to 99%) in the months of July – September. 22 
These changes in rainfall and temperature will increase the frequency and intensity of extreme 
events. The duration of long-lasting heat waves is expected to increase by 22 days by 2100, 
potentially causing more severe droughts. At the same time, intensity of heavy rains is expected to 
increase (+4% by 2100) and the proportion of total annual rainfall that falls in such heavy rain events 
will also increase. This combination may intensify seasonal and inter-annual variation – with drought 
in one year and floods in the next, or even droughts and floods within the same season. Another 
projected effect of climate change is a rising sea level. Ghana’s coastal regions, including its largest 
city, Accra, are expected to face a sea level rise of 13-45 cm in 100 years and are especially 
vulnerable to flooding and waterborne disease.23 
22 WHO & UNFCCC (2105), Climate and Health Profile – 2015, Ghana. 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/208862/1/WHO_FWC_PHE_ 
23 Ibid 
20 
Temperature average over the reference period 1986-2005. This map is based on the EWEMBI 
dataset. 
Projected change in temperature for 2031-2050 compared to the reference period 1986-2005. Here 
the ensemble mean of regional climate model projections is displayed. Grid-cells for which a model-
disagreement is found are colored in gray. The projections are based on the emission scenario 
RCP4.5. 
These changes are likely to affect Ghana’s water availability and food security, especially in the north 
of the country, where the mono-modal rainfall pattern results in a long ‘hunger season’ before the 
harvesting of new crops. This season used to be April - July, but some reports indicate that this has 
extended to March –August due to an ongoing decline in productivity of subsistence food crops. 
Food insecurity is largest in the Upper East (6-7 months for all crops), followed by the Upper West 
and the Northern Region (depending on the crop, on average 5 months). Projected future climate-
related impacts to food security include: 
Increased water stress as streams and rivers as well as small-scale dam systems dry up (-15-20% of 
water flow in all Ghana’s basins for 2020, and -30-40% for 2050), flooding of coastal areas and low 
water levels that will affect operation of the only hydro-generating dam in the country (which 
produces 80% of national electricity supply);  
increased crop loss/failure and reduced yields, particularly for cassava; 
desertification and loss of arable land for agricultural production; 
outbreaks of crop/livestock pests/diseases due to high temperatures and/or standing water;  
loss of productive lands due to ecosystem deterioration; 
reduced freshwater water stocks due to reduced river flows;  
post-harvest losses due to difficulties in crop preservation as a result of erratic/heavy rainfall; 
salinization effects on crops due to sea erosion and tidal flooding in the coastal region. 
21 
Socio-Economic Vulnerability 
Climate change vulnerability in Ghana is greatest for those who are strongly dependent on natural 
resources and have the lowest capacity to cope with these changes. Smallholder farmers (especially 
female-headed farming households) in Ghana are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change and variability due to the compounding impacts on yield from poor lateritic soils, limited 
irrigation, and limited transport to markets. In Ghana, women constitute 52% of the agricultural 
labour force and produce 70% of subsistence crops.24In addition, they depend on water and crops 
due to their responsibilities in the household. They are hampered in their adaptive capacity to 
climate change due to various factors, including inaccessibility of financial resources, a lack of 
information and technology, and unfavourable land tenure systems. 
Agriculture is the backbone of Ghana’s economy, providing employment to 45% of its workforce, 
contributing to 21% of GDP and supplying over 70% of its national food requirements. Since 
Ghanaian agriculture is predominantly rain-fed (with only 4% of its irrigation potential developed), 
particularly in the semi-arid north, it is highly vulnerable to climate change. Agriculture is 
characterized by a low level of diversification, which makes farmers more vulnerable to crop failure. 
Farmers in the north of the country – and particularly in the Upper East – are most vulnerable.25This 
is partly due to the hot and dry conditions of the area and the bad quality of agricultural lands (the 
Upper East is most exposed to land degradation and soil erosion), but also because of general 
poverty and limited access to alternative livelihoods. In the northern regional total crop failure is 
expected to occur approximately once every 5 years due to delayed or diminished rains. Ghana’s 
main staple crops are, in order of amount produced and consumed: cassava, yam, plantain, maize, 
and rice. 
Root and tuber crops are predominantly grown and consumed in the south of the country, while 
grain crops are cultivated in the north. Important cash crops include cocoa (mainly in the south) and 
groundnuts (in the north). Projected climate change impacts for these crops include:26 
Cassava yields are expected to reduce due to both increased temperatures and periods of water 
stress. Projections of productivity losses are up to 3% in 2020, 13.5% in 2050, and 53% in 2080.  
24 NDESA (2017): World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables. 
Working Paper No. 
ESA/P/WP/248.https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2017_KeyFindings.pdf 
25 USAID (2017) note 16 above 
26 CIA (2015). The World Fact book, Ghana. Available via 
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/gh.html 
22 
Yam requires fertile soils but less water than cassava. Yam yields are expected to decrease by 11.8% 
by 2020, 29.6% by 2050 and 68% by 2080.  
Maize yields will decrease by about 15% by 2050 in all regions. Some models however predict a yield 
increase for the north of the country.  
Rice cultivation is expected to be subject to a similar decrease of 0-25%. 
Groundnuts are currently cultivated mainly in the north, but no clear yield change projections under 
climate change exist for this part of the country. In the south, however, yield increases of around 
25% have been estimated.  
Cocoa, a major cash crop and Ghana’s second leading foreign exchange earner, is highly sensitive to 
rising temperatures and drought. Areas suitable to for cocoa production will contract by 2030 as 
temperature rise, floods increase, and soil salinization and coastal erosion occur. It is also vulnerable 
to pests and diseases that may be triggered by increasing temperature and humidity.27 
Access to water resources will also decline. About half of the water used in Ghana originates from 
three international rivers (Volta, Bia and Tano) which flow from outside its borders. A recent study 
projected flows in the Volta Basin could fall by 24% by 2050 and 45% by 2100 due to reduced rainfall 
and increased evaporation (from increased temperature). Transboundary climate-related conflicts 
are likely to increase, e.g. current tensions with Burkina Faso over its decision to withdraw water 
from the Volta which would reduce the water levels required for hydropower generation in 
Ghana.28 
Other conflicts/tensions include the movement of Fulani herdsmen and their cattle from the dry 
Sahel region into farming communities in southern Ghana, water allocation disputes between the 
north and south of the country, and tensions arising from economic dependence on climate change-
susceptible crops such as cocoa. Such conflicts not only arise from climate change, but can also 
deepen vulnerability to climate change effects as they often result in increased poverty and eroded 
social networks. 
Effects of climate change on the agricultural sector 
Most agricultural production in Ghana relies on small, rainfed plots that are highly vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change. Erratic precipitation patterns have severe consequences on production, 
as only 2 percent of the country’s irrigation potential has been tapped. Rising temperatures are 
projected to lower yields in major staple crops (cassava, yams, plantains, maize and rice). Cassava 
27 USAID (2017) note 16 above 
28 Ibid. 
23 
yields, for example, are projected to fall by 29.6 percent by 2080 and maize yields by 7 percent by 
2050. Total crop failure is expected to occur approximately once every five years in Ghana’s 
northern region due to delayed or diminished rains. Cocoa, a major cash crop and Ghana’s second 
leading foreign exchange earner, is sensitive to rising temperatures and drought. Areas suitable for 
cocoa production, which lie primarily along the coast, are contracting as temperatures rise, floods 
increase, and soil salinization and coastal erosion continue.29 
Climate Stressors and Climate Risks  
AGRICULTURE 
Stressors 
Rising  
temperatures 
Risks 
Increased crop loss/failure and reduced yields, 
particularly for cassava 
Increased incidence of pests and crop diseases 
Reduced rainfall 
Shorter growing seasons 
Desertification and loss of arable land for 
agricultural production 
Soil salinization and saltwater intrusion into 
coastal aquifers 
Drought-like  
conditions 
Rising sea level 
Table: Climate Stressors and Climate Risks - Agriculture 
Smallholder and subsistence farmers are particularly vulnerable to any type of climatic or economic 
shock owing to their high dependence on local natural resources for their livelihoods, their chronic 
food insecurity, physical isolation and lack of access to formal safety nets (e.g., insurance). Small 
farmers in Ghana are more exposed to pest and disease outbreaks, droughts and extreme weather 
events.Droughts in the Northern part of Ghana), which cause significant crop and income losses and 
exacerbate food insecurity. Although small farmers use a variety of informal risk-coping strategies 
(storing water, seeds and food, replanting crops, rebuilding homes with local materials, finding 
temporary work), these are insufficient to prevent them from remaining food insecure and reduce 
their vulnerability. Due to the limited resources and technical capacity of the MoFA, few farmers 
have adjusted their farming strategies in response to climate change. Thus, urgent technical, 
29 Olesen, J., Chirinda, N., & Adiku, S. (2013). Climate change impacts on crop productivity and 
possible adaptations in Ghana. Ghana Policy Journal Edition on Climate Change. Available via 
http://dspace.africaportal.org/jspui/bitstream/123456789/34938/2/gpj-v5-n4.pdf?1 
24 
financial and institutional support is needed to improve the agricultural production and food security 
of small farmers in Ghana and make their livelihoods resilient to climate change.30 
Figure: Projected change in crop suitability for different crops under RCP8.5 (business as usual 
climate change) by 2050, as compared to current suitability. Legend: blue = increase, yellow = stable, 
red = decrease. (Postdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, 2019) 
Adaptation 
From the foregoing, Climate Change places a high demand on management techniques for 
agricultural production and extra inputs (e.g., irrigation, drainage, protective covered structures, and 
climate proof facilities) into agriculture thereby resulting in an increase in cost of production. 
However, the costs of reconstruction after disasters are proven to be far more expensive than the 
costs of adaptation and risk reduction. Proactive adaptation responses could reduce the vulnerability 
of farmers and agriculture sector-dependent communities while saving important social and 
economic costs. Climate change only exacerbates problems that already exist. Furthermore, the 
adaptive capacities of local communities to cope with the effects of severe climate impacts decline if 
there is a lack of physical, economic and institutional resources. Below is a discussion of specific 
adaptation measures recommended for both government and smallholder farmer beneficiaries of 
the Project, disaggregated by stage in the value chain. 
Production 
At farmer level : Use locally-adapted technologies (like Conservation Agriculture) where farming can 
be practised without altering the local ecosystem; avoid importing foreign technologies and produce 
inputs from local resources; adjust planting dates to match rainfall patterns as much as possible; 
introduce efficient irrigation mechanisms; plant local crop varieties (heat, pest and flood-resilient); 
introduce Integrated Planting Mechanisms (IPMS); build climate-proof crop cover structures; 
implement integrated soil fertility systems (e.g., fertigation from tilapia ponds); conserve native fruit 
trees and other varieties of locally-adapted crops; maintain genetic diversity in fields and herds; 
create both temporal and spatial diversity in fields (with multi- and inter-cropping, agro-forestry and 
30 Ibid; WASCAL (2015): West African Science Service Center on Climate Change and Adapted Land 
Use. https://icg4wascal.icg.kfa-juelich.de/ 
25 
livestock-crop systems); practice fallow and no-tillage to cope with soil moisture and nutrient 
deficiencies; maintain and promote backyard gardens; replace poultry with climate-adapted fowls. 
At government level: Farmers from the drought-prone districts in the north cultivating vegetables (of 
high water intake) should, in addition to adopting technologies on irrigation, be encouraged to 
slowly transit to high value, drought adapted crops. Safeguard the knowledge, practices and benefits 
of regional ancestral agricultural techniques, which form the basis for current and future agricultural 
innovations and improved technologies.  
Promote a diversified use of the landscape. 
Develop Climate Information Systems that allow farmers to plan the timing of operations. 
Study the implementation of an index-based crop insurance and Payments for Environmental 
Services Schemes. 
Storage. Promote skills and technologies of food preservation and storage among women and youth. 
Maintain strategic local food and seed reserves, though Community Seedbanks. Build climate-proof 
storage facilities. 
Processing. Build climate-proof agro-processing facilities; conserve water, and ensure correct 
disposal of wastewater. Run facilities with autonomous energy systems 
Marketing. Advocate for local agricultural production from sustainable family farmers. Maximize 
selling of value-added products. 
Consumption. Encourage a local and diversified diet. 
Transversal. Strengthen formal and informal farmers’ associations. A strong sense of community and 
ownership is vital for quick recovery from extreme climate events and effective dissemination of 
climate adapted technologies and farming practices. 
These adaptation options may face a variety of challenges and barriers in Ghana including: economic 
resources, technical knowledge and adaptive capacity in the agriculture sector. Climate change may, 
therefore, enhance existing opportunities and priorities for the modernization of agriculture in 
Ghana by enabling effective and proactive adaptation to climate change as this project proposes to 
do. 
Climate risk category 
26 
Changes in temperature and rainfall are having significant impacts on Ghana, especially in the 
poorest communities of smallholder and subsistence farmers. Risk and exposure are high in the 
agriculture sector, therefore the project is considered to be of high climate risk and it will be 
necessary to conduct an in-depth analysis. The design has been enhanced by mainstreaming climate 
resilience across all its components and activities. Financing from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) will 
be sought for this purpose, recognizing the higher costs that climate change imposes on the 
development efforts and investments by vulnerable developing countries. With the risk mitigation 
measures incorporated in the project, the climate risk is reduced to medium. 
Key Issues 
Access to markets: Among marketing constraints identified by smallholder farmers interviewed 
during Project design were: 
poor bargaining power in the main markets and with local processing plants; and 
low prices paid by middlemen. 
 Agricultural production.: Among production constraints identified by smallholder farmers 
interviewed during Project design were: 
climate-induced crop losses, (b) weak farmers’ organizations and associations (c) Unavailability of 
inputs and equipment; (d) limited access to finance; and (e) limited access to irrigation. 
Institutional capacity:  The ratio of trained and equipped agriculture personnel to farmers is critically 
small. There is also a need to improve the technical capacity of agricultural personnel. Specifically, 
there exists a need for more trained personnel in climate resilient agriculture practices, integrated 
crop/pest management, food processing, hydrology, monitoring and documentation, research 
methods, Information Technology (IT) and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). This expertise 
must be established in the MoFA so that these critical services can be available at the national level 
and for the benefit of all farmers 
Institutional analysis and Capacity building: Aiming for a long transformation that will enhance the 
communities’ resilience and coping capacities, the following capacity-building needs among farmers, 
villagers and government staff have been identified during Project design: 
Production planning in relation to market demand. 
Training on agroforestry, and climate-smart agricultural practices. 
Networking, leadership, cooperativism, conflict resolution, negotiation, procurement of goods. 
Skills for disaster response, for economic use of excess produce and for adding value to produce 
such as: non-refrigerated storage of food which includes fruits and vegetables. This is especially 
27 
important for communities without reliable supplies of electrical power and/or vulnerable to loss of 
power due to climate disasters. 
Monitoring, documentation and analysis of Climate Change impacts. 
Implementation arrangements: The Ministry of Finance will be designated as Lead Programme 
Agency (LPA) with overall responsibility for the project implementation; and the GCF’s clear position 
on their mandate to finance climate resilience projects.The Government of Ghana, and especially the 
MOF, has experience in the implementation of externally financed projects and is knowledgeable of 
the Categories of Expenditure for organizing disbursements and applying the percentages of 
financing according to the different funding sources. The MOF will ensure proper financial 
management and implementation of the project through the creation of a dedicated Project 
Management Unit (PMU). The PMU will carry out the overall programming and budgeting taking the 
lead for overall project implementation, which will include working with service providers, 
Government Ministries and Departments, existing projects with similar objectives, individual project 
participants and the municipalities of the Project’s target areas. Therefore, will host the specialists as 
well as the know-how related to the SECAP implementation i.e. climate change adaptation and 
ESMP safeguards triggering. The PMU will also lead the hiring of dedicated consultants or consulting 
firms for the program’s SECAP follow up and M&E. Environmental Assessment of the proposed 
design solutions, as per the applicable laws of Ghana are to be carried out by the Ghana 
Environmental Protection Agency.   
Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public etc.:Field trips and interviews 
were held with people from the communities targeted by the project including farmers, village 
council, and women in Kumasi, Brong Ahafo, Northern Region and the Upper East Region. Meetings 
were held in Accra, with key actors from government institutions. which are listed below: 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Rural Development 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
Ministry of Women and Children's Affairs 
Forestry Commission 
University of Ghana. Marine & Fisheries Science Department 
Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development 
Ghana Commodity Exchange 
Ghana Investment Promotion Centre 
Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool 
Rural Development Fund 
Ghana Community Bank 
28 
United Nations Development Programme (Ghana) 
Apex Bank 
Alliance for Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) 
Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (GASIP) 
Ghana Incentive-Based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) 
Targeting  
Geographical Targeting: AFFORD targets two regions; namely, Northern region and Brong Ahafo 
region are selected from the old definition of 10 regions for AAFORD. The regions  are targeted 
based on: (i) their level of production; (ii) the presence of other value chain programmes; and 
(iii) the existence of processors for value addition iii) high level of poverty iv) impact of climate 
change  and climate variability v) food insecurity and nutrition vi) presence of banking sector vii) 
gender and youth gap in agriculture 
508,307 households, 30 clusters and 350 villages. A total of 75,000 households will be targeted by 
the programme as beneficiaries. As Ghana’s poverty is largely rural with 38.2% of the people in rural 
areas considered poor compared to 10.4 in the urban areas, the focus of the programme is on rural 
areas in the Northern and Brong-Ahafo regions. 
Inequality  
GINI 
Coefficient  
GLSS 7 
Upper West 
48.1 
Northern 
45.3 
Upper East 
43.7 
No. of rural poor 
people (million) 
Mean annual per 
capital income (GHS) 
Number of Rural 
Community 
Banks31 
 GLSS 7, 2019 
Est32 
0.5 
1.65 
0.62 
GLSS 6 
3,015.7 
3,023.5 
1,801.9 
2019 
4 
7 
5 
31 Extracted from Arb Apex Bank web page: 
https://www.arbapexbank.com/region_select.cfm?Ashanti%20Region&region_id=3&corpnews_cati
d=8   
32 2019 population projection was used for the estimation 
https://www.citypopulation.de/en/ghana/cities/  
29 
Volta 
39.7 
Brong Ahafo 
38.6 
Eastern 
Ashanti 
35.4 
37.9 
Greater Accra  35.1 
Central 
Western 
37.4 
36 
0.71 
0.65 
0.31 
0.48 
0.04 
0.26 
0.46 
4,382.2 
3,949.1 
3,919.1 
8,205.4 
5,428.5 
3,975.7 
7,730.7 
14 
21 
23 
29 
7 
20 
12 
Target Group: The primary target groups for the programme remain rural smallholder households 
engaged in the millet, sorghum, maize, groundnut, cassava, soya bean  and poultry value chains. This 
includes all groups compile in the table below.The entry point for  AFFORD is organized FBAs, 
MSMEs, Nucleolus farmers, off takers  or those willing to organize themselves into groups. Good 
governance, social inclusion, and participation are also criteria for the selection of organizations. This 
approach is to mitigate credit risks and better organize value chains from subsistence agriculture to 
markets oriented agriculture. This includes strengthening the capacity of all actors along the Value 
chains to address underlying barriers limiting agricultural productivity and competitiveness ( gender 
and youth gap, climate change, saving and credit behaviour; sustainable agricultural practices and 
techniques) 
Target group 
Direct 
Outreac
h 
(HH) 
% of 
outreac
h 
Land 
ownershi
p 
Key characteristics 
Smallholder semi 
subsistence 
households 
60,000  80% 
Up to 2 
Ha 
Resource-poor with little or no access to credit. 
Revenue may fall below the upper poverty line of 
1,341 GHS a year per adult.  
Limited access to improved inputs, mechanization 
services, post-harvest management and marketing.  
Rely on their savings to finance their agricultural 
activities.   
30 
Market-oriented 
smallholder 
households 
11,250  15% 
2-10 Ha 
Income may range GHS 1,000 to GHS 6,000 a month 
from the production of cash crops. Separate income 
sources may exist from off-farm activities and 
remittances.  
May consider using credit/loans to access improved 
seeds, machinery for land preparation, harvesting, 
planting and storage facilities if readily available.  
Large farming 
households 
3,750 
5% 
More 
than 10 
Ha 
Have better access to financial capital.  
Use hired labour for farming activities.  
Total 
75,000  100% 
Youth (18-35) 
30,000  40% 
Likely to be food secure, literate and influential in their 
communities.  
Target one or two specific commodities for 
commercial purposes and produce based on a 
contractual agreement 
- Majority of youth who are younger than 30 years old in Brong 
Ahafo and 25 years old in Northern Region are not married. 
- Unemployment rate is highest among youth who are between 
20 to 29 years old in Rural Ghana. Unemployment is higher for 
female youth especially for those who have graduated from 
secondary education.  .  
Women 
37,500  50% 
Have less access to land and credit when compared to male 
counterparts. 
More than 70% of women who are above 35 years old are 
married 
Female-headed households tend to have inadequate food 
consumption and being poor than the male counterparts, 
especially in the Northern region (8% of total population in the 
region). 
Ghana Financial system in Ghana  :  
 A according to AfDB Africa’s financial system is lagging behind other developing regions in every 
dimension of financial sector development, from regulations, and product sophistication to access, 
gender, and inclusion. The  financial systems are small, concentrated, and unaffordable, with limited 
outreach. However, financial systems in Africa have also seen dramatic transformation, over the past 
two decades, in market structure and stability. There are enormous differences across sub-regions 
and countries, ranging from well-developed financial systems in middle-income countries, to shallow 
banking systems offering only the most basic banking services in fragile and poor states. Variation 
31 
and disparity also exists within countries, like Ghana''s polarized demographic structure between the 
northern regions, and the fast-developing southern regions. (A2F, 2016). Every sub-region on the 
African continent fares differently in terms of progress towards financial development but as a 
whole access to finance is one of the major constraints for private sector development. The World 
Bank’s enterprise survey’s data reveals that many African MSMEs report access to finance as a major 
barrier. The analysis of firms’ perception of access to finance by world regions and firm ownership 
(see Figure 2 below) indicates that many African women MSMEs perceive access to finance to be a 
major obstacle (44%), more than in any other developing region, including when disaggregated by 
gender. On average more women than men across the developing world consider access to finance 
to be a significant barrier (except for Central Asia and Eastern Europe). This finding is in line with 
economic literature and the available research on gender access to finance issues. (A2F, 2016) 
Access to financing in Ghana’s agriculture sector 
Over a period of 25 years, bank lending to agriculture has been on the general decline, dropping 
from about 16% of total bank credit to about 4%. This is in spite of the various agri-financing 
mechanisms implemented. (PWC, 2017). It can be recognized that in addition to experiencing the 
normal access to finance obstacles faced by all MSMEs, SMEs as well as large firms, African women 
entrepreneurs1 face specific access to finance disadvantages as compared to their male 
counterparts. Available research indicates that access to finance is one of the major constraints for 
women entrepreneurs worldwide. Access to finance is not gender neutral, with men having better 
access to finance than women. Women account for only 20% of the banked population as compared 
to 27% for men in the region. Nonfinancial barriers often restrain women from accessing financial 
services. These include: (i) the broader business and legal environment that may differentially affect 
women and men in businesses; (ii) personal characteristics of the entrepreneurs (such as differences 
in educational attainment and skills); (iii) characteristics of the firm (size, area of specialization, 
location, formal/informal sector); and (iv) constraints within financial institutions (little familiarity 
with women entrepreneurs). (A2F, 2016) 
Challenges for women/ youth  in accessing finance (A2F, 2016) 
High amount of collateral and high interest rates were found to be impeding women’s financial 
access in the six country case studies. 
Women’s low level of financial literacy limits their knowledge of available funds and financial 
products that they could have availed otherwise  
A number of banks offer tailored products for women and youth  in business, but the country 
surveys suggest this doesn’t typically represent a major share of their portfolio 
Various national governments and policy makers have embraced an agenda for greater financial 
inclusion of women/ youth  entrepreneurs, but the existing gender finance programs are typically of 
limited scale or still at infancy stage 
Implications of limited financing on agriculture performance  
32 
The financing of agriculture by commercial banks in the country is largely dominated by a few ones, 
indicating the low risk appetite that commercial banks, generally, have for the sector. The public 
sector contribution to agriculture sector remains low, resulting in slower agricultural sector growth 
rate in Ghana over the last two decades. The government’s budget allocation needs to increase to 
stimulate better growth. (PWC, 2017). Despite expressed commitment to the Comprehensive Africa 
Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) since 2003, the funding allocation made by the 
Government of Ghana from its Budget Statement and Economic Policies indicate an 
underinvestment in the sector. Between 2013 and 2016, only a tenth of the target amount planned 
for the sector was actually disbursed. Furthermore, the allocated amounts tend to fund recurrent 
expenditure, which leaves a disproportionally small amount for investments. (PWC, 2017). With 
growing pressure on governmental resources and emerging priorities, much is expected from the 
private sector to step in the gap, especially in the non-infrastructure space, and to drive growth 
inducing investments in the agricultural sector. There will also be the need for a deliberate increase 
in government’s budgetary contribution to the agricultural sector targeting relevant infrastructure in 
particular. This should help to crowd in the participation of the private sector, using various vehicles 
/ models, not least via public private partnerships. (PWC, 2017) 
The case for a stronger intervention to attract more participation cannot be over emphasized. 
Lending by commercial banks has been in decline over the last few years and has been dominated by 
a few banks only. Further, bank lending to the agriculture sector in Ghana, as a proxy for private 
sector investment has also been in decline in recent times, mimicking the downward slide in the 
public sector. The share of agriculture in total commercial bank lending in Ghana is illustrated Error! 
Reference source not found.. (PWC, 2017) 
Figure 1: Agriculture as a percentage of commercial bank lending in Ghana (PWC, 2017) 
Lending by banks dropped from their double-digit figures in the mid-1990s to under 4% in 2015. The 
low participation in lending to the agricultural sector is further characterized by the following 
features:  
Eight commercial banks accounted for 88.5% of the amount of loans granted 
ADB alone was responsible for nearly 40% 
Three banks (ADB, EBG, and SB) provided more than two-thirds of the loans 
33 
Local banks accounted for 57.3% 
15 commercial banks had less than 1% of their loans in the agricultural sector 
Clearly, these commercial banks represent private sector financial institutions that could be 
incentivized to support investments to the agriculture sector. (PWC, 2017) 
Environment for access to credit among female entrepreneurs 
USAID analyzed the environment for access to credit among women from multiple angles, including 
from the perspective of demand, supply, and BAS service provision. Donor agencies were also 
interviewed to understand how these entities are approaching gender and access to finance. On the 
demand side, all of the project’s female-led small, medium, including large enterprises (SMiLEs) were 
interviewed, as were approximately a dozen male and female staple food traders, and two dozen 
male and female smallholder farmers of staple foods. On the financing supply side, staff of nine 
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) were interviewed in Accra and Kumasi. On the service 
provision side, six Business Advisory Services (BAS) providers were interviewed, both male- and 
female-led, that are successfully releasing financing and investment at a rapid pace and have 
successfully engaged new, female SMiLEs to support with services. The selected sample of SMiLEs 
and BAS providers was not random, and was weighted towards firms led by women. Data collected 
from interviews was collated and analyzed, however control groups were not utilized, and formal 
surveys were not collected, so the results in this report should be considered qualitative in nature. 
(USAID , 2015)USAID’s ADVANCE II substantiates this finding, as only 4 of the estimated 200 nucleus 
farmers it directly supports in the FTF zone of influence are women. Women are more likely to be 
found in market centers, either selling or processing staple foods, and less likely to be providing 
migratory on-farm processing services, services which tend to be provided by men, who are more 
easily mobileThe research suggests that USAID-FinGAP is designed to directly benefit segments of 
the value chain in which few women are found, segments that are seeking “missing middle” 
financing at amounts of $25,000 to $500,000. (USAID , 2015) 
Demand side : Demand for finance among women  and youth along the value chain remains highly 
unsatisfied, and the nature of demand in each segment is different. Given their location in the value 
chains, the nature of demand is different among female and male actors within each segment, and 
requires further analysis to fully understand and quantify. No PFI interviewed for the USAID (2015) 
study had conducted market research or financing demand analysis specific to the target value 
chains, nor had any segmented customers (men and women) within these value chains to identify 
their distinct needs. Initial findings from the study demonstrates that credit is available to the small 
and medium female actors downstream in the rice, soy, and maize value chains who wish it, 
however the scale of financing and terms offered (e.g., interest rate, collateral requirements) by PFIs 
to these actors do not meet their businesses’ needs. The same is true for micro traders in the target 
value chains, who also are largely able to access credit from formal financial institutions and also 
from the buyers they source product for, but not in amounts sufficient, or for the length of time, 
most favorable for their businesses to grow. (USAID , 2015) 
Formal credit is tightest for the smallholder farmers in each value chain. Although this group is not 
within the target population of the USAID-FinGAP project, the project cannot avoid considering the 
needs of these actors, as most of the direct beneficiaries for whom it facilitates financial services 
34 
(e.g., processers, traders, aggregators in the target value chain) are on-lending to upstream actors 
within each value chain using finance facilitated by the project. (USAID , 2015). Interviews point to 
the fact that women in Ghana’s north are largely ignored by both formal and informal lenders as 
potential customers for credit for a variety of reasons, both economic and cultural. Most women 
smallholder farmers work on rice, maize, or soya farms with their husbands, and are likely to be 
illiterate and innumerate, and often defer to their husbands in farm matters, in particular when it 
comes to accessing input loans. Men in northern Ghana are therefore the primary recipients of 
smallholder input credit. Many aggregators and traders, including female traders, prefer not to lend 
to women smallholder farmers in Ghana’s north, as the perception is that they don’t control the 
farm or household resources (see text box). Other female smallholder farmers in different 
geographic regions, such as rice farmers interviewed in Kumasi in the Ashanti region, are able to 
access inputs (seeds) from buyers and processers, but report that they cannot afford formal 
financing at prevailing interest rates given the size of plots they manage, even if they could access 
required collateral. (USAID , 2015) 
In general, at current productivity levels and plot sizes (90% of smallholder farmers operate on 
holdings of less than 2 ha), and even if they are bundled into groups (making them more attractive 
and less risky customers for PFIs), smallholder farmers throughout the country may be unlikely to 
generate sufficient revenue to successfully repay input loans to formal PFIs at prevailing interest 
rates. Whether on-lent input credit is affordable for smallholder farmers is an important point for 
study, as USAID-FinGAP does not want to inadvertently saddle female actors with unsustainable 
debt. Other SMiLE and PFI project beneficiaries are providing input and other forms of credit to 
upstream actors at a variety of interest rates, which may or may not be profitable for those receiving 
informal loans. (USAID , 2015) 
Supply side:  A number of PFIs, in particular large commercial banks, are strategically entering the 
financial services for women market with new products and networking platforms. Fidelity Bank has 
strong board and management commitment to undertake a large-scale financial inclusion expansion 
campaign targeting women that includes agent identification and expansion, mobile banking 
expansion, “smart accounts”5 for individuals and group lending through the village savings and 
lending association (VSLA) model in collaboration with NGOs. Fidelity has invested heavily in this line 
of business, conducting international visits to witness best practices in financial inclusion and hiring 
experts in this field to lead the bank’s efforts. Fidelity created 400 new agents just in the last few 
months (“we are the only bank doing this, but we think it will pay off”) and has opened 250,000 
smart accounts since this product was unveiled. Fidelity intends to make VSLAs totally cashless 
through a new mobile banking application, as soon as it can fine-tune its software application. 
(USAID , 2015) 
Access Bank has launched the W Initiative, a bundling of banking products for women, segmented 
into young professionals (savings, salary advance, debit card, local transaction link card), 
businesswomen (corporate account, m-power account, staff salary account, credit cards, savings 
products for children, insurance, and instant savings), families (current account, target savings 
account, single savings account, early savings accounts for children, accounts for youth, accounts for 
elderly, savings for dependents and domestics), and maternal health financial products (such as 
35 
fertility treatment loans). Access Bank is looking at women as an entirely new sector, and believes it 
is the only bank to approach women in this manner in Ghana. Access Bank’s managing director 
believes this is a smart move to improve its value proposition to the Ghanaian customer and satisfy 
the interest of its capital providers. Access Bank conducted a thorough analysis of the small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SME) market, and as part of this study, surveyed the needs of women, 
although not women in the agribusiness sector, as the bank has “run away from this sector” given 
the bank’s unfamiliarity with agribusiness lending in general. As part of the W Initiative, Access Bank 
supports networking among its female clients, and holds trainings and “power briefs” for its 
members on different subjects to improve their capacity as businesswomen. (USAID , 2015). Led by a 
female deputy managing director, UT Bank has launched AKOMA, a networking platform for women 
to connect with women across Ghana, as an entrée into the women’s financial services market. UT 
Bank is a member of an international association of PFIs committed to financial inclusion, and has 
sent bank staff to attend international trainings. UT Bank also recently began an effort to study 
demand among female agribusiness actors in Ghana’s north with the intention of expanding its 
agricultural lending portfolio to reach more women. UT Bank was initially championing the concept 
of “women to women” communications in serving women more effectively, and was in the midst of 
changing front-line staff to be more representative of their female clientele, until the bank learned 
that women customers preferred being served by men, not by other women, so they kept their 
front-line staff as it was originally. (USAID , 2015) 
SASL piloted a new loan product among 1,600 female rice producers that triangulated the financial 
institution, women rice producers, and a buyer. SASL provided input loans for the smallholder 
farmers and a purchase price was negotiated between producers and the buyer. SASL’s repayment 
rate among smallholder farmers for input loans in this pilot was an impressive 98.7% (far above the 
estimated 21% rate of non-performing agribusiness loans on the whole in Ghana), however SASL 
found that many women ended up side-selling their rice to other buyers offering better prices. 
(USAID , 2015). More PFIs with strong balance sheets are studying and entering the agribusiness 
market in force. However, none interviewed have studied the target value chains in-depth, nor have 
they studied the differentiated needs of men and women within the target value chains. (USAID , 
2015) 
Some of the larger banks (Fidelity, Ecobank, and Barclays) are engaged in heavy competition to 
dominate market share in agribusiness lending, and are critical partners with USAID-FinGAP in this 
effort. However, the concept of serving men and women differently within the agribusiness sector 
remains foreign to even these forward-thinking, innovative PFIs, and none, including the PFIs with 
large female clientele, have scientifically mapped the financial services demand within these specific 
value chains (maize, rice, soy) by gender. (USAID , 2015). Fidelity studied the agribusiness and SME 
markets intensively, and recently acquired ProCredit to serve the “missing middle” in the SME 
sector. Fidelity reports that the SME sector represents a reported 92% of all businesses in the 
country, and that 40% of the country’s GDP is generated by SMEs; it has targeted agribusiness and 
microfinance institutions as key segments of the SME market it will focus on. Until now, Fidelity had 
not considered further segmenting the SMEs in terms of male and female markets. (USAID , 2015) 
36 
UT Bank is currently studying the agribusiness market more intensively, specifically in Ghana’s north. 
The intention of the bank is to make agriculture the key business in Tamale and even further north in 
Ghana. Within this strategy, it wants to ensure that it is working with women as well, so it will hold 
focus groups and interviews to learn from women and to hear about what they want and need. UT 
Bank is also looking to secure concessional capital it can on-lend to women. Access Bank is keen to 
enter the agribusiness lending space. It is looking at agro processing and exporting as key sectors for 
expansion and would like USAID-FinGAP support in these areas. It would like to access capital at 
preferable rates so that it can successfully on-lend to female customers. (USAID , 2015). In addition 
to streamlining approvals for new agribusiness clients, Ecobank is expanding its lending to rural 
community banks and microfinance institutions as a strategy to enlarge access to finance among 
women and underserved sectors. There are 135 rural and community banks in Ghana, with 700 
branches distributed throughout the 10 regions, which only hold about 5% of all assets in the 
banking sector.6 These PFIs are seen by Ecobank as more suitable actors to reach upstream clients, 
such as women, in the target value chains. (USAID , 2015) 
SASL has analyzed the agribusiness market in “bits and pieces” over the years, and has analyzed each 
of the value chains, but has not studied the different needs of male and female borrowers within 
these chains. An estimated 80% of SASL’s overall lending portfolio is to women, and 40% of the 
savings and loans’ agricultural customers are women. This is less a PFI strategy than a natural 
occurrence, as SASL began as a microfinance institution, and small loans “naturally attract” more 
women than men. The bank currently lends to an estimated 12,000 female agribusiness clients, 
primarily smallholder farmers, rice millers, aggregators, and market processors of soya beans. SASL is 
concerned about the interest rate charged women clients, and would also welcome assistance to 
obtain concessional capital, however SASL has a board resolution barring it from borrowing in 
international currencies. (USAID , 2015) 
A large performance data gap exists, as few PFIs track agribusiness lending and lending performance 
disaggregated by gender.  Although PFIs uniformly report that women borrowers repay loans better 
than their male counterparts, few interviewed could back up this statement with data.  SASL tracks 
the number of female clients it has (80% of their overall lending is to female borrowers), but to date 
have not tracked product uptake or performance by gender. (USAID , 2015).Access Bank tracks the 
number of female clients it has (an estimated 30% of their SME clients are women), and tracks 
male/female uptake of product by gender, but does not track loan performance by gender. Fidelity 
tracks this information for SME legacy clients from ProCredit (of which 15% were women), but a 
recent initiative by the GOG to eliminate individual loans and replace these with business loans is 
pushing Fidelity to undertake a large-scale campaign to “formalize” individual borrowers into 
businesses, offering this service for free. Once this formalization process of existing customers is 
completed, Fidelity will have effectively formalized hundreds of women and men into businesses, 
however, once classified as a business, the business is no longer tracked by gender by the bank’s 
tracking system. (USAID , 2015) 
The Government of Ghana is not seen by PFIs to be taking an active role in expanding agricultural 
finance. According to a 2014 study commissioned by Making Finance Work for Africa and the 
German government, agricultural finance (other than for the cocoa sector) has not been articulated 
37 
by the GOG as a strategic priority. In the USAID (2015) study, the approach of the GOG towards 
agricultural finance is classified as “laissez-faire” due to the legacy of past “extensive Government 
intervention” and policy failures, resulting in eroded net worth of the banking system. This opinion 
was echoed by those interviewed, as only one actor could identify a GOG intervention to expand 
agricultural finance by pointing to the apex group the Microfinance and Small Loans Center, which 
has been criticized for low-performance and politicization. One PFI partner openly lamented the lack 
of leadership by the GOG on agricultural policy, and is pushing the GOG to develop a comprehensive 
plan, asking for USAID-FinGAP support in this matter. Since neither the GOG nor the banks are 
heavily engaged in data collection around the FTF value chains, USAID-FinGAP could fill this data gap 
to support the private sector in engaging with the GOG in developing improved and gender-sensitive 
SME and agricultural finance policies related to staple foods. (USAID , 2015) 
Service provision learnings in Ghana 
BAS providers and female SMiLEs have reported their satisfaction with the project-supported 
investment mini-summits in Kumasi and Techiman as an opportunity to identify new potential 
borrowers (on the part of BAS providers) and to understand the project’s service offerings and 
engage with the project (on the part of SMiLEs). Holding these and other events (e.g., meet and 
greets, events at markets) closer to where the women in the value chains are physically located was 
unanimously suggested as a method to identify additional clients, and in particular, female clients. 
(USAID , 2015).  Many of the upstream actors attending the USAID-FinGAP-supported investment 
mini-summits in Kumasi and Techiman (traders, small-scale processors, aggregators, millers) are 
micro actors, who run businesses in the target value chains with 1 to 9 full-time employees (and 
often more part-time employees) and demand small loan amounts. To serve these actors, most of 
whom had not previously established relationships with financial institutions, BAS providers are 
bundling them into groups, and presenting the financial institution with one larger loan application 
(>US$25,000), rather than 25 individual applications. The loan recipients all open current accounts 
with the financial institution at the same time, so this strategy has the added benefit of bringing 
more upstream actors into the formal financial system, in particular women. (USAID , 2015) 
Female SMiLEs need more and different levels of technical assistance to access financing than their 
male counterparts. BAS providers uniformly state that given their location upstream in the value 
chains, female entrepreneurs in the target chains require more intensive levels of service and lower 
amounts of financing than their male peers. Given their size (primarily micro and small), the 
financing needs required most often fall below the “missing middle” target of the USAID-FinGAP 
project ($25,000 – $500,000), and in segments of the value chain where margins are lowest. In terms 
of service needs, the perception among BAS providers is that female customers require more 
handholding, more business growth, and more financial management advice than male-led SMiLEs. 
One BAS provider recounted having to reconstitute five years of financial statements for one female 
SMiLE before he could present a sound credit application to a financial institution, and the time this 
took led the PFI to lose interest in the financing deal. This same BAS provider suggested that female-
led entrepreneurs in these staple food value chains have more disorganized accounts or non-
existent accounts in comparison to their male peers. Another BAS provider reported that women are 
more cautious about taking on debt they cannot responsibly service, while men are (for better or 
38 
worse) bolder in terms of the values of loans requested. Another BAS provider recounted that 
female staple foods traders trade in heavy volumes and many are cash rich but are unsophisticated 
in terms of planning business growth. Male BAS providers also suggested that it can be difficult to 
network with female SMiLE clients without it seeming inappropriate, a problem he does not have 
with his male clients. A number of BAS providers asked about the possibility of receiving a different 
level of compensation for spending more time with female entrepreneurs, given that the cost of 
serving female entrepreneurs is higher than the cost of serving their male peers. (USAID , 2015) 
Recommendations to strengthen access to credit among female/ youth  entrepreneurs 
The lessons learnt presented in this section are the lessons learnt from the USAID-FinGAP project 
and represent the actions that need to be taken to improve FinGAP’s performance, or female 
entrepreneur access to credit in general (USAID , 2015). The proposed actions are summarized in 
Error! Reference source not found..  
Issue 
Recommendations 
Project data 
Project data 
collected does not 
fully capture impact 
of project overall, or 
on women  and 
youth  
Limited 
understanding of 
nature of financing 
demand for men 
and women/ youth  
in the target value 
chains 
Demand side issues 
Refine data tracked by the project to include the value of the initial 
transaction and the associated on-lending disaggregated by gender.  
Systematically track each transaction/deal’s connections with other FTF 
projects.  
Begin systematic collection of SMiLE impact data to adequately measure 
impact on sales, and gender impacts as well as youth . Consider instituting 
business surveys used by other donor projects (e.g., ADVANCE II, IFC) to 
facilitate data collection.  
Map each value chain to understand where men and women are located, 
and what financing demand is, disaggregated by men and women.  
Hold more mini-summits.  
Go through networks of women to continue identifying more female-led 
SMiLEs.  
Few female SMiLEs  
Encourage the formation of female SMiLE networks.  
Highlight female SMiLE successes in communications efforts (success 
stories).  
39 
Women  and 
youthbSMiLEs are 
not accessing 
finance in ways that 
satisfy demand  
Service provision 
Existence of few 
female BAS 
providers  
Female/ youth  
SMiLEs require more 
handholding and 
cost more to serve  
Risk that BAS 
providers may be 
facilitating on-lent 
financing that 
borrowers cannot 
responsibly repay  
Develop an award for most successful female-led SMiLE, to present at 
annual agribusiness conferences.  
Continue to support women SMiLEs via BAS providers to access financing 
at appropriate loan sizes, terms, interest rates.  
Continue to group female borrowers to facilitate expanded access to 
finance.  
Continue searching for and identifying female-led BAS providers.  
Consider additional project supports to SMiLEs/BAS providers to stimulate 
expanded service provision to women and youth -led businesses given 
higher costs and more time/labor in serving them.  
Encourage equity finance instead of debt for SMiLEs.  
Develop model revenue statements for SMiLEs, for BAS providers and PFIs 
to encourage understanding of the debt burden that upstream actors can 
carry and still make money to grow and service their debts.  
Encourage BAS providers to assist SMiLEs in lending to upstream 
borrowers at interest rates they can afford while continuing to grow, or to 
support them in expanding plot/farm sizes to a point where they can make 
money while receiving input loans.  
Encourage BAS providers to work with PFIs and input providers that offer 
lower interest rates to female/youth  smallholder producers and upstream 
actors in the value chains (e.g., preferred interest rates on John Deere 
tractors, Premium Foods interest-free input loans).  
Issues with participating financial institutions 
Encourage/support PFIs to seek blended capital solutions including 
concessional loans that can be on-lent to female value chain actors at 
lower interest rates.  
Conduct a study to investigate the idea of creating a hedge fund to cover 
currency risk among PFIs borrowing overseas.  
Provide technical assistance to project-supported PFIs to disaggregate 
agribusiness lending performance by gender.  
PFIs want 
concessional finance 
to expand lending to 
women  
PFIs need assistance 
to track gender-and 
youth disaggregated 
lending performance  
Policy issues 
40 
The Bank of Ghana 
does not collect 
sufficient data to 
understand how 
women and men 
interact differently 
with the financial 
sector  
GOG has a laissez-
faire strategy 
towards agricultural 
finance while the 
private sector is 
interested in 
engaging the GOG 
more actively  
Support the Bank of Ghana in encouraging the gathering of gender-
disaggregated lending information among Ghanaian PFIs.  
Support private sector actors interested in engaging with the GOG with 
data to help shape agricultural finance policies.  
Table 1: Recommendations to improve access for female entrepreneurs to access credit (USAID , 
2015) 
Technical assistance programs in Ghana 
With the aid of different development partners, Ghana has experimented with and implemented 
various interventions aimed at increasing financial support to the agricultural sector. Ghana has 
made several efforts, through the implementation of different kinds of structured interventions, to 
mitigate risks associated with agricultural lending, with especial focus on the mitigation of financial 
or business risks. 
These interventions have been focused on one or more of the under listed routes to achieve risk 
mitigation or increased agricultural lending: 
Provide credit guarantee 
Provide access to finance 
Provide access to finance at a subsidized rate of interest 
Provide credit as part of a larger value chain specific project 
Provide non-cash support for agricultural and agribusiness enterprises through business advisory 
support 
Provide grants to augment either equity or debt for purposes of acquiring fixed assets or pay for 
much needed technical advisory support 
The financing interventions were from the following sources or a combination of them: 
Multilateral Agencies: World Bank, Africa Development Bank, IFAD 
Bilateral agencies: USAID, US/MCC, DANIDA, DFID, AfD 
Government of Ghana: Exim-Guaranty Company, EDAIF, PEED 
41 
Others: AGRA 
The African Development Bank, for example, funded a number of agricultural specific projects. These 
projects had specific credit lines for on-lending to particular value chain actors. The projects included 
the following: 
Food Crop Development Projects (food crops) 
Cashew Development Project 
Inland Valley Rice Development Project 
Livestock Development Project 
Small-scale Irrigation Development Project 
Most of these credit lines were borrowed by Government, and on-lent to the Agricultural 
Development Bank (ADB) for purposes of lending to smallholder farmers in the targeted value chains 
and the geographical areas selected. These lines were largely meant to provide access to credit by 
smallholders and some value chain actors. In addition to the funding, the project management units 
of the respective projects provided technical advisory support through MOFA’s Agricultural 
Extension Agents (AEAs), as well as funded some common-use infrastructure that were determined 
as needed. Generally, by the end of these projects, the smallholder farmers that were targeted/ 
benefited had their respective capacities built in good agricultural practices as well. 
Ghana’s experience with agricultural sector lending – Credit Guarantee Funds 
Ghana’s experience with credit risk guarantee funds has been limited over the years. The following 
are examples are in the last decade (PWC, 2017): 
Exim-Guaranty Company Ghana Limited: The main credit guarantee scheme has been the Exim 
Guaranty Company, which was set up by the Bank of Ghana to provide credit guarantee to financial 
institutions who seek to enhance their credit risk cover. (PWC, 2017). Ghana’s agricultural insurance 
market is currently very basic and underdeveloped. There is no legislation in place. Unlike in Nigeria, 
there is no central government sponsorship, and supply-side interest seems low. (PWC, 2017) 
There is no legal framework for the provision of agricultural insurance in the country since the 
Insurance Law of 2006, Act 724 has no provisions for agricultural insurance. 
There was a draft amendment bill relating to insurance, which has not yet received the approval of 
Cabinet. However, this also has no provisions for agricultural insurance. 
According to the National Insurance Commission (NIC), there is a marketing agreement among all 
the key stakeholders of the insurance industry for the operation of the Ghana Agricultural Insurance 
Pool (GAIP), hence, the monopoly it is currently enjoying. 
GAIP is the only entity providing agricultural insurance in the country, at present. 
GAIP represents 17 pool members. These are private sector insurance companies under the 
membership of the Ghana Insurance Association (GIA). 
42 
Only Ghana Reinsurance Company has a treaty with GAIP for its Drought Index Insurance, while the 
other lines of business are reinsured with a foreign reinsurer, i.e. Swiss Re. 
The other reinsurance companies do not participate in the agricultural insurance market in Ghana 
There is no subsidy on agricultural insurance (even globally, there are subsidies) and that makes it 
unaffordable to the stakeholders who demand insurance products. (PWC, 2017) 
The Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool provides agricultural insurance products for the following 
(PWC, 2017): 
Drought Index Insurance targeting smallholder farmers through aggregators 
Multi-Peril Crop Insurance targeting commercial farmers and agribusiness (minimum farm size 
should be 20 hectares) for both cereals (food crops) and forestry or tree crops 
Poultry Insurance targeting poultry farmers 
Livestock Insurance (for cattle) targeting smallholder cattle farmers. This is yet to be piloted.  
Key issues (PWC, 2017): 
The industry does not have adequate agricultural insurance products to satisfy the demands of the 
market. 
GAIP has capacity challenges which need to be addressed 
The local reinsurance capacity is a challenge which needs to be addressed 
The other actors of the agricultural value chain (except production) require (patronize) traditional 
insurance, which is readily available 
There is availability of both Direct Insurers and Reinsurers for the provision of the traditional 
insurance products to satisfy any value chain. 
Introduction to GIRSAL:  
The total financing gap for women in Africa is estimated at USD 42 billion. The financing gap for 
women in Agriculture is estimated at $15.6 billion. The highest credit gap for women was found for 
women in the Central and North regions, followed by the Southern, West and finally East regions. 
The Central and North regions alone make up more than half of the total credit gap for the 
continent. The gap difference among regions can on average be as wide as near USD 70,000 per 
enterprise. Moroccan women business owners appear to have the highest average credit value gap 
among the six deep dive countries. (A2F, 2016) 
The Ghana Incentive-based Risk Sharing Scheme for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) is aimed at 
encouraging lending by financial institutions to agriculture to help accelerate growth, spur 
agribusiness development, and reduce capital constraints that limit competitiveness in agriculture. 
GIRSAL is rooted in the incentive-based risk sharing scheme conceived by Alliance for a Green 
Revolution in Africa (AGRA) to leverage lending by private financial institutions into agriculture. 
43 
Nigeria was the first African country to implement this scheme in what is called Nigeria Incentive-
based Risk Sharing Scheme for Agricultural Lending (NIRSAL), and the program was built on the 
following five pillars:  
Risk sharing facility:  
USD 300 million 
Insurance facility: 
USD   30 million  
Technical assistance facility:   USD   60 million 
Bank rating mechanism:  
USD   10 million 
Bank incentive mechanism:  
USD 100 million 
The six pillars of GIRSAL 
GIRSAL will be conceptualized very much like NIRSAL with a sixth pillar added to take full account of 
the potential contribution that advances in digital finance could benefit agriculture in Ghana. GIRSAL 
is based on the following six pillars:  
Risk sharing facility: to support development of risk sharing instruments to reduce the risks of banks 
through credit risks enhancements 
Technical assistance facility: to strengthen the institutional capacity of banks and intermediaries to 
support new lending into agriculture, develop new platforms to support delivery of loans to rural 
areas, as well as provide technical assistance to farmer groups and agribusinesses.  
Insurance facility: to support development and deployment of insurance products for agriculture to 
lower risks faced by smallholder farmers and agribusinesses. 
Bank incentive mechanism: to develop incentives to reward banks that are lending to the agriculture 
sector, based on the volume of lending, effectiveness of lending, and impacts. 
Bank rating scheme: to rate banks in Ghana based on their lending to agriculture, with the aim of 
creating extra incentives for banks that are achieving impacts in agricultural lending. 
Digital finance: to significantly increase the low-cost distribution and administration of financial 
services particularly in rural areas using mobile phones and other digital distribution channels.  
Together, these six pillars are aimed at de-risking agricultural value chains, building long term 
capacity and institutionalizing incentives for agricultural lending. The risk sharing- and insurance 
facilities contribute to de-risking agriculture finance value chains. The technical assistance facility 
enables building long-term capacity by means of training and information to farmers, institutions 
and private entities, and the development of a common platform for communication. Bank incentive 
mechanisms and the agricultural bank rating scheme institutionalize incentives for agriculture 
lending through enhancing the visibility of ‘beneficial partners’ and by establishing mechanisms that 
increase the attractiveness of agriculture lending to banks. Lastly, digital finance services have the 
capability to increase access to financing by leveraging on existing technologies and hence enhances 
the outreach to farming communities (accessibility) concerning the products, and the product itself 
(access). (PWC, 2017) 
44 
GIRSAL’s multiplier effect for insurance 
GIRSAL could serve as a catalytic factor for transforming, at an accelerated pace, the agricultural 
insurance industry in Ghana, leveraging examples elsewhere in Africa, including from NIRSAL. 
Emerging trends:  
Agricultural insurance is well patronized when bundled with what farmers need (especially with the 
smallholder farmers who are in the majority in African agricultural production space). 
In Kenya it was bundled with seeds; in Malawi under the World Bank project, it was bundled with 
agricultural lending; while in Zambia, NWK bundled it with inputs for farmers. 
The Weather Index Insurance is becoming economical to distribute to large smallholder farmers and 
it covers what the Private Insurance Providers are not willing to put on the market. 
According to S. Kuhn et al, it will only be done with a public-private partnership (PPP) arrangement, 
where the state provides the targeting finance while relying on the efficiency of the private sector 
in the delivery of agricultural insurance products  
The opportunity with GIRSAL 
GIRSAL intends to promote risk sharing among the key stakeholders in the agricultural financing 
environment. Agricultural insurance is one of the risk mitigation tools that will be required to de-risk 
agricultural lending. This comes with the opportunity of creating a large market for the providers of 
agricultural insurance in the insurance industry. 
The financial institutions and agricultural insurance providers will be working in the same space. This 
could result in collaboration with one another; as financial institutions use life insurance products as 
a requirement for granting personal loans, similarly, FIs could demand agricultural insurance from 
customers before facilities are granted or approved. 
There should be a legislation or regulation that will provide the necessary legal framework for the 
operations of agricultural insurance in the country. 
Furthermore, the legislation could accommodate a comprehensive agricultural policy which will 
include, among other things, the agricultural lending and provision of agricultural insurance, etc. 
The issue of premium subsidy which is non-existent in the country could be addressed under the 
GIRSAL project. 
To ensure a more competitive agricultural insurance market, other players apart from GAIP could be 
allowed to operate in Ghana. 
Agricultural lending: Insights and lessons learnt to date 
Fundamental constraints to accelerated lending by financial institutions include the low availability 
of risk mitigating instruments, the weak capacities of both lenders and borrowers, and a general lack 
of incentives. Error! Reference source not found. summarizes the key constraints to agricultural 
lending in Ghana and provides a description of the respective constraints.  
45 
Aspect 
Description 
Inadequate credit 
risk enhancing 
instruments 
Agriculture in Ghana is largely undertaken by smallholder farmers 
who produce most of the food. These farmers usually have no 
collateral to secure their borrowings. Apart from Exim Guaranty 
Company Ltd., all other credit risk guarantee instruments have been 
short-term project based. Examples include AGRA/Stanbic Bank First 
Loss Guarantee, DANIDA/AGRA Stanbic/UT Bank/Sinapi Aba S&Ls 
risks sharing instrument. Exim Guaranty’s exposure to the 
agricultural sector is also rather low. 
Low risk mitigating 
instruments 
Agricultural insurance is rather new and weak against a backdrop of 
risks such as inadequate rainfall, diseases and pests, low yield and 
markets being present and high. 
Weak capacity of 
lenders 
It has been determined that banks have weak capacities when it 
comes to lending to agriculture and to the business activities of all 
value chain actors. Low understanding of the technical issues of 
agriculture, and relating to the risks they present, tends to affect 
effective lending. Lenders also have weak capacity to design 
products, as well as for structuring deals relating to agriculture. 
Weak capacity of 
borrowers 
Weak capacities of borrowers in terms of management, HR, financial 
management, risks associated with agricultural businesses 
undermine their ability to repay their loans. 
Limited distribution 
channels 
The benefits relating to setting up branches in rural areas, where a 
lot of the agricultural activities is low. 
Inadequate 
incentives for 
agricultural lenders 
& borrowers 
Low incentives exist to promote increased appetite for lending to 
the agricultural sector. This is in addition to interest rates being high 
and market access for borrowers being generally weak. 
Table Overview of major constraints to agricultural lending 
Institutional , policy , legal framework 
46 
This SECAP  has been prepared in accordance with applicable environmental and social policies, 
legislations, regulations, and standards of the Republic of Ghana. The summary of relevant national 
and sectoral policies, legal and institutional frameworks 
Constitution of the Republic Of Ghana  
The Constitution of Ghana (1992) states that ‘the State shall take appropriate measures needed to 
protect and safeguard the national environment for posterity; and shall seek cooperation with other 
states and bodies for purposes of protecting the wider international environment for mankind’’ 
(Section 6 (41) (9)). The Constitution also upholds the principle of private ownership of lands. 
Adequate safeguards from deprivation of private property rights have been provided for, in the 1992 
Constitution. Even the state’s inherent powers to compulsorily acquire private property rights have 
been reconsidered and somewhat controlled. Article 20 of the constitution prescribes that under no 
circumstance should private properties be compulsorily taken unless there are weighty and 
justifiable grounds for such acquisition, which invariably must be in the public interest. It requires 
that all people have access to the High Court in the case that there is a dispute with regard to his/her 
right or interest over the land or the amount of compensation being offered.  Environmental 
regulation within Ghana falls under the requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency Act 
1994 (Act 490) and the Environmental Assessment Regulations 1999 (LI1 652). The function of these 
and other national legislation tools relevant to the project are outlined in this section.  
National Environmental Policy  
The Ghana National Environmental Policy was launched in November 2012 with the vision to 
manage the environment in a sustainable way to benefit Ghanaian society. The objective of this 
policy is to promote healthy lifestyles and reduce risk factors that arise from environmental, 
economic, social, and behavioral causes thereby promoting healthy lifestyles in a healthy 
environment. The policy notes that proper management of Ghana's resources requires that efforts 
should be redirected into more environmentally sustainable programs and practices. Such programs 
should protect and preserve the resource base for use by present and future generations. 
Assessment of the potential environmental impacts of development projects and planning in 
advance to mitigate or eliminate these impacts will decrease environmental costs to the economy 
and make more cost-effective use of the country's resources. The Environmental Policy aims to 
ensure that a preventive approach is adopted in the pursuit of sound environmental management. 
The main preventive tool envisaged in the policy is the environmental impact assessment (EIA) 
process.  
Applicable Legislation  
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Act 1994, Act 490 : The EPA was established under the 
Environmental Protection Agency Act (Act 490 of 1994) as the leading public body responsible for 
the protection and improvement of the environment in Ghana. It is responsible for enforcing  
environmental policy and legislation, prescribing standards and guidelines, inspecting and regulating 
businesses and responding to emergency incidents. It is responsible for issuing environmental 
47 
permits and pollution abatement notices for controlling waste discharges, emissions, deposits or 
others sources of pollutants and issuing directives, procedures or warnings for the purpose of 
controlling noise. The EPA has the authority to require an EIA and is responsible for ensuring 
compliance with EIA procedures. Additionally, the Agency is required to:  
Control and prevent the discharge of waste and the generation, treatment, storage, transportation 
and disposal of waste;  
Control and monitor use and advice on regulation and management of hazardous substances;  
Develop environmental standards such as the EPA’s Ambient Noise Level to guide compliance and 
aid effective enforcement;  
Develop comprehensive database on environment and environmental protection for promotion of 
sound ecological systems, effective planning and sustainable development; and  
 Create environmental awareness and build environmental capacity as relates all sectors. 
Under this Act, LFIs in Ghana, MSEs, FBAs are require to conduct and submit for approval any 
environmental assessment report and subsequently annual reports and management plans for EPA’s 
review, as applicable  
Energy Commission Act 1997, Act 541  
The Energy Commission Act 1997 (Act 541) provide for its functions relating to the regulations, 
management, development and utilisation of energy resources, provide for the granting of licenses 
for the transmission, wholesale supply, distribution and sale of electricity and natural gas, refining, 
storage bulk distribution marketing and sale of petroleum products and to provide for related 
matters.  
Environmental Assessment Regulations 1999, LI 1652  
The Environmental Assessment Regulations 1999 (LI 1652) enjoins any proponent or person to 
register an undertaking with the Agency and obtain an Environmental Permit prior to the 
commencement of the project. The regulations require that “No environmental permit shall be 
issued by the Agency for any of the undertakings mentioned in Schedule 2 to these Regulations 
unless there is submitted by the responsible person to the Agency, an environmental impact 
assessment in accordance with these Regulations in respect of the undertaking”.  Application for 
environmental permit: (1) a person required under regulation 1 or 2 to register an undertaking and 
obtain an environmental permit shall submit to the Agency an application in such form as the 
Agency shall determine. (2) There shall be paid for the application such fee, as the Agency shall 
determine. 
Hazardous and Electronic Waste control and Management Act 2016 (Act 917):  
The Act provides for the control, management, and disposal of hazardous waste, electrical and 
electronic waste and for related purposes. The act also prohibits the importation, exportation, 
transportation, selling, purchasing or dealing in or depositing of hazardous waste or other waste on 
48 
any land in the country or in the territorial waters of Ghana. It deals with hazardous waste and other 
waste and seeks to domesticate the Basel Convention on the control of Transboundary Movement 
of Hazardous Waste and their disposal, prescribes the Electrical and Electronic Waste levy and 
establishes a Fund as well as an Electronic Waste Recycling Plant. The Act has five (5) main schedules 
with the following descriptions:  
i) List of hazardous wastes and other wastes;  
ii) Notification form for transboundary movement or shipment of waste;  
iii) Movement document for transboundary movement or shipment of waste;  
iv) Classification of polychlorinated biphenyls waste for segregation; and  
v) List of electrical and electronic equipment for which advance eco levy is applicable.  
The proposed AFAWA program will employ the best environmentally friendly measures in handling 
Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE).  
The State Lands Act 1962 (Act 125 as Amended)  
This is the principal Law under which private lands could be compulsorily acquired. The Law 
empowers the President to acquire any land for the public benefit. The Act and its Regulation, that 
is, the State Lands Regulation 1962, L1 230 detail out the mechanism and procedure for compulsorily 
acquiring lands. It is a mandatory requirement that a copy of the instrument of acquisition be served 
on any person having an interest in or possession such lands or be affixed at a convenient place on 
the land and be published thrice in a newspaper circulating in the district where the land is situate. 
The Act emphasizes the payment of compensation to the victims of acquisition made under the Act. 
The basis of the said Compensation should be either the market value or Replacement value. Costs 
of disturbance and incidental expenses or other damage suffered are to be considered in the award 
of compensation.  
Lands Commission (LC) Act 2008, Act 767  
This act provides for the management of public lands and other lands and for related matters. The 
Commission manages public lands and any other lands vested in the President by the Constitution or 
by any other enactment or the lands vested in the Commission. The act advises the Government, 
local authorities and traditional authorities on the policy framework for the development of 
particular areas to ensure that the development of individual pieces of land is coordinated with the 
relevant development plan for the area concerned. The commission formulates and submits to 
Government recommendations on national policy with respect to land use and capability; advise on, 
and assist in the execution of, comprehensive program for the registration of title to land 
throughout the Republic in consultation with the Title Registration Advisory Board established under 
section 10 of the Land Title Registration Act, 1986;  The Minister ay, with the approval of the 
President, give general directions in writing to the Commission on matters of policy in respect of the 
management of public lands. The commission has the following divisions: Survey and Mapping; Land 
Registration; Land Valuation; Public and Vested Lands Management; and Any other Division the 
Commission may determine.  
49 
The Local Government Act, 1993 (Act 462)  
The Local Government Act, 1993 (Act 462) mandates Metropolitan, Municipal, and District 
Assemblies (MMDAs) to take charge for the overall development of their respective areas, making 
them representatives of the central Government at the local level. Under the Act, various MMDA’s 
are mandated to:  
Provide facilities, infrastructural services and programs for effective and efficient waste 
management;  
Develop plans of the district to the National Development Planning Commission for approval;  
Approve all planning schemes before it can take effect within the district; and  
Be responsible for development control through the grant of permit for development.  
National Development Planning (Systems) Act, 1994 (Act 480) 
The National Development Planning (Systems) Act, (Act 480) was enacted to harmonize the 
operations of Planning Authorities in the country. Planning authority includes the District Planning 
Authority at the district level, the Regional Coordinating Council at regional level, the planning 
division of a Ministry or sector agency and any other body designated by the Commission to carry 
out a development planning function. It spells out the roles of the various planning units, the 
preparation of local action plans and sub- district plans, grievance redress procedure, among others. 
The AFAWA Program will conform to the national development planning systems by cooperating 
with the appropriate bodies.  
Fire Precaution (Premises) Regulations, 2003 (LI 1724) 
The Ghana National Fire Service Act, 1997 (Act 537) states that a fire certificate shall be equired for 
premises used as a public place or place of work. This requirement is reinforced by the Fire 
Precaution (Premises) Regulations, 2003 (LI 1724). It is incumbent on any project developer to 
ensure that adequate provision and measures are introduced to minimize or prevent fire outbreaks. 
LFIs in Ghana, FBAs, MSMEs management will comply with the relevant provisions in the regulations 
to protect the facility from potential fire outbreak.  
National Labour Act, 2003 (Act 651) 
The purpose of the Labour Act, 2003 (Act 651) is to amend and consolidate existing laws relating to 
labour, employers, trade unions and industrial relations. The Act provides for the rights and duties of 
employers and workers; legal or illegal strike; guarantees trade unions and freedom of associations, 
and establishes the Labour Commission to mediate and act in respect of all labour issues. Under Part 
XV (Occupational Health, Safety and Environment), the Act explicitly indicates that it is the duty of an 
employer to ensure that every worker works under satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions. The 
occupational health and safety plan prepared for this project was informed by the afore-mentioned 
requirements. Additionally, labour issues and rights will be protected and respected.  
50 
Occupational Safety and Health Policy of Ghana (Draft)  
The policy statement of the OSH Policy (draft 2004) is: ‘to prevent accidents and injuries arising out 
of or linked with or occurring in the course of work, by minimizing as far as reasonably practicable 
the cause of the hazards in the working environment and, therefore the risk to which employees and 
the public may be exposed’. The policy is derived from provisions of the International Labour 
Organization (ILO) Conventions 155 and 161. Identification, evaluation, and mitigation of health and 
safety risks associated with the construction and operational phases of the project works were also 
guided by this policy.  
 Persons with Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715)  
The Act requires that persons with disability are not treated differently in respect of transportation 
except where otherwise required by the condition or need for improvement of such a person. It 
requires that appropriate facilities are provided to make public places or facilities accessible to and 
available for use by persons with disability. This would therefore require that facilities such as offices 
and terminal buildings are designed and constructed to provide services such as wheelchair ramps, 
special parking place reserved for their exclusive use, lifts, etc. to ensure that the needs of persons 
with disability are taken care of at the operational phase of the project.  
Workmen’s Compensation Law 1987, (PNDCL 187)  
The law holds employers responsible for the payment of compensation to workmen for personal 
injuries caused by accidents arising out and in the course of their employment. Where an employee 
sustains personal injury by accident arising out of, and in the course of employment, the employer is 
liable, subject to this Act, to pay compensation in accordance with this Act. Compensation is not 
payable under this Act in respect of incapacity or a death resulting from a deliberate self-injury.  
Administrative and Institutional Framework  
The EIA process followed for this project is consistent with the regulations in Ghana and involves 
consultations throughout the life cycle of the Project with a number of governmental authorities 
which are likely have an interest in the project. These include ministries, departments and agencies 
as well as regional and local agencies. The environmental and social management of the project will 
involve several institutions, national, regional, and local structures as set out below.  
 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)  
 As the law stipulates, the EPA is statutorily mandated to ensure that the implementation of all 
undertakings do not harm the environment. The Agency has eleven (11) regional offices, which are 
accessible, staffed, and equipped to perform its functions. The EPA Act, 1994 (Act 490) mandates the 
EPA to “ensure compliance with any laid down environmental impact assessment procedures in the 
planning and execution of development projects.” In pursuance of this provision, EPA will conduct 
inspection and monitoring activities in order to ensure compliance with regulations, environmental 
standards and mitigation commitments as outlined in this ESMS.In general, the EPA has the mandate 
to decide on project screening, guide the conduct of EAs (including this ESIA) and to grant 
51 
environmental approval for aviation sector projects to commence. Its mandate also covers 
monitoring of construction and operation phases of airport projects to ensure compliance with 
approval conditions, mitigation measures, and other environmental commitments and quality 
standards. The EPA has an Environmental Assessment and Audit Department with the capacity to 
handle its mandate. The Proposed Program will engage the EPA in their capacity as the statutory 
body responsible for supervising the Project to ensure all social and environment impacts are 
properly mitigated.  
Land Commission  
The Land Valuation Division (LVD) of the Lands Commission is the statutory government institution 
responsible for assessing and approving compensation amounts to PAPs. It will receive value and 
verify documentation on affected properties. This is to ensure that payments are not made to 
people who are not adversely affected and also compensations offered to affected persons are 
reasonable. The valuation of assets and estimating of disturbance to livelihood will be carried out 
using standards set by the Lands commission of Ghana.  
International Policies, Standards and Institutions  
This section describes international development institutions and their applicable Environmental and 
Social (E&S) sustainability standards relevant to this ESMS and the implementation of sub-projects 
under the program.  
Consistency of the assessment with IFAD safeguards 
The SECAP note is at the core of IFAD’s corporate mandate to design and implement sustainable 
projects avoiding or mitigating social and environmental damage. Therefore, projects are subject to 
a scrutiny and analysis to determine not only the category but also the potential triggering of 
safeguards measures. This SECAP note found that there will be no significant or irreversible 
environmental impacts associated with the project. Nor will there be human populations negatively 
affected by the project aims. The potential impacts identified are mainly localized given the small-
scale approach of the interventions, which can be effectively mitigated and are addressed with no 
risk of irreversible and or permanent damage over the project influence area. 
The SECAP sets out actions to implement mitigation measures and monitoring and reporting 
measures on performance, institutional and organizational arrangements. It will address measures 
for information disclosure and the process for continued consultation and participation of affected 
people during project implementation. Hence, it will be a living matrix and flexible, as its actions may 
be subject to change based on feedback received during project. 
Assessment of potential impacts 
52 
Even though the project interventions will mainly promote the sustainable development and climate 
resilient agriculture with positive environmental and social externalities there may also be potential 
negative consequences during the implementation phase that need to be avoided or mitigated. In 
line with corporate policies, special consideration to social and environmental issues will be taken 
into account. 
Positive impacts 
The project will benefit up to 75,000 communities in the Northern and Ashanti Regions of Ghana. 
The project’s main positive social and environmental effects will be to substantially improve 
decision-making among smallholder farmers as they become active stakeholders in developing 
climate resilient agriculture. Their capacity will be improved through training and engaging in 
implementing activities while improving their understanding of value chains and market 
negotiations. There will also be an exchange of existing knowledge with other communities 
supporting the dissemination of good practices. Besides, collective decision-making and the climate 
information system will enable advances in social and inter-community communication improving 
resilience and sustainable agriculture. 
Essentially, the project will, through a holistic model, support the mainstreaming lessons learned on 
Climate Change adaptation and agro-ecological restoration knowhow in decision making, rural 
planning and agriculture production processes, promoting broader awareness, institutional 
development and technical capacity among small holder farmers, farmers’ organizations, extension 
agents, policy makers and other stakeholders in Ghana. It will build the capacity of the stakeholders 
to adopt climate-resilient agronomic systems and technologies, and produce and implement Climate 
Change adaptation plans (e.g. vulnerability assessments, land and crop suitability planning, drought 
contingency plans), that incorporate soil and water conservation, and climate-risks reduction needs. 
A relevant social aspect of the project is the focus on institutional strengthening of producers’ 
organizations, that will target inclusion of women and young people. There are specific indicators for 
this purpose given priority to the gender mainstreaming in the decision-making process, to this end, 
the project indicator will be gender-disaggregated as appropriate, with an overall target of minimum 
50% female participants in the project. For the similar reasons, youth will comprise 40% of project 
participants. 
Negative impacts 
The initial assessment of each of the project sub-components has revealed a number of potential 
negative social and environmental impacts as follows: 
Inappropriate fertilizer application; 
53 
Risk of deforestation and land degradation from demo plots and likely future encroachment of forest 
areas; 
Risk of excluding a number of farmers from trainings; 
Effective involvement of women and youth 
Labor and working conditions 
The activities will be screened further and where needed, a more focused due diligence will be 
conducted once the specific locations and interventions are finalised. The results of the screening 
and focused assessments will inform the specific measures that will be developed or updated as part 
of the ESMP. 
Environmental and social category 
Assessment of the main environmental and social issues in the project area and identification of 
significant impacts (positive and negative) and social concerns likely to be associated with the 
project concluded in a Social and Environmental categorization B. 
The categorization was based on IFAD social and environmental categorization criteria. Taking into 
account that any adverse social and environmental impacts would be short term, and would be 
remedied or mitigated through actions included in the Project’s activities. The overview has been 
informed by an appraisal of environmental and, social issues to determine if an in-depth 
environmental and social impact assessment was needed. Guiding questions for environmental and 
social risk classification can be found in annex 1. 
Mitigation measures 
The potential unintended consequences have been discussed with the Project’s design team and 
relevant stakeholders. Based on IFAD's social and environmental guidelines as well as Ghana’s 
environmental policies, the following mitigation measures are proposed to reduce potential risks 
and maximize positive impacts on social, environmental and climatic attributes.  
Risk associated with Fertilizer Application 
Ensure that dressings do not exceed recommended doses. 
Reduce leaching through appropriate choice of fertilizer to suit soil conditions, split applications and 
fertilizer placement. 
54 
Reduce run-off through incorporation of fertilizer into soil, timing of applications to avoid erosive 
rains, and soil and water conservation measures. 
Limit nitrate use in sensitive watersheds serving urban areas. 
Select non-ammonium sources of nitrogen such as urea. 
Carry out liming (usually to pH 5.5 for tropical crops). 
Explore the potential for increasing production without the use of chemical fertilizers, especially 
using indigenous technologies, including organic fertilizers, and supporting integrated soil fertility 
systems. 
Support crop management practices that increase the nutrients available to crops, including by: (i) 
using more organic and less inorganic fertilizer; (ii) increasing the efficiency of fertilizer use through 
appropriate fertilizer selection, timing and split applications; (iii) increasing nutrient recycling using 
crop residues and livestock grazing after crop harvest (mixed farming); use of nitrogen fixing trees, 
where feasible (agroforestry); and (iv) improving rotations (e.g. inclusion of legumes, multicropping). 
Risk of deforestation and land degradation. 
The project will not work in protected areas nor in buffer zones but will facilitate the means and 
encourage agroforestry practices in the nearby of buffer zones of protected areas and forest 
reserves. The project will work with communities and other stakeholders to promote measures to 
avoid or limit deforestation and degradation by: 
Encouraging zero-deforestation value chains and developing certification schemes 
Supporting landscape planning involving local communities and the strengthening of local 
governance capacity; 
Identifying areas that should not be cleared (e.g., streams and bodies of water) and limit the clearing 
of land to the areas that are most suitable for agricultural production and avoiding the use of fire as 
a land clearing method; 
Increasing awareness and education on sustainable forest management; 
Promoting forest-based alternative livelihoods involving women. 
 Capacity building. 
Training is a long-term commitment. To maximize training activities during the Project, and to 
guarantee widespread dissemination of best practices after conclusion of the Project, training under 
the Project should: (i) focus on identifying pioneer farmers (who are already implementing 
innovative and sustainable farming technologies) in strategic locations; (ii) support and encourage 
these farmers; and (iii) establish a farmer-to-farmer training mechanism, allowing farmers 
themselves will serve as multipliers in their communities. Also, training of Financial Institution (FI) 
55 
staff and other stakeholders on multidimensional risk management, should be upscaled physically 
and virtually. 
Women and youth involvement. 
The Project will support the capacity building of backyard gardens, a sustainable agricultural 
technology that fosters food security, while strengthening women’s leadership and influence in 
decision-making in the household, and natural resource management in the community. In order to 
increase participation of youth and women, the Project’s field extension agents should give priority 
to women and youth in training activities related to nursery implementation and management, food 
storage and processing, seed selection and breeding, marketing, organization and negotiation skills. 
Empowering women and youth can change overall gender inequality, safeguard food security and 
ensure long-term results of the Project by giving youth reasons to stay instead of migrating to cities.  
Multi-benefit approaches 
The Project will stimulate a long-term approach of multiple benefits for diversified and increased 
production, poverty reduction, enhanced risk management among smallholder farmers, enhanced 
ecosystems services and biodiversity within agricultural landscapes, reduced deforestation and 
increased resilience. 
These systems can be considered a multi-benefit approach because they: (i) increase productivity in 
a sustainable way; (ii) diversify production in space and time - a fundamental risk management tool 
of the smallholder farmers; (iii) conserve the natural resource base through afforestation and 
reforestation while providing economic benefits to the farmer; (iv) act as a buffer against changing 
patterns of precipitation, temperature, and new pests and diseases, and thus are resilient to 
extreme weather events as well as market shocks; (v) sequester carbon and lower GHG emissions; 
(vi) prevent deforestation and forest degradation by providing sustainable alternatives (like 
briquettes for fire), reducing pressure on adjacent natural forests and improving the coexistence of 
small-scale agriculture with forest ecosystems; and (vii) contribute to the achievement of food 
security and the Sustainable Development Goals. 
Incentives for good practices 
One economic incentive for adopting good farming practices has to do with access to high-end 
markets that pay a premium price for sustainable and clean products. By strengthening farmers’ 
capacity to access markets and by training farmers on climate resilient agricultural practices, the 
Project will bring farmers a step closer to access untapped green high-end markets. The Project may 
advocate for eco-labelling schemes that certify sustainable farming practices. 
56 
Stakeholder Engagement 
Institutional Stakeholders including governmental agencies and academic institutions were defined, 
as well potential producer organizations and persons that could participate in the project. Additional 
stakeholders that will act as service suppliers will be identified through a competitive process. 
Stakeholder Name 
Interest/Role in the project 
International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD) 
Accredited Entity 
Executing Agency 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) 
Member of the Programme  
Ministry of Food and  Agriculture (MOA) 
Oversight Committee 
Member of the Programme Oversight Committee 
Member of the ad hoc Technical Evaluation 
Committee 
Ministry of Land and Natural Resources 
Member of the Programme Oversight Committee 
Ghana Environmental Protection Agency 
Project participants (Beneficiaries) 
Member of the Programme Oversight Committee 
Member of the ad hoc Technical Evaluation 
Committee 
75, 000 households with approximately 500,000 
farmers of which 
50% are women, and 40% youth, from about 10 
villages in the Northern and Ashanti Regions of 
Ghana. 
University of Development Studies and 
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology, and University of Ghana 
Academic partners, supporting Research and 
Development and capacity building 
Producer Organizations 
Organizational groups supporting project participants 
Non-governmental organizations  
Services suppliers and organizational  development 
opportunities 
Table 2 : Main Stakeholders in AAFFORD 
57 
Institutional Stakeholders have been defined. Other stakeholders, such as the NGOs that will act as 
service suppliers will be identified through a competitive process. Beneficiaries have been identified 
through a participatory targeting approach developed jointly with the Government of Ghana for 
initial targeting. The Project´s target group of poor and vulnerable farmers or agricultural workers, is 
scattered throughout the country and that IFAD together with the Ministries of Agriculture and 
Women and Children have made the effort of identifying their location, which has resulted in the 
first group of communities and villages that constitute the priority areas. Any new community to be 
phased-in during project implementation will be identified by the Project Management Unit (PMU), 
in line with the targeting criteria, the Government of Ghana’s priorities and the orientation from the 
Projects Oversight Committee (POC). 
Participation of stakeholders is essential and mandatory during the design and during the execution 
of the project. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan will be developed to be executed during project 
implementation. 
The consultation process during design 
An interdisciplinary team (including specialists in Rural Finance, Environment and Climate, Economic 
and Financial Analysis, Agricultural Value Chains, Gender and Social Inclusion) was organized on the 
basis of the thematic needs of the various consultations. The consultations were carried out both 
with officials from previously identified institutions and with people at district levels. 
The consultation process allowed an organized process of information exchange with all 
stakeholders identified. Throughout the process they expressed their views, expectations, concerns 
and ideas for the proposal during and beyond the life of the project 
Local Level Consultations 
Two field missions were developed, and twelve focus groups on gender and social inclusion aspects 
were organized with institutional and community level stakeholders at design stage. Participants 
included representatives from associations, governmental and non-governmental institutions, 
producer organizations, community development associations, among others to collect information 
on agricultural practices, social and environmental vulnerabilities, access to value chains, socio-
economic and gender activities, institutional and organizational capacities, environmental 
monitoring and information generation. 
Participants were specifically asked if they had any reservations or concerns in relation to the 
proposed design of the project or any aspect of the proposed project implementation. General 
58 
concerns were raised as to the sustainability of previous interventions with similar objectives for 
smallholder farmers, thereby impeding a lasting impact of the projects’ activities. Aside from this, 
there were no concerns raised, and as such, for all intents and purposes, the proposed design has 
received the general blessing of all stakeholders present at the consultation. 
Gender and Social Inclusion Focus Groups 
A total of about two hundred and fifty (250) participants, from different producer organizations 
participated, divided as follows: 
Place of the Event 
Male 
Female 
Northern Ghana 
Ashanti Region 
93 
67 
50 
40 
Total 
143 
107 
The main topics addressed were: 
Access and control of resources. 
Needs and priorities in the framework of the project 
Access and control of resources: The deduction was that men and women are equally in control of 
natural resources. However, in rare cases where farmer groups have a predominantly male 
membership, the women play supportive roles. 
Needs and priorities: Once informed on the objectives of the consultations and provided the central 
information of the project, the participants analysed their needs and priorities. For this they 
concentrated on the activities they carry out in the agricultural value chains in which they 
participate. The common priorities to men and women were found to be: irrigation systems, access 
to markets, cover structures, seeds to plant, chemicals and tools.  
Stakeholder Engagement Strategy 
A stakeholder engagement plan will be prepared by the IFAD Country Office at the beginning of the 
project that will identify and describe the mechanisms for ongoing stakeholder engagement, 
consultations, and external communication. The plan will also be used so that the stakeholders have 
the necessary and sufficient information for their active participation in decision-making and as 
beneficiaries of the services and products offered by the project. Likewise, it should define in more 
detail, if necessary, the spaces and mechanisms for stakeholder participation in each of the project's 
components. In developing the plan, the following will be considered: 
59 
Identify institutional, governmental, non-governmental, commercial and community actors at the 
national, district and local levels that complement the identification already made during the design. 
Build capacities in the project teams on the importance of stakeholder participation and how to 
promote it. 
Prepare a dissemination and information strategy that responds to the characteristics of the 
different types of institutional and community actors, including women and young people, including 
an analysis of their link with the available social media. 
Develop a strategy based on the study of the types of participation expected in relation to each 
outcome and specific activity of the project, identify the mechanisms and instruments necessary to 
involve stakeholders, including consultation on language, timetables, places and times in which 
activities must be carried out to guarantee the participation of all, especially in the case of women 
and young people. 
Identify the actors that should be strengthened in their leadership and capacity to make decisions 
within the framework of the project and in their communities. 
Define procedures for the establishment of formal or informal commitments between the project 
and the stakeholders, mainly beneficiaries, for their continued participation until the end of the 
activities, once they are involved. 
This Plan, once formulated, will be shared with key actors, institutional and communities in order to 
receive feedback and agree on its application. 
Participatory processes 
To improve farmers’ production and resilience, the Project will perform a self-vulnerability 
assessment following a participatory approach, in which farmers will be able to identify the climate 
threats that they are exposed to and determine their response capacity and practices they need to 
improve in order to achieve resilience at the farm level. 
Additionally, the Project will facilitate face-to-face meetings between buyers and producers, in 
which producers will be able to hear first-hand the market demands and requirements to access 
those markets. Similarly, buyers will have the opportunity to hear problems to meet those demands 
from producers themselves, and together will be able to devise win-win solutions. The most 
powerful feature of these participatory discussions is that the producers will have the opportunity to 
influence market demand as well, since they will be able to propose lesser-known products with 
good marketing potential. 
Stakeholder engagement is built into the project design to ensure project buy in and response to 
beneficiary needs. The key stakeholder engagement processes are: 
60 
Development of climate vulnerability assessments 
Development of value chain analyses and market assessments 
Development of investment and production plans 
Producer Organization Strengthening and women/youth economic empowerment 
Development and financing of climate resilient support plans 
 Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 
The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be monitored through the Project M&E 
system. The M&E specialist will lead the process and will be supported with technical support as 
required from specialists within the team or subcontracted technical expertise as necessary. The 
M&E activities of the ESMP will employ a participatory approach in which Project participants are 
fully engaged in the collection of field data, discussion and analysis of this data, and decision-making 
regarding changes that may be required for more effective Project implementation. The M&E Officer 
is responsible for analyzing the data against the potential impacts identified and overall ESMP 
targets to monitor, assess Project implementation progress and effectiveness and reporting the 
results to the POC and IFAD. The M&E Officer will ensure that information flow is multi-directional; 
information must flow upward to the POC and IFAD, horizontally to the IPs and downward to Project 
beneficiaries. The M&E Officer will be in close coordination with the Safeguards Specialist, the two 
will participate in data collection and the outputs from the M&E Systems must be beneficial to them 
to ensure their continued participation. At the governance level, the results of the analyses are used 
for discussion on implementation progress and to make decisions on improvements and/or 
corrective measures on project implementation strategies, where necessary. At the implementation 
level, the information is used as a learning mechanism to guide the PMU in the management of the 
ESMP, the IPs and Project beneficiaries on the execution of Project activities for achieving optimal 
results avoiding and/or mitigating social and environmental impacts. It is important to understand 
the right type of information that is needed to influence the right type of target audiences at the 
right times, therefore the amount allocation may vary during the design phase once project areas 
are identified and during the implementation phase depending on potential on the ground findings. 
61 
Annex 3: Matrix of risks of the Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Parameter 
Activity 
Performance 
Indicator 
Target 
Responsibility 
Risk associated 
with fertilizer 
application 
Soil test has 
been done to 
determine 
quality of 
fertilizer 
Yes/No) 
All PO’s test 
representativ
e soil samples 
of production 
sites 
Monitoring 
means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Recommended 
Enhancement 
measures 
As part of sub-
project 
approval 
Annual reports, 
mid-term reports, 
closing 
for monitoring 
during project 
implementation 
PMU in 
collaboration with 
MoA extension 
officers 
Limit nitrate use in sensitive 
watersheds serving urban areas. 
Select non-ammonium sources of 
nitrogen such as urea. 
Is the organic 
alternative being 
applied (Yes/No) 
All PO’s apply 
organic 
Alternative 
PMU in 
collaboration with 
MoA extension 
officers 
As part of 
project 
environmental 
Annual reports, 
mid-term report, 
closing 
monitoring by 
PMU 
62 
All 
stakeholders 
are trained in 
sustainable 
PMU in 
collaboration with 
MoA extension 
officers 
practices 
As part of 
project 
environmental 
Annual reports, 
mid-term report, 
closing 
monitoring by 
PMU 
Encouraging zero-deforestation 
value chains and developing 
certification schemes 
Physical monthly 
inspections. 
Supporting landscape planning 
involving local communities and 
the strengthening of local 
governance capacity; 
Identifying areas that should not 
be cleared (e.g., streams and 
bodies of water) and limit the 
clearing of land to the areas that 
are most suitable for agricultural 
production and avoiding the use 
of fire as a land clearing method; 
Increasing awareness and 
education on sustainable forest 
management; 
Promoting forest-based 
alternative livelihoods involving 
women. 
extensive use of shifting 
agriculture; and human-wildlife 
conflicts will be updated and 
included 
Risk of 
deforestation 
and Land 
degradation 
63 
Capacity 
building to 
stakeholders 
Prepare training 
material adapted to the needs of 
each stakeholder 
Stakeholders 
trained 
All 
stakeholders 
are trained in 
sustainable 
practices 
PMU in 
collaboration with 
local governments 
and Department of 
Environment 
As part of 
Before 
project 
implementation 
approval 
of activities 
Involvement of 
women and 
youth 
In order to increase participation 
of youth and women, the 
Project’s field extension agents 
should give priority to women 
and youth in training activities 
related to nursery 
implementation and 
management, food storage and 
processing, seed selection and 
breeding, marketing, organization 
and negotiation skills. 
Women and 
youth trained 
50% Women 
and 40% 
Youth 
As part of 
Bi-annually 
project 
approval 
PMU in 
collaboration with 
local governments 
and Department of 
Environment. 
Ministry of Women, 
Children and Social 
Protection and 
Ministry of Youth 
and Sports, 
Include capacity 
building material 
for sustainable 
development 
practices as part of 
subcomponents 
training 
Include capacity 
building material 
for sustainable 
development 
practices as part of 
subcomponents 
training 
64 
65 
Table Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
Production 
affecting  
 Land 
the 
preparation – land 
Environment 
clearing, cultivation 
and other issues 
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
 Forest and 
Woodland loss 
 Land & soil 
degradation 
 Use of earth- moving 
machines, e.g. tractors 
for clearing 
 Water and soil 
pollution 
 Use of agro- 
chemicals 
 Flooding 
 Use of pesticides 
 Erosion 
Ensure that dressings 
do not exceed 
recommended doses. 
Reduce leaching 
through appropriate 
choice of fertilizer to 
suit soil conditions, 
split applications and 
fertilizer placement. 
 Bush fire 
 Biodiversity loss 
 Waste 
management 
issues 
66 
Reduce run-off through 
incorporation of 
fertilizer into soil, 
timing of applications 
to avoid erosive rains, 
and soil and water 
 GHG emission 
 Increased youth, 
women and men 
employment directly 
and indirectly  
 Increased sense of 
pride and 
responsibility by 
participating youth 
and women 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
Increased household income 
and reduced poverty 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
 As much as possible, 
discourage the opening of 
virgin forests 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Number of farmers that 
received training on 
sustainable land preparation 
 Increased youth employment 
and social well-being 
 Train farmers in sustainable 
 Improved nutrition and food 
security 
 Resource conflicts 
 Possible agitation 
from youth not 
presently included in 
the programme  
 Increased ability of women 
and youth to manage their 
enterprises in productive and 
profitable manner, 
thereby increasing GDP and 
manpower development 
land management practices 
and agrochemical 
management  
 Deliver training and 
agricultural inputs to farmers 
on-time to enable them to 
adjust and adapt their 
planting and harvesting 
methods and timing 
 Increased import substitution 
especially of rice 
 Adopt and enforce health, 
safety and environment rules 
at production sites  
 But increasing associated 
environmental and social costs 
 Encourage full exploration 
of the value chain including 
soil testing and agrochemical 
services  
 Social exclusion - 
women and youth 
and PLWD 
Use of child labour 
Possible loss of 
cultural assets  
 Change in forests area 
 Results from periodic soil 
and water analysis 
 Heath, safety and 
environment manual 
 Number of value chain 
enterprises around soil 
testing and agrochemicals 
management  
 Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan 
 Conflict resolution 
committee meetings 
 Develop     a     clear     and     
simple Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), incl.  
 Lists of approved projects 
and their beneficiaries 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
Processing 
affecting  
 Use of 
the 
processing machine 
Environment 
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
 Waste 
generation 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
 Unsafe and non- 
 Increased sales and 
healthy working 
conditions 
household income 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
 Encourage the use of 
renewable and low-carbon   
energy   sources   during 
processing operations 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Number of operators 
adopting renewable low 
carbon technologies 
Parboiling of Rice  
 Air, water and 
land pollution 
 GHG emission 
from machines 
 Increased youth 
Possible use of child 
Labourers 
employment and social 
 Adopt health, safety and 
 Number of enterprises 
well-being 
environment rules at 
processing sites 
established focusing on 
processing 
Migration influx  to 
processing sites  
Use of wood for 
heating/parboiling 
 Improved processing 
capacity, value additions and 
value chain development 
 Train farmers in sustainable 
agro- processing practices to 
reduce environmental 
impacts 
 Number of entrepreneurs 
adopting sustainable 
processing operations 
 Improved nutrition and food 
security 
 Step up knowledge 
 Knowledge management 
management and 
information dissemination to 
showcase the achievement of 
the project 
/communication plans, 
stakeholder meeting reports, 
communication project 
flyers/leaflets 
 Increased ability of youth to 
manage their enterprises in 
productive and profitable 
manner, thereby increasing 
GDP and manpower 
development 
67 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
Monitoring & indicators 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
 Increased import substitution 
of Rice 
 But increasing associated 
environmental and social costs 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
affecting  
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
the 
Environment 
68 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
Marketing 
affecting  
 Construction 
the 
of market 
Environment 
infrastructure 
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
 Dust, smoke, 
noise, ground 
movement / 
vibration 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
 Better access to 
 Improved market 
market 
penetration 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
 Use construction 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Observation of construction 
equipment with moderate 
decibel during construction 
equipment for dust, noise, 
smoke, vibration, etc. 
 Better access to 
 Access to market information 
 Deforestation 
production and 
processing sites by 
supervisory agencies 
and market linkage and 
support services 
 Water pollution 
 Strengthened market value 
 Improved access to 
rural communities 
chain, with more profitable 
enterprises 
 Conflict over land 
 Improved storage and 
reduced waste and postharvest 
losses 
and demand for 
compensation where 
infrastructure is to be 
constructed 
 Work inspection report on 
the environmental quality of 
market infrastructure 
 Health, safety and 
environment plans 
 Copy of consent of 
community /individuals on 
market infrastructure land 
site 
 Develop/adopt and enforce 
health, safety and 
environment rules at 
construction sites 
 Lawful and willing consent 
of community/or individuals 
on land site for market 
infrastructure 
Roads must be constructed 
with drainages 
Develop  contingency plans 
for dykes/spillways to 
manage  unexpected  
circumstances. 
 Flooding and 
erosion  from 
poorly 
constructed 
culverts, roads, 
etc. 
69 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Code of conduct for 
transport operators 
 Minutes of meetings of 
transport operators’ 
association 
Project reports 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
Transportatio
n 
affecting  
 Use of motorized and 
the 
heavy transportation 
Environment 
machines 
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
 GHG emission 
from 
transportation 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
 Influx of rural 
 Increased ownership of 
Migrant workers  to 
agri- enterprise sites 
and processing areas 
motorized and other transport 
system 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
 Organize transport 
entrepreneurs into an 
association for easy 
management 
Prepare training 
material adapted to the 
needs of each 
stakeholder 
Reduce negative 
impacts on 
environment  
 Increased number 
of service providers, 
which boost the 
economy 
Change in behavior 
and attitudes 
 Increased number of service 
providers 
 Increased GDP 
Increased revenues due to 
good practices  
 But increasing associated 
environmental and social costs 
 Develop a code of conduct, 
and health, safety and 
environment regulation for 
transport operators 
Include capacity building 
material for sustainable 
development practices as 
part of subcomponents 
training 
Capacity 
building to 
stakeholders 
70 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
 Targets for youth and 
women with disaggregated 
data 
Monitoring & indicators 
Project reports/ M&E 
Part in 
Key issue 
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
affecting  
 Gender and youth gap   More pressure on 
the 
resources , 
migration  
Environment 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
Gender and 
inequality, poverty  
More revenues  
value chain 
Involvement 
of women 
and youth 
71 
Table  Environmental and Social/ Climate  Monitoring Plan  
Parameter 
Activity 
Monitoring 
Indicator 
Responsibility for 
monitoring 
Monitoring means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Estimated Monitoring 
Costs (USD) 
ENVIRONMENTAL/ SOCIAL/ CLIMATE MONITORING  
Compliance 
reports 
PMU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
ESIA reports 
Adherence to laid 
legal and policy 
requirements 
Once business 
plans are 
developed and 
submitted for 
approval  
100,000 
PMU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
 Project reports, 
banks MFIs reports, 
stakeholder surveys  
Baseline on 
status of the 
sustainability 
principles of 
the financial 
system  
Annually  
150,000 
Environmental 
and Social 
Screening and 
impact 
assessment for 
sub project 
financed by 
the facility and 
financial 
institutions  
Banks, MFIs 
supportive 
and adopt 
tools and 
methods 
developed  
etc. to 
respond to 
climate 
change and 
variability 
Sub projects/ 
business plan  
Environmental and 
Social Screening  
Strengthened 
capacity and 
business planning  
for FOs and or 
cooperatives, 
MSMEs 
( disaggregated by  
gender and Youth ),  
to design business 
plans  and  access 
green lines 
products  from 
financial 
institutions  and 
other MFIs and 
72 
commercial banks 
and   implement 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options. 
Improved 
readiness and 
capacities of 
financial 
institutions on 
green lending   
Training on 
sustainable 
agriculture -
includes training of 
spraying gangs, 
draining of rice 
paddies; and 
construction of 
water harvesting 
73 
Technical 
Assistance to 
enhance 
governance 
and 
management 
of loan 
products and 
green lines 
policy gap 
(identification, 
definition, gap 
assessment 
including 
gender and 
closing the 
gap.) 
Training of 
spraying gangs 
integrated 
pest and 
agrochemical 
management 
Training of 
farmers on 
water 
PMU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
Project reports, 
banks MFIs reports, 
stakeholder surveys 
Baseline on 
status of the 
sustainability 
principles of 
the financial 
system 
Annual 
250,000 
Number of 
those trained 
PMU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
Field observation 
Once  
200,000 ( included in 
the capacity building 
budget) 
structure for dry 
season irrigation 
harvesting for 
dry season 
farming 
Support for conflict 
resolution -  
include support for 
stakeholders 
dialogue on conflict 
management and 
land governance 
Conflict 
resolution 
stakeholders 
support and 
land 
governance 
dialogue 
Other Social 
monitoring 
including 
adherence to labor 
law and working 
conditions  
Include gender 
and People 
living with 
disabilities 
(PLWD) 
mainstreaming  
Activities of 
conflict 
resolution 
committee 
Organize 
land 
governance 
dialogue 
Activities of 
Targeting 
committee  
Health and Safety 
Number of 
farmers sign 
unto health 
insurance  
Health 
Insurance and 
outreach  
Total  
, PMU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
Conflict resolution 
and land governance 
dialogue  reports  
Once  
PMU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
Social Surveys, 
Beneficiaries 
assessment  
Annual 
NPMU, SPU,  
SPC Reports  
Annual 
75,000 
50,000 
75,000 
900,000 
74 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING OF SUB-PROJECTS  to be financed by financial institutions 
Introduction: Screening and Review 
The Environment and Social Risk Category of AFFORD is ‘B’ which means that ‘some adverse impacts 
can be readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation33. However, to remain 
a ‘B’ Category Project serious attention has to be paid to sub projects to be implemented by 
borrowers  
During implementation, it is essential that all sub-project proposals be screened, first on eligibility on 
the basis of the ‘letter of interest’ / application form (see Annex 1), and secondly on the basis of 
environmental, climate and social impacts using the more detailed screening forms (see Annex 2). 
Project Screening for Environmental Impacts will ensure that sub-projects with high and irreversible 
impacts on the environment or people that cannot be readily mitigated are not eligible for support 
by AFFORD. It is very important to ensure that before land is developed for any cluster or farmer 
organization, MSMES, they should take into account sustainability  measures. 
Sub-project proposals with medium (manageable) environmental and social impacts should include 
the following basic elements in the application and contain in the project-specific ESMP:  
A summary and description of the possible adverse effects that specific sub-project activities may 
occur;  
A description of any planned measures to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts, and how and when 
they will be implemented including labor regulations and work conditions;  
A system for monitoring the environmental and social effects of the project;  
A description of who will be responsible for implementing and monitoring the mitigation measures; 
and  
A cost estimate of the mitigation measures, which should be included in the sub-project proposal.  
The scope of any environmental and/or social review and related mitigation measures will be 
determined by the relevant (environmental/climate change) PSU staff in consultation with technical 
experts where needed, via the sub-project screening and approval process. Sub-project proposals 
with only minor or no adverse impacts do not need a separate review (or ESMP).  
33 Source: IFAD (2016) Managing Risks to Create Opportunities. IFAD’s Social, Environmental and 
Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) (IFAD: Rome), p.18  
75 
Screening for Eligibility  
The AFFORD  provides a detailed description of the targeting and selection process for beneficiaries. 
Annex 1 provides the proposed format for the letter of interest / application form, which should be 
completed by each intended beneficiary and will be used as the primary tool for screening for 
eligibility.  
Screening for Environmental and Social Impacts and Climate Impacts  
Based on relevant SECAP guidelines, two separate environmental and social screening forms have 
been developed: for agri-enterprise (Annex 2) and related (market) infrastructure subprojects 
(Annex 3), and climate screening form for sub-projects (Annex 4).The intended beneficiaries are only 
required to complete the intention/application form in Annex 1 while the screening is done using 
the form in Annex 2, 3 and 4 by the PSU Environmental/Climate Change Officer (assisted by any 
Service Provider for that purpose).  
Annex 5 provides an environmental and social guideline for contractors especially those handling the 
construction of market infrastructure such as the construction /rehabilitation of market-connected 
rural feeder roads, irrigation facilities, dam’s construction, production platforms, etc. Sound 
environmental and social management of construction projects can be achieved only with adequate 
site selection and project design. As such, the ESMP for projects involving any new construction, or 
any rehabilitation or reconstruction for existing projects, should provide information as to screening 
criteria for site selection and design. The guidelines include the site selection, prohibitions, 
construction management measures, safety during construction, community relations, chance finds 
procedures and environmental supervision during construction. This include as well adherence to 
labor and work conditions.  
Impact Significance Rating 
In order to determine the significance of impacts, the likelihood of an impact occurring is considered 
against the consequence or magnitude of the impact if it was to occur. Likelihood is defined as the 
frequency of an impact occurring.  
Table 8.1 Definitions of Consequence  
Consequence 
Definition 
No Impact / No 
change  
No impacts on biophysical and social environments / livelihood / 
health / gender  
No public concerns  
76 
No legal issues  
Negligible  
Low/minor impact on environment / livelihood / health / gender  
Minor social impacts  
No legal issues  
Intermediate  
Some level of impact on environment / livelihood / health / 
gender  
Social issues apparent  
May have legal implications  
Severe  
High level impacts on environment / livelihood / health / gender  
High public concerns or perceptions  
Legal non- compliance  
Unknown  
Extent of the impact cannot be determined at this point  
Apply precautionary principle  
Projects that have low significance impacts may not require a new ESMP; in that case the standard 
ESMP and ESMF in this report will suffice. In the case of project with medium significance, the 
development of appropriate plans, in addition to the standard ESMP and ESMF may suffice to 
manage the severity of the impacts. In the case of projects with impacts of high significance, a 
separate ESIA is almost always required. 
77 
Annex 1 
Guiding Questions for environment and 
Comments/explanation 
Yes/No 
social screening 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily remedied 
adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
Would the project develop any wetlands? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
Would the project cause significant adverse 
impacts to habitats and/or ecosystems and their 
services (e.g. conversion of more than 50 
hectares of natural forest, loss of habitat, 
erosion/other form of land  degradation, 
fragmentation and hydrological  changes)? 
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 5) 
No 
No 
Does  the  proposed  project  target  area include 
ecologically sensitive areas,34 areas of 
global/national significance for biodiversity 
conservation, and/or biodiversity-rich areas and 
habitats depended on by endangered species? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
No 
Is the project location subjected to major 
destruction as a result of geophysical hazards? 
No 
Natural resources 
Would the  project  lead  to  unsustainable 
natural resource management practices 
(fisheries, forestry, livestock) and/or result in 
exceeding carrying capacity. For example, is the 
development happening in areas where little up-
No 
34  
“Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, 
biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; 
habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, 
including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to 
climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land 
degradation, areas that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or 
other cultural significance), and areas with high social vulnerability. 
78 
to-date information exists on sustainable 
yield/carrying capacity? 
(Guidance statements 4, 5 and 6) 
Would the project develop 
large-scale35 
aquaculture or mariculture projects, or where 
their development involves significant alteration 
of ecologically sensitive areas? 
No 
Would the project result in significant use of 
agrochemicals which may lead to life-threatening 
illness and long-term public health and safety 
concerns?  
No 
(Guidance statement 14) 
Does  the  project  rely  on  water-based 
(groundwater and/or surface water) 
development where there is reason to believe 
that significant depletion and/or reduced flow 
has occurred from the effects of climate change 
or from overutilization?   
(Guidance statement 7) 
Does the project pose a risk of introducing 
potentially invasive species or genetically 
modified organisms which might alter genetic 
traits of indigenous species or have an adverse 
effect on local biodiversity? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. 
industrial, mining, sewage effluent)? 
(Guidance statement 7) 
Infrastructure development 
Does the project include the construction 
/rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s) and/or 
No 
No 
No 
No 
The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
35  
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on 
minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be adopted 
where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as an 
aquaculture unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
79 
reservoir(s) meeting at least one of the following 
criteria? 
more than 15 metre high wall; 
more than 500 metre long crest; 
more than 3 million m3  reservoir 
capacity; or 
- incoming flood of more 
than 2,000 m3/s (Guidance 
Does  the  project  involve  large-scale irrigation  
schemes  rehabilitation  and/or 
development (more than 100 hectares per 
scheme)? 
No 
(Guidance statement 7) 
Does  the  project  include  
construction/rehabilitation/upgrade of roads 
that entail a total area being cleared above 10 
km long, or any farmer with more than 10 per 
cent of his or her private land taken? (Guidance 
statement 10) 
Does the project include drainage or correction 
of natural waterbodies (e.g. river
training)? 
(Guidance statement 7)  
Does   the   project   involve   significant 
extraction/diversion/containment of  surface 
water, leaving the river flow below 20 per cent 
environmental  flow  plus  downstream  user 
requirements?   
Social 
Would the project result in economic 
displacement or physical resettlement of more 
than 20 people, or impacting more than 10 per 
cent of an individual household’s assets? 
(Guidance statement 13) 
Would the project result in conversion and/or 
loss of physical cultural  resources?   
(Guidance statement 9) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
80 
Would the project generate significant social 
adverse impacts to local communities (including 
disadvantaged  and vulnerable groups and 
indigenous people) or other project-affected 
parties? 
No 
(Guidance statement 13) 
Others 
Does the project include the manufacture and 
transportation of hazardous and toxic materials 
which may affect the environment?  
(Guidance statement 2)  
Does the project include the construction of a 
large or medium-scale industrial plant?   
Does the project include the development of 
large-scale production forestry?  
(Guidance statement 5)  
Rural finance 
Does the project support any of the above 
(Question 1 to Question 21) through the 
provision of a line of credit to financial service 
providers? 
(Guidance statement 12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications which 
can be readily remedied. 
Location 
Does the project involve agricultural 
intensification and/or expansion of cropping 
area in non-sensitive areas that may have 
adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems and/or 
livelihoods? 
No 
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
Do the project activities include rangeland and 
livestock development?  
No 
 (Guidance statement 6) 
81 
Does the project involve fisheries where there is 
information on stocks, fishing effort and 
sustainable yield? Is there any risk of overfishing, 
habitat damage and knowledge of fishing zones 
and seasons? 
No 
 (Guidance statement 4) 
Would the project activities include aquaculture 
and/or agriculture in newly introduced or 
intensively practiced areas? Do project activities 
include conversion of wetlands and clearing of 
coastal vegetation, change in hydrology or 
introduction of exotic species?  
(Guidance statement 4)  
Do the project activities include natural 
resource-based value chain development?   
(Guidance statements 1, 6 and 12) 
Do the project activities include  watershed 
management or rehabilitation? 
Does the project include large-scale soil and 
water conservation measures? (Guidance 
statements 1 and 5) 
Infrastructure 
Does the project include small-scale irrigation 
and drainage, and small and medium dam 
subprojects (capacity < 3 million m3)?  
(Guidance statements 7 and 8) 
Does the project include small and micro 
enterprise development subprojects? 
(Guidance statements 12 and 13) 
Does the project include the development of 
agro-processing facilities? 
(Guidance statements 2, 6 and 12) 
Would the construction or operation of the 
project cause an increase in traffic on rural 
roads? 
(Guidance statement 10) 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
82 
This activity is related to the 
development of agro- 
ecological practices using 
demo plots in different 
locations. 
Producer’s organizations will 
be supported to enhance their 
market access 
Social 
Would any of the project activities have minor 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
No 
(Guidance statement 9)  
Would the project result in physical resettlement 
of 20 people or less, or impacting less than 10 
per cent of an individual household’s assets  
No 
(Guidance statement 13)? 
Would the project result in short-term public 
health and safety concerns? 
(Guidance statement 14) 
Would the project require a migrant workforce 
or seasonal workers (for construction, planting 
and/or harvesting)?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
Rural finance 
Does the project support any of the above 
(Question 23 
provision of a line of credit to financial service 
providers?  
to Question 37) through the 
(Guidance statement 12) 
Guidance for categorization 
“Yes” response any 
questions between 1 
and 22 
Environmental and 
social  
category is A 
83 
No 
No 
No 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment or an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(full or specific) is required depending on 
Also, some specific 
availability of information. 
questions would require the below specific actions: 
Yes  to  question  16  –  A Resettlement Action Plan 
or a Resettlement Action Framework is   required 
depending 
on availability of information. 
Yes to question 17 – A Physical Cultural Resources 
Management Plan is required that includes 
provisions for managing chance finds at 
implementation. 
Yes to question 18 – Free, prior and informed 
consent should be obtained/ Free, Prior and 
Informed Consent Implementation Plan is required 
depending on whether the affected communities 
are identifiable. In instances  where indigenous 
peoples are affected an Indigenous Peoples Plan is 
required. 
required. 
A Social Impact Assessment is 
Yes to question 8 and/or question 15   –   A   water   
resources management plan for the project is 
required. 
Yes to question 7, question 9 and/or question 19 – 
A pest management plan is required. 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
An environmental and social analysis to develop an 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) is required. 
No further analysis is required. 
Environmental and 
social 
category is C 
“No” response to all 
Questions between 
1 and 22 and “Yes” 
response to questions 
between 23 and 38 
“No” response to all 
questions  between 
1 and 38 
In case projects fall under both category A and B, the highest category will be taken as reference. 
The determination of the project category and classification will depend on the magnitude of 
impacts and would depend on the scale of such activities; a cautious approach to the concern of 
cumulative impacts is considered essential. In such cases, the necessary environmental and social 
analysis and associated budget should be incorporated into project design. Such projects may be 
considered for category B. 
Determining the environmental and social category A, including the extent of assessments and 
studies to be conducted, will also take into account available information, i.e. recent studies and 
assessments, including other initiatives in the country, to the extent these are relevant to the 
proposed project. 
Declassification (from A to B or from B to C) may also be possible in case negative externalities are 
being addressed by other projects or activities implemented by third parties. For this project, no 
Category A projects will be supported. 
84 
ANNEX 2: Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Yes  No 
Additional Explanation of “yes” response 
Project is designed to reduce impact of 
such events of rural smallholders. 
Project integrates such climate scenarios in 
its design to minimize such adverse effects 
As described in the project design Ghana is 
highly vulnerable to climate and weather 
related losses and the project is designed to 
reduce such impacts. 
As rural smallholders, project beneficiaries 
rely partially or entirely on agricultural 
production that has been severely affected 
by changing climactic patterns. The project 
is designed to counteract such effects.  
Is the project area subject to extreme 
climatic events, such as flooding, drought, 
tropical storms or heat waves? 
X 
Do climate scenarios for the project 
foresee changes in temperature, rainfall 
or extreme weather that will adversely 
affect the project impact, sustainability or 
cost over its lifetime? 
X 
Would the project make investments in 
low-lying coastal areas/zones exposed to 
tropical storms? 
Would the project make investments in 
glacial areas and mountain zones? 
Would the project promote agricultural 
activity in marginal and/or highly 
degraded areas that have increased 
sensitivity to climatic events (such as on 
hillsides, 
deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
Is the project located in areas where rural 
development projects have experienced 
significant weather-related losses and 
damages in the past? 
X 
Would the project develop/install 
infrastructure in areas with a track record 
of extreme weather events? 
Is the project target group entirely 
dependent on natural resources (such as 
seasonal crops, rain-fed agricultural plots, 
migratory fish stocks) that have been 
affected by in the last decade by climate 
trends or specific climatic events?  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
85 
Would climate variability likely affect 
agricultural productivity 
(crops/livestock/fisheries), access to 
markets and/or the associated incidence 
of pests and diseases for 
X 
the project target groups? 
Would weather-related risks or climatic 
extremes likely adversely impact upon 
key stages of identified value chains in the 
project (from production to markets)? 
X 
Is the project investing in climate-
sensitive livelihoods that are diversified?  X 
Is the project investing in infrastructure 
that is exposed to infrequent extreme 
weather events? 
X 
Is the project investing in institutional 
development and capacity-building for 
rural institutions (such as farmer groups, 
cooperatives) in climatically 
heterogeneous areas? 
Does the project have the potential to 
become more resilient through the 
adoption of green technologies at a 
reasonable cost? 
X 
X 
Does the project have opportunities to 
integrate climate resilience aspects 
through policy dialogue to improve 
agricultural sector strategies and policies? 
X 
Does the project have potential to 
integrate climate resilience measures 
without extensive additional costs (e.g. 
improved building codes, capacity- 
building, or including climate risk issues in 
policy processes)? 
X 
Based on the information available would 
the project benefit from a more thorough 
climate risk and vulnerability analysis to 
identify the most vulnerable rural 
X 
86 
Productivity and access to markets are 
directly affected by climate variability and 
are directly addressed by the project 
Climate proofing of value chains is an 
essential aspect of the project design. 
The project will strengthen production and 
market access, including diversification of 
Crops through capacity building 
The project invests intensely in rural 
development in climate sensitive areas, 
with a climate vulnerability analysis being a 
central guiding aspect to shape the 
intervention strategy at a local level. 
Such technologies have been assessed and 
are being adopted. 
The project strategy mainstreams climate 
resilient agriculture into the Government of 
Ghana’s agricultural policies to ensure 
integration and sustainability of the newly 
adopted practices and services. 
While several of the climate resilience 
measures included in the project have an 
additional cost, the project also promotes a 
paradigm shift towards climate resilient 
agriculture that will promote more stable 
production and improved market access. 
These measures will have a positive 
economic return. 
The project will develop local, participatory 
climate vulnerability assessments that will 
population, improve targeting and 
identify additional complementary 
investment actions to manage climate 
risks? 
Guidance for classification 
guide the project strategy and intervention 
at the local level. 
“Yes” response to any of the 
questions 1 to 7 
The climate risk classification is 
high 
A detailed analysis is required 
“Yes” response to any of the 
questions 8 to 16 
The climate risk classification is 
moderate 
A basic analysis is required 
“Yes” response to question 17  GHG assessment 
For example, EX-ACT tool 
“No” response to almost all 
questions 
The climate risk classification is 
low 
No further analysis is required, 
but voluntary measures can be  
incorporated 
MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL IMPACTS 
Introduction 
The overall objective of environmental and social monitoring is to ensure that recommended 
mitigation measures are incorporated, and that activities carried out during sensitization (i.e. 
training and awareness-raising) and infrastructure construction/maintenance are environmentally 
and socially acceptable, and therefore sustainable. 
Key Performance Indicators 
The key impact indicators for AFFORD are that: 
Estimated corresponding total number of household members - C.I. 1.b 
Corresponding number of households reached - C.I. 1.a 
Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project (out of which 10% will be people 
with disabilities) - C.I. 1  
Number of people with greater resilience including people with Disabilities   
Households reporting an improved access to markets and a 30% income increase (percentage) - C.I. 
1.2.2 
The key monitoring indicators/variables from the AFFORD logframe include:  
Number of persons/households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs, technologies or 
practices - C.I. 1.1.2 
87 
Number of hectares of farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated  
Number of upgraded women-led vegetable gardens 
Number of integrated market-oriented vegetable garden financed through matching grants 
Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies - C.I. 1.1.4 
Number of rural producers accessing production inputs - C.I. 1.1.3 
Number of Jobs created (100% youth-led agricultural service businesses) - C.I. 2.2.1 
Number of financial service providers supported in delivering outreach strategies, financial products 
and services to rural areas - C.I. 1.1.6 
Number of farmers’ organizations engaged in formal partnerships/ agreements or contracts with 
public or private entities - C.I. 2.2.3 
Number of effective agricultural value chain interaction platforms (AVIP) 
Number of rural farmers’ organizations supported - C.I. 2.1.3 
Number of 4P businesses supported 
Number of market, r or storage facilities constructed or rehabilitated - C.I. 2.1.6 
Number of agribusiness policy-dialogue (meetings, roundtables) between public, private and 
producers’ stakeholders conducted 
Various project impacts and aspects relate to these overall performance targets. When the activities 
and indicators are established, baseline data needs to be collected to serve as a benchmark and 
against which changes in the identified indicators can be measured. The types of parameters that 
can be monitored may include mitigation measures or design features, or actual impacts. In some 
cases, such as drainage structures and soil conservation interventions, monitoring is fairly 
straightforward and can be done as part of routine or periodic maintenance.  However, other 
parameters, particularly those related to social, ecological and climate change issues can only be 
effectively assessed over a period of 2 to 3 years. 
The monitoring plan in Table 9.1 lists the parameters to be monitored, activity that will generate the 
parameters, monitoring indicator, and responsibility, monitoring means, frequency and the 
estimated cost.  
88 
Guiding questions for environment and social 
screening 
Yes/No 
Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily remedied 
adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
Would the project develop any wetlands? (Guidance 
statement GS1) 
Would the project cause significant adverse impacts to 
habitats and/or ecosystems and their services (e.g. 
conversion of more than 50 hectares of natural forest, loss 
of habitat, erosion/other form of land degradation, 
fragmentation, and hydrological changes)? (GS 1, 2 and 5) 
Does the proposed project target area include ecologically 
sensitive areas,36 areas of global/national significance for 
biodiversity conservation and/or biodiversity-rich areas and 
habitats depended on by endangered species? (GS1) 
Is the project location subjected to major destruction as a 
result geophysical hazards (tsunamis, landslides, 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions)? 
Natural resources 
Would the project lead to unsustainable natural resource 
management practices (fisheries, forestry, livestock) 
and/or result in exceeding carrying capacity. For example, 
is their development happening in areas where little up-to-
date information exists on sustainable yield/carrying 
capacity? (GS 4, 5 and 6) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
36 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere 
reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral 
reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and 
variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and 
areas that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural 
significance) and areas with high social vulnerability. 
89 
Would the project develop large-scale37 aquaculture or 
mariculture projects, or where their development involves 
significant alteration of ecologically sensitive areas? 
Would the project result in significant use of agrochemicals 
which may lead to life-threatening illness and long-term 
public health and safety concerns? (GS 14) 
Does the project rely on water-based (ground and/or 
surface) development where there is reason to believe that 
significant depletion and/or reduced flow has occured from 
the effects of climate change or from overutilization? (GS7) 
Does the project pose a risk of introducing potentially 
invasive species or GMOs which might alter genetic traits 
of indigenous species or have an adverse effect on local 
biodiversity? (GS1) 
Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. industrial, 
mining, sewage effluent)? (GS7) 
Infrastructure development 
Does the project include the construction/ 
rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s)/reservoir(s) meeting at 
least one of the following criteria? (GS8) 
more than 15 metre high wall or  
more than 500 metre long crest or  
more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity or  
incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes 
rehabilitation/development (above 100 hectares per 
scheme)?38 (GS7) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
37 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on 
minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be adopted 
where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as an 
aquaculture unit size to trigger ESIA. 
38 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary 
based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations 
determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted where 
they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an 
irrigation development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
90 
Does the project include 
construction/rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that entail a 
total area being cleared above 10 km long, or any farmer 
with more than 10 per cent of his or her private land 
taken? (GS10) 
Does the project include drainage or correction of natural 
water bodies (e.g. river training)? (GS7) 
Does the project involve significant 
extraction/diversion/containment of surface water, leaving 
the river flow below 20 per cent environmental flow plus 
downstream user requirements? (GS7) 
Social 
Would the project result in economic displacement39 or 
physical resettlement of more than 20 people, or impacting 
more than 10 per cent of an individual household’s assets? 
(GS13) 
Would the project result in conversion and/or loss of 
physical cultural resources? (GS9) 
Would the project generate significant social adverse 
impacts to local communities (including disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups and indigenous people) or other project-
affected parties? (GS13) 
Other 
Does the project include manufacture and transportation 
of hazardous and toxic materials which may affect the 
environment? (GS2) 
Does the project include the construction of a large or 
medium-scale industrial plant? 
 Does the project include the development of large-scale 
production forestry? (GS5) 
Rural finance 
Does the project support any of the above (Q1 to Q22) 
through the provision of a line of credit to financial service 
providers? (GS12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
39 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or 
means of livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
91 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications 
which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
Does the project involve agricultural intensification and/or 
expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas that may 
have adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems and/or 
livelihoods? (GS1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
Do the project activities include rangeland and livestock 
development? (GS6) 
Does the project involve fisheries where there is 
information on stocks, fishing effort and sustainable yield? 
Is there any risk of overfishing, habitat damage and 
knowledge of fishing zones and seasons? (GS4) 
Would the project activities include aquaculture and/or 
agriculture in newly introduced or intensively practiced 
areas? Do project activities include conversion of wetlands 
and clearing of coastal vegetation, change in hydrology or 
introduction of exotic species? (GS4) 
Do the project activities include natural resources-based 
value chain development? (GS 1, 6 and 12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
The project will support 
Cereal production(maize, 
millet, sorghum, rice) and 
vegetable crop (onion, 
garlic, cabbage etc,) 
Do the project activities include watershed management or 
rehabilitation? 
Yes 
Does the project include large-scale soil and water 
conservation measures? (GS 1 and 5)  
Infrastructure 
Does the project include small-scale irrigation and 
drainage, and small and medium (capacity < 3 million m3) 
dam subprojects? (GS 7 and 8) 
Does the project include small and microenterprise 
development subprojects? (GS 12 and 13) 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
The project will develop 
small scale hydro-
agricultural and water 
mobilisation 
infrastructure. 
The project will target 
youth and women leaded 
microenterprises.  
92 
Does the project include the development of 
agroprocessing facilities? (GS 2, 6 and 12) 
Yes 
The project will support 
improved storage and the 
development of small 
processing units for 
income generation. 
Would the construction or operation of the project cause 
an increase in traffic on rural roads? (GS10) 
No 
Social 
Would any of the project activities have minor adverse 
impacts on physical cultural resources? (GS9) 
Would the project result in physical resettlement of less 
than 20 people, or impacting less than 10 per cent of an 
individual household’s assets (GS13)? 
Would the project result in short-term public health and 
safety concerns? (GS14) 
Would the project require a migrant workforce or seasonal 
workers (for construction, planting and/or harvesting)? 
(GS13) 
Rural finance 
Does the project support any of the above (Q24 to Q37) 
through the provision of a line of credit to financial service 
providers? (GS12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
The project will establish 
partnership relationships 
with microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) to 
finance the activities of 
farmers 
organization/cooperatives. 
Annex 1 – Eligibility Screening Form 
93 
Letter of Interest (Eligibility Screening Form) 
Please complete all the required spaces in this form 
1. Name: Surname -------------------------------------------------Other Names:--------------------------------------
Maiden name (for married women):------------------------------------------------------ 
2. Sex: (a) Male {      }         (b)  Female {       } 
3. Date of birth: ---------------------------------------------------- 
4. Highest Education Level: (a) No formal education {    }      (b) Primary School {    }   (c) Secondary 
School {   } (d) Vocational school   (e) Tertiary Education {    } 
5. Which community do you belong to: -------------------------------------------------------------- 
6. How long have you lived in this community: -------------------------------------------------------- 
7. How do you belong to this community: (a) by birth {    }    (b) by marriage {   } (c) other (specify):----
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
8. Local Government Area (LGA): ----------------------------------------------- State: ------------------------------- 
9. What enterprise are you interested in (see list of selected enterprises for the LGA): --------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
10. Do you have any experience in this enterprise: (a) Yes  {   }     (b) No {   }. If yes, how many years: --
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
11. Do you belong to any youth or women organization: (a) Yes {   }   (b) No  {  }. If yes, what is the 
name: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
12. Do you belong to any cooperative society: (a) Yes {  }   (b) No {  }. If yes, what is the name: ----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
13. Do you have access to any land for the enterprise: (a) Yes  {  }  (b) No  {  }.  
14. If yes to question 13, where is the land located-------------------------------------------------------; and 
what is the area size of the land? ----------------------------------------------------- 
15. What kind of title to you have to the land: (a) Government paper {  }  (b) Inheritance from parent 
{  }   (c) husband or wife’s consent {    }  (d) family allocation {  }  (e) community’s allocation {  } (f) 
Others (specify):------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Endorsements: 
Applicant: I certify that the information provided here is correct  
Name: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Signature: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
94 
Date: --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Community/traditional leader:  
Name: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Sign: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Verifications:  
Comments by the Local Government Liaison Office:------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Name of Officer: ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Designation: ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Sign and date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Comments by the RCU Office:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Name of Officer: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Designation: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Sign and date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Screening:   
Comments by service providers:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Categorical comments (a) Applicant Eligible {    }  (b) Applicant Ineligible  {   } 
95 
96 
Annex 2 - Environmental and Social Screening Forms for Subprojects 
A: Screening Form for Agri-Enterprise Projects 
General Information 
Project Name: 
Name of incubator / applicant: 
Name of Cooperative: 
Contact person’s details:  
Name of Apex Group: 
Contact person’s details: 
Project Location: 
Project sector (e.g. rice farming, vegetable 
processing, etc.) 
Estimated Cost: 
Proposed Date of Commencement:  
Expected Project duration: 
Site (estimated area in ha): 
Any equity/contribution brought into the 
project: 
Any plan for new construction: 
A1. Screening for Environmental and Social Issues 
Question 
Will the sub-project develop any wetlands? 
Would the sub-project result in economic displacement40 (loss of 
assets or access to resources) or physical resettlement  
Yes  No 
Additional explanation of 
‘Yes’ response  
40 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or 
means of livelihoods (see SECAP Procedure Guidance Statement 13) 
97 
Question 
Yes  No 
Additional explanation of 
‘Yes’ response  
Would the sub-project result in conversion and/or loss of physical 
cultural resources? 
Will the sub-project have significant social adverse impacts 
(affecting access to and/use rights to land, access to potable water 
and water for other uses) on local communities or other project-
affected parties? 
Will the project trigger unsustainable natural resource 
management practices (fisheries, forestry, livestock, and 
significant increase in use of agrochemicals) that exceed the 
carrying capacity? 
Does the sub-project include conversion of significant areas 
(above 50 ha) of natural forests/other wild lands? 
Would the project potentially cause significant adverse impacts to 
habitats and/or ecosystems and their services (e.g. habitat loss, 
erosion/ other form of land degradation, fragmentation, 
hydrological changes)? 
Does the proposed project target area include ecologically 
sensitive areas41; areas of global significance for biodiversity 
conservation and/or biodiversity-rich area; habitats depended on 
by endangered species? 
Does the project involve fisheries development in situations where 
little information exists on sustainable yield? 
Could the project pose a risk of introducing invasive alien species? 
Does the project involve the transfer, handling or use of 
genetically modified organisms/living modified organisms that 
may have an adverse effect on threatened biodiversity? 
Is the project site close to any oil and gas installation such as flow 
stations, oil terminal, oil or gas pipeline right of way? 
Has oil spill/ or pipeline fire ever been recorded around project 
site? 
41 ‘Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere  
reserves); areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by 
endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and 
mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and variability; 
lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas that 
include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural 
significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
98 
Question 
Yes  No 
Additional explanation of 
‘Yes’ response  
Does the project involve land use changes (agricultural 
intensification and/or expansion of the cropping area) and 
resources that may have adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems, 
and/or livelihoods? 
Will the project result in increased use of agrochemicals which 
may affect the natural environment/human health? 
Does the project include small-scale irrigation and drainage 
projects, and water impoundment including small dams (except in 
wetlands)? 
Does the project involve agricultural intensification and/or 
expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas? 
Do the project activities include rangeland and livestock 
development? 
Does the project involve artisanal fisheries where there is 
information on sustainable yield? 
Do the project activities include aquaculture and/or mariculture? 
Do the project activities include watershed management or 
rehabilitation? 
Does the project include large-scale soil and water conservation 
measures? 
Does the project include small and micro enterprise development 
sub-projects? 
Does the project involve credit operations through financial 
service providers, including credit for pesticide/other 
agrochemicals, livestock purchasing, irrigation, etc.? 
Do the project activities include natural resources-based value 
chain development? 
Would any of the project activities have minor adverse impacts on 
physical cultural resources? 
Would the project have low probability to have physical 
resettlement or economic displacement? 
Does the project include development of agro-processing 
facilities?  
Will the project require a migrant workforce during construction? 
99 
Question 
Yes  No 
Additional explanation of 
‘Yes’ response  
Will the project require seasonal workers to plant and/or harvest 
produce? 
Will the construction or operation of the project cause an increase 
in traffic on rural roads? 
Guidance for sub-project categorization 
"Yes" response to any 
of questions 1-13 
"Yes” response to 
questions 14-31 
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
Sub-project 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
Sub-project 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Subproject 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
ESIA is required for subproject  
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the general 
ESMF 
No further analysis is required 
B: Screening Form for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-Projects 
Name of market infrastructure: 
Infrastructure type: 
Location: 
Proposed Date of Commencement:  
Expected Project duration: 
Estimated cost: 
Estimate number of communities to be 
served: 
Estimated number of entrepreneur to be 
served:  
B1: Screening for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-projects 
100 
Question 
Yes  No 
Will the project activities include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads or other 
rural infrastructure in protected/sensitive areas42? 
Does the project include construction of roads or other infrastructure that entail the 
total area being cleared of 50 ha or above? 
Does the project include construction of dam (s)/reservoir (between 5-15 m high 
with a reservoir exceeding 2 million m3)? 
Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes rehabilitation/ development 
(above 100 ha)? 
Does the project involve significant extraction of ground water (significantly above 
recharge capacity)? 
Does the project include water-based (ground or surface) development where it is 
believed that significant depletion due to climate change or overutilization has 
occurred? 
Does the project involve significant extraction, diversion or containment of surface 
water? 
Does the project include drainage or correction of natural water bodies (e.g. river 
draining)? 
Will the project include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads that pass through 
oil infrastructure locations such as flow stations, tank farms or oil and gas pipelines? 
Would any of the project activities have minor adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
Does the project include development of agro-processing facilities?  
Will the project require a migrant workforce during construction? 
Will the construction or operation of the project cause an increase in traffic on rural 
roads? 
Has the government or community guaranteed the lease of the land for the (market) 
infrastructure? 
Is there any plan in place for sustainability of the infrastructure during the project 
life time? 
42 ‘Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere  
reserves); areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by 
endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and 
mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change and variability; 
lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas that 
include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural 
significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
101 
Does the project include specific measures to protect against dust (such as dust 
masks and water spraying)? 
Has arrangement been made to pay adequate compensation for private property 
that may be affected by the construction of the project? 
Will construction equipment with moderate decibels be used and the timing of use 
be so that people will experience less discomfort? 
Will tree and vegetation replanting be carried out to stabilize slopes and re-green 
road sides? 
Guidance for categorization 
"Yes" response to any 
of questions 1-9 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
ESIA is required  
"Yes" response to 
questions 10-13 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Sub-project to adopt the general ESMP in the 
ESMF  
"No" response to 
almost all questions 1-
13 and ‘Yes’ to 
questions 14-19 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
No further analysis is required 
C: Climate Screening Form for Sub-Projects 
To be used with the environmental and social screening forms. 
Yes 
No 
Additional Explanation of 'Yes' 
response* 
Screening for Climate Issues   
Question 
Is the project area subject to extreme climatic events 
such as flooding, drought, tropical storms, or heat 
waves?  
Do climate scenarios for the project area foresee 
changes in temperature, rainfall or extreme weather 
that will adversely affect the project impact, 
sustainability or cost over its lifetime? 
Will the project make investments in low-lying coastal 
areas/ zones exposed to river flooding and coastal 
storm surge? 
Will the project promote agricultural activity in 
marginal and/or highly degraded areas that have 
102 
increased sensitivity to climatic events (such as on 
hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
  Is the project located in areas where rural 
development projects have experienced significant 
weather- related losses and damages in the past?  
Will the project develop/ install infrastructure in areas 
with a track record of extreme weather events? 
Is the project target group entirely dependent on 
natural resources (such as seasonal crops, rain-fed 
agricultural plots, and migratory fish stocks) that have 
been affected by in the last decade by climate trends or 
specific climatic events? 
Will climate variability likely affect agricultural 
productivity (crops/ livestock/fisheries) or the 
associated incidence of pests and diseases for the 
project target groups?   
Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes likely 
adversely impact upon key stages of identified value 
chains in the project (from production to markets)? 
Is the project investing in climate-sensitive livelihoods 
that are diversified?  
Is the project investing in infrastructure that is exposed 
to infrequent extreme weather events? 
Is the project investing in institutional development and 
capacity building for rural institutions (such as farmer 
groups, cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous 
areas? 
Does the project have the potential to become more 
resilient through the adoption green technologies at a 
reasonable cost? 
Does the project intervention have opportunities to 
strengthen indigenous climate risk management 
capabilities? 
Does the project have opportunities to integrate 
climate resilience aspects through policy dialogue to 
improve agricultural sector strategies/policies?   
Does the project have potential to integrate climate 
resilience measures without extensive additional costs 
(e.g. improved crop variety, capacity building; or 
including climate risk issues in policy processes) 
103 
Based on the information available would the project 
benefit from a more thorough climate risk and 
vulnerability analysis to identify additional 
complementary investment actions to manage climate 
risks? 
Guidance for categorization 
"Yes" response to any 
of questions 1-9 
Sub-project Climate 
risk is High  
Climate risk Analysis is required for sub-project  
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
Sub-project climate 
risk is moderate 
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the general 
ESMF 
104 
Annex 3 - Environmental and Social Guidelines for contractors43 
(for reference in contractor agreements/contracts) 
Sound environmental and social management of construction projects can be achieved only with 
adequate site selection and project design. As such, the ESMP for projects involving any new 
construction, or any rehabilitation or reconstruction for existing projects, should provide information 
as to screening criteria for site selection and design including the following:  
Site Selection  
Sites should be chosen based on community needs for additional projects, with specific lots chosen 
based on geographic and topographic characteristics. The site selection process involves site visits 
and studies to analyze: (i) the site’s, sub-urban, or rural characteristics; (ii) national, regional, or 
municipal regulations affecting the proposed sites; (iii) accessibility and distance from inhabited 
areas; (iv) land ownership, including verification of absence of squatters and/or other potential legal 
problems with land acquisition; (v) determination of site vulnerability to natural hazards, (i.e. 
intensity and frequency of floods, landslides, etc.); (vi) suitability of soils and sub-soils for 
construction; (vii) site contamination; (viii) flora and fauna characteristics; (ix) presence or absence 
of natural habitats and/or ecologically important habitats on site or in vicinity (e.g. forests, wetlands, 
rare or endangered species); and (ix) historic and community characteristics.  
The rules (including specific prohibitions and construction management measures) should be 
incorporated into all relevant bidding documents, contracts, and work orders.  
Prohibitions  
The following activities are prohibited on or near the project site:  
Cutting of trees for any reason outside the approved construction area;  
Hunting, fishing, wildlife capture, or plant collection;  
Use of unapproved toxic materials, including lead-based paints, asbestos, etc.  
43 Adapted from Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development, Republic of Malawi 
(2015) Environmental and Social Management Framework for Programme for Rural Irrigation 
Development in Malawi, pp.76-80. 
105 
Disturbance to anything with architectural or historical value;  
Building of fires;  
Use of firearms (except by authorized security guards); 
Use of alcohol by workers.  
Construction Management Measures  
Solid, sanitation, and hazardous wastes must be properly controlled, through the implementation of 
the following measures:  
Waste Management:  
Minimize the production of waste that must be treated or eliminated; 
Identify and classify the type of waste generated. If hazardous wastes (including health care wastes) 
are generated, proper procedures must be taken regarding their storage, collection, transportation 
and disposal;  
Identify and demarcate disposal areas clearly indicating the specific materials that can be deposited 
in each;  
Control placement of all construction waste (including earth cuts) to approved disposal sites (>300 m 
from rivers, streams, lakes, or wetlands). All garbage, metals, used oils, and excess material 
generated during construction should only be dispose in authorized areas, incorporating recycling 
systems and the separation of materials.  
Maintenance:  
Identify and demarcate equipment maintenance areas (>15m from rivers, streams, lakes or 
wetlands); 
Ensure that all equipment maintenance activities, including oil changes, are conducted within 
demarcated maintenance areas; never dispose spent oils on the ground, in water courses, drainage 
canals or in sewer systems; 
Identify, demarcate and enforce the use of within-site access routes to limit impact on site 
vegetation; 
Install and maintain an adequate drainage system to prevent erosion on the site during and after 
construction.  
Erosion Control  
Erect erosion control barriers around perimeter of cuts, disposal pits, and roadways; 
Spray water on dirt roads, cuts, fill material and stockpiled soil to reduce wind-induced erosion, as 
needed; 
106 
Maintain vehicle speeds at or below 10mph within the work area, 15mph or below within 200m of 
the site, and abide by the relevant speed limits at all times to / from the work area.  
Stockpiles and Borrow Pits  
Identify and demarcate locations for stockpiles and borrow pits, ensuring that they are 15 meters 
away from critical areas such as steep slopes, erosion-prone soils, and areas that drain directly into 
sensitive water bodies; 
Limit extraction of material to approved and demarcated borrow pits.  
Site Cleanup  
Establish and enforce daily site clean-up procedures, including maintenance of adequate disposal 
facilities for construction debris.  
Safety during Construction  
The Contractor’s responsibilities include the protection of every person and nearby property from 
construction accidents. The Contractor shall be responsible for complying with all national and local 
safety requirements and any other measures necessary to avoid accidents, including the following:  
Carefully and clearly mark pedestrian-safe access routes; 
If school children are in the vicinity, include traffic safety personnel to direct traffic; 
Maintain supply of supplies for traffic signs (including paint, easel, sign material, etc.), road marking, 
and guard rails to maintain pedestrian safety during construction; 
Conduct safety training for construction workers prior to beginning work; 
Provide personal protective equipment (PPE) and clothing (such as goggles, gloves, respirators, dust 
masks, hard hats, steel-toed and –shanked boots, etc.,) for construction workers and enforce their 
use; 
Post Material Safety Data Sheets for each chemical present on the worksite; 
Require that all workers read, or have read, all Material Safety Data Sheets. Clearly explain the risks 
to them and their partners, especially when pregnant or planning to start a family. Encourage 
workers to share the information with their physicians, when relevant; 
Ensure that the removal of asbestos-containing materials or other toxic substances be performed 
and disposed of by specially trained workers; 
During heavy rains or emergencies of any kind, apply construction safeguards guidelines; 
Brace electrical and mechanical equipment to withstand unexpected events during construction.  
Nuisance and Dust Control  
107 
To control nuisance and dust the Contractor should:  
Maintain all construction-related traffic at or below 15 mph on streets within 200 m of the site; 
Maintain all on-site vehicle speeds at or below 10 mph; 
To the extent possible, maintain noise levels associated with all machinery and equipment at or 
below 90db;  
In sensitive areas (including residential neighborhoods, health centers, schools, etc.) more strict 
measures may need to be implemented to prevent undesirable noise levels; 
Minimize production of dust and particulate materials at all times, to avoid impacts on surrounding 
families and businesses, and especially to vulnerable people (children, elderly); 
Phase removal of vegetation to prevent large areas from becoming exposed to wind; 
Place dust screens around construction areas, paying particular attention to areas close to housing, 
commercial areas, and recreational areas; 
Spray water as needed on dirt roads, cut areas and soil stockpiles or fill material; 
Apply proper measures to minimize disruptions from vibration or noise coming from construction 
activities.  
Community Relations  
To maintain cordial community relations, the Contractor should:  
Following the country and ESMP requirements, inform the population about construction and work 
schedules, interruption of services, traffic detour routes, as appropriate; 
Limit construction activities at night. When necessary ensure that night work is carefully scheduled 
and the community is properly informed so they can take necessary measures; 
At least five days in advance of any service interruption (including water, electricity) the community 
must be advised through clearly visible posters at the project site and at central community 
locations; 
Where possible, particularly for tasks that can also be performed through low-skilled manual labor 
(such as digging of shallow trenches, etc.), make use of labor from the local community. 
Chance Find Procedures for Culturally Significant Artifacts  
In case culturally valuable materials (incl. shrines, graves, etc.) are uncovered during excavation:  
Stop work immediately following the discovery of any materials with possible archeological, 
historical, paleontological, or other cultural value, announce findings to project manager and notify 
relevant authorities;  
108 
Protect artifacts as well as possible using plastic covers, and implement measures to stabilize the 
area, if necessary, to properly protect artifacts; 
Prevent and penalize any unauthorized access to the artifacts; 
Restart construction works only upon the authorization of the relevant authorities.  
Environmental Supervision during Construction  
The bidding documents should indicate how compliance with environmental rules and design 
specifications would be supervised, along with the penalties for non-compliance by contractors or 
workers. Construction supervision requires oversight of compliance with the manual and 
environmental specifications by the contractor or his designated environmental supervisor. 
Contractors are also required to comply with national and state regulations governing the 
environment, public health and safety. 
109 
Annex 4 – Checklist for Construction Works  
Based on the National Environmental (Construction Sector) Regulations (2011), at every construction 
facility the following checklist should be implemented:44 
(1) Every facility shall implement programmes on best practices as set out in Schedule I of the 
Regulations. 
(2) Every facility shall provide base for ancillary equipment and bund wall for containment of waste 
oil in the event of any unanticipated discharge or spillage. 
(3) Every operator of construction facility/site shall ensure: 
(a) it has a functional, adequate and appropriate drainage system for the project; 
(b) the separation or diversion of clean water runoff to prevent it from mixing with water containing 
high solid particle content; 
(c) it minimizes the volume of water to be treated prior to release (same as storm water control 
system); 
(d) the use of color coding for the drainage system such as blue for surface water drains and red for 
foul water drains; 
(e) safe movement of materials and fuel to and from site; 
(f) tanks are clearly labelled with their contents and storage capacity; 
(g) workers are trained to carry out the outlined procedures in the Emergency Response Plan as 
specified in Schedule II to the Regulations; 
(h) absorbent materials and other containment equipment (e.g. spill kits) suitable for the 
construction type, are available in adequate quantity on site; and 
(i) all tanks are properly covered. 
(4) The operator shall ensure: 
(a) high standard of housekeeping; 
(b) that dust/particulate matter arising from loaded trucks entering or leaving the site is kept to a 
minimum level by the use of tarpaulin materials as cover and that water sprays or other dust 
suppression or collection methods are used at every dusty place where work is carried out; 
44 National Environmental (Construction Sector) Regulations (2011). S.I. No.19. 
110 
(c) appropriate use of Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) by all persons at construction site as in 
Schedule VI to the Regulations; 
 (5) Every facility shall have an Emergency Response Plan in accordance with the guide template 
specified in Schedule II to these Regulations. 
111 
Annex 5 - Social Inclusion Strategy  
“In every country, certain groups (..) Confront barriers that prevent them from fully participating in 
their nation’s political, economic, and social life. These groups are branded by stereotypes, stigmas, 
and superstitions. They often live with insecurity. And such disadvantages not only preclude them 
from capitalizing on opportunities to lead a better life, they also rob them of dignity.”45 
Social inclusion means different things to different people. In its flagship publication on the topic, 
the World Bank defines social inclusion as “the process of improving the ability, opportunity, and 
dignity of people, disadvantaged on the basis of their identity, to take part in society.”46 A strategy 
for social inclusion should therefore both address the above-mentioned ‘barriers’ as well as 
strengthen the capacities that disadvantaged groups in society require to make the most of 
development opportunities and realize their full potential. 
PADRIR  will directly contribute to social inclusion by actively focusing on unemployed youth and 
women, which together with people with disabilities and widows remain among the most 
disadvantaged groups . Using the World Bank’s advice to focus on three critical ‘inclusion domains’ 
of markets, services and spaces, PADRIR can help promote social inclusion in the project area 
through the following instruments and policies: 
Markets (Land, Regulatory Framework) 
Negotiate with traditional authorities in local communities for long-term land access by women and 
youth for agri-enterprise activities; 
Negotiate with state governments to allocate larger plots of unused (but suitable) farmland and 
provide security of tenure for women and youth associations for agri-enterprise activities; 
Support legislative reform establishing gender parity in land ownership and inheritance; 
Closely monitor project progress, hold regular meetings with leaders/representatives of women and 
youth organizations to discuss project challenges, and provide additional (technical) support where 
needed. 
Services (Training, Financial, Labour, ICT) 
45 World Bank (2013) Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity (WB: Washington, 
D.C.), p.xv. 
46 Idem, p.4. 
112 
Provide refresher, advanced and/or top-up skills training on-site for women and youth (on any 
relevant topic that hinders progress in their agri-enterprises) in combination with intensive 
mentoring support; 
Support opportunities for information sharing, whereby women and youth who are currently not 
part of the project can visit the agri-enterprise sites and whereby entrepreneurs can share their 
experiences (including reasons for failure and success); 
Negotiate with agricultural banks to provide preferential credit arrangements for high-potential 
women or youth agri-entrepreneurs; 
Encourage contractors / service providers to give employment preference to local community 
members (e.g. via ‘code of conduct’); 
Organize a ‘hackathon’ together with a technology-oriented innovation centre to develop a special 
app for rural youth in the project area to promote farming and facilitate market access as well as 
create an online platform that allows women and youth to showcase their achievements and 
experiences with wider society and other relevant actors (e.g. government and donor agencies). 
Spaces (Physical, Cultural, Social) 
Liaise with local police to ensure security in farming areas, markets and access routes; 
Organize public awareness-raising campaigns in consultation with local CSOs to promote farming, 
encourage inclusive community-level decision-making, prevent intra-community conflict and reduce 
gender-based violence; 
In general, ensure that initial screening, selection and support to project beneficiaries by community 
leaders and others at the grassroots level is based on merit and need rather than lingering 
primordial considerations; 
To prevent climate-induced exclusion, recommended climate change adaptation and mitigation 
measures should be given priority. Many beneficiaries may not be able to bounce back once they are 
affected by hydro-meteorological disasters such as flooding and erosion. 
113 
114 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Descriptio
n of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quantity-
2020 
Quantity-
2021 (half) 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 (000’US$)  
Total              
(2020+20
21 half) 
Financier Rule ( 2020 and half 2021) 
(000’US$) 
Narrative on 
status, rationale, 
challenges, 
solutions 
Plan (18 
month) 
GoG (taxies 
& duties) 
IFAD 
GCF 
AGRA 
Subcomponent 1.1. "A. Develop capacities of target groups to obtain financing and markets in 
their climate resilient agricultural value chains" 
1.  Building capacities of target groups, intermediaries and market enhancing solutions 
1. Identification of key technical partners and service providers /a 
Identification of key technical partners and service providers /b 
Identification and needs assessment of community clusters /c 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
Needs assessment of key stakeholders including community institution, FOs, off-
takers, input providers, FIs, BAC/BRC, MoFA /d 
CST_EA 
Assess climate change vulnerability resilience and nutrition security activities and 
cost benefit 
lumpsu
m 
No. of 
days 
baselin
e 
baselin
e 
30,00 
0,00 
30,00 
56,32 
11,26 
45,05 
20,00 
50,00 
70,00 
61,07 
12,21 
48,86 
0,00 
15,00 
15,00 
371,08 
74,22 
0,00 
15,00 
15,00 
159,04 
296,8
7 
159,0
4 
CST_EA  Design capacity building packages for community institutions 
Study 
0,00 
0,50 
0,50 
29,45 
5,89 
23,56 
2. Support to Community Institutions and target groups 
Delivery of capacity building models including agricultural/ climate business and 
finance modules (field) /e 
Delivery of capacity building models including agricultural/ climate business and 
finance modules (office) 
3. Mobilization of youth community facilitators (YCF) 
T&W_EA 
CST_EA 
inst. 
and 
groups 
inst. 
and 
groups 
0,00 
37,50 
37,50 
298,19 
149,1
0 
149,1
0 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
Service provider to recruit and train YCF 
CST_EA 
baselin
e/per 
cluster 
0,00 
3,00 
3,00 
15,90 
CST_EA  Design of recruitment training and oversight 
Study 
0,00 
0,50 
3,00 
0,50 
3,00 
11,78 
15,90 
0,00 
0,00 
3,00 
3,00 
15,90 
baselin
e 
baselin
e/per 
cluster 
people 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
per 
region 
quarterl
y 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
15,90 
11,78 
15,90 
15,90 
0,00 
88,35 
0,00 
0,00 
Purchasing motorcycles /g 
each 
0,00 
30,00 
30,00 
88,35 
Monitoring, reporting and managing turnover climate resilient activities 
CST_EA 
Recruitment of YCF in the cluster 
Training of YCF 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
YCF Implementation /f 
EQG&VE
H_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
Reporting to ISU 
4. Community Outreach Development Plan ( CODP) 
T&W_EA 
Community Outreach Development Plan ( CODP) (field) 
CST_EA 
Community Outreach Development Plan ( CODP) (office) 
5. Support to Community Institutions (CIs)and Target Groups 
CST_EA 
Selection of Community Institutions /h 
7. Support to ISU/ZCU 
CST_EA 
Senior Rural Finance Specialist 
CST_EA 
Community Development, livelihood and Gender Specialist 
per 
cluster 
0,00 
plan 
0,00 
4,00 
4,00 
4,00 
4,00 
28,27 
28,27 
14,14 
14,14 
14,14 
14,14 
baselin
e 
0,00 
0,50 
0,50 
1,77 
0,88 
0,88 
month 
12,00 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
6,00 
18,00 
18,00 
51,46 
51,46 
51,46 
51,46 
Commented [D1]: updated 
CST_EA 
Climate and environment specialist 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
51,46 
Total of subcomponent 1.1 
1335,68 
0,00 
Subcomponent 1.2. " B. Capacity building of institutional partners and intermediaries" 
B. Capacity building of institutional partners and intermediaries 
CST_EA 
1. Mapping, needs assessment and selection of partner institutions 
2. Development of Outreach and Linkage Business Plan ( OLPB) /k 
T&W_EA 
Orientation workshops /l 
T&W_EA 
TA to develop OLBP 
T&W_EA 
Finalization, review and validation 
3. Capacity building of selected partner intermediaries /m 
CST_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
4. Youth Institutional Internship (YII) Programme 
Mobilize YIIs for strengthening institutions 
Train YIIs for supporting outreach 
T&W_EA 
5. Cluster Linkage Problem Solving /o 
C&G_FU
NDS_EA 
6. Value of Insurance Guarantees and Warehouse Receipts leveraged /p 
instituti
ons 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
per 
instituti
ons 
per 
zone 
per 
zone 
602,5
3 
149,1
0 
0,00 
51,46 
584,0
6 
117,8
0 
8,84 
44,18 
44,18 
25,00 
25,00 
117,80 
0,00 
0,50 
0,50 
8,84 
0,00 
25,00 
25,00 
44,18 
0,00 
25,00 
25,00 
44,18 
0,00 
25,00 
25,00 
88,35 
79,52 
8,84 
0,00 
2,00 
2,00 
23,56 
4,00 
0,00 
4,00 
38,09 
23,56 
38,09 
Total of subcomponent 1.2 
Subcomponent 1.3. " C. Outreach of financial and agricultural services" 
1. Outreach of financial and agricultural services 
T&W_EA 
Training and rural agricultural finance /r 
Training 
0,00 
1,00 
1,00 
Total of subcomponent 1.3 
Total Component 1 
364,99 
 -      
356,1
6    
 8,84    
 -      
 -      
17,67 
17,67 
 17,67    
 -      
 17,67    
 -      
 1.718,35    
 -      
957,8
9    
611,3
6    
149,1
0    
Subcomponent.2.2 "B. Enhancing environment for market access" 
 -      
2. Improve smallholder capacity to access agricultural loans and other rural financial services 
A. Collaboration with other programmes 
T&W_EA  Annual policy forum 
forum 
0,00 
0,50 
0,50 
 12.500,00  
Total of subcomponent 2.2. 
Total of Component 2 
 12.500,00    
 12.500,00    
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
Component 3." Project Management and Coordination Unit" 
3. Project management and Coordination Unit 
A. Investment Costs 
 I. Investment Costs 
A. Inv.Costs 
EQG&VE
H_EA 
4x4 SUV Vehicle 
each 
1,00 
0,00 
1,00 
 56.313,02    
56.31
3,02    
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
4x4 Pickups Vehicles 
Desktop computers 
each 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
 -      
 -      
each 
20,00 
0,00 
20,00 
 22.525,21    
Laptop computers 
each 
20,00 
0,00 
20,00 
 22.525,21    
EQG&VE
H_EA 
EQG&VE
H_EA 
EQG&VE
H_EA 
EQG&VE
H_EA 
EQG&VE
H_EA 
Office furniture & fittings 
Miscellaneous equipment & replacements 
B. M&E operational costs 
CST_EA  Audit Fees 
Training & Workshops 
T&W_EA 
Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
A. Salaries and Allowances 
1. ISU 
National coordinator 
S&A_EA 
per 
region 
lumpsu
m 
3,00 
0,00 
3,00 
 33.787,81    
1,00 
0,00 
1,00 
 1.689,39    
p.y. 
1,00 
0,00 
0,50 
0,00 
1,50 
 -      
 8.576,41    
 8.576,41    
month/
region 
18,00 
18,00 
36,00 
 82.954,91    
 228.371,96    
 8.576,41    
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 93.036,88    
22.52
5,21    
22.52
5,21    
33.78
7,81    
1.689,
39    
 -      
82.95
4,91    
219.7
95,55    
 -      
 -      
 -      
93.03
6,88    
 -      
 -      
 -      
Senior M&E 
S&A_EA 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 69.777,66    
Finance Manager 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 69.777,66    
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
Project Accountant 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 46.518,44    
Account Assistant 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 27.911,06    
Procurement Assistant 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 27.911,06    
Procurement Officer 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 46.518,44    
Secretary 
S&A_EA 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 18.607,38    
Driver/Office or Research Assistant 
month 
24,00 
12,00 
36,00 
 23.262,96    
2. ZCU - North 
 -      
Senior ZCU Project Coordinator 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 69.777,66    
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
69.77
7,66    
69.77
7,66    
46.51
8,44    
27.91
1,06    
27.91
1,06    
46.51
8,44    
18.60
7,38    
23.26
2,96    
 -      
69.77
7,66    
Commented [D2]: updated 
Field Implementation Supervisor 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 46.518,44    
S&A_EA 
M&E Officer 
S&A_EA 
Secretary 
S&A_EA 
Driver 
S&A_EA 
3. ZCU - Middle 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 46.518,44    
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 18.607,38    
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 11.631,48    
Senior ZCU  Project Coordinator 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 69.777,66    
Field Implementation Supervisor 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 46.518,44    
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
M&E Officer 
S&A_EA 
Secretary 
S&A_EA 
Driver 
S&A_EA 
4. Staff travel costs 
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 46.518,44    
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 18.607,38    
month 
12,00 
6,00 
18,00 
 11.631,48    
46.51
8,44    
46.51
8,44    
18.60
7,38    
11.63
1,48    
 -      
69.77
7,66    
46.51
8,44    
46.51
8,44    
18.60
7,38    
11.63
1,48    
 -      
Commented [D3]: updated 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
Staff travel costs (int) /a 
Staff travel costs (local) /b 
Field visit (staff costs) /c 
B. Operation and Maintenance 
Stationery 
O&M_EA 
Office rental 
O&M_EA 
lumpsu
m 
lumpsu
m 
lumpsu
m 
3,00 
1,50 
4,50 
 77.187,68    
3,00 
1,50 
4,50 
 51.458,45    
18,00 
18,00 
36,00 
 62.216,18    
month 
36,00 
18,00 
54,00 
 12.350,03    
month 
36,00 
18,00 
54,00 
 61.750,14    
Water and electricity 
month 
36,00 
18,00 
54,00 
 15.437,54    
Office maintenance 
month 
36,00 
18,00 
54,00 
 3.087,51    
Vehicle fuel & maintenance /d 
month 
96,00 
48,00 
144,00 
 131.733,63    
Communication /e 
month 
36,00 
18,00 
54,00 
 18.525,04    
O&M_EA 
O&M_EA 
O&M_EA 
O&M_EA 
77.18
7,68    
51.45
8,45    
62.21
6,18    
 -      
12.35
0,03    
61.75
0,14    
15.43
7,54    
3.087,
51    
131.7
33,63    
18.52
5,04    
Meetings and conferences 
month 
36,00 
18,00 
54,00 
 61.750,14    
Accounting software & Other miscellaneous overhead costs 
month 
36,00 
18,00 
54,00 
 61.750,14    
Total Recurrent Costs 
 1.366.674,81    
 -      
Total of Component 3 
 1.595.046,77    
 8.576,41    
Grand Total of the Project 
 1.609.265,11    
 8.576,41    
61.75
0,14    
61.75
0,14    
1.366.
674,8
1    
1.586.
470,3
6    
1.587.
428,2
5    
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
611,3
6    
149,1
0    
O&M_EA 
O&M_EA 
: 
Annex 6:  First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7:  Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
GOODSGhanaMinistry of FinanceProject/Programme:AAFORDProcurement MethodLoan #:ICB and LIB (Goods):ICB (Works):ICB (Non-Consultancy Services):NCB and LNB (Goods):NCB (Works):NCB (Non-Consultancy Services):IFAD prior review is required for procurement value with more than USXXXPlan vs.DescriptionLot NumberUnitQuantityActualCOMPONENT 1: Sub-component 1.3:each30Plan07-Jan-2014-Jan-2021-Jan-2018-Feb-2003-Mar-2010-Mar-2017-Mar-2031-Mar-20Actualeach1Plan02-Apr-209-Apr-2016-Apr-2014-May-2028-May-2004-Jun-2011-Jun-2025-Jun-20Actualeach20Plan14-Apr-2021-Apr-2028-Apr-2026-May-2009-Jun-2016-Jun-2023-Jun-2007-Jul-20Actualeach20Plan14-Apr-2021-Apr-2028-Apr-2026-May-2009-Jun-2016-Jun-2023-Jun-2007-Jul-20Actualper region3Plan14-Apr-2021-Apr-2028-Apr-2026-May-2009-Jun-2016-Jun-2023-Jun-2007-Jul-20ActualTotalPlanActual3.2COMPONENT 3: PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND CORDINATION UNITPurchase of Motorcycles1.3Develop capacities of target groups to obtain financing and markets in their climate resilient agricultural value chainsMobilization of Youth Community Facilitators                88,350 NCBPriorLaptop computersOffice furniture & fittings3.4AFFORDABLE AGRICULTURAL FINANCING FOR RESILIENT RURAL DEVELOPMENT (AAFORD)EIGHTEEN-MONTH PROCUREMENT PLAN: JANUARY 1, 2020 - JUNE 30, 20214x4 SUV VehicleDesktop computers3.1PriorPriorNCB                22,500 Estimated Amount in US$Country/Organization:3.3Issue # of invitation for bidsBid DocumentsBidding PeriodDate ProposedDate No- ObjectionProcurement MethodPre- or post- reviewPiorContract finalization Bid invitation dateBASIC DATA                56,300 NCBPriorBid closing/opening                33,800 NCB                22,500 NCB              223,450 Bid evaluation reportDate Contract AwardBid evaluation reportDate Contract SignatureNo-ObjectionContract amount in US$ 
Drafter of this PP: Mr. John XYZ, MORAPProject/Programme:Procurement MethodLoan #:ICB and LIB (Goods):ICB (Works):ICB (Non-Consultancy Services):NCB and LNB (Goods):NCB (Works):NCB (Non-Consultancy Services):IFAD prior review is required for procurement value with more than USXXXPlan vsDescriptionLot NumberActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualDate contract awardDate contract signatureDate no- ObjectionBid invitation dateLumpsum or bill of quantitiesPre- or post- qualificationsBid closing-openingBid evaluation reportno-objectionContract amount in US$Issue # of invitation for bidsProcurement methodEstimated Amount in US$Prior- or post- reviewDate ProposedWORKSCountry/Organization:BASIC DATABid DocumentsBidding PeriodBid evaluation reportContract finalization  
CONSULTANTSCountry/Organization:GHANAMinistry of FinanceProject/Programme:Affordable Agricultural Financing for Rural Development (AAFORD)Procurement MethodLoan #:QCBSQBSFBSLCSCQSSSSSICIFAD prior review is required for procurement value with more than USXXXDescriptionSelection methodLump-sum or time-basedEstimated amount in US$Pre/Post- reviewPlan vs. ActualDate publishedClosing dateDate proposedDate no-objection Date proposed Date no-objection Plan vs. ActualDate preparedDate no-objectionInvitation dateSubmission/opening dateSubmission evaluation report (T)no-objection evaluation report (T)Opening Financial ProposalSubmission eval. Report (T) and (F)no-objection eval. Report (T) and (F) Plan vs. ActualContract amount in US$Contract awardContract signatureQCBSPrior reviewPlan23-Apr-2007-May-2014-May-2028-May-20Plan04-Jun-2018-Jun-2025-Jun-2023-Jul-2030-Jul-2006-Aug-2013-Aug-2020-Aug-2003-Sep-20Plan10-Sep-2017-Sep-20ActualActualActualQCBSPrior reviewPlan23-Apr-2007-May-2014-May-2028-May-20Plan04-Jun-2018-Jun-2025-Jun-2023-Jul-2030-Jul-2006-Aug-2013-Aug-2020-Aug-2003-Sep-20Plan10-Sep-2017-Sep-20ActualActualActualCQSPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-2023-May-2006-Jun-20Plan13-Jun-2027-Jun-204-Jul-2001-Aug-2008-Aug-2015-Aug-2022-Aug-2029-Aug-2012-Sep-20Plan19-Sep-2026-Sep-20ActualActualActualQCBSPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-2023-May-2006-Jun-20Plan13-Jun-2027-Jun-204-Jul-2001-Aug-2008-Aug-2015-Aug-2022-Aug-2029-Aug-2012-Sep-20Plan19-Sep-2026-Sep-20ActualActualActualSSSPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-20N/AN/APlan23-May-2030-May-206-Jun-2020-Jun-2027-Jun-2011-Jul-20N/A18-Jul-2001-Aug-20Plan08-Aug-2015-Aug-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-2023-May-2006-Jun-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A13-Jun-2027-Jun-2004-Jul-2011-Jul-2025-Jul-20Plan01-Aug-2008-Aug-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-2023-May-2006-Jun-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A13-Jun-2027-Jun-2004-Jul-2011-Jul-2025-Jul-20Plan01-Aug-2008-Aug-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-2023-May-2006-Jun-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A13-Jun-2027-Jun-2004-Jul-2011-Jul-2025-Jul-20Plan01-Aug-2008-Aug-20ActualActualActualSub-total1,234,270             QCBSPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-2023-May-2006-Jun-20Plan13-Jun-2027-Jun-204-Jul-2001-Aug-2008-Aug-2015-Aug-2022-Aug-2029-Aug-2012-Sep-20Plan19-Sep-2026-Sep-20ActualActualActualQCBSPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-2023-May-2006-Jun-20Plan13-Jun-2027-Jun-204-Jul-2001-Aug-2008-Aug-2015-Aug-2022-Aug-2029-Aug-2012-Sep-20Plan19-Sep-2026-Sep-20ActualActualActualQCBSPrior reviewPlan02-May-2016-May-2023-May-2006-Jun-20Plan13-Jun-2027-Jun-204-Jul-2001-Aug-2008-Aug-2015-Aug-2022-Aug-2029-Aug-2012-Sep-20Plan19-Sep-2026-Sep-20ActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan28-Jan-2011-Feb-2018-Feb-2003-Mar-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A10-Mar-2024-Mar-2031-Mar-2007-Apr-2021-Apr-20Plan28-Apr-2005-May-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan28-Jan-2011-Feb-2018-Feb-2003-Mar-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A10-Mar-2024-Mar-2031-Mar-2007-Apr-2021-Apr-20Plan28-Apr-2005-May-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan28-Jan-2011-Feb-2018-Feb-2003-Mar-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A10-Mar-2024-Mar-2031-Mar-2007-Apr-2021-Apr-20Plan28-Apr-2005-May-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan28-Jan-2011-Feb-2018-Feb-2003-Mar-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A10-Mar-2024-Mar-2031-Mar-2007-Apr-2021-Apr-20Plan28-Apr-2005-May-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan23-Apr-2007-May-2014-May-2028-May-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A04-Jun-2018-Jun-2025-Jun-2002-Jul-2016-Jul-20Plan23-Jul-2030-Jul-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan28-Jan-2011-Feb-2018-Feb-2003-Mar-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A10-Mar-2024-Mar-2031-Mar-2007-Apr-2021-Apr-20Plan28-Apr-2005-May-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan23-Apr-2007-May-2014-May-2028-May-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A04-Jun-2018-Jun-2025-Jun-2002-Jul-2016-Jul-20Plan23-Jul-2030-Jul-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan23-Apr-2007-May-2014-May-2028-May-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A04-Jun-2018-Jun-2025-Jun-2002-Jul-2016-Jul-20Plan23-Jul-2030-Jul-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan23-Apr-2007-May-2014-May-2028-May-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A04-Jun-2018-Jun-2025-Jun-2002-Jul-2016-Jul-20Plan23-Jul-2030-Jul-20ActualActualActualLCSPrior reviewPlan22-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2016-Sep-2023-Sep-2021-Oct-2028-Oct-2004-Nov-2011-Nov-2018-Nov-2002-Dec-20Plan09-Dec-2016-Dec-20ActualActualActualSub-total441,900                SICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSub-total204,700                PlanPlanPlanActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualSICPrior reviewPlan03-Jun-2017-Jun-2024-Jun-2008-Jul-20PlanN/AN/AN/AN/A15-Jul-2029-Jul-2005-Aug-2012-Aug-2026-Aug-20Plan02-Sep-2009-Sep-20ActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualGrand-Total2,353,470   11-Apr-2025-Apr-20Sub-component 1.1: Identification of key technical partners and service providersSub-component 1.2: Capacity Building of Institutional Partners and IntermediariesSelection of Community InstitutionsLump-sum1,770                     11-Apr-2025-Apr-20Support to CPCU - Senior Rural Finance SpecialistTime-based51,500                   Sub-total267,900                Capacity Building of Selected Partner IntermediariesLump-sum88,400                   25-Apr-20 Youth Institutional Internship Programme (Mobilization & Training) Lump-sum61,700                   11-Apr-2025-Apr-2011-Apr-20Support to CPCU - Climate and Environment SpecialistTime-based51,500                   11-Apr-2025-Apr-20Mapping, Needs Assessment & Selection of Partner InstitutionsLump-sum117,800                11-Apr-2025-Apr-20Support to CPCU - Community Development, Livelihoods & Gender SpecialistTime-based51,500                   11-Apr-2025-Apr-20Lump-sum56,500                   11-Apr-2025-Apr-20Consultant for Community Outreach Development PlanLump-sum46,500                   11-Apr-2025-Apr-20AFFORDABLE AGRICULTURAL FINANCING FOR RESILIENT RURAL DEVELOPMENT (AAFORD)EIGHTEEN-MONTH PROCUREMENT PLAN: JANUARY 1, 2020 - JUNE 30, 2021Sub-component 3.1: Central Project Coordination UnitSub-component 3.2: Zonal Project Coordinating Unit - Northern ZoneSub-component 3.3: Zonal Project Coordinating Unit - Middle ZoneConsultant for Identification of Key Technical Partners & Service ProvidersLump-sum677,000                02-Apr-2016-Apr-2027-May-20Sub-total204,700                DriverTime-based23,300                   13-May-2027-May-2027-May-20M & E OfficerTime-based46,500                   13-May-20SecretaryTime-based18,600                   13-May-20Senior ZPCU CoordinatorTime-based69,800                   13-May-2027-May-20Field Implementation SupervisorTime-based46,500                   13-May-2027-May-20DriverTime-based23,300                   13-May-2027-May-20SecretaryTime-based18,600                   13-May-2027-May-20M & E OfficerTime-based46,500                   27-May-2013-May-2027-May-20Field Implementation SupervisorTime-based46,500                   13-May-2016-Apr-20Driver/Office AssistantTime-based15-Jul-20Senior ZPCU CoordinatorTime-based69,800                   13-May-2027-May-2018,600                   02-Apr-20Hire of Auditor for Project AuditLump-sum18,600                   01-Jul-20Assistant Procurement OfficerTime-based27,900                   02-Apr-2016-Apr-2023,300                   02-Apr-2016-Apr-20SecretaryTime-basedProcurement OfficerTime-based46,500                   07-Jan-2021-Jan-20Accounting AssistantTime-based27,900                   21-Jan-2002-Apr-2016-Apr-20Project AccountantTime-based46,500                   07-Jan-2021-Jan-20Finance ManagerTime-based69,800                   07-Jan-2021-Jan-20Senior M & E SpecialistTime-based69,800                   07-Jan-20National CoordinatorTime-based93,000                   07-Jan-2021-Jan-20298,000                02-Apr-2016-Apr-20COMPONENT 1: Develop capacities of target groups to obtain financing and markets in their climate resilient agricultural value chainsRequest for ProposalBid ProposalBid evaluations technical (T) and financial (F) COMPONENT 3: PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION UNITContract Finalisation Consultant for Support to Community Institutions and Target GrupsLump-sumConsultant for Mobilization of Youth Community Facilitators (YCF)Request for expression of interestTerms of Reference Shortlist 
Project Title: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development (AAFORD)NoRef.Description of CourseQuantityAmount USD1Subcomponent 1.2Capacity building of Institutional Partners & Intermediaries - Orientation Workshop0.5                      8,840 2Subcomponent 1.2Workshop for TA to develop OLBP25                    44,180 3Subcomponent 1.2Workshop for Finalization, review and Validation2544,180                    4Subcomponent 1.3Workshop for Outreach of Financial & Agricultural Services117,700                    5Subcomponent 2.2Annual Forum for Enabling Environment for Market Access0.512,500                    127,400TRAINING PLAN (January 1, 2020 - June 30, 2021)LOAN/GRANT NO.  
NoDescription of ExpenditureQuantityAmount USD1Office Stationery18 months           12,350 2Office Rental18 months           61,750 3Water & Electricity18 months15,400           4Office Maintenance18 months3,100             5Vehicle Fuel & Maintenance18 months131,700         6Communication18 months18,530           7Meetings & Conferences18 months61,800           8Accounting Software & maintenance18 months61,800           366,430Administration and Office General ExpensesProject Title: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development (AAFORD) 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 8:  Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Republic of Ghana 
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development (AAFORD) 
Project Implementation Manual 
October 2019 
Main report and appendices 
Page 1 of 207 
Contents 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
Map of the Programme Area 
4 
8 
Chapter 1: Introduction and background 9 
Chapter 2: The Programme 
21 
Chapter 3: Programme Components 
41 
Chapter 4: Programme implementation structure and responsibilities 
Chapter 5: Programme Cost and Financing  
75 
Chapter 6: Financial Management 
83 
Page 2 of 207 
Chapter 7: Procurement and Contracting 
89 
Chapter 8: Environment and Social Management Plan  136 
Annexes 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 1: Terms of reference of Key staff 178 
Annex 2: Logframe 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 3: Market Overview of Key Agricultural Commodities in the project area  Error! Bookmark not 
defined. 
Annex 4: Overview of the Rural Finance Environment in Ghana  Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 5: Overview of GIRSAL 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 6: Overview of GCX 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 7: Overview of GAIP 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 8: Overview of rural finance activities of ongoing IFAD supported projects Error! Bookmark not 
defined. 
Annex 9: Overview of RF programme of other development partners 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 10: Overview of financial services unit of the Ministry of Finance  Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 11: Overview of TA Service Providers 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Page 3 of 207 
Abbreviations and Acronyms  
1d1f 
AA 
One district One factory 
Accounts Assistant 
AAFORD 
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development 
ABC Fund 
Agri Business Capital Fund 
AfDB 
AOS 
APC 
ARB 
African Development Bank 
Annual Outcome Survey 
AAFORD Procurement Committee 
Association of Rural Banks 
AWPB 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Business Advisory Centre 
Blended Finance Facility 
Bank of Ghana 
Business Resource Centres 
Conservation Agriculture 
Community-Based Organisations 
Climate and Environment Specialist 
Community Development, Livelihood and Gender Specialist 
Community Institutions 
Community Outreach Development Plan 
Central Project Coordinator 
Community Savings and Credit Groups 
Digital Financial Services 
Farmer-Based Organisations 
BAC 
BFF 
BoG 
BRC 
CA 
CBO 
CES 
CGS 
CI 
CODP 
CPC 
CSCG 
DFS 
FBO 
Page 4 of 207 
FIS 
FIs 
GAIP 
GAP 
GCF 
GCX 
GDP 
Field Implementation Supervisor 
Financial Institutions 
Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool 
Gender Action Plan 
Green Climate Fund 
Ghana Commodity Exchange 
Gross Domestic Product 
GHAMFIN 
Ghana Microfinance Institutions Network 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gases 
GIRSAL 
Ghana Incentive-based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending 
GMA 
Ghana Meteorological Agency 
IBP 
IBP 
ICB 
ICO 
ICT 
ISU 
IFAD 
KM 
LTR 
MCC 
MDG 
MEF 
MFC 
MFIs 
MIS 
Institutional Business Plans 
Institutional Business Plans 
International Competitive Bidding 
IFAD Country Office 
Information and Communications Technology  
Implementation Support Unit 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Knowledge Management 
Letter to the Recipient 
Micro Credit Company 
Millennium Development Goal 
Monitoring and Evaluation Focal Point 
Micro Finance Company 
Microfinance Institutions 
Management Information System 
MNDPF 
Medium-Term National Development Policy Framework 
Page 5 of 207 
MoF 
MoFA 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
MoMo 
Mobile Money 
MoTI 
Ministry of Trade and Industry 
MSME 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MTR 
NCS 
NFIDS 
NGO 
ORMS 
OVCF 
PA 
PFI 
PIM 
PO 
PrA 
PSC 
PTC 
Mid-term Review 
Non-consulting Services 
National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy 
Non Governmental Organisation 
Operational and Results Management System 
Outgrower and Value Chain Fund 
Project Accountant 
Participating Financial Institution 
Project Implementation Manual 
Procurement Officer 
Procurement Assistant 
Project Steering Committee 
PSC Technical Committee 
RADUs 
Regional Agricultural Development Units 
RCBs 
RDF 
REDF 
REP 
RMFI 
S&L 
SEA 
Rural and Community Banks 
Rural Development Fund 
Rural Enterprise Development Fund 
Rural Enterprises Programme 
Rural Microfinance Institutions 
Savings and Loan Company 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
SECAP 
Social, Environmental and Climate Change Assessment Procedures 
Page 6 of 207 
SFM 
SMES 
SP  
SRFS 
TA 
ToT 
USD 
YCF 
YII 
ZPC 
ZCU 
ZSC 
ZTC 
Senior Finance Manager 
Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Service Providers 
Senior Rural Finance Specialist 
Technical Assistance 
Training of Trainers 
United States Dollars 
Youth Community Facilitator 
Youth Institutional Intern 
ZCU Project Coordinator 
Zonal Coordination Unit 
Zonal Steering Committee 
ZSC Technical Committee 
Page 7 of 207 
Map of the Programme Area 
Page 8 of 207 
Chapter 1: Introduction and background 
National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
National Context 
Economic and political context: Ghana became a lower middle-income country in 2011, with an annual 
income per capita of US$ 1,490. In 2015, Ghana achieved the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 1: to 
halve the proportion of people living in extreme poverty1. GDP per capita reached US$ 2,260 in 2019. Annual 
GDP growth averaged 6.6 per cent from 2000 to 2013 and then increased to 14 per cent in 2014 driven by 
oil, followed by a few years of an economic slowdown from the sharp drop in oil prices. The economy started 
recovering in 2017 with the growth of 8.1 per cent and the growth in 2019 is projected to be 8.8 per cent, 
the highest in the world.2 However, the economy is highly dependent on the export of a limited number of 
commodities, in particular, gold, cocoa and oil, and consequently remains vulnerable to commodity price 
shocks. The inflation rate is around 9.2 per cent3; unemployment is about 2.4 per cent. Ghana's political 
environment continues to be stable with the new president elected in 2017. 
Poverty: The Ghana Living Standard Survey (2012) defines a lower poverty line as 792 GHS per adult per 
year, focusing on what's necessary to meet the nutritional requirements. The Upper poverty line is set as 
1,314 GHS per adult per year, incorporating both essential food and non-food consumptions. Out of the total 
population of 28.8 million about 23 per cent, equivalent of 6.8 million people, is poor. The percentage of the 
people in poverty has declined by 8.5 per cent since 2006, but the rate of poverty reduction has been slow 
for the last four years - it has fallen only 0.8 per cent. Disparities in poverty follow geographic and gender 
lines. Geographically, rural poverty is almost five times high when compared to urban poverty. The rural 
population is around 45 per cent out of the total population of 28.8 million. However, without considering 
the Greater Accra and Ashanti regions, which have significantly higher urban people, the rural population 
reaches up to 60 per cent in the rest of the country. Approximately 40 per cent of the population is in 
poverty in rural areas, while 7.8 per cent is in the urban areas.  
The rural areas of Northern Ghana have a higher incidence of poverty with 71 per cent poverty reported in 
the Upper West Region, 61 per cent in the Northern Region and 55 per cent in the Upper East Region.4 In 
the central regions of Ghana, referred to as the middle belt, poverty has shown declining trends, but the rate 
1 World Bank, November 2018 
2 IMF, World Economic Outlook Database April 2019 
3 https://tradingeconomics.com/ghana/indicators 
4 World Bank, November 2018 
Page 9 of 207 
of people in extreme poverty remains higher than the national average. For example, 27 per cent of the 
population live in poverty in the Brong Ahafo region, 13 per cent in the Eastern region and 12 per cent in the 
Ashanti region5. Fewer opportunities for intensifying and commercialising agriculture, poor access to credit, 
input and output markets and advisory services drive poverty in the rural areas. The literacy rate remains 
high and is as low as 35 per cent in the Northern regions. Limited access to power also inhibits commercial 
agricultural activities. Post-harvest losses are high and are attributed partly to the lack of access to storage 
and drying facilities. 
About 62 per cent of female-headed households fall in the poorest wealth quintiles compared to 39 per cent 
of male-headed households. The gender gap exists as women have limited access to credit, extension 
services, new technologies, inputs and output markets. Unemployment of youth is a growing concern in 
Ghana caused by qualification and skills gaps and shortage of economic engagement opportunities. Youth 
unemployment reached 13.7 per cent in 2018 after increasing 4.4 per cent from the lowest rate of around 
9.3 per cent attained in 2006. Women and youth’s economic dependency on the family has increased due to 
these factors and have contributed to poverty. 
Agriculture Development: The agricultural sector accounts for one-fifth of Ghana’s Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP). The sector is an essential contributor to Ghana’s export earnings, and a significant source of inputs for 
the manufacturing industry with two-thirds of non-oil manufacturing depending on agriculture for raw 
materials. In 2017, Ghana exported US$ 17.1 billion in agricultural products resulting in a positive trade 
balance of US$ 3.9 billion.6 The top export destinations are India, China, Switzerland, South Africa and the 
Netherlands7 and the principal agricultural exports are cocoa, timber, horticultural products and fish.8 
Around 71 per cent of formal employment in rural areas is in the farming sector, indicating the importance 
of increasing agrarian incomes as a means of lowering rural poverty.9 Agribusiness has a very high multiplier 
effect on employment, creating over 750 jobs for every additional US$ 1 million of output.10 Yet, agricultural 
growth is affected by low productivity and competitiveness. Rainfed agriculture is practised in around 96 per 
cent of the farming area, informal private small-scale irrigation is prevalent in 3 per cent of the area and 
formal irrigation covers 0.4 per cent of the agricultural lands. Agricultural imports are substantial, reaching 
US$13.2 billion in 2017 mainly through the imports of wheat, rice, chicken (frozen), milk and fish.  
5 GLSS 7 
6 Observatory of Economic Complexity https://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/gha/  
7 Observatory of Economic Complexity https://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/gha/  
8 IFPRI, 2018, post-harvest losses in Ghana 
9 World Bank 2016 
10Ghana Economic Update, World bank, 2018 
Page 10 of 207 
Smallholder agriculture: Approximately 85 per cent of farming households own less than 10 Ha of land and 
are considered smallholders. More than two-thirds of these smallholders own less than 2 Ha cultivable land 
resulting in a large group of poor semi-subsistence smallholder farmers. In the Northern regions, the poor 
semi-subsistence farmers produce mainly soya, maize, sorghum, millets, groundnuts and rainfed rice while in 
the Central part they rely more on cassava, plantain, maize and cashew nut production. In both the areas, 
these farmers produce vegetables such as tomato, pepper, cabbage, carrots and eggplants for subsistence 
and supplementary income. (Refer PIM, Annex 3, for a detailed market overview of agricultural commodities 
in the project area). The semi-subsistence smallholders primarily practice rain-fed, subsistence-oriented and 
manual-labour intensive farming practices and depend mainly on family labour. They often suffer from 
inadequate and uncertain income resulting from low crop productivity, weak farmers institutions, limited 
market linkages, gaps in access to market infrastructure and limited post-harvest support as elaborated 
below.  
Low crop productivity is a significant challenge with actual yields of most crops recorded at 50-60 per cent 
below their potential returns. Low productivity arises from limited access to good quality agricultural inputs, 
outdated technologies, lack of access to mechanised services, inadequate pest and disease management, 
limited access to rural advisory services and gap in the access to affordable rural finance11. Other factors 
such as land degradation, drought and soil nutrient depletion also affect production more prominently in the 
Northern regions. Due to the low crop production and productivity, the semi-subsistence smallholders suffer 
from low bargaining power and depend mainly on low prices offered by traders and local markets resulting 
in low and uncertain levels of income. Weak marketing linkages has developed smallholders’ dependence on 
selling small quantities of produce (such as processed cassava, plantain and vegetables) in the local retail 
markets on an individual basis and on traders who visit the villages occasionally to purchase commodities at 
low prices.  Smallholders linkage to high-value offtakers is generally missing though in some places they have 
linkages to local processors. The Ghana Commodity Exchange (GCX) which provides farmers with access to 
certified warehouses require minimum one-ton produce and has strict quality requirements to avail the 
facility which is beyond the immediate capacity of most smallholders. Weak farmers organisations have 
resulted in the limited presence of collaborative and remunerative models for access to inputs and markets 
through Farmer-based Organisations (FBO)s. FBOs’ presence in rural communities is variable from a few to 
many. Less than 50 per cent of them are considered active, and relatively larger farmers usually dominate 
the functional FBOs. Often FBOs with successful linkages to offtakers have limited outreach and typically 
exclude the smallholders. Gaps in access to market infrastructure have led to the inability of the smallholders 
to store their commodities and wait for prices to improve. Consequently, they are compelled to sell their 
produce to traders even when the offered prices are much lower than those in the previous seasons. Limited 
post-harvest assistance has created gaps in processing and value addition capabilities at the local level and 
sometimes high incidence of post-harvest losses. 
11 Index database 2017 
Page 11 of 207 
Rural financial services: The Bank of Ghana (BoG) leads the formal banking sector. There are 29 Commercial 
Banks (CB), 141 Rural and Community Banks (RCB), 24 Savings and Loan Companies (SLC), 494 Microfinance 
Companies (MC), 70 Moneylending Companies (MLC), 12 Financial NGOs (FNGO) and numerous individual 
money lenders and susu collectors. Village Savings and Loan Associations (VSLAs) are widespread, and 
function as member-managed, women-oriented, savings led groups. The ARB Apex Bank functions as the 
regulator of the RCBs. Ghana Microfinance Institutions Network (GHAMFIN) is the umbrella association for 
the association of the different types of financial institutions (FI). Mobile money (“MoMo”) is primarily used 
for transferring funds and payments. However, MoMo and other digital financial services (DFS) is an 
important entry point to accessing a range of services such as saving, banking, small loans and weather and 
price information as most household now has access to a mobile phone. Despite the diversity of FIs only 37 
per cent of the rural population has access to accounts in formal FIs. Overall, loans and advances designated 
as “agricultural” account for only about 5 per cent of the credit to the private sector by the banking system.  
The gap in the flow of financial services particularly to smallholders in the agricultural sector has resulted 
from both demand and supply constraints. On the demand side, semi-subsistence smallholders are reluctant 
to borrow to increase production due to marketing and income uncertainties and fearing the consequences 
of their inability to repay the loans. They are further deterred from borrowing due to by high interest rates 
(as high as 20 per cent per month offered by some credit unions and 30-36 per cent flat offered by RCBs), 
lengthy procedures for borrowing even small sums and the fear of crop losses from weather-related events. 
There is little awareness of prevailing agricultural insurance services and low demand for such products 
considering the high premiums of 5-8 per cent. Other constraints include collateral requirements in some 
cases, and the lack of financial literacy and knowledge to utilise appropriate financial instruments. On the 
supply side, all types of FIs in Ghana remain averse to lending to agricultural production because of the high 
risks and uncertainty involved. Often the FIs portfolios are already exposed to a high level of risk with PAR (> 
30 days) ranging from 15-20 per cent and have little appetite for risky agricultural loans. Although the 
availability of “de-risking” instruments such as insurance (through Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool), 
guarantees (through Ghana Incentive-Based Risk Sharing for Agricultural Lending) and warehousing (through 
Ghana Commodity Exchange) is increasing, there is limited awareness about their features, the capacity 
needed to partner and partnership mechanisms. Also, most FI currently does not have the specialised 
products and the capabilities required to address the specific requirements of the agricultural sector 
effectively. In general, the interest rates charged across different loan products offered by the intermediary 
FIs range between 33-36 per cent (often applied on a flat basis). The primary factor contributing to the high 
interest rates is the high cost of funds at 20 to 24 per cent and operations costs of 7-8 per cent, leaving a 
profit margin of only 3 to 5 per cent.  
AAFORD’s interventions will be geared to increase the flow and outreach of formal financial resources to the 
target households by addressing both demand and supply-side constraints. The key demand-side issues will 
be addressed by improving production and productivity, strengthening farmers organisations, developing 
competitive marketing linkages, increasing financial literacy and savings and supporting the adoption of 
microinsurance services. Supply side issues will be addressed through de-risking agricultural loan portfolios 
through collateral guarantee partnership, capacity building of FIs for to enable effective administration of 
Page 12 of 207 
agricultural portfolio and lowering the cost of capital and interest rates on agricultural loans by supporting 
Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) to access to concessional credit through a Blended Finance 
Facility (BFF). The support from the BFF in combination with measures for de-risking agricultural loan 
portfolios will allow the FIs to diversify and operate in a new market segment (smallholders agricultural 
production) which will help to align them with their development objective of serving the rural communities. 
The success of the BFF will crowd in development funds from the government and other development 
partners and support AAFORD’s nationwide scaling up in the future. (Refer PIM, Annex 4, an overview of RF 
environment) 
National strategies policies and lead institutions: The President’s office has issued the Medium-Term 
National Development Policy Framework (MNDPF 2018-2021) which recognises the growth of agriculture as 
the main driving force for rural development and transformation. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) has set a 
target to increase financial inclusion in Ghana from 58 per cent to 75 per cent by 202312" and has 
established a Development Finance Unit (DFU) under the Financial Sector Division (FSD) to promote financial 
inclusion and rural financial services and support them with oversight and policy guidance. The DFU, in close 
coordination with development partners such as the World Bank (WB) and the African Development Bank 
(AfDB), has championed initiatives such as Ghana Commodities Exchange (GCX), Ghana Incentive-based Risk 
Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) and the Ghana Financial Sector Development Project 
(GFSDP). The DFU hosted the ISU for the IFAD supported Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme (RAFIP) 
which was completed in 2016.  
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA), has developed a Ghana Agricultural Development Plan 
(GhAIP), focusing on the development of the agricultural sector in Ghana from 2018 to 2021 through 
modernisation and transformation efforts. MoFA has started the nationwide Planting for Food and Jobs 
initiative (PFJ), focusing on smallholders with 2-3 acres land to access improved seeds and fertilisers at 50 
per cent subsidy, extension services and marketing opportunities. The MoFA leads the Planting for Exports 
and Development (PERD) initiative focusing on improving the productivity of export-oriented tree crops such 
as cashew, coffee, cotton and coconut. The MoFA also chairs the Agricultural Working Sector Group (AWSG) 
established between the Government of Ghana (GoG) and the development partners such as UN agencies 
and donors. The Ministry of Industry and Trade (MoTI) has started the One district One Factory (1d1f) 
programme that focuses on establishing at least one medium-to-large-scale industrial enterprise in every 
district to create quality jobs and achieve a balanced spread of industries. The MoTI also leads the Strategic 
Anchor Industries (SAI) development programme, the Small and Medium-scale Enterprises (SMEs) 
Development programme and the Exports Development Programme (EDP), focusing on job creation, export 
development, and public-private partnerships.  
Initiatives of development partners (DP): In response to the challenges limiting smallholder access to finance, 
the GoG and DPs have recently launched several initiatives with the objective of de-risking agricultural 
production loans, lowering interest rates, and smoothing the incomes of smallholder farmers. GIRSAL: 
GIRSAL is structured as a company limited by shares aiming to de-risk agricultural lending and promote 
12 NFIDS 
Page 13 of 207 
investment in agriculture. GIRSAL comprises a guarantee fund of GHS 400 million (US$ 72 million) to provide 
credit guarantees to cover upto 80 per cent of agricultural sector loans delivered by formal FI to farmers 
directly or indirectly through offtakers. The AfDB has approved US$ 14 million and the GoG has provided 
US$ 57 million for creating the credit guarantee fund. GIRSAL also supports technical assistance to FIs to 
improve their capacity and performance on agricultural loan portfolios and crop production insurance for 
smallholders through the Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool (GAIP). The Alliance for a Green Revolution in 
Africa (AGRA) has contributed around US$ 0.35 million to support GIRSAL’s technical assistance activities 
GCX: The GCX is structured as a limited liability company providing commodity storage and trading services 
to farmers. GCX operates a network of certified warehouses linked to farmer cooperatives cultivating 
commodities traded in a GCX platform. The GCX supports an electronic warehouse receipts system that 
enables farmers to access cash credit to meet their livelihood needs during the period when their 
commodities are stored in the warehouse waiting for a sale at a better price. However, at present, the 
warehouse receipt system has very limited outreach to smallholder due to limited awareness and readiness 
amongst rural FIs about this product. GAIP: The leading insurance companies in Ghana have partnered to 
form GAIP as an arm to design and offer crop insurance products to farmers either directly or through 
marketing partners. GAIP’s, outreach is limited to less than 10,000 farmers (not necessarily smallholders) 
mainly due to high premiums ranging from 5-7 per cent, limited awareness of its products, limited 
partnerships and capacity constraints. (refer PIM Annex 5,6,7 for an overview of GIRSAL, GCX and GAIP). 
Other donor initiatives consist of the KfW supported Outgrower and Value Chain Fund (OVCF) which is 
refinancing facility for PFIs to help off-takers/aggregators (bank to offtaker interest rate 18 per cent) that are 
contractually linked to groups of smallholders growing rubber, oil palm, rice, pineapple, cassava cocoa and 
maize. Ghana Financial Sector Development Project (GFSDP): The World Bank has approved the GFSDP to 
establish a domestic credit rating agency, design a financial data centre, develop an asset registry for 
traditional/physical collateral, increase the outreach of FIs by linking Village Saving and Loans Associations 
(VSLAs) to the formal financial sector. (Refer PIM, Annex 9 for an overview of rural finance programmes of 
other development partners) 
Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities 
Gender and social inclusion: Ghana is ranked second in the Gender Inequality Index for Sub-Saharan Africa in 
2018. However, globally, its position is number 140. Women represent roughly 51 per cent of the population 
and constitute 58 per cent of the rural labour force. Women have a critical role in agriculture and other 
livelihood activities such as artisanal and trading activities. In the north, women are also engaged in 
collecting shea nuts and fruits from the surrounding environment. There is a division of labour between men 
and women when conducting family farming. Male gender roles are associated with tasks that involve 
control over agricultural assets, mobility and decision making. Female gender roles are related to manual 
work in agriculture such as planting and weeding as well as basic post-harvest actions, e.g. drying and 
processing. Women are also involved in activities such as livestock rearing.  
Page 14 of 207 
Gender inequality is prevalent across several socio-economic areas. For example, the average hourly 
earnings of women are 57 per cent of that of men regardless of the type of employment and other factors. 
Women far outnumber men in non-farm self-employment and private informal work where earnings are 
relatively low. The key factors contributing to gender inequalities are low literacy rates with 42 per cent 
female literacy compared to 60 per cent male, lower exposure of women to education and skills 
development training, higher involvement of women as family workers compared to men who have five 
times more wage employment, unequal access to land, 50 per cent smaller landholding size for women and 
limited access to credit as collateral assets are often registered in the husbands name. A National Gender 
Policy was developed by the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social protection for gender mainstreaming 
across all Ministries. The ministries, departments and agencies do not strictly adhere to 40 per cent 
disbursement of budget to gender issues, although this is mandated by the National Development Planning 
Commission (NDPC). In 2016, MOFA developed the Gender and Agricultural Development Strategy (GADS II) 
to support gender mainstreaming processes in the sector.  
Youth: Youth in Ghana is defined as those between 15-35 years of age. The country has a youth bulge with 
57 per cent of the total population below the age of 25. The rural community consists of 56 per cent youth 
while the urban population has 44 per cent. The youth often contribute to family labour for agricultural 
production. They also engage in activities outside of production such as processing, warehousing, 
transportation, small enterprises and marketing. Youth unemployment is a growing concern in Ghana and 
reached 13.7 per cent in 2018. The formal sector can engage only 2 per cent young people entering the 
labour market annually, leaving about 98 per cent to survive in the informal sector or remain unemployed. 
Inadequate or inappropriate training for the job market as well as an opportunity to access such a job is also 
another challenge faced by youth. Illiteracy is also a significant impediment to getting quality jobs. 
Approximately 77 per cent of youth has an only essential educational qualification or less, which prevents 
them from finding a decent job. Literacy rate in Northern region is 41 per cent (32 per cent girls, 52 per cent 
boys) and 62 per cent (57 per cent girls, 79 per cent boys) in the Brong Ahafo region. Ironically, the 
unemployment rate is the highest for youth who attained secondary education in the Brong Ahafo and the 
Northern regions as they do not have the appropriate skills and entrepreneurial orientation matching the 
economic opportunities in these regions. The youth are often unable to pursue farming independently due 
to limited access to credit, quality inputs and markets. Some of the ongoing programmes for youth 
entrepreneurship, skills training and job creation are the IFAD supported Rural Enterprise Program and the 
Youth Agri-preneurship Development program, jointly run by AGRA and Nestle. Nevertheless, the outreach 
of these programmes to the youth from the semi-subsistence smallholder families is relatively limited. Policy 
environment surrounding the youth has been revamped. The Youth Employment Agency (YEA) established 
under the 2015 Ghana Youth Employment Act is mandated to create youth jobs. The National Youth Policy 
was revised in 2018 to align to SDG and aims to make the agricultural sector more attractive to young 
people. 
One of the biggest challenges Ghana face is internal trafficking of children. Many Ghanaian children are 
trafficked from their home villages to work in the industries such as fishery and cocoa plantations. They work 
long hours every day and are exploited by fishermen and plantation owners. Many kids and their parents 
believe that this is a form of apprenticeship and a route to a better life within the tradition of Ghana. 
Nevertheless, the need for children to have familial emotional succour and to be educated has to be 
stressed. Thus, both the traffickers and parents need sensitization about the perils and illegality of child 
Page 15 of 207 
trafficking. Though the legal framework on trafficking in Ghana was strengthened in December 2005, when 
the Government passed a comprehensive anti-trafficking bill, there is a lack of capacity or will to effectively 
implement the bill. Assisting smallholders to improve their productivity and income will enable the parents 
to invest in their children to have a better education. The programme could also canvass assistance to 
traffickers to enable them have a better understanding of child trafficking and the equipment necessary to 
perform their tasks without being dependent on children. 
Nutrition13: Overall levels of undernourishment and malnutrition in Ghana have decreased significantly over 
the last decade. However, the improved status is not uniform across the country. The levels of 
malnourishment, undernourishment and other nutrition-related deficiencies in the relatively poor northern 
regions are up to three times higher than in the rest of the country. The overall percentage of the 
undernourished population was 6.1 per cent in 2017 (FAO, 2017). Malnutrition is another growing public 
health concern, leading to high rates of stunting of children under five (19 per cent), child wasting (5 per 
cent), and anemia in women of reproductive age (46 per cent).14 Also, there is an increasing prevalence of 
children being overweight and obese (UNICEF, FAO 2016/17).15 About 10 per cent of adults is obese. 
FAO reports16 Ghanaian’s diet mainly relying on starchy roots (cassava, yams), fruit (plantain) and cereals 
(maize, rice). Starchy roots and cereals are estimated to supply almost three-quarters of the dietary energy, 
but the diversity of the diet remains low. It is reported that the dietary supply meets population energy 
requirements, but the share of protein and lipids in the dietary energy supply is lower than 
recommendations. For infants (from conceptions to 24 years old), adequate intake of micronutrients, 
particularly iron, vitamin A, iodine and zinc are essential for their growth. The world bank reports17 that 
about three-fourths of preschool-aged children are deficient in vitamin A and iron. One-fifth of pregnant 
women are deficient in vitamin A, and two-thirds of pregnant women suffer from anaemia. Provision of 
supplements, especially for infants, dietary diversification and fortification of staple foods are effective 
strategies to improve the micronutrients intake.  
Climate and environment: The mean annual temperature in Ghana has risen by 1.0 °C since 1960.  The 
number of 'hot' days per year has increased by 13.2 per cent, while the number of 'hot' nights per year has 
increased by 20 per cent. Only 2-4 per cent of the country’s irrigation potential is tapped. Most agricultural 
production in Ghana relies on small, rainfed plots that are highly vulnerable to erratic precipitation patterns 
and the impacts of climate change. Rising temperatures are projected to lower yields in major staple crops, 
13 COSOP 2019-2024 
14 http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4644e.pdf 
15 https://www.unicef.org/egypt/nutrition 
16 http://www.fao.org/ag/agn/nutrition/gha_en.stm  
17 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/270611468031495248/pdf/771660BRI0Box00IC00ghana0April
02011.pdf  
Page 16 of 207 
e.g. cassava yields are projected to fall by 29.6 per cent by 2080 and maize yields by 7 per cent by 2050.18 In 
Ghana’s northern areas total crop failure is expected to occur approximately once every five years due to 
delayed or diminished rains. Smallholder and subsistence farmers are particularly vulnerable to any climatic 
or economic shock owing to their high dependence on local natural resources for their livelihoods, their 
chronic food insecurity, physical isolation and lack of access to formal safety nets (e.g., insurance). These 
households are also more exposed to pest and disease outbreaks, droughts and extreme weather events 
(particularly droughts in the Northern part of Ghana), which cause significant crop and income losses and 
exacerbate food insecurity. Although smallholders use a variety of informal risk-coping strategies (storing 
water, seeds and food, replanting crops, etc.) these are insufficient to address their food insecurity and 
vulnerability. MoFA’s has limited resources and technical capacity to assist farmers in adjusting their farming 
strategies in response to climate change which has a significant impact on their access to finance and 
markets. Urgent technical, financial and institutional support is needed to improve smallholder’s agricultural 
production, food security and resilience to the effects of climate change. 
Rationale for IFAD involvement 
High levels of poverty in the project area: The project areas located in the northern and middle belt of Ghana 
suffer from high levels of rural poverty arising from relatively small cultivable areas, limited production, low 
yield, weak bargaining power and weak community institutions (CIs). They have little incentive to borrow 
funds to increase their investment in agricultural production fearing that the uncertainties of markets and 
income can cause losses leading to loan repayment problems and adverse consequences related to it. 
Further, smallholders in the project areas are also vulnerable to the effects of climate change such as 
droughts, changes in rainfall patterns and high temperatures. Currently, they have little resilience to these 
adversities due to inadequate technical knowledge, limited incentives to borrow and invest in adaptation 
measures and limited access to affordable agricultural insurance services. Periodic droughts also affect the 
availability of nutritious food and the health of children and young mothers. 
Additionally, youth and women unemployment in the rural areas remain high due to the lack of employment 
and skills, mismatch of education and industry, inability of the economy to create new jobs and limited 
access to capital for youth. The AAFORD intervention is needed to assist smallholders and their associations 
in developing secured market linkages that can incentivise and stimulate these households to borrow and 
invest in increasing agricultural production, improving food security and nutrition and building resilience 
against the effects of climate change. AAFORD is also needed to develop the skills of youth and women 
entrepreneurs and increase their access to finance to support a range of microenterprises along the 
agricultural value chains that can sustain increased production, productivity, value addition and income to 
the target households. 
18 Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (2011b): Ghana’s Second National Communication to the 
UNFCCC. http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ghanc2.pdf 
Page 17 of 207 
Long experience of IFAD in Ghana: Since 1980, IFAD has accumulated a long experience of rural development 
programmes in Ghana focusing on a range of areas relevant to AAFORD such as productivity improvement, 
developing rural institutions, marketing improvement through offtaker linkages, supporting access to 
finance, enhancing youth skill development and youth microenterprises and developing resilient livelihoods. 
In the past one decade, IFAD supported five projects; The Northern Rural Growth Programme (NRGP) and 
the Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (GASIP) focused on developing value chains, the Rural 
Enterprises Programme (REP) focused on promoting rural enterprises; and the Rural and Agricultural Finance 
Programme (RAFIP) supported rural and agricultural finance development. IFAD funded projects have 
supported 66 partner financial institutions manly Rural Community Banks (RCB) credit unions, Financial 
NGOs, and savings and loan companies. Past experiences have familiarised IFAD with the agricultural sector, 
Micro Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) sector, and the financial sector and developed its readiness for 
implementing AAFORD. Additionally, IFAD has developed a solid relationship with the government, 
particularly the MoAF, MOF and MoTI, each of which has served as the lead ministry for an IFAD project 
within the last decade. The strong relationship with these ministries has developed IFAD’s advantage to 
establish adequate coordination mechanisms to ensure AAFORD’s success through agricultural production 
initiatives supported by MoFA, youth entrepreneurship and value chain based enterprise development 
initiatives supported by MoTI and financial services initiatives supported by MoF. Moreover, IFAD is also 
recognised for rural finance, value chain and agricultural production-oriented innovations within the WCA 
region and elsewhere and has also contributed to improved nutrition and resilient livelihoods. (Refer PIM, 
Annex 8, for an overview of rural finance activities of ongoing IFAD supported projects in Ghana) 
Support the successful implementation of the COSOP 2019-2024: AAFORD will contribute to the successful 
implementation of the COSOP (2019-2024) for Ghana as AAFORD’s goals and development objectives are 
aligned to the COSOP. The COSOP recognises the need for geographical targeting, developing the marketing 
capacity of the FBOs, increasing the role private sector, and improving access to finance and focuses on three 
interrelated strategic objectives (SOs). SO1 is oriented to promoting financially sustainable and inclusive 
rural transformation, SO2 aims to Strengthen productivity in inclusive value chain development, and SO3 
seeks to Strengthen capacities and economic opportunities of target households. AAFORD is also in line with 
the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and relevant IFAD policies. In particular, it is in line with the SO1 of 
the Strategic Framework ‘Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities’ through improved access to 
agricultural technology, rural finance and capacity building and SO2 ‘Increase poor rural people’s market 
participation’ through strengthening of farmers organisations, marketing infrastructure and strengthening of 
the rural investment environment. The design of AAFORD activities, implementation arrangements and M&E 
system complies with IFAD Targeting Policy, the Rural Youth Action Plan 2019-21, IFAD rural finance policy 
and IFAD policy on gender equality and women’s empowerment. AAFORD is also aligned to the IFAD 
mainstreaming priorities of climate and environment, gender, youth inclusion and nutrition.  
Convene development partners working on similar themes: AAFORD will benefit from IFAD’s country 
presence and convening capacity to network with other relevant government ministries and development 
partners such as AfDB and AGRA. For example, these partnerships can support policy dialogue based on 
evidences generated from AAFORD’s implementation and also invest jointly in scaling up good practices 
nationwide in Ghana. Although donor programmes have several success stories, many of them focus on the 
supply-side factors while others deal with demand related issues. Sometimes the outreach of the individual 
initiatives is limited by the resources available with each donor. AAFORD will address both the demand 
Page 18 of 207 
agricultural credit as well as the supply of agricultural finance simultaneously through the engagement of 
FBOs, offtakers, FIs and apex institutions. Thus, based on its success in a limited geographical area AAFORD 
will provide a single platform for multiple development partners working on similar themes to convene and 
collaborate towards achieving a unified objective for triggering rural transformation and achieving 
sustainable and scalable results in the future.  
Capitalise on existing opportunities: The AAFORD interventions will capitalise on the current opportunities 
created by other IFAD supported, donor and government projects to address the critical challenges. The IFAD 
supported GASIP, which is a nationwide project, partners with strong offtakers and links them to newly 
formed FBOs. AAFORD will capitalise on the presence of these FBOs and offtakers in the project area and 
focus on increasing their outreach to the target group. Similarly, wherever possible AAFORD will partner with 
the Business Advisory or Resource Centre (BAC/BRC) developed by the IFAD supported REP for enterprise 
training and capacity building of youth and women entrepreneurs. Although the financial intermediaries 
consider agriculture to be risky, they are willing to consider agricultural lending at affordable rates if backed 
by risk-sharing and interest lowering mechanisms. The GoG, in partnership with AfDB has recently 
established GIRSAL as a risk-sharing mechanism which will enable AAFORD to promote agricultural lending at 
affordable rates. Similarly, GCX has recently rolled out certified warehousing facility and warehouse receipts. 
These, along with MoTI’s 1D1F initiative, has created new marketing opportunities for smallholders. Under 
normal conditions, the implementation of the initiatives as mentioned above can take several years before 
reaching poor smallholder farmers located in the more impoverished geographical areas. AAFORD will 
enable the faster outreach of these initiatives to the intended target group.  
Lessons learned  
The AAFORD design has incorporated the following lessons learned from the implementation of RAFIP, 
GASIP and REP: 
Geographical targeting to enable pro-poor orientation: National programmes such as RAFIP, REP and GASIP 
have proved to be beneficial since it has promoted countrywide institutional development. It has brought 
about pro-poor orientation within PFIs, private-sector offtakers and microenterprise support services. 
However, the national scope of these programs, with a relatively limited budget, has resulted in a wide 
spread of project resources over a large area and limited project presence at the community level. Learning 
from these experiences AAFORD will concentrate its operations in two regions, one in the northern belt in 
the other in the middle belt of the country to realise the pro-poor targeting policy of IFAD given the 
concentration of poverty in these regions. 
Well resourced ISUs with a degree of autonomy from host Ministries: The RAFIP Project Completion Report 
(PCR) concluded that one of the main bottlenecks that limited the RAFIP achievements during the first 2 to 3 
years was its implementation structure comprising a very small Project Coordination Office (PCO) within 
MOF in Accra that was designed to mainstream the project in the permanent institutional structure of MOF 
using normal civil service protocols. The experiences of other projects centralised in Accra, such as GASIP, 
also indicate the need for stronger regional presence to facilitate and ensure the quality of the pro-poor 
Page 19 of 207 
linkages between public and private sector project partners and the communities. AAFORD will address this 
challenge by driving implementation through a well-resourced Implementation Support Unit (ISU)ISU(ISU) 
located close to the area of implementation backed by Zonal Coordination Units (ZCUs) overseeing the 
quality of implementation and pro-poor outreach in the project communities.  
Bottom-up demand-driven approach: The RAFIP Project Completion Report (PCR) concluded that RAFiP’s 
results were limited by its efforts concentrating on supply-oriented measures in the upper parts of the 
pyramid based on the unstated assumption that measures to build capacity in the upper parts of the 
pyramid would “trickle-down” to the beneficiaries at the base. Learning from this experience, AAFORD will 
follow a bottom-up demand-driven approach to ensure that capable target households have definite access 
to sustainable, affordable, financial support through their integration pro-ppoor value chains, instead of 
waiting with uncertainty for such benefits to trickle down. (Refer section 2C, project approach). 
Assured availability of specialised financing resources: Previous studies have indicated that the gap in 
dedicated credit funds within the RAFIP design was another critical limitation that restricted the final results 
of this project. As a result of this gap, the enhanced capacities of the FIs developed through RAFIP did not 
necessarily result in the flow of financial resources from the FIs to the IFAD target group in the communities. 
AAFORD will address this issue by setting up the BFF with a specific objective of addressing the void in the 
availability of affordable agricultural production loans for semi-subsistence smallholder farmers with less 
than 2 ha cultivable land. The BFF, delivered in partnership with GIRSAL credit collateral support for financial 
intermediaries and GAIP agricultural insurance protection to smallholders will reassure swift response from 
financial intermediaries to the increased demands of agricultural production loans from the AAFORD clusters 
expressed directly through FOs or indirectly through offtakers. 
Build Marketing Capacity of FBOs: The experience of providing support to FBOs is mixed. The FBOs, 
supported through the Root and Tuber Improvement and Marketing Programme (RTIMP) and NRGP, have 
increased their productivity but they still need further strengthening in the marketing of their products to 
ensure their transformation into viable business entities. REP does not deal with FBOs. Though GASIP 
supports FBOs to develop and improve their marketing linkages, the project’s national scope and limited 
community presence is not fully oriented to transform these CIs. In contract, the AAFORD implementation 
structure will include strong community presence aimed to develop the bonding between the communities 
and the project and provide a robust platform for the FBOs to adopt long-term institutional changes from 
the perspective of self-help and sustainability rather than for gaining opportunistic and immediate access to 
external project resources.  
Strengthen the role of the private sector: Experience from NRGP, RTIMP and other projects have shown the 
crucial role of the private sector in supporting the smallholders and FBOs in providing inputs, marketing 
channels, and other services. The primary lesson learned is that lack of access to finance in rural areas is one 
of the most significant factors in constraining private sector growth. AAFORD recognises private sector 
offtakers as the primary vehicle for smallholder farmers to gain access to credit external to their operations 
and local groups. Offtakers have both the regular cash flow and the collateral (financial and physical assets, 
and eligibility for insurance and guarantees that can substitute for other collateral) needed to secure loans 
from formal FIs. 
Page 20 of 207 
Business plan-based approach: Several past IFAD projects, including the ongoing GASIP, has worked with CIs 
such as FBOs. The main focus has been to prepare them to benefit from other project services such as 
matching grants for the members. There was a limited emphasis on the long-term vision and financial 
sustainability of these institutions. AAFORD will follow a participatory institutional and business plan 
development approach for engaging with the CIs (FBOs, VSLAs, youth enterprise groups). The Institutional 
Business Plans (IBP) developed by CIs and the Outreach and Linkage Business Plans (OLBPs) developed by 
PFIs will identify the future goals and objectives and provide a blueprint of activities for achieving these 
through the successful AAFORD partnership. Investments will not be made before these plans are agreed to 
and endorsed by the assembly in the CIs and the management of the PFIs. The institutional development and 
business plan approach will improve the capacity of the CIs to sustain and further develop the achievements 
of AAFORD interventions. 
Chapter 2: The Programme 
Programme Goal and Objectives 
Project goals and objectives 
The project goal is to support the food security and improved living standards of smallholder farmers, poor 
and vulnerable women and youth. 
AAFORD’s development objective is to improve productivity, income and resilience of smallholder farmers, 
vulnerable women and youth. The objective will be achieved through increased access to affordable finance 
in support of better marketing linkages, sustainable and climate change adapted agricultural intensification, 
skills and enterprise development in agricultural value chains, supporting inclusive policy engagement and 
building on women and youth potentials as untapped resources for family resilience..  
Project duration: The AAFORD project duration is six years.  
AAFORD outreach: AAFORD will provide services to 90,000 poor rural households (540,000 individuals with 
an average of 6 members per household), across 350 communities in 30 clusters in the erstwhile Northern 
region in North Ghana and the erstwhile Brong Ahafo region in the Central Belt of the country. The target 
households are divided into ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ categories. The direct target group consists of 75,000 
smallholder households (450,000 individuals) who will receive the full set of AAFORD services.  
Approximately 80 per cent of the ‘direct’ smallholder category will be drawn from the semi-subsistence 
smallholder households (less than 2 Ha cultivable land) and 20 per cent will be included from market-
oriented (more than 2 to 10 Ha cultivable land) and large (more than 10 Ha cultivable land) farming 
households with special emphasis on the inclusion of women, women-headed households and youth (aged 
18-35). The ‘indirect’ target group comprises 15,000 households (90,000 individuals) located in communities 
outside the AAFORD clusters but within the command area of AAFORD’s PFIs and offtakers. The ‘indirect’ 
target group will also benefit from the AAFORD supported services of these PMIs and offtakers. However, 
Page 21 of 207 
initially, the PFIs are likely to use traditional sources of finance bearing higher interest rates to support the 
‘indirect’ target households. Consequently, many of the indirect group will possibly be market-oriented and 
large farmers who enjoy higher economies of scale and have the capacity to service relatively expensive 
loans.  
Key outcomes and impact indicators: Key impacts/outcomes of the AAFORD project include: i) 5 per cent 
reduction in the number of rural households living below the poverty line in the AAFORD supported districts; 
ii) 60 per cent of target households reporting an increase in income; iii) 60 per cent of target households 
reporting yield improvement and decrease in food insecurity; iv) 30 per cent reduction in 0-5 year child 
malnutrition in the AAFORD communities; v) 50 per cent women reporting improved quality diet; vi) At least 
25 per cent of the targeted households reporting adoption on environmentally sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies; vii) Approximately 45,000 households benefitting from combination of concessional 
loans, warehouse receipts and microinsurance services; viii) At least 1,000 full time equivalent youth jobs 
created in 300 value chain enterprises, 30 PFIs and 24 partner offtakers; ix) Approximately 12,500 HH 
engaged in food processing mechanism and x) 2 policies or strategies proposed to policy makers for 
approval, ratification or amendment.  
AAFORD supported commodities: In general, AAFORD will support pro poor, outreach-oriented and 
profitable economic opportunities relevant to the specific AAFORD clusters. Within this framework, 
investments will support value chain activities concentrated on mainly pro-poor field crops such as cassava, 
sorghum, maize, soyabean, millets, and groundnuts. Depending on the opportunities, it will also support 
vegetable value chains such as tomato, pepper, cabbage, carrots and eggplants relevant to smallholders. The 
selection of crops and enterprises which support food security; nutrition; women, youth and vulnerable 
groups engagement; value addition; suitability as raw material for industries; low inputs and ecological 
compliance (e.g. millet, sorghum, maize, and groundnut for the northern zone); import substitution (e.g. 
rice) will be given high priorioty.  
Value chain partnership approach: AAFORD will follow a value chain partnership approach focusing on 
developing profitable linkages between producers, offtakers and financial partners. It will support business 
models that i) increase the income of the target households by developing profitable marketing linkages 
between them and offtakers and ii) facilitates PFIs to finance the implementation of these business models 
at affordable terms. Offtakers are typically nucleus farmers; processors; and aggregator. A nucleus farmer is 
a large, commercial operation with associated groups of smallholder outgrowers sometimes organised as 
FBOs. The nucleus farmers access funds to purchase inputs in bulk and distribute to the outgrowers and also 
provide the outgrowers with services on credit, which is deducted from the value of products delivered to 
the nucleus farmer at harvest time. A processer is a business entity (private company, cooperative, NGO) 
that purchases raw materials for transformation into a processed product for the market (e.g., gari from 
cassava, parboiled rice). Smallholders can sell their produce to the processing company at market price or 
bring their crop for processing for a fee, then sell the product individually (or through the company). 
Aggregators are traders who purchase (usually directly) from farmers and bulk up the quantities for sale to 
the market. They may operate or utilise warehouses. Some traders (e.g. in tomatoes) may even provide 
inputs to their suppliers as an advance, which then entitles them to purchase the crop, after deducting the 
value of the inputs. Big aggregators provide a market (sometimes with semi-contractual relationships with 
FBOs, primarily through projects). They are in a good position to obtain financing (on commercial terms). The 
Page 22 of 207 
big aggregators may also have a contractual agreement to take a specified amount from farmers and may 
also be able to facilitate warehouse receipts for the FBOs. 
AAFORD will support the integration of target households in the above mentioned offtaker models by i) 
supporting the capacity building of the farmers to increase their production and productivity according to 
the needs of the offtakers; ii) strengthening the FBO and increasing the membership of target households in 
FBOs; iii) brokering marketing linkages between the FBOs and offtakers based on business plan approach; 
and iv) enabling offtakers/FBOs to access sufficient funds at affordable terms through PFIs to increase the 
outreach and secure the profitability of their partnerships with the AAFORD target households AAFORD will 
integrate target households in the offtaker marketing linkages by i) supporting the capacity building of the 
farmers to increase their production, productivity and quality according to the needs of the offtakers; ii) 
strengthening FBOs and increasing target households’ memberships in the FBOs; iii) brokering marketing 
linkages between the FBOs and offtakers based on business plan (BP) approach; and iv) supporting PFIs to 
partner with agricultural credit guarantee and agricultural insurance initiatives; improve agricultural lending 
capacities and access concessional credit funds and incentives from the AAFORD supported BFF and reduce 
the interest rates on agricultural loans. 
AAFORD’s demand and supply side experiences in the two zones can be scaled up at the national level 
through several pathways. For example, future cycles of GASIP can be designed based on AAFORD 
experiences, whereby target households benefiting from demand side interventions are graduated from 
matching grants to BFF supported concessional credit backed by GIRSAL guarantees and GAIP 
microinsurance support. The scope of the BFF can be expanded to serve national needs. 
Crop targeting strategy: Crops to be selected would be of high priority in terms of improving food and 
nutrition security, importance as primary source of income for the rural households, including women and 
other vulnerable groups, suitability and potential for value addition(e.g. crops suitable as raw material for 
industries), crops and enterprises that do well with low input and are ecologically compliant (e.g. millet, 
sorghum, maize, and groundnut for the northern zone) and import substitution crops/products on which 
foreign exchange is being expended despite comparative advantage, e.g. rice. Analysis of commodities will 
be conducted to identify the potential opportunity to invest in each of the value chains. 
The following table summarizes the production of major crops in two regions. Brong Ahafo region 
contributes 24% of Ghana’s agricultural production whereas Northern region contributes 12 %. Cassava, 
maize, rice and soybeans are priorities for AAFORD’s intervention partly because these crops are important 
both as traditional staple foods for nutrition and food security and sources of income. They also have 
domestic market potential as well as export value in addition to market demand by processing industries. 
Primary processing for value addition of these commodities is most probably the most common off-farm 
income-generating activity in the proposed project regions. Processing industries related to the four 
commodities could be also strengthened as a part of the intervention. Moreover, as the above mentioned 
crops are yet to realize their yield potential, AAFORD will contribute to reduce the gap between the actual 
and achievable yields of each crop.  
Page 23 of 207 
MT produced in 2017 and proportion (%) of total production in the country 
Pro-poor value chains based community cluster selection: AAFORD will follow a pro-poor value chains based 
approach for clustering communities, focusing project interventions on a group of 10-15 communities that 
serve as recognised production base of one or more pro-poor commodity such as sorghum, maize and 
cassava. AAFORD will select the clusters based on criteria including (i) higher concentration of poverty; (ii) 
presence of formal financial institutions offering services to the communities in the cluster; (iii) presence or 
willingness of offtakers to form linkages in the cluster communities; (iv) presence of active CIs; (v) proximity 
to REP supported business resource centres (vi) readiness of the GAIP to provide agricultural insurance 
services in the clusters and (vii) willingness by farmers to participate in the project including participation in 
FBOs and AAFORD brokered marketing linkages and commitment to fulfil the contractual obligations related 
to the marketing partnerships. 
As a preparatory measure, The IFAD supported GASIP and REP, which are familiar and active in the project 
area will carry out the preliminary identification of the AAFORD clusters first by shortlisting the broad 
location of the clusters by superimposing the map of the main poverty pockets in the AAFORD Zones on the 
map of the production bases of the main pro-poor commodities. Within these locations, the relatively larger 
communities, with high or medium presence of poor population, which also meet the other community 
selection criteria, will be selected. The cluster selection process will consider that the selected clusters are 
distributed across the poorer districts and not concentrated in just 1-2 districts.  
Communities and households from the respective districts will be selected taking into consideration two sets 
of criteria. The Communities will be selected on the basis of general socio-economic and physical factors 
such as government priorities; existence of farmer organizations, production practices; potential; availability 
of land; ecology and climate factors; infrastructural facilities; existence of financial institutions; availability of 
extension, inputs and technology, etc.  
At the individual or household levels, the specific challenges that farmers face in their agricultural economic 
activities will be used. These may include farm size and access to land, quality of farm inputs and tools, 
access to planting materials and extension; yields and production level; food security and market surplus; 
Page 24 of 207 
BRONG AHAFO% GhanaNORTHERN% GhanaCASSAVA4 950 058           24%1 375 152 7%YAM2 478 177           32%2 334 528 30%PLANTAIN1 193 048           25%0%MAIZE441 329              19%234 888     10%COCOYAM322 693              22%0%RICE17 628                 2%163 545     21%GROUNDNUT16 797                 3%174 567     34%COWPEA6 566                   3%90 936       38%SORGHUM1 293                   0%123 562     39%SOYABEAN0%126 759     72%MILLET0%87 618       48%Grand Total9 427 590           24%4 711 555 12% 
amount of labour available and ability to use hired labour; ability to preserve and process agricultural 
produce; engagement in off-farm activities and ability to invest in its expansion; access to credit; level of 
education; etc. Information on the above will be collected as a part of the baseline survey and needs 
assessment of the communities and households in the respective districts at the beginning of the 
intervention. 
Project Area and Geographical targeting 
Geographic area of intervention: Two regions; namely, Northern region (NR) and Brong Ahafo region (BAR) 
are selected from the old definition of 10 regions for AAFORD intervention after taking into account the 
prevalence of poverty measured by the number of poor people in the rural area, inequality measured by the 
mean annual per capita income and GINI coefficient, and access to financial institutions measured by the 
number of Rural Community Banks (RCBs) present in the regions. Using these considerations, Northern 
region and Brong-Ahafo region have been selected as the project area. Northern region covers one-third of 
the territory of Ghana, is one of the poorest regions with 70% in the bottom 20% income category, cases of 
malnutrition and malnourishment are rampant with up to 16% considered food insecure; and about 72% of 
its land is vulnerable to desertification. Production of surplus depends a great deal on natural characteristics 
of the zone.   Farm sizes tend to be relatively small in the northern region which is even arid with one rainy 
season. Brong Ahafo region was selected as it follows closely Northern region in the characteristics 
mentioned above. It is relatively fertile and has two rainy seasons. Moreover, it is close to the Northern 
region for ease of programme management and coordination.  As Ghana’s poverty is largely rural with 38.2% 
of the people in rural areas considered poor compared to 10.4 in the urban areas, the focus of the 
programme will be on rural areas in the Northern and Brong-Ahafo regions. The rural population of the two 
regions is close to 3 million people, 50% women and 34% youth, made up of 508,307 households, 30 clusters 
and 350 villages. A total of 75,000 households will be targeted by the programme as beneficiaries. 
Income and poverty profile of rural population by region 
Inequality  
GINI 
Coefficient  
GLSS 7 
No. of rural poor 
people (million) 
Mean annual per 
capital income (GHS) 
Number of Rural 
Community 
Banks19 
 GLSS 7, 2019 
Est20 
GLSS 6 
2019 
19 Extracted from Arb Apex Bank web page: 
https://www.arbapexbank.com/region_select.cfm?Ashanti%20Region&region_id=3&corpnews_catid=8   
20 2019 population projection was used for the estimation https://www.citypopulation.de/en/ghana/cities/  
Page 25 of 207 
3,015.7 
3,023.5 
1,801.9 
4,382.2 
3,949.1 
3,919.1 
8,205.4 
5,428.5 
3,975.7 
7,730.7 
4 
7 
5 
14 
21 
23 
29 
7 
20 
12 
Upper West 
48.1 
Northern 
45.3 
Upper East 
43.7 
Volta 
39.7 
Brong Ahafo 
38.6 
Eastern 
Ashanti 
35.4 
37.9 
Greater Accra  35.1 
Central 
Western 
37.4 
36 
0.5 
1.65 
0.62 
0.71 
0.65 
0.31 
0.48 
0.04 
0.26 
0.46 
Target Groups and Targeting Strategy:  
Target groups 
Direct beneficiaries are classified into five target groups, described mainly based on poverty level, land 
ownership and access to the market. These are i) smallholder semi-subsistence households; ii) market-
oriented smallholder households; iii) large farming households; iv) youth (age 18-35) and v) women. The 
table below summarises the target group characteristics; 
Target group  Direct 
Outreach 
(HH) 
Key characteristics 
 per 
cent of 
outreac
h 
Cultivable 
land 
ownershi
p 
Smallholder 
semi-
subsistence 
households 
60,000 
80% 
Up to 2 
Ha 
Resource-poor with little or no access to credit;  
Rely on savings to finance agricultural activities;  
Revenue may fall below the upper poverty line of 1,341 GHS a year per 
adult;  
Page 26 of 207 
Limited access to improved inputs, mechanisation services, post-harvest 
management and marketing; Low bargaining power; 
Family labour used for agricultural production with high women’s 
involvement  
Depend on individual sales to traders and in local markets; 
Can suffer from periodic food insecurity and nutrition deficiency mainly 
during dry months  
Uncertain income from marketing agricultural produce;  
Involved in labour work to supplement income;  
Limited diversification of income. 
Market-
oriented 
smallholder 
households 
11,250 
18% 
More 
than 2 to 
10 Ha 
Income from GHS 1,000 to 6,000 a month cash crop production;  
More diversified income, e.g. from off-farm activities and remittances; 
Combination of family labour and hired labour used for agricultural 
production  
Can be members in FBOs linked to offtakers;  
May consider using credit to access improved seeds, machinery for land 
preparation, harvesting, planting and storage facilities if readily 
available.  
Large farming 
households 
3,750 
2% 
More 
than 10 
Ha 
Have ability (collateral) and access to financial resources  
Use hired labour for farming activities  
Likely to be food secure, literate and influential in their communities 
Sometimes serve as nucleus farmers linked to a group of smallholders  
Target one or two specific commodities for commercial purposes and 
produce based on a contractual agreement 
Has access to market information and market intelligence 
Total 
75,000 
100% 
Rural youth 
(18-35) 
30,000 
40% 
High unemployment rate (especially between 20 to 29 years) old in Rural Ghana.  
Higher unemployment is female youth especially graduated individuals due to 
mismatch between education and industry 
Often unmarried due to unsteady income sources to support new families 
Page 27 of 207 
Lack of employable skills, entrepreneurial training and opportunities 
Limited access to capital due to lack of collateral and other guarantees  
Women 
37,500 
50% 
Less access to land and credit compared to men 
More than 70 per cent women above 35 are married and with children 
Female-headed households suffer more from food insecurity and nutrition 
deficiency, especially in the Northern region. 
Smallholder semi-subsistence households (upto 2 Ha): This group represent about 80 per cent of the target 
population of 75,000 (60 per cent women, 42 per cent youth). Typically, the farmers in this group are poor. 
They may cultivate not more than 2 ha of land21, depend essentially on family labour which is often limited. 
They represent about 80% of the target population. They are generally resource poor with little or no access 
to financial capital. Their crop yields are low due to the inability to use farm inputs and they are invariably 
food insecure. They are also distinguished by low income as they have little or no commodity for sale, their 
production is mainly for own consumption. Because of persistent population increase, there is pressure  on 
their limited land resources leading to a shortened fallow period and land degradation. Climate change also 
impacts their productivity negatively and thus tends to exacerbate their precarious situation. They may be 
part of the farmer-based organizations or savings groups but such groups are hardly effective and activities 
carried out by them are commonly small scale. They rely primarily on own savings in kind – primarily 
retention of seeds/cutting at harvest to plant the following year. Due to inadequate capital, their access to 
improved production inputs, mechanizations, marketing and post-harvest management facilities are limited, 
may only have access when subsidized by the MoFA. . Their revenue may fall below the upper poverty line of 
GHS 1,34122 a year per adult.  
These farmers are averse to seek credit from formal financial institutions because low level of production 
and productivity and the related risk and consequences of being unable to repay. They tend to rely on their 
lean personal savings and traditional sources of funds such as susu and VSLAs. The would only begin to 
consider obtaining a small loan to expand their operations when their marketable surplus increases. 
Market-oriented smallholder households (more than 2ha and upto 10 Ha): This group represent about 18 
per cent of the target population of 75,000. The smallholder farmers in this group are moderately poor but 
with a strong orientation to sell to the market. Typically they own more than 2 to 10 ha of land, augment 
their family labour with hired labour, and are capable of making some investments in farm inputs and assets. 
They constitute about 18% of the target population. They tend to target specific commodities for production 
for purely commercial purposes but diversify their production to include other crops for consumption. 
21 The definition of smallholder farmers is referred from WFP’s Comprehensive Food Security and 
Vulnerability Analysis, 2012 
22 Ghana Living Standards Survey 6 (GLSS 6), Poverty Profile in Ghana 2013. Ghana Living Standard Survey 7 
was held in 2018 and the survey concluded to keep the poverty line the same. 
Page 28 of 207 
Depending on the land sizes allocated for cash crops, the farmers may earn from GHS 1,000 to GHS 6,00023 
a month separately from the earnings generated from off-farm activities and remittances. The farmers in this 
group are more likely to have a regular demand for credit and often are part of the out-grower models as 
their desire to increase marketable surplus drives them to demand for credit, especially when the interest 
rate is commensurate with the expected returns. They may be part of savings schemes so as to meet their 
own household and agricultural input needs and also as a basis for accessing credit which is usually 
dependent on evidence of capacity to save and repay. They are also likely to have account with formal 
financial institutions such as such as Rural Community Banks (RCB), credit unions, or commercial banks. 
Large farming households (more than 10 ha): They will constitute 2 per cent of the beneficiaries. This group 
cultivates more than 10 ha of land using largely hired labour. They have better access to financial capital 
than the two other categories. Thus, they have substantial opportunity to acquire farm inputs, storage, and 
marketing facilities. They target specific commodities for commercial purposes and may have access to the 
market on a contractual basis. They earn substantial income from the sale of agricultural commodities and 
off-farm activities and are basically food secure. They are likely to be literate and influential in their 
communities. Commercial farmers generally specialize in one or two crops. Though they may not be 
considered poor, they may be targeted as those who can serve as drivers of change and important channels 
for finance, marketing and services to the smallholders. The farmers in this category may represent about 2% 
of the target population.  
Thus, the main direct beneficiaries would be the semi-subsistence rural households and market-oriented 
farmers with a specific emphasis on women and youth. In all regions, women and youth producers are likely 
to have smaller farm sizes than men and have less access to credit.  Another key category of beneficiaries are 
the large scale commercial farmers, small scale processors, and traders in the relevant value chains. 
Targeting criteria that may be used to select households include smallholder farmers with less than 5ha, 
membership of a saving group that has reasonable balance, linkage with financial institutions and willingness 
to be part of an FBO. Priorities would be given to those who have not benefited from GASIP/NRGP/RTIMP 
before. 
Youth: Ghana National Youth Policy (2010) defines youth as those who are in the age range of 15-35 years 
old. The country has a youth bulge estimated to be 34 per cent of the total population. The rural population 
consists of 55.6 per cent youth while urban population consists of 44.4 per cent. Unemployment of youth is a 
growing concern in Ghana and reached 13.7 per cent in 2018. The formal sector is only able to engage less 
than 5,000 (2 per cent) of the 250,000 young people entering the labour market annually, leaving about 98 
per cent to survive in the informal sector or out rightly unemployed. Approximately, 77 per cent of the youth 
have only basic educational qualification or less which prevents them from finding a decent job. Data 
indicates that attainment of education does not necessarily lead to an employment. Unemployment is 
highest among secondary school graduates.  
In Brong Ahafo Region, 33.7% of the population consists of youth. Unemployment rate for youth is 
approximately 14.7 % for the age group between 20-24 years which is higher than other age group. The 
23 Reference is made to the baseline studies of on-going IFAD funded programmes  
Page 29 of 207 
unemployment rate is highest for those who either attained secondary education or MSLC/BECE24 
certificate25. The unemployment rate of female youth who are in the age range of 15-24 years old is 14.1%, 
which is 1.8 times higher than their male counterpart26. Literacy rate is 62.1 per cent (56.9 per cent for girls, 
79.1 per cent for boys). More than 65% of youth who are above 30 years old are married27.  In Northern 
Region (NR): 33 % of the population consists of youth. Unemployment rate for rural youth is highest (16.8%) 
for the age group between 15-24 years28. The unemployment rate is highest for those who attained 
secondary education. The unemployment rate of female youth who are in the age range between 15-24 
years old is 26.9% which twice higher than their male counterpart29. Literacy rate is 40.7 per cent (31.9 per 
cent for girls, 51.6 per cent for boys). More than 65% of the youth who are above 25 years old are 
married30. Taking into the above situations in the two regions, AAFORD will focus its intervention for those 
who are in the age group between 20-24 years old, and especially for those who have attained secondary 
education or MSLC/BECE certificate. The gender gap will be also carefully examined when supporting youth. 
AAFORD will be highly youth sensitive with around US$ 27 million (40 per cent of investments) invested in 
youth. Youth will comprise 40 per cent of total direct beneficiaries (20 per cent women and 20 per cent 
men). The target group includes (i) youth (18-35 years) currently engaged (full time or part-time) in 
agricultural production and other rural activities at subsistence level with an interest to further develop their 
farming activities as a business, participate in marketing and financial linkages and increase their income, (ii) 
unemployed (or seasonal workers) youth interested to explore, identify and engage in better employment 
and self-employment opportunities both in agricultural production and other value chain related 
enterprises, including service provision, and allied sectors; and (iii) young graduates interested to apply their 
skills in the agriculture sectors as professional service providers, outreach agents commissioned by 
marketing and financial intermediaries to increase their outreach to the target households in the 
communities and as agribusiness entrepreneurs.  
Women: Women represent roughly 51 per cent of the population of Ghana. Ghana is among the champions 
of gender equality in ECOWAS and ranks second among ECOWA nations in Gender Inequality Index in 2018 
(0.538, better than Sub-Saharan African average of 0.569, 140th place globally). Ghana ranked first in 
MasterCard index of women entrepreneurs in 2018. This indicator measures various dimensions of gender 
inequality in access to education, employment, health and political empowerment. Ghana ranked 4th for its 
24 Basic Education Certificate Examination  
25 2015 Labour Force Report 
26 2015 Labour Force Report 
27 PHC (Population Housing Census) 2010, Brong-Ahafo Region 
28 2015 Labour Force Report 
29 2015 Labour Force Report 
30 PHC (Population Housing Census) 2010, Northern Region 
Page 30 of 207 
gender development index of Sab-Saharan Africa that measures the gender gap between men and women in 
terms of Human Development Index.  
FAO (2018) reported that women constitute 58 percent of the rural labour force. Women have a critical role 
in agriculture and other livelihood activities. Women play dominant role in crop production and livestock 
rearing as the main sources of cash income. In the north, women are also engaged in collecting naturally 
growing produce such as shea nuts and fruits from the surrounding environment. Above FAO report indicate 
that there is a division of labour between men and women in farming. Male gender roles are associated with 
tasks that involve control over agricultural assets, mobility and decision making. Female gender roles are 
associated with manual work in agriculture and livestock, including pre- and post-harvest activities, food 
processing and household tasks. These distributions of labour have resulted to women’s limited access to 
and control over agricultural assets and decision making.   
Gender is still an important dimension of poverty and food insecurity in Ghana. About 62% of female-headed 
households fall into the two poorest wealth quintiles compared with 39% of male-headed households. 
Similarly, only 11% of female-headed households reach the wealthiest quintile in comparison with 21% of 
male-headed households. Across the northern regions, 30% of female-headed households are food insecure 
compared with 15% of male-headed households. In Brong Ahafo Region, 25% of households engaged in 
agricultural activities are headed by women31. More than 70% of women who are older than 30 years old 
are married. Average household size is 5.3 in rural Brong Ahafo32. 35% of women are illiterate compared to 
25% of men33.  In the Northern Region, 7.6% of households engaged in agricultural activities are headed by 
women. More than 80% of women who are older than 30 years old are married34. Average household size is 
8.4 in rural35. Only about 1.5% of female-headed households is literate while 8.4% of male-headed 
households are literate36.   
AAFORD will be highly gender sensitive with around USD 34 million (50 per cent of investments) invested in 
women. Women will comprise 50 per cent of total direct beneficiaries. More details of target groups, youth 
and women’s roles and responsibilities and opportunities are presented in the PIM.  
Youth mainstreaming strategy: Particular attention would be paid to the youth group who have attained 
secondary education, as their unemployment rate is highest, as well as youth that has the potential to be 
economically active and start a new enterprise. AAFORD will focus on three mechanisms for supporting 
youth employment and youth jobs (a) for youth already engaged in agricultural production but at 
subsistence level: support exposure to production and productivity-enhancing training, linkage to marketing 
31 2015 Labour Force Report 
32 PHC (Population Housing Census) 2010, Brong-Ahafo Region 
33 PHC (Population Housing Census) 2010, Brong-Ahafo Region 
34 PHC (Population Housing Census) 2010, Northern Region 
35 PHC (Population Housing Census) 2010, Northern Region 
36 PHC (Population Housing Census) 2010, Northern Region 
Page 31 of 207 
and access to finance to upgrade and operate their production-related activities in business scale (b) for 
youth currently unemployed: provide practical, employable and income-generating skills and support them 
to find employment in the value chains promoted by the project and also to start up their enterprises; 
Develop youth technical capacities in these areas by engaging them as AAFORD youth facilitators (b) for 
educated/graduated youth: increase access to innovation and new technology and assist them to adapt to 
new approaches and become professional service providers and entrepreneurs. Engage such youth in the 
AAFORD young institutional intern initiative to develop their orientation, skills and employability.  
Strategy and approach for gender and youth mainstreaming  
The project will address gender disparities and the key constraints that limit women progress in agricultural 
activities and increase their access to financial services up to 50% by (a) creating enabling environment and 
ensuring that women have equal access to capacity building trainings. For example, extension or training 
services would be conducted through female extension officers or must follow the social norms in the 
communities selected for intervention (b) promoting productive opportunities that are suitable for women 
by ensuring that analysis is done to capture women’s needs and priorities (c) increase women’s access to 
skills and knowledge in financial literacy, digital literacy, savings and financial management as well as 
business development; (d) promote women leadership and representation in grassroots institutions and 
organization; (e) encourage women participation in decision making within the household. Furthermore, the 
project will select crops such as horticultural crops which intensively involve women. 
Similarly, the project will segment youth into (i) single male youth, (ii) single female youth, and (iii) married 
youth couple and conduct a needs assessment for each group. As stated by government, youth 
unemployment is a factor of lack of unemployable skills, mismatch of education with industries and limited 
access to capital.  AAFORD will therefore provide (a) practical, employable or income generation related skill 
trainings and (b) opportunity to adopt new innovation, approach and technology.  
Project interventions would be aimed at men and women who belongs to semi-subsistence target group to 
enhance their living standards and reach market-oriented group. They will be formed into groups on the 
basis of common interest as it would be difficult for individual poor rural households to gain access to 
financial services and other support services. Groups can more easily gain such access, enabling individuals 
to benefit as a consequence. Social inclusion will rely on a baseline survey and community mobilization 
activities which are to be undertaken at the beginning of the project implementation. This will take into 
consideration the situation of women and youth and people with disabilities who represent about 3% of 
Ghana’s population. Service providers will be recruited to mobilize the communities and have specific focus 
group discussions in the targeted communities, with focus on women, youth and people with disabilities. 
AAFORD will pay particular attention rural households (HHs) in the selected clusters, with particular focus on 
livelihoods, nutrition and financial inclusion for women and youth. The project has about 3 million people 
made up of 508, 307 households comprising 50% women and 34% youth. Farmer-based organizations (FBOs) 
are the key channels for providing finance and technical support to raise productivity in the rural sector. A 
critical element of the project is strengthening the governance of farmers’ organisations to enable them 
Page 32 of 207 
provide the required services to their members in a transparent and sustainable manner. The expected 
outcome is the interplay between farmers’ organisations and other stakeholders to create market 
opportunities and address issues along the value chains so as to maximize impact for the beneficiaries.  
The Project will take a holistic approach to addressing financial constraints and other challenges along the 
value chains. To make sure that the constraints of the main beneficiaries, particularly women and youths, 
are addressed adequately, the Project will adopt a demand-driven approach. This would start with baseline 
survey to (i) determine the scope, capacity, and development needs of the FOs; (ii) markets, agro-processing 
enterprises and technologies (including constraints and potentials), critical infrastructures and services; and 
(iii) needs for capacity building for staff, service providers and beneficiaries.  
A thorough institutional mapping of existing FOs in each of the two regions will be carried out before the 
beginning of the project implementation in order to fine-tune the strategy of intervention and the activities 
to be undertaken in support of the FO’s capacity building. This mapping, scheduled to be carried out by 
specialized service providers, will assess the member characteristics (men , women, mixed, youth) and 
purpose, the type of services rendered to members, the level of maturity and governance and presence in 
the selected communities. The mapping will lead to a classification of the FOs in three maturity categories 
(low, medium, high) for which a differentiated approach, including milestones to move from one category to 
the next, and associated support package would be elaborated. In parallel to the mapping exercise, 
reputable partners will be identified to carry out the capacity building of the FOs.  
Gender and youth mainstreaming activities  
AAFORD must influence policy and provide impetus for elimination of gender discrimination and cultural 
biases against women to be relevant. Gender and youth mainstreaming should be maximised through 
identifying their issues and addressing them at every component of the intervention. The choice of 
commodities or enterprises must take into consideration the interest of the women and youth who are often 
marginalized. The project must appraise gender dynamics and identify the specific constraints women, the 
youth and the vulnerable face in the selected value chains and how to remove them. There should be a 
workshops to enable stakeholders appreciate the gains of involving women and other vulnerable groups in 
the project. Such workshops will also help in dispelling theories, long held notions and practices that lead to 
discrimination and may constitute an obstacle to the realization of the objectives of the project. Women 
participation must be stressed in all stakeholders’ workshops. 
Gender-based advocacy activities targeted at key stakeholders like traditional and religious leaders further 
contributes to knowledge and moderation of attitudes and practices towards women that may affect the 
project outputs. Linking the project with public agencies like relevant ministries  and agencies will serve as a 
veritable bridge that would facilitate confidence building and acceptability of gender mainstreaming and the 
project in general. Gender sensitivity must also be reflected in the organizational framework of the project 
including the management structure of the PCU. Both formal and informal networks will be used as links and 
platforms for the dissemination of the mainstreaming agenda. 
Page 33 of 207 
To ensure mainstreaming of gender, youth and the vulnerable, the project must gain the services of an 
expert at inception to promote sharpened awareness of the differential needs, perceptions and economic 
activities and integrating the needs of the vulnerable, women, youth and people who are physically 
challenged. At the implementation stage, mainstreaming of gender in the project will be maintained through 
enhancing the capacity of gender specialists to ensure participation of women in all activities. 
Gap and training need assessment of the FBOs: A Gap Assessment of FBOs will be undertaken so as to 
identity their training needs and prepare a training plan. A consultant shall be identified to carry out the 
following tasks: 
Benchmark FBOs into producers, processors and marketers: Based on the profile/analysis of the farmer 
groups, the consultant is requested to group them into producers, processors and marketers and benchmark 
their potentials in terms of legal status; their leadership structure/governance including internal 
administration; age of members; quality of group; economic performance (financial portfolio/strength, 
volume of sales, linkage to market and financial services, ability to serve their members or render various 
services to their members); years of existence, availability/quality of their growth plan,   level of resilience in 
term of internal funding, level of dependence on external funding, sources of finance, etc. in benchmarking, 
the consultant will take cognisance of commodities, enterprises and gender ensuring membership of youths 
and women in the FBOs. 
Classify the FBOs in terms of strong, moderate and weak and identify training Needs of the FBOs to 
strengthen the weak ones and determine pathways for their growth 
Prepare the Framework and Operational Guidelines to strengthen the weak FBOs  
Based on operational guideline prepare a Training Module Package and Training Plan:  
Based on the main training needs identified for each category of the FBOs (weak, moderate and strong), 
prepare a Training Module Package (TMP) and establish a training plan (TP) for them, including the training 
of Master Trainers to step down the training to the FBOs. 
Farmer organization strengthening: As it would be difficult for individual poor rural households to gain 
access to financial services and other support services, FBOs will be the main entry point for the project. 
However, many of the existing groups in the rural sector are ineffective because of lack of effective 
leadership, poor management and weak financial base. To become effective vehicles for development in the 
rural sector, the existing groups need to be strengthened. Given the existing social and cultural bias, it would 
be necessary to legitimise the participation of rural women, the youth and other vulnerable members of the 
communities in the project, guiding the project along gender-sensitive lines, to ensure that rural elites are 
not alienated by the focus on them. Provision should be made by the project to have enlightenment 
campaigns, meetings and discussions with relevant people and groups to ensure common understanding by 
all concerned of the principles behind the project approach, its objectives, strategy, and how it would be 
operated. 
Page 34 of 207 
The project will strengthen the capacity of FBOs to enable them to serve their members better through 
efficient input delivery, bargaining power, and input and output prices to increase profitability. It will partner 
as much as possible with existing private and public institutions, as well as donor-funded projects/projects to 
avoid duplication of efforts and maximise impact on beneficiaries. 
Competent service providers will be recruited competitively to organize the training of FBOs. The Project will 
strengthen the capacity of selected FBOs through training sessions on: (i) group dynamics promoting good 
governance of FBOs; (ii) group management; (iii) enterprise planning and management; (iv) participatory 
monitoring and evaluation; and (v) functional literacy. The training will be outsourced to consulting firms or 
consultants/research centres or universities. The Project will build on the existing social structure through 
strengthening selected grassroots organisations.  
In order to facilitate FBOs’ access to rural finance and the establishment of contracts with suppliers or 
traders, the service provider will also assist non-registered FBOs, including women and youth groups, in the 
development of bye-laws and registration with the relevant government departments to give them legal 
status. This activity will be implemented by a service provider under the overall coordination of the PCU in 
close collaboration with the relevant government departments. 
The service provider will design and implement targeted capacity building of FBOs in the two regions, based 
on their needs identified by the gap/training needs assessment, using such approaches as training, 
sensitization, advocacy, mentoring and appropriate technical support. He/she is to: 
Sensitize FBOs, as key VC actors, on the Value Chain approach and the need for them to be structured as 
entities that provide leadership and service to their members 
Promote and coordinate the establishment of sustainable, gender sensitive and democratic Farmers’ 
Organizations 
Audit and categorize the FBOs into weak, moderate and strong, including proposing a support package that 
would enable them move from one category to the next 
Package the FBOs as enforceable business entities with strengthened leadership, organizational, 
entrepreneurial skills, financial and management capacities to plan, implement and manage their crop 
production, processing and marketing as profitable agribusinesses. 
Identify their capacity needs and design appropriate training modules that will address the gaps to make 
them more effective. 
Train the FOs on group dynamics – group formation and development, good governance, leadership 
enhancement and development, including institutional performance management, entrepreneurial skill 
development, record keeping, input and product marketing, market information services, business plan 
development and gender mainstreaming. 
Train FOs on business planning and budgeting, business transaction and negotiation skills, resource 
mobilisation, loan drive and recovery, institutions development/governance. 
Use participatory approaches to develop appropriate by-laws for the FOs and ensure their registration with 
relevant State Ministry. 
Page 35 of 207 
Organize learning visits/routes for the farmer groups within and outside the states with a view to facilitating 
experience/knowledge sharing on best practices, tested innovations, entrepreneurial and leadership skills, 
governance structure, savings mobilization, financial management, loan drive and recovery. 
Train the FBOs on the preparation of their short-term vision (strategic development plans, SDP), and working 
with private sector operators, especially financial institutions, input dealers and marketers. 
Strengthen the management, leadership and technical capacity of youth and women- only groups in order to 
empower them to retain control over produce, technology and income. 
Build capacity of beneficiaries for sustainable ownership of assets. 
Facilitate FBO members to open bank accounts 
Extension Service Provision: With the realization that there is no sector in Ghana that can create jobs as 
quickly and sustainably as the agriculture sector, alleviating rural poverty requires strategic interventions to 
ensure the greatest impact.  The strategy would be to focus on the poor producers, processors and traders 
that need assistance, especially, the semi-subsistence farmers and the small market-oriented farmers and 
small scale processors and marketers. The use of participatory approach of the project would result to active 
involvement and participation of the poor.  
AAFORD will enhance their technical competence and raise their awareness to see agriculture as a business 
and Improve their income through efficient marketing arrangement and access road to enable them get 
good prices for their commodities. 
 The Project would need to scale up capacity building of the farmers’ groups and link them to formal financial 
institutions. It will promote private sector and NGO involvement in extension through building the capacity 
of selected service providers to effectively serve the farmers.  
The farmers need training in specific skills, e.g. agronomic practices and the selection, use and application of 
agro-chemicals and inputs. The Project will also promote improved processing methods and establish better 
linkages between producers, processors, service providers and end-users through enhancing the income-
generating capacity of the poor rural men and women involved in the marketing chain. It will aim at 
strengthening agricultural system including improving the capacity of the public extension delivery system. 
Part of the strategy will be to improve their capacity and accountability in services delivery. Along with the 
farmers, extension agents (eas) in the regions shall assisted by service providers to understand the art of 
best agronomic and post-harvest handling practices to ensure improved production at economically viable 
cost to the farmers. This arrangement will lead to improved farmer-extension relationship and enhanced 
capacity of the extension workers to deliver training on market-led technology transfer in the regions and 
other key players in processing and marketing. 
AAFORD will facilitate partnership arrangement between the farmer and off-takers, as well as service 
providers and the governments to provide sound technical assistance (extension, business and market 
information assistance) to enable the farmers increase productivity/production in a manner that satisfies 
their business partners (off-takers), as well as liaise constantly with the off-takers to keep to the agreed 
terms of partnership.  
Page 36 of 207 
Specifically, AAFORD will engage and support government extension service, input service providers and off-
takers to establish farmer managed demonstration plots for best agronomic practices to be given to the 
farmers in each region. The demo plots shall serve as practical demonstration tool on the use and application 
of improved technologies to the farmers. They will be used to provide agronomic trainings pre-season and 2 
field days/practical demonstrations, in-season and before harvest. The trainings will be based on a well-
developed package of practices (POP) handbook that is to be made available to the farmers. 
The main tasks of the arrangement will include: (i) provide best agronomic and best training (ii) liaise with 
value chain clusters to use champion farmers to establish on-farm, farmer managed, farmer owned demo 
plots ii) conduct bi-weekly practical demonstrations on demo-plots for farmers within the regions, providing 
field assistance on a day to day basis to farmers within their region (iv) ensure that the group leaders that 
benefited from certain exclusive trainings shall go on to share the knowledge with the rest of other farmers 
(v) organise monthly review meetings to discuss the progress of the Project, achievements and challenges as 
well as upcoming activities in concert with AAFORD management and (vi) provide a mechanism for data 
collection, collation and reporting. The service provider that will be designated to perform this task will have 
extensive experience in establishing and managing on-farm demo plots including conducting field days. The 
service provider shall also have experience and practical evidence in farmer group management and farm 
enterprise management training. The service provider shall have knowledge of and extensive experience 
with managing large number of farmers.   
The following criteria shall apply in competitively selecting the service provider: demonstrated institutional 
capability, experience and successful past performance and corporate capabilities in commodity value 
chains, agricultural extension delivery (both technical and operational experience), participation in IFAD and 
other donor-funded activities will be an advantage.  
Financial literacy inclusion: To promote savings culture and improve management of credit and finances at 
the producers’ level, the Project will engage a reputable financial consultant to train staff of the service 
provider(s) (consultants’ firms) to design and implement financial literacy capacity building of FBOs, based on 
their identified knowledge or understanding gaps or needs that are relevant to their purpose, using such 
approaches as training, sensitization, advocacy, mentoring, appropriate technical support and linkage to 
financial institutions. His specific tasks include identifying the financial literacy knowledge/capacity needs or 
understanding gaps that are relevant for the purposes of the Project in the two regions and design 
appropriate training modules that will address these gaps and make them more effective.  
The service provider must have a strong institutional capability and a full complement of 
experts/professionals with strong entrepreneurial skills and degree in Agriculture, Agribusiness or related 
fields. The firm/consultant must have demonstrated work experience and successful performance for a 
minimum of five years and above in agriculture, agribusiness and value chain development. Previous 
experience in working with IFAD or other donor funded agency in value chain development will be an 
advantage. Fluency in the local language of the FBOs by Local staff is an advantage.   
Needs Assessment and provision of infrastructure: 
Page 37 of 207 
AAFORD will facilitate conduct of needs assessment and provision of physical infrastructures that will 
promote value chain development activities in the two regions. The project will engage the services of a 
Service Provider to carry out needs assessment of infrastructure in the two regions with the following terms 
of reference (ToR): 
Conduct a needs assessment of the candidate infrastructures so as to ensure that the infrastructures are 
demand driven and aligned to the needs of the beneficiaries with particular concern for women and youth. 
In addition to the needs assessment, identify and inventorise all community assets (skills, capacities, 
resources and interests) that can be leveraged by the project to facilitate routine operations and 
maintenance of the infrastructures. 
Undertake a risk mapping of the infrastructures earmarked for the various communities and outline a risk 
management plan. 
Coordination and monitoring of targeting aspects 
The project must monitor closely its performance in service delivery to the target segment of AAFORD; 
namely, women (50%), youth (30%) and other vulnerable groups. ISU of AAFORD will work closely with the 
district assemblies to monitor the implementation progress of mainstreaming gender and youth as well as 
the project activities. M&E data will be collected and segregated by gender and age group to ease the 
monitoring. After mid-term, an Annual Outcome Survey will be conducted to obtain qualitative data as well 
as quantitative data to evaluate the program performance.    
The project must monitor closely its performance in service delivery to women and other vulnerable groups. 
It will need to build capacity in social impact assessment, which would include training in participatory 
methods and gender analysis, identify baseline social indicators and carry out periodic beneficiary 
assessment to monitor effects on rural livelihoods and the entire market driven approach as a mechanism to 
bring about sustainable improvement in rural livelihoods for poor men and women.. 
A major issue of concern is food security, income generation and poverty reduction. Indicators such as crop 
yields, farm and non-farm income and household income status would have to be considered. Another 
important issue is community development where indicators such as extent of local resource mobilization, 
quality of leadership, farmer empowerment, measured by existence of viable farmer associations and groups 
and their ability to set priorities and access services that respond to priorities. Similarly, assessment of 
improvement in access education and other social services is also important. The assessment would need to 
pay particular attention to population factors, gender differences and generally the impact on disadvantaged 
and vulnerable groups. 
With particular reference to gender, systematic monitoring and evaluation must be an integral part of the 
gender mainstreaming activities. At the output level, the involvement and participation of women in the 
activities of the project will be measured with indicators developed to assess the extent to which the specific 
Page 38 of 207 
needs of women are addressed e.g. in terms of selection of commodities/enterprises access to finance and 
markets, service provision, inputs etc. The percent of women involved in direct implementation of the 
project will also be assessed.   Gender specific indicators and milestones must be part of the monitoring and 
evaluation framework for the project. The use of outcome and performance indicators below disaggregated 
by gender and category of beneficiaries would be necessary 
Benefits and risks 
The success of the project is largely dependent on capacity building geared to the needs of the target group. 
The project would therefore make substantial provision for this and work out details of its capacity building 
activities. The approach would also involve improving on the ability of service providers to provide rural 
financial services and other necessary services to the rural people. The interventions would result to 
improved capacity of the target groups and service provider would have better skills, management capacity 
and motivation to render services to the target groups. They would also become more sensitized to the 
problems of rural people and be able assist and ensure complete involvement of women, youth and other 
disadvantaged groups as beneficiaries. 
It is hoped that by the end of the project, several service providers and NGOs in the communities of primary 
focus would have been strengthened. Similarly, FBOs would have become more cohesive with better 
leadership and greater likelihood of accessing credit and other support services provided by the project and 
other agencies.  
The interventions are designed to ensure sustainability and make the participating organizations, 
communities, groups and individuals viable channels for development. The project approach is also highly 
dependent on improved capacity of the service providers. If the service providers are weak  the success of 
the project will be threatened.  
Furthermore, significant differences exist in social and economic status of households in the rural 
communities and there must be particular attention to reach the very poor and disadvantaged groups. The 
project may fail if it does not pay attention to activities that are of importance to this group and ensure their 
participation as beneficiaries. In other words, to provide voice to the voiceless, there must be safeguards 
against social exclusion and elite capture. 
The project must also be cautious to ensure that the relationship with the communities is one that 
counteracts the mentality of dependence on external assistance. In the project regions gender issues has 
religious connotations and may elicit certain sentiments; emphasis on gender mainstreaming may have the 
risk of a backlash. 
Involvement of women in project activities where men are dominant may be resisted.  Both men and women 
may feel uneasy whenever they are to participate in any activity together. On the other hand, excluding 
women in the project activities may distort project outcomes because women form the bulk of the core poor 
and play key roles in livelihood of the communities. The strategy to minimize these risks is to begin with 
gender awareness workshops for stakeholders, followed by advocacy visits to key stakeholders. The 
Page 39 of 207 
involvement of existing and accepted women machinery and women based civil society organizations will 
help to mainstream gender in the project with minimal risks and threats.   
Page 40 of 207 
Chapter 3: Programme Components 
AAFORD is designed with two inter-related technical components and project management: Component 1: 
Technical Assistance for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural Value Chains; ii) 
Component 2: Expanding and directing affordable finance in a conducive environment and iii) Component 3: 
Project management. 
The Project is designed to identify and close the gaps between demand for and supply of financing to 
support increased marketable surpluses and improved livelihoods in low-income smallholder farming 
communities in selected areas and value chains. Component 1 addresses Technical Assistance (TA) needs at 
three levels: (a) ultimate beneficiaries and their organizations at the community level; (b) intermediary 
market and financial institutions, through which smallholders typically obtain financing (including cashless 
pre-financing) and sell their surpluses; and (c) market-enhancing institutions that provide instruments such 
as warehouse receipts, insurance and guarantees to help mitigate risks that inhibit financial institutions from 
lending to smallholder agriculture. Component 2 mobilises funds and risk-mitigating instruments on terms 
that are affordable to the beneficiaries in the face of their limited returns on investment, and seeks to 
improve the environment in terms of coordination of interventions, knowledge of successful models for 
scaling up, and the policy, strategic, legal and regulatory framework. Component 3 provides for project 
management and implementation. 
Component 1: Technical Assistance for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural 
Value Chains: The expected outcome is enhanced capacity for target groups to access affordable financing 
which will lead to increases in smallholder farmers’ marketed surpluses and household welfare and 
increased business for financial institutions. This component focuses on TA to: (a) smallholder farmers and 
their associations, to introduce Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and access financial and marketing 
services compatible with their needs in order to raise productivity and surpluses; (b) rural households 
(especially women and youth) to improve their livelihoods, health and financial inclusion; (c) nucleus 
farmers, aggregators and processors to intermediate between smallholders and input, product and financial 
markets; and (d) financial intermediaries and market-enhancing institutions that provide instruments to help 
mitigate financial risks. It also supports outreach of institutions to the target groups and their intermediaries 
to meet the conditions for market transactions to take place and utilize the funds available through 
Component 2.  
The component has three subcomponents:  Subcomponent 1.1 works to build up demand by identifying the 
potentials, constraints and needs of key target groups (smallholders, women, youth) at the community level, 
providing TA that increases their knowledge of improved agricultural practices to raise productivity, financial 
and business skills, and by working through groups to access markets and finance. Subcomponent 1.2 
similarly identifies opportunities at the level of intermediary institutions in both (i) marketing, building 
offtaker capacity to serve the key targeted groups and (ii) outreach (including market-enhancing 
instruments) in Subcomponent 2. Subcomponent 1.3 bridges the gap by supporting institutions to reach out 
and market their products to the key target groups and intermediaries. 
Page 41 of 207 
Subcomponent 1.1: Develop capacities of target groups to expand marketable surpluses: The expected 
outcomes are that targeted beneficiaries have a better understanding of and ability to access affordable 
financial and marketing services (whose development is supported in Subcomponent 1.2 and outreach in 
Subcomponent 1.3); acquire skills for good agricultural practices and for income-generating activities; and 
build social capital through community-based groups. The first step is to identify the communities, 
beneficiaries, institutions and intermediaries in the project areas and assess their potentials and needs. The 
second step is to package and deliver TA tailored to each community’s aspirations and needs. The third step 
is to facilitate access to financing smallholders, primarily through offtakers and other marketing 
intermediaries. This will involve sensitizing and training smallholder farmers and their associations about the 
features, benefits, risks, processes, rights and responsibilities of offtakers, as well as about seeking direct 
credit from retail financial service providers. It will orient farmers’ organizations towards the inclusion of 
poor smallholders with a focus on women and youth and toward GAPs and post-harvest mechanisms that 
promote resilience to the effects of climate change, as well as food security and nutritional improvements. 
For specific target groups such as women, youth and other vulnerable groups, it will involve sensitization and 
training on entry points for financial inclusion (such as Community Savings and Credit Groups [CSCGs], use of 
Digital Financial Services [DFS] and other services such as output product prices and weather information), 
green skills for climate-resilient agricultural practices and environmentally sustainable livelihoods, and 
healthy nutritional practices. 
Identification of key technical partners and service providers: The ISU will engage technical partners that are 
actively supporting smallholder agricultural value chains in Ghana, have complementary financial and 
technical resources and can use local service providers as needed to implement the services indicated in the 
activities and other subcomponents below. The technical partners will be selected according to criteria 
specified in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), including capabilities with respect to climate change 
resilience and nutrition security factors. 
Identification and needs assessment of community clusters: In order to focus limited project resources on 
piloting and achieving results that can be scaled up, a Service Provider (SP) will be engaged to identify 
clusters of communities in the project area (specified in the PIM) that include concentrations of smallholder 
farmers in selected value chains, economically active poor, presence of potential PFIs, presence of a 
BAC/BRC, and the crops and practices relevant to income, climatic, food security and nutritional concerns. 
Particular attention will be paid to the potential for increasing surplus through improved GAPs. Once the 
clusters and value chains to be targeted by the Project are agreed, the SP will carry out a stakeholder 
identification survey which will identify the relevant stakeholders and their critical challenges and needs, 
including existing CIs (such as FBOs, cooperatives, women and youth groups); input providers; offtakers; 
financial institutions; BACs/BRCs; agricultural research stations and MoFA programs; and government 
development programs where each District is provided with a factory, a dam, and/or warehouse. In addition, 
the survey will identify: (a) outreach and institutional development needs of CIs; (b) measures to upgrade 
smallholders’ agricultural production technology and productivity; (c) their sensitization and capacity 
building needs with respect to (i) outgrower models relevant to their main marketable crops; (ii) accessing 
financial services through CSCGs, through intermediaries (offtakers and financial institutions), and via mobile 
phones (DFSs); (iii) climate change vulnerability and scope for local resilience strategies; and (iv) cost-benefit 
analysis of adopting climate resilient and nutrition sensitive production activities; and (d) key gaps in the 
Page 42 of 207 
awareness, understanding and utilization of available financing mechanisms (direct and indirect) by 
smallholders and other target groups.  
Based on the findings of the needs assessment survey, the SPs will structure capacity building packages 
tailored to the needs of the different target groups (see Capacity building of target groups and their CIs, 
below). These will include identification and development of the key messages to be delivered through 
awareness and sensitization sessions, contents of a range of training modules, ToRs for technical assistance 
and scope for exposure visits. 
Mobilization of Youth Community Facilitators: In order to ensure effective and sustained engagement at the 
community level and facilitate transactions made possible through capacity-building, a pool of 4-5 Youth 
Community Facilitators (YCFs) (including one to focus on climate change resilience) from the selected 
communities will be engaged for each cluster (discussed further under Project Management) to facilitate 
community mobilization and interaction with AAFORD. The YCFs will comprise young women and men from 
the communities with social skills for community mobilization, as well as educational background to 
understand and interpret project objectives. Training will build their skills on strengthening CIs, gender 
mainstreaming, youth mobilization, nutrition sensitivity and climate-resilient agricultural practices. They will 
be responsible for ensuring inclusion of target groups (especially women and youth) in the relevant CIs; 
facilitating development of Community Outreach Development Plans (see next activity) and outreach of the 
project-supported activities to the target groups; community-level data collection and reporting; monitoring, 
identifying and reporting community-level implementation issues and assisting to solve these problems; and 
facilitating the outreach of marketing and financial institutions, project SPs and other value chain actors and 
facilitators. They will interact with the Youth Institutional Interns (YIIs) (see Subcomponent 1.2). The primary 
objectives are to provide a clear community-level focal point of interaction for other project stakeholders 
such as input suppliers and other value chain actors, financial intermediaries and project SPs, ensure smooth 
implementation at the cluster level and facilitate the ability of youth to work in public service and 
development institutions.  
Community Outreach Development Plan (CODP): A SP will be engaged to support and oversee the YCFs to 
develop a 7-10 page CODP in each project cluster. The objective is to facilitate both implementation and 
sustainability of project interventions by building community consensus around clear road maps for 
sustaining and scaling up good practices, strengthening CIs and engaging with external ones, and enhancing 
access to product markets and financing. The desired social, economic and productive changes envisioned in 
the community through AAFORD implementation will be presented in the CODPs along with the specific 
project interventions, which will help to achieve these changes.  
The CODP will define the specific project target groups in the community, the projected outreach of AAFORD 
activities to these target groups over the project duration, the approach for reaching the target groups and 
an overall budget estimate for capacity building (see below). It will include the scope for strengthening 
offtaker-outgrower models. It will also present needs for nutrition awareness raising and how training on 
healthy diets can be included in capacity building activities for different groups. Similarly, it will include 
specific climate-related risks to the community and mitigation measures to be integrated in project 
implementation activities, in particular to complement TA for improved agricultural technologies and 
practices to raise productivity.  Against the framework of the CODPs, the ZCUs, in coordination with the SPs 
and YCFs, will prepare detailed annual cluster workplans and budgets presenting the physical and financial 
Page 43 of 207 
targets to be achieved in each community cluster during the year. These targets will be related to outreach 
of activities such as strengthening CIs, developing livelihood investment plans (see next activity), training and 
technical assistance in areas such as production, marketing, business development, entrepreneurship, 
dietary diversification and nutrition standards. AAFORD SPs and partners responsible for implementing each 
activity will be identified along with the community-level coordination mechanisms between them. AAFORD 
will direct support to the communities based on the activities identified in the CODPs. 
Capacity building of target groups: The expected outcomes of TA to target groups and their organizations are 
to increase smallholders’ marketable surpluses in a sustainable way, strengthen their mutual support 
associations, build their relationships with marketing and financial institutions, and improve their livelihoods, 
climate resilience and health. Training will utilize existing groups to the extent possible (FBOs, CSCGs, youth 
groups), but may include group formation/management if a need is identified.  
TA will be adapted to the identified needs of each community cluster and detailed in the CODPs in the 
following modules: (a) improved crop production technologies, including high yield varieties, Conservation 
Agriculture (CA) (such as minimum tillage), awareness and utilization of climate-resilient agricultural 
practices, crop diversification and selection of varieties for home consumption and nutrition, post-harvest 
management capacity through activities such as grading, drying and processing, and marketing through 
offtaker-outgrower models; (b) increased entrepreneurial and business management capacity and livelihood 
diversification, especially of youth and women, through capacity building, training (in particular, ‘green skills’ 
to take advantage of environment-friendly income-generating opportunities) and exposure visits facilitated 
by the SPs in coordination with the BACs/BRCs; and (c) improved financial literacy and access to financial and 
marketing services by exploring integration in agricultural value chain offtaker-outgrower models (including 
the One District One Factory [1d1f] initiative), certified warehousing and warehouse receipts models 
(through partnership with GCX), and linkages to other aggregators, processors and traders in coordination 
with MoFA and MoTI, and by strengthening savings habits through financial literacy training and formation 
of CSCGs for women. TA will also be provided (by a different SP) for formation and  strengthening the 
governance of community associations (such as FBOs and youth and women savings or enterprise groups).  
The nutrition related training and capacity building will focus on i) women’s access to and control over 
productive resources such as capital, and farming inputs; ii) promoting the use of labour-saving technologies 
to enable women to manage caring, reproductive, and productive roles; iii) promoting nutrition-sensitive 
agriculture and food-based approaches; iv) promoting diversified farming: production and consumption of 
high-value crops and small livestock including small ruminants, poultry and fish to increase dietary diversity 
and nutrition security; v) promoting small irrigation schemes and household production systems to support 
year-round production, especially vegetables and fruits; vi) promoting food safety along the agricultural 
value chain: agro-processing, preservation, storage, distribution of food, and marketing; vii) intensifying 
nutrition and health behaviour change strategies in agricultural interventions; and viii) promoting and 
strengthening food fortification interventions. 
The project SPs together with the YCFs will coordinate the implementation of these activities and will engage 
MoFA’s extension services for supporting relevant services. The project will also partner with the Rural 
Enterprises Programme (REP) and its associated BACs/BRCs operating in AAFORD areas to facilitate business 
planning and access to financing for promising microenterprises arising out of this activity (see 
Subcomponent 1.2, Capacity building of selected partner intermediaries). 
Page 44 of 207 
Support to Community Institutions (CIs): AAFORD will identify partner CIs (including offtaker-outgrower 
arrangements) in each community with potential and express desire to develop marketing and financial 
linkages. Based on the needs assessment and CODPs, partner CIs will be selected using criteria such as 
outreach orientation, current representation of AAFORD target groups (especially women and youth), 
current level of activity and member involvement, governance and management status and willingness to 
partner with AAFORD and adopt recommended institutional strengthening measures. AAFORD will consider 
mobilizing new CIs if existing CIs do not qualify as partners. Partner CIs will comprise mainly FBOs dealing 
with crop production and other value chain related activities; CSCGs, especially with women members 
involved in savings and credit activities, trading and services; and value chain-based enterprises and rural 
youth enterprise groups engaged in a range of agricultural and non-agricultural microenterprises.  
The objective is to establish linkages between CIs and market and financial intermediaries (including 
offtakers and financial institutions) as a basis for mobilizing their own funds (e.g. by establishing a CSCG; see 
below) or engaging BACs/BRCs to facilitate their approach to financial institutions (if appropriate). TA will be 
tailored to assessed and expressed needs of the CIs, and facilitated by the YCFs. 
The AAFORD SPs will capacitate the YCFs, together with the Youth Institutional Interns (YIIs) (see 
Subcomponent 1.2) engaged in the BACs/BRCs, to develop Institutional Business Plans (IBPs) for the CIs in 
each cluster having met the selection criteria and expressed a desire for capacity-building or to seek 
financing (either individually or together). Each IBP will detail the areas of investment chosen by the CIs for 
improving the knowledge, skills and livelihoods of the members. The first part of the IBP (3-5 pages) will 
detail how the CIs will strengthen their governance and management systems and address issues relating to 
inclusion of women, youth and other vulnerable groups; climate change; nutrition; financing; and linkages 
with external market and financial institutions. This will include how the CI intends to expand access to 
financial services, including savings mechanisms, credit (in kind and/or cash), reinvesting earnings, 
agricultural insurance, and DFS. The second part (4-6 pages) will focus on the details of the specific business 
area in which the CI members decide to collaborate, including: description of the business concept or model; 
market opportunities; strategic, operational and financial details such as projected profitability, financing 
plan and reinvestment plan; direct and indirect beneficiaries (particularly women and youth); outreach of 
benefits; measures to improve productivity, meet required market standards and address the effects of 
climate change.  
Community-based savings and credit groups (CSCGs) for women and youth: The objective is to get targeted 
project beneficiaries that generally have been excluded from formal financial services onto the first rung of 
the ladder to access financial services. Smallholders (women in particular), especially those with smaller farm 
sizes, prefer saving over credit but often lack convenient and affordable means to save –which is also a 
precondition for eventually obtaining credit. Building on Ghana’s traditional daily savings culture (susu), 
international and local NGOs have had considerable success training groups at the community level to 
manage and fund their own CSCGs. When their financial needs exceed the capacity of the CSCG, it provides a 
stepping-stone to linking them with formal financial institutions (an objective of Ghana’s Financial Inclusion 
Strategy). AAFORD will partner with agencies that are already implementing CSCGs in Ghana to extend the 
model to women and youth groups in its targeted clusters, in order to facilitate community-level 
mobilization and management of savings and credit to support their income-generating activities and 
Page 45 of 207 
household financial needs. In addition to forming new CSCGs in communities that lack them, existing CSCGs 
that prepare IBPs may be supported for strengthening and linking to formal financial institutions. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity building of institutional partners and intermediaries: The expected outcome is 
that products will be adapted and developed to suit the needs of target beneficiaries (whose capacities are 
being built in Subcomponent 1.1 and outreach in Component 2.1). This will involve the selection of partners 
that provide market-enhancing instruments (such as offtaking, aggregation, warehousing/storage, electronic 
trading, digital information services for product markets and insurance, guarantees, warehouse receipts and 
DFSs), as well as intermediary financial institutions such as commercial banks and rural/micro finance 
institutions. Training and TA aimed at product enhancement relevant to AAFORD beneficiaries will be 
available to these institutional partners and intermediaries based on capacity building needs assessment and 
innovative proposals. Intermediaries that provide linkages between smallholder farmers and output 
product/financial markets will be trained in models and management of these relationships.  
Activities: 
Mapping, needs assessment and selection of partner institutions: This exercise will engage a SP to map out 
the institutions (in consultation with BACs/BRCs) providing marketing, financial, risk mitigation and digital 
services in the project area, and assess their needs for capacity building to better serve the value chains, 
communities and beneficiaries being targeted by AAFORD (The SP will also deliver the capacity-building 
activity; see below). In addition, national institutions providing market-enhancing instruments (warehouses 
[GCX], insurance [GAIP], guarantees [GIRSAL, RDF], weather and price information [GMA, Esoko], digital 
financial services, etc.), as well as relevant Apex institutions (ARB Apex Bank, GHAMFIN), will be assessed for 
their potential and interest in serving intermediaries in project areas. Candidate partner institutions will be 
invited to orientation workshops on the potential business opportunities for increasing outreach to 
smallholder farmers (directly or through intermediaries), women and youth, and the possibilities available 
through this subcomponent. The expected outcome are the expressions of interest by and selection of 
institutional partners and intermediaries to receive the support indicated in the activities below (as well as 
under Subcomponent 2.1), based on: their active presence in AAFORD areas; their expressed commitment to 
serve AAFORD beneficiaries; licensing, regulatory and performance status (for PFIs); and sound governance 
structures. Such institutions and intermediaries will be able to seek partnership with AAFORD at any time. 
In 2018-19, BoG undertook a number of measures to strengthen the financial system, including raising 
minimum capital requirements across the board, liquidating or consolidating a number of universal banks, 
and de-licensing some 357 MFIs. AAFORD expects to engage a number of universal banks that wish to build 
their loan portfolios for agricultural value chains, as well as RCBs, which have a clear mission to serve rural 
communities. MFIs are less likely to be involved, except with respect to rural MSMEs (currently being served 
through REP). The current landscape for agricultural lending will be assessed up front, and implementation 
arrangements and the role of the ARB Apex Bank will also be reviewed, as part of establishing the BFF. 
Development of Outreach and Linkage Business Plans (OLBP): Selected partners will be given TA through a SP 
engaged by AAFORD to develop OLBPs, which will clearly indicate the outreach, profitability and other 
benefits they will achieve in the project communities as a result of project support to increase their 
Page 46 of 207 
capabilities to: (a) reach AAFORD targeted beneficiaries and intermediaries; (b) develop appropriate 
products and delivery mechanisms; (c) communicate relevant information through local FM radio services 
and mobile phones; (d) develop physical or software uptake capacity; and (e) market products (supported 
under 1.1.7). The OLBPs will specify how GCX, GIRSAL and GAIP can support financing to project beneficiaries 
through PFIs and offtakers, and the gap between the costs of these instruments and the ability of potential 
borrowers to afford them. The objectives are to provide: (i) a sound justification for the capacity-building to 
be provided (see below), ensure partner buy-in and establish results indicators; and (ii) a basis for cost-
sharing grants under the Blended Finance Facility (Subcomponent 2.1) to close the affordability gap. 
In the orientation workshops (see above), the project SP will assist the interested intermediaries to prepare 
and submit a short concept note (1-2 pages). After the concept note is approved by the SPs and AAFORD ISU, 
the SPs will provide technical assistance to the intermediaries to help them develop and submit the detailed 
OLBPs, which will support realization of the CODPs and IBPs (subcomponent 1.1) by aligning services to the 
needs of targeted beneficiaries and CIs, and planning how to deliver them to those groups and areas 
(supported under Subcomponent 2.1). The OLBP will also indicate how the partner institution can make use 
of YIIs both with project support and subsequently (see below). The IBP review committee in AAFORD will 
review and approve submitted OLBPs as a basis for delivery of TA and capacity-building and outreach 
support (see below and Subcomponent 2.1). 
Capacity-building of selected partner intermediaries: Partner institutions will receive TA support from the 
AAFORD partner SPs for activities identified in their OLBP, including: (a) sensitization and skills training for 
staff, in particular on multidimensional risk mitigation related to climate change and environment; (b) 
supporting the establishment of agricultural finance desks, training agricultural finance officers, or special 
windows for agricultural production financing; (c) product and systems development to enhance outreach, 
including rural/micro finance institutions (RMFIs) to adapt loan products to the seasonal nature of 
agricultural activities and their cash flows; and (d) sensitization and training of RMFIs to understand and 
utilize risk mitigation instruments, to finance business plans of intermediaries and FBOs, and to utilize 
available concessional and/or blended credit lines (in collaboration with other IFAD projects). Training of 
RMFIs on risk mitigation instruments and relevant products (such as warehouse receipts, agricultural loan 
portfolio guarantees, agricultural insurance) will include board members as well as managers and credit 
officers/analysts, to facilitate policies to adopt such products. The BACs/BRCs working with REP in the 
AAFORD areas will also be considered as AAFORD partners and receive training in evaluating and advising 
clients on the creditworthiness of their MSMEs and options for financing. Regional workshops will bring 
together BAC/BRCs and PFIs to promote mutual understanding and development of mutually suitable 
business planning and assessment tools. 
Youth Institutional Internship (YII) Programme: In this capacity-building activity, up to 80 youth will be 
trained in skills identified by partner marketing and financial institutions as relevant to increasing their 
outreach to smallholder farmers (especially women and youth), offtakers and other agricultural value chain 
actors. They will be supported for up to three years (on a declining cost-sharing basis) as interns to the 
requesting institutions and to BAC/BRCs in collaboration with REP. This will be targeted toward graduates 
with a first degree in subjects relevant to finance, marketing, agriculture or environment, to give them 
practical skills and experience that will benefit partner institutions and enhance their subsequent 
employment prospects. The primary objective is to facilitate linkages with the YCFs (Activity 1.1.3) for 
Page 47 of 207 
effective outreach (Activity 2.1.2); a secondary objective is to give youth practical skills and experience that 
will enhance their productivity and future employability prospects. 
Cluster Linkage Problem-solving: Multi-stakeholder platforms meeting at the cluster level (using Value Chain 
Committees, if active, or a similar model) will be organized by YCFs to identify critical bottlenecks and 
challenges to implementation in a particular area and value chain, and to identify specific institutions and 
individuals to solve them. This process will facilitate development of partnerships among AAFORD, offtakers, 
financial institutions, and other support programmes. YCFs (see Subcomponent 1.1) will be assigned to help 
address issues at the cluster/beneficiary level, and YIIs may be tasked with facilitating institutional 
responses. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Marketing and ICTs for outreach of rural financial and agricultural services: The expected 
outcome is the increased access to relevant information and services, including using mobile phones and 
adapted DFSs, needed to improve agricultural production, mitigate risks and lower costs. This activity 
focuses on sensitization and outreach to Project beneficiaries to implement OLBPs of partner agencies 
(Subcomponent 1.2), including those providing meteorological and agricultural price information, taking 
advantage of support to develop products and channels of communication suitable for smallholder farmers. 
Based on their Business Plans, institutions providing these services will be able to apply for project co-
funding of sensitization and outreach activities to target clusters and groups. 
In particular, partnerships with key market-enhancing institutions will focus on marketing to intermediaries 
(financial and offtakers) serving smallholder FBOs in AAFORD clusters, and on utilizing YIIs (Subcomponent 
1.2) and the BFF (Subcomponent 2.1). These partnerships will be built on the assessments in Subcomponent 
1.2 (and OLBPs if prepared), and fostered through forums in Subcomponent 2.2. This may include outreach 
by GCX and other warehouse operators to increase awareness and use of warehousing and receipts by FBOs 
and offtakers; development by GAIP of agreements with PFIs and BFF regarding how to cover and recover 
the costs of agricultural insurance; sensitization of AAFORD PFIs by GIRSAL on how to utilize guarantees to 
offset losses by clients as well as the PFIs, and to absorb the cost of guarantees while avoiding moral hazard 
concerns. It will also include using the YIIs attached to these partner institutions to build and maintain 
relationships with PFIs and BACs/BRCs in AAFORD areas. 
Component 2: Expanding and Directing Affordable Finance in a Conducive Environment. The expected 
outcomes are increased outreach and uptake of affordable finance and supporting instruments, especially by 
smallholder producers; enhanced knowledge, enabling the replication of good practices; and an improved 
policy framework. Acting as a multi-stakeholder platform, this component will support the availability of 
affordable finance for selected agricultural value chains through blended finance, to make credit and risk 
mitigation instruments available on concessional or blended terms (Subcomponent 2.1). Together with 
capacity-building of both the demand and the supply sides in Component 1, this component is expected to 
bridge the gap that has excluded smallholder producers and their intermediaries from access to affordable 
finance. In addition, Subcomponent 2.2 will help to document good practices and lessons learned as a basis 
for replication and improvements in the policy and enabling environment.   
Subcomponent 2.1: Blended Finance Facility (BFF): The expected outcome is expanded availability of 
affordable finance and market-enhancing instruments directed to smallholder production and its key 
intermediaries in selected agricultural value chains, in order to realize the benefits of capacity-building on 
Page 48 of 207 
the demand side (Subcomponent 1.1) and on the supply side (Subcomponent 1.2), including the application 
of risk-mitigation instruments to lending to smallholders and other agricultural value chain actors.  
Currently, the share of bank loans and advances flowing to smallholder producers is negligible and not 
readily accessible or affordable to them. In order to develop this nascent market by ‘crowding in’ funds and 
risk mitigation instruments at rates compatible with the returns to smallholder crop products, a BFF will be 
established to provide wholesale funds on concessional or blended terms to PFIs to on-lend for smallholder 
agricultural production, and cost-sharing grants (premium subsidies) that enable FBOs and their 
intermediaries to afford agricultural insurance, guarantees, warehouse receipts and other market-enhancing 
instruments. The objective is to ‘crowd in’ funds that are presently not available to targeted agricultural 
value chains, especially for the production end, into the BFF. The facility will also have a window to serve 
other value chain actors (offtakers, MSMEs, input suppliers) that have different rates of return and risk 
profiles from those of primary producers in the same value chains. This second window will also enable 
reflows from the Rural Enterprise Development Fund (REDF) to continue revolving beyond the close of REP, 
to benefit and improve the livelihoods of households and groups operating micro and small enterprises.  
The BFF will be estimated based on a demand survey and it will be grounded on and supported through 
business planning referred to in Subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2 and by outreach activities referred to in 
Subcomponent 1.3, including FBOs, women and youth groups. This will include demand for investments 
financing, inputs and labor for improved agricultural practices to enhance climate change resilience. The BFF 
will seek to leverage commercial funds and risk mitigation instruments that are currently not reaching 
AAFORD target groups. Compatibility and accessibility of other comparable funds will also be considered. 
Interest rates at the wholesale and retail levels will be negotiated through the multi-stakeholder platform 
established in Subcomponent 2.2, taking into consideration the supply-side sustainability and the demand-
side producers' reasonable returns on investment for poverty reduction, with the grant window available to 
help close gaps and incentivize the use of risk-mitigating instruments (especially agricultural insurance) 
needed to support loan portfolios for agricultural production.  
The BFF will be capitalized with an initial contribution from IFAD with the expectation of mobilizing 
additional funds from other external sources such as the Agri-Business Capital (ABC) Fund and the Green 
Climate Fund (GCF), expected to reach US$ 12-15 million. It will also be compatible with the REDF and REP’s 
Matching Grant Fund in order to facilitate government contribution of revolving reflows for the benefit of 
agricultural value chains and rural MSMEs on a sustained basis (about US$ 4-6 million expected). The BFF will 
utilize the existing disbursement structure of the credit line from the BoG through ARB Apex Bank to RCBs 
and non-bank PFIs, or directly to participating universal banks. The ARB Apex Bank shall manage the grant 
funds, as under REP. These arrangements will be reviewed and administrative arrangements will be put in 
place to ensure that BoG and/or ARB Apex Bank can continue to revolve the recovered funds beyond the end 
of the project, as an exit strategy (recognizing that funds will periodically need to be replenished to maintain 
their real value, as a consequence of the subsidized-pricing arrangements and loan losses). All PFIs must be 
licensed and meet minimum performance criteria.  
The first step will be for the ISU to develop operational manuals, including criteria for selecting PFIs, flow of 
funds, administrative procedures, etc. These will be adapted from the operational manuals for REDF and REP 
Matching Grants. The second step will be for the BOG and the ARB Apex Bank to open accounts to receive 
the funds mobilized for the BFF.  
Page 49 of 207 
Detailed description of the BFF and implementation mechanisms is presented below 
Overview 
The primary rationale underpinning the BFF is that financial markets presently are not accessible to 
smallholder agricultural producers.  Although smallholder farmers are the backbone of agricultural 
production and the key to improved livelihoods and income distribution in rural areas, their rates of return 
are low relative to prevailing interest rates on loans that might enable them to obtain improved inputs and 
apply good agricultural practices in order to increase their yields and marketable surpluses. Although there is 
substantial liquidity in Ghana’s financial system, it does not flow to smallholder agriculture when it is not 
profitable for financial intermediaries and when risks, uncertainty and loan losses are high. Although Rural 
and Community Banks’ mission is to serve their communities, their financial strength and sustainability are 
often too precarious to bear such risks and potential losses, especially when there is strong demand for 
credit at higher market rates for trading, MSMEs, school fees, and other household and business uses. 
Although there is a growing number of instruments to mitigate risks, such as insurance and guarantees, 
understanding of their functions is low and their costs are often high – aggravating the problem of loan costs 
in excess of returns on investment. AAFORD capacity-building of beneficiaries and intermediaries is intended 
to raise understanding and demand for credit; BFF is set up to address the supply side. 
AAFORD includes a Blended Finance Facility (BFF) that is intended to increase the supply of affordable 
financing for agricultural value chains for beneficiaries who do not have access to financial services or who 
are involved in activities along the value chains that participating financial institutions would not typically 
cover for the target groups from their own resources on their own. It is designed to leverage funding from 
participating financial institutions (PFIs) and from market-enhancing institutions that provide insurance, 
guarantees and other risk mitigation instruments, as well as beneficiaries’ contributions. It aims at making 
agricultural value chain financing more affordable through a combination of:  (i) wholesale funds at 
concessional rates lower than those available in the local market to participating financial institutions for on-
lending to targeted beneficiaries; and (ii) results-based incentives to buy down the cost of risk-mitigating 
instruments such as insurance, portfolio guarantees and warehouse receipts, and to offset direct costs and 
risks of expanding agricultural loan portfolios. The key beneficiaries are smallholder farmers, women and 
youth in the AAFORD areas and their associations, who may receive financing directly or indirectly via 
offtakers (nucleus farmers, processors, aggregators). The BFF will also have a window for lending to 
offtakers, input suppliers, transporters, MSMEs, and other actors in rural and agricultural value chains that 
involve the above target group.  
The objective of BFF is to overcome barriers to the accessibility of financial markets to agricultural producers 
and value chain actors by bridging the gap between their rates of return and the cost of funds available to 
them. This will be done both by lowering the cost of loan funds and by grants to share some of the costs of 
developing and mitigating the risks of agricultural loan portfolios. This is intended to minimize risk premiums 
that would otherwise exacerbate the cost of borrowing. An important reason for including a grant 
Page 50 of 207 
instrument is that lessons of experience show that attempts to lower interest rates by providing wholesale 
funds at a concessional rate and mandating a fixed spread for retail FIs inevitably results in low take-up rates 
when FIs find that their costs and loan losses exceed that spread. In the absence of complementary 
incentives that offset costs and losses, the desired result of increased lending is not likely to be achieved. 
Key financial principles to be considered in costing BFF revolving funds include: (i) maintain the value of 
principal in real terms through a wholesale rate sufficient to offset inflation, management expenses, and 
losses; (ii) allow retail PFIs sufficient spread between wholesale and retail rates to cover their operating 
costs, risk premium to cover expected loan losses, and a minimal profit margin to incentivize utilization of 
the funds; 37 and (iii) charge retail rates that are low enough to be affordable to targeted clients who are 
creditworthy but not so low as to attract clients whose rates of return on investment fall below minimum 
acceptable levels. However, it is recognized that these three principles may not be mutually compatible in a 
particular environment – in particular, with respect to agricultural production lending in Ghana. This will be 
dealt with through a combination of: (a) results-based subsidies to help close the gap; (b) negotiations to set 
both wholesale and retail rates according to the conditions of both the type of borrower and the type of FI; 
and (c) readiness to lower wholesale rates below sustainability, if necessary to achieve affordability 
objectives. 
Key principles underlying subsidies are that they should be targeted, transparent, budgeted and capped. The 
drawback of concessional interest rates is that the subsidy element is hidden. This will be partially offset by 
including some transparent results-based subsidies to help leverage counterpart funds from FIs (blended 
finance), and, eventually, through the need to budget for replenishing the revolving fund as it decapitalizes. 
Implementation 
The BFF will be implemented using the same methodology as the Rural Enterprises Programme (REP) for its 
concessional credit and matching grant funds. This is in order to make it easy to set up, and also to establish 
a suitable vehicle for continuing to revolve the reflows from loans in the Rural Enterprise Development Fund 
(REDF) after the close of REP (constituting government contribution, since it would be from recovered 
funds). At the same time, AAFORD will review these arrangements with a view to seeing what modifications 
might enhance the sustainability and administration of the funds going forward. 
37 Arbitrary spreads are more problematic for agriculture than for loans to traders and small enterprises 
because agricultural production loans are usually “bullet” loans with a single repayment at the end, so that 
the nominal rate is also the effective annual percentage rate (APR); whereas interest on microfinance loans 
is usually levied on a flat rate basis on the initial loan amount, but monthly repayments mean that the 
effective APR (and thus return to the PFI relative to the loan balance outstanding) is higher and can offset 
higher costs. 
Page 51 of 207 
The BFF credit funds will be held in an account in BoG, and disbursed to microfinance institutions (RCBs, 
S&Ls, credit unions, NGOs) through the ARB Apex Bank and to universal banks directly, upon instruction from 
the AAFORD ISU. All PFIs must be licensed and meet minimum performance criteria (specified in the PIM).  
The BFF will have two windows for concessional credit: (1) agricultural production; (2) other rural and 
agricultural value chain actors. These will have different negotiated interest rates to account for differences 
in the relative returns on investment, cost of funds, costs of loan handling, repayment schedules (bullet vs. 
monthly), and risks. Window 2 will initially be available to offtakers and agricultural value chain actors in 
AAFORD areas. When REDF reflows are incorporated, these will be available nationwide to MSMEs that meet 
current REDF criteria. 
A third window for results-based incentives will adapt the REP Matching Grant Fund methodology, managed 
by ARB Apex Bank, to buy down the cost of market-enhancing and risk mitigation instruments such as 
warehousing, insurance and guarantees, and to share some of the costs and losses identified by PFIs as 
barriers to increasing their agricultural loan portfolios (in order to incentivize them to use the funds in 
Window 1). 
In both cases (loans and grants), the ARB Apex Bank receives a fee upon disbursement (to be negotiated) to 
cover its costs of handling, monitoring and quarterly reporting. 
Rationale: Leveraging Finance for Agricultural Value Chains 
Targeting smallholder farmers poses a particular challenge because they have difficulty meeting the 
conditions for receiving loans directly from PFIs, even through their FBOs. Although their FBOs may be 
registered as associations, banks usually require corporate status for such entities. More problematic is 
meeting PFIs’ security (collateral) requirements —which may exceed the minimum to comply with BoG 
prudential regulations. Also important is the risk factor: in the case of default, PFIs prefer to deal with 
offtakers, who can better enforce (or reschedule) payment through their relationships with their outgrower 
farmers. Thus it is assumed that the majority of loans will be secured by and processed through offtakers on 
behalf of their outgrowers. The loans may actually be designated to the FBOs or even individual outgrowers, 
but purchase of inputs and provision of services is provided by the offtaker using the funds, with the debt 
collected at harvest time when the farmers supply their output. 
These relationships are portrayed in Figure 1. In some cases, community-level FBOs may be affiliated into a 
larger, secondary FBO that is better able to deal with offtakers and PFIs.  
Figure 1 also portrays the role of risk-sharing instruments such as guarantees and insurance in enabling deals 
to take place that would otherwise be considered to have too much downside risk. Unlike enterprise lending, 
where defaults are likely to be random among clients (“idiosyncratic risks”), agricultural production loans 
bear substantial systemic risk (factors such as drought affect all farmers in the area). In particular, these 
include guarantees through the Ghana Incentive-based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL; 
represented in Figure 1) and the Rural Development Fund (RDF, set up by Danida), and agricultural insurance 
through the Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool (GAIP). Likewise, the Ghana Commodity Exchange (GCX) has 
Page 52 of 207 
been set up to provide warehousing and trading services that can facilitate transactions by offtakers. Despite 
the advent of these instruments, their usage has been limited, and experience has shown that banks and 
other FSPs continue to charge very high interest rates as perceived by the smallholder producers. The risk-
sharing and mitigation schemes have not contributed significantly to overcoming the risk barrier to 
agricultural lending, let alone to reducing interest rates, although they have helped to quantify the risk 
premium that would have to be added to the base on-lending interest rate. 
AAFORD is designed to help leverage such instruments for loan portfolios that benefit smallholder farmers. 
First, it provides TA to help these institutions adapt and market their products to smallholder farmers and 
their offtakers. Second, it has results-based grant funds under Window 3 to help buy down the costs of these 
instruments – which would otherwise add to the already high interest costs of loans. It is proposed initially to 
cover 70 per cent of the cost of insurance and guarantees for agricultural production loan portfolios, 
consistent with the current methodology under GASIP. Thus, as a supplement to Step 4 in Figure 1, the PFI 
would apply on behalf of the client to BFF for a matching grant to share in the cost of the guarantee and/or 
agricultural insurance. 
Figure 1: Flow Chart for Agricultural Financing  
Page 53 of 207 
These incentives for PFIs and their borrowers to utilize guarantees and insurance are intended to put the BFF 
in a better position to mobilize funds from international private and development-oriented sources (such as 
the ABC Fund) to be blended with lower-cost funds from IFAD, GoG and others (such as Green Climate Fund). 
This would enable BFF to use the funds initially available under AAFORD to leverage additional resources 
from international investors with social and development objectives. Although such financiers may price 
loans below fully commercial rates, their rates nevertheless tend to be higher than what can be absorbed 
through on-lending to smallholder famers. AAFORD addresses such concerns by: (i) blending those funds 
with lower-cost Project funds to achieve a wholesale rate that is more affordable; and (ii) bringing in 
guarantees and insurance to mitigate the risk profile that might otherwise deter such investors. In addition, 
these instruments serve to help secure loans, consistent with BoG regulations for portfolio quality.  
Sector review and demand survey 
Because a market for loans to smallholder farmers essentially does not exist, the design of the BFF has been 
based on certain assumptions (drawn from experience) that need to be validated. Although lowering the 
interest on loans would in principle encourage increased demand from farmers, their risk aversion to loans 
may limit the actual extent of that demand. More importantly, experience has shown that attempts to lower 
interest rates by mandating a maximum spread of retail over wholesale rates for a line of credit tends to 
stifle demand from the financial intermediaries by making agricultural loans unprofitable – as well as risky. 
Furthermore, recent measures by BoG to raise minimum capital requirements, consolidate or de-license 
insolvent FIs, and strengthen prudential regulation may have heightened the reluctance of FIs to incur the 
actual and perceived risks of lending to agricultural value chains.  
To provide a sound empirical basis for implementing the BFF, AAFORD will undertake a review and sample 
survey of the agricultural finance sector to take stock of: (i) the current status and demand for existing lines 
of credit for agricultural value chains, in particular the Outgrower and Value Chain Fund (OVCF), the Rural 
Development Fund (RDF), and the Rural Enterprise Development Fund (REDF); (ii) the current status of the 
different types of FIs that are potential partners for AAFORD (especially Rural and Community Banks, 
universal banks, credit unions, and savings and loan companies) and their understanding of and readiness to 
use instruments such as guarantees, insurance and warehouse receipts; and (iii) lessons of experience with 
respect to concessional lines of credit, mandated interest rate spreads, matching grants, insurance and 
guarantees. 
The demand survey will help in determining the allocation of credit funds between Windows 1 and 2, i.e., 
adjusting the arbitrary allocation made at design stage. The relative costs of the different sources of funds 
should also be considered, with more expensive funds allocated to Window 2 to the extent consistent with 
the objectives of the different funders. 
Page 54 of 207 
This review will include an assessment of the different channels through which additional funds for 
agricultural value chains might flow. Whereas RCBs are best positioned to receive funds through the ARB 
Apex Bank (even if the fund itself may be lodged in BoG), universal banks may be in a position to access 
funds directly from private international sources. 
Steps for Establishing BFF 
To prepare for administratively launching the BFF, the AAFORD Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will first 
prepare draft operational manuals, drawing on those for the REDF and Matching Grant programmes under 
the Rural Enterprises Programme (REP).  
Accounts 
BoG will then open accounts to receive funds – both in foreign exchange (for externally-provided funds) and 
in Cedis (for the GoG contribution of REDF funds at the end of REP, as well as for BFF reflows). If some 
funders have restrictions against investing contributed funds (to generate revenues that would help cross-
subsidize the low wholesale rate to be offered), it may be necessary to set up separate foreign exchange 
accounts for different sources of funds. The ARB Apex Bank will also open (i) an account to receive funds 
from BoG that have been approved for disbursement to RCBs and other microfinance institutions (MFIs) that 
it will handle; and (ii) an account for results-based grants (Window 3).  
Funding 
Meanwhile, the PCU should be following up to formalize agreements with external funders that have been 
identified as potential contributors (in addition to IFAD and GoG). Those funders that are able to advance 
funds would then be requested to do so. For those whose methodology is refinancing of designated 
portfolios, it may be necessary first to build up a pipeline of proposals as a basis for estimating 
disbursements to be (re)financed over the next quarter in response to disbursement requests. 
PFIs 
The PCU will issue a request for expressions of interest by financial institutions that wish to partner with 
AAFORD, to be able to access the BFF, as well as to receive capacity-building support if they are serving 
beneficiaries in the AAFORD Project areas. Criteria for selection would include: 
Page 55 of 207 
Licensed and meets minimum capital, reporting and regulatory requirements of BoG; 
For RCBs, ARB Apex Bank “Satisfactory” rating or above (however, “Fair” RCBs may be considered if they are 
the only formal FI serving a particular AAFORD cluster); 
Serving or interested in serving AAFORD areas and target groups (smallholders, women, youth). 
Contributions 
The BFF is intended to be flexible enough to mobilize funding from different sources, including international 
private impact investors. Core funding from the AAFORD Project and GoG (reflows from REDF) available at a 
nominal cost makes it possible to absorb private funds at a higher (but still development-oriented) rate and 
blend them to meet the targeted low wholesale rate for on-lending to smallholder farmers for agricultural 
production. In  particular, co-funding is being sought from The Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Agri-
Business Capital (ABC) Fund. 
For investments (whether involving equipment38 or just working capital) financed through BFF, the expected 
contributions as a share of the total investment amount are: 
Borrower:  
10% (so loan is for 90% of investment cost) 
PFI:  
BFF: 
18% (20% of loan amount) 
72% (80% of loan amount) 
Pricing and Terms 
Given the above shares, in calculating the average cost of funds to the PFI for on-lending, it will be necessary 
to include the true marginal cost of the funds provided by the PFI, as well as the rate charged on the funds 
from BFF. For RCBs, the cost of borrowing from the ARB Apex Bank is presently at 24%. Thus, even if BFF 
charges 0% on its contribution, the blended cost of funds to the PFI would be 4.8%. If the BFF charges 10%, 
the blended cost of funds would be 12.8%. This is the base rate on which the PFI’s markup should be 
calculated (not just the rate from the BFF). Thus the BFF would have to charge no more than 4% to keep the 
blended cost of funds to the PFI below 8%. Since the wholesale interest rate to PFIs is expected to be lower 
for Window 1 than Window 2 (serving commercial farms, offtakers, input suppliers, and MSMEs with a 
38 Investments involving equipment or other capital investment may be eligible for matching grants from 
REP or GASIP to reduce the amount that has to be borrowed. 
Page 56 of 207 
higher ability to pay), it may make sense to allocate higher cost funds to Window 2, if compatible with the 
objectives of the investors. 
The average cost of funds to BFF must also be considered. While funds from GoG (whether borrowed from 
IFAD or recycled from REDF) may be made available at a negligible (or even 0%) interest rate, those from 
external sources may come at a cost. In order to ensure that international investors that can earn a 
satisfactory return on their contributions, the weighted cost of all the loan funds in BFF must be considered 
in calculating the blended cost. That is, if half the resources come from international sources at 8% interest 
and the other half from IFAD and GoG at 2%, the blended wholesale rate to PFIs would be 5%. When funds 
are disbursed, they presumably would be charged proportionately to the different sources of funds. 
The spread that the PFI adds to the wholesale rate should be sufficient to cover: 
Operating costs (for RCBs, estimated to be on the order of 14-20% of loan portfolios); 39 
Loan loss rate: normally 3-5%; expected to be higher on average (over several years) for agricultural loan 
portfolios  
Profit margin: 3-5%; 
Risk premium. 
Uncertainty about the degree of risk is one reason FIs have been reluctant to lend for agriculture. Insurance 
and guarantees have helped to put a price on mitigating that risk by sharing in losses. The costs of risk-
mitigating instruments for agriculture presently are: 
Agricultural production insurance (50% coverage): 7-8% (GAIP) 
Portfolio guarantee (50% coverage): 1% (GIRSAL; internally subsidized rate) 
All of these costs would add a total of about 33% (28-39%) to the cost of funds if both insurance and 
guarantees are used – comparable to existing retail rates (ignoring the cost of funds), but well above rates 
that are considered affordable for agricultural value chains, especially production. BFF's onlending rates will 
be negotiated through the stakeholder platforms that are supported by AAFORD Subcomponent 2.2 to make 
sure the repayment burden on production loans for semi-subsistence smallholder farmers is minimized and 
provides for reasonable returns on their production activity. 
The BFF grant window would buy down 70% of the cost of insurance and guarantees, so that they would add 
no more than 1-3% to costs.  
Even if RCBs are willing to accept a zero profit margin in order to fulfill their mandate to serve their rural 
agricultural constituencies, the costs of providing credit would still need further subsidy to be both 
affordable to the targeted borrowers and not impose a net cost on the PFI. For this reason, BFF Window 3 
will include the option to share in direct costs to PFIs of developing agricultural loan portfolios. The 
39 GHAMFIN, Performance Monitoring and Benchmarkings of Microfinance Institutions in Ghana: Trends in 
the Industry during the 2000s, Accra: GHAMFIN, 2014,  Table 3.11. Nevertheless, some RCBs are indicating 
that they add only 7-9% for operating costs. 
Page 57 of 207 
parameters for doing so, as well as the considerations and determinants of interest rates and spreads, are to 
be discussed and negotiated in stakeholder Forums to be held by AAFORD. 
Especially for Window 1, PFIs are expected to offer flexible loan products that can be adapted to the cash 
flow of the borrowers; i.e., the loan duration and grace period should be consistent with the crop cycle. TA 
support is provided under AAFORD Subcomponent 1.2 for the purpose of developing suitable products, 
especially for RCBs.  
Sustainability 
The BFF is not expected to fully retain its value in real terms over time without periodic replenishment, 
because funds will be priced below the rate of inflation in order to make retail interest rates affordable to 
smallholder farmers. In addition, loan losses and management fees will tend to diminish the reflows. 
Nonetheless, repayments during the Project period (and after) will be substantial, and it is critical to ensure 
that funds will continue to revolve. Thus a review will be undertaken of the administrative arrangements 
under BFF and REDF to make recommendations on how they might be utilized or amended to ensure that 
the funds continue to revolve on more or less the same terms. The objective is to institutionalize the BFF and 
set up for periodic replenishment, if the supply of funds dwindles below demand. The review would also 
assess the best mechanism for accessing additional international private funds, including what would be 
required for ARB Apex Bank to be able to access such funds directly and manage them, and the current 
capability of the Apex Bank to do so. 
This review is to be undertaken early in AAFORD, before the end of REP, so that formal arrangements can be 
concluded for GoG to transfer the balance and future reflows of REDF funds into the BFF, as well as for 
similar arrangements at the end of AAFORD. 
Flow of Funds: Disbursement and Recovery 
Once PFIs have been selected, they would work with AAFORD ZCUs, Youth Community Facilitators, Youth 
Institutional Interns, and Business Advisory and Resource Centres (BACs/BRCs) to develop a pipeline of 
proposed loans for agricultural production (Window 1) and for offtakers and rural MSMEs (Window 2) in the 
AAFORD areas. On the basis of loans approved or being requested, the PFIs should submit at least a month in 
advance of each quarter estimates of the amounts of funds to be (i) committed and (ii) disbursed during the 
next quarter.  
The flow of funds from BFF to PFIs and on to their clients, as well as reflows from clients to PFIs back to BFF, 
is depicted in Figure 2. The PFIs submit a package of loan proposals (normally on a quarterly basis) to ARB 
Apex Bank (or directly to BoG, in the case of universal banks) for review for consistency with BFF criteria, and 
authorization to disburse is sought from the ISU. When approved, the funds are disbursed by BoG to ARB 
Apex Bank for forwarding to its member RCBs or other participating MFIs (or directly by BoG to universal 
Page 58 of 207 
banks). These PFIs then disburse to the borrower of record (for Window 1, this will usually be an offtaker, 
who will provide inputs and services to the associated outgrowers, who are the ultimate beneficiaries of the 
loan.  
Disbursements from BFF would normally be charged proportionately across the sources of funds for each 
Window. 
Loan recoveries then flow back in the same way. In the case of RCBs, ARB Apex Bank deducts the PFI’s 
repayment obligation from its account with Apex Bank, regardless of actual repayment performance of the 
borrowers. This can cause liquidity problems for RCBs, and it is imperative that ARB Apex Bank monitor 
portfolio at risk (PAR) at the level of the PFIs.  
BFF Flow of Funds 
Page 59 of 207 
Subcomponent 2.2: Enhancing the environment for market access: The expected outcomes are the 
replication of success cases based on lessons learned, by engaging stakeholders in a learning process and a 
sustainable policy dialogue, enabling improvements in the overall framework to address the current 
weaknesses that inhibit public and private investment in agricultural value chains. Conducive policy dialogue, 
forums and stakeholder engagement are needed to improve the quality and efficiency of regulatory systems 
that govern access to key agricultural factors, particularly for smallholder farmers. Studies of lessons learned 
will provide a basis for replicating and scaling up successful models, and will help support improvement of 
the policy and legal framework.  
Activities: 
Page 60 of 207 
Collaboration with other IFAD programmes, Development Partners and Apex organizations for knowledge-
sharing (informed by studies; see below), policy dialogue and replication. Annual Policy Forums will address 
issues such as: affordability of agricultural production financing and risk mitigation instruments; reducing 
production costs and enhancing productivity and returns on investment for smallholder producers 
(especially women and youths); development of market-enhancing institutions; development and status of 
FBOs, women and youth as clients of PFIs and intermediaries; warehouse receipts and their acceptability as 
collateral; identification of policy gaps of green agricultural financing in Ghana; etc. This will be implemented 
in partnership with an agency able to sustain the activity beyond AAFORD. 
Lessons learned for replication: Studies will be undertaken to document lessons learned with respect to 
directed concessional and/or blended lines of credit to reduce producers’ repayment burden, risk mitigation 
instruments, climate-resilient practices, and other lessons of experience to facilitate replication in other 
projects (e.g., with respect to making agricultural insurance more affordable; ensuring that some of the 
benefits of portfolio guarantees and insurance are passed on to smallholder farmers; minimizing adverse 
effects of climate change; inclusion of women and youth; etc.). The findings will feed into the other activities 
of this Subcomponent 2.2.  
Enabling policy environment: This activity will involve development of the overall policy and the strategic 
and legal framework for expanding access of smallholders and other agricultural value chain actors to 
financial services. Drawing on the results of the above stakeholder consultations and studies, AAFORD will 
facilitate the updating of the agricultural finance strategy and action plan; implementation of the legal 
framework for warehouse receipts; and other relevant policy, regulatory and legal issues that arise.   
The immediate policy issue to be addressed is legislation to formally recognize and specify the terms of 
warehouse receipts, which at present come under general contract law and are not widely understood or 
utilized. AAFORD also proposes to take the lead in engaging stakeholders to update the 2008 Agricultural 
Finance Strategy and Action Plan, recognizing that significant developments have taken place in the last 
decade (especially regarding various risk mitigation instruments, FBOs, and District-level coordinating 
mechanisms) and that there is a need for greater coordination of policies and approaches governing various 
government and donor-supported projects. In addition, AAFORD would support an annual Policy Forum that 
would identify additional policy and legal issues that need to be addressed, and could potentially be 
supported under Subcomponent 2.2, in partnership with other programmes. 
Component 3: Project Implementation Support 
Details of all implementation support aspects is presented in section 4.K.a 
Chapter 4: Programme implementation structure and responsibilities 
Project Management, Implementation Structure and Staffing 
Page 61 of 207 
Project management and coordination  
The Project’s Lead Implementing Agency (PLIA) will be the Ministry of Finance (MoF) with close collaboration 
with the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA), and also the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI). These 
ministries will form the core of an inter-ministerial platform by ministers to provide policy guidance and 
consistency with government’s development agenda. It shall have an annual meeting cycle. 
AAFORD’s implementation will rely on a mix of community, public and private sector and technical service 
providers. Beneficiary households will play a lead role through CIs (farmer-based organizations, NGOs, 
women and youth groups, savings and credit groups, among others). 
Project Steering Committee (PSC): A high-ranking inter-ministerial Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be 
set up for overall policy decisions and guidance at the central level. The Minister of Finance will designate 
the Chair of the PSC and an alternate. The committee will include representatives of all relevant ministries 
and agencies (MoF, MoFA, MoTI and representatives from the regions of implementation), and both public 
(representing financial sector intermediaries and agricultural market intermediaries) and private sector 
institutions and non-state actors’ representatives (such as NGOs), those representing financial sector 
intermediaries and agricultural market intermediaries), and representatives of youth and women who 
operate along the relevant agricultural value chains as practitioners or advocates. The PSC will meet at least 
twice a year, and as necessary. The main responsibilities of the steering committee will include: (i) providing 
strategic and policy guidance to the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) for implementation and coordination of 
activities; (ii) ensuring overall conformity with government policies and strategies; (iii) reviewing project 
progress and performance; (iv) approving the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB); (v) resolving 
implementation problems or conflicts; and (iv) assisting the ISU in obtaining government assistance and 
contributions to the project when needed. An PSC Technical Committee (PTC) will be constituted at the 
central level comprising members drawn from the PSC. The PTC will serve as a standing committee 
empowered to meet whenever needed to resolve implementation bottlenecks that cannot be settled at the 
zonal level and requires immediate attention.  
Zonal Platfolrms: A zonal Platform (ZP) will be formed in each AAFORD implementation zone to oversee 
planning, review progress, facilitate linkages between project stakeholders and remove bottlenecks affecting 
smooth implementation. The ZP will comprise representatives of MoFA (Regional Agricultural Development 
Units (RADUs), MoTI, district assembles, financial institutions, agricultural market intermediaries such as 
offtakers (aggregators, processors and nucleus farmers), input suppliers and representatives of farmer 
groups and civil society organisations, among others in the private sector. The ZSC will meet at least twice a 
year, and as necessary. The ZP will constitute a Zonal Technical Committee (ZTC) from within the ZP 
members to meet whenever needed to resolve any project implementation bottlenecks encountered within 
the Zones. 
Implementation structure: A two-level organisational structure will be established. The Implementation 
Support Unit (ISU) located in Sunyani and two Zonal Coordination Units (ZCUs); one in Sunyani and the other 
in Tamale. Each ZCU will be roughly anchored in the jurisdiction of the former Brong-Ahafo and Northern 
Page 62 of 207 
regions. These zonal offices will represent the coordinating centres for the operational areas of AAFORD. 
(Refer to PIM for organizational structure, implementation modalities and procedures). 
ISU: The ISU will be established in an implementation area of AAFORD to ensure effective implementation. 
Within the current targeting framework, the ISU is envisaged to be located in Sunyani. All ISU staff members 
will be competitively recruited from the professional labour market and will work on a full-time basis for 
managing AAFORD. The coordination unit will operate within the strategic framework of the Financial 
Services Division of the MoF40, which will provide oversight and strategic direction to the ISU. A Central 
Project Coordinator (CPC) will head the ISU’s day to day operations. The CPC will be assisted by a central 
technical support team and a central operations support team with the following composition. Wherever 
possible or relevant, synergies with other Project Units could be brought in subject to how complex such 
arrangement would be, especially in cases where the units are in different line ministeries.  
Central technical support team: The central technical support team will comprise the following officers: (i) 
Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (SMES), (ii) Senior Rural Finance Specialist (SRFS), (iii) Community 
Development, Livelihood and Gender Specialist (CGS), and (iv) Climate and Environment Specialist (CES). This 
team will carry out overall technical planning, implementation oversight and technical guidance to the Zones 
for AAFORD implementation.  
Central operations support team: The team will consist of (i) Senior Finance Manager (SFM), (ii) Project 
Accountant (PA), (iii) Accounts Assistant (AA) (iv) Procurement Officer (PO), and (v) Procurement Assistant 
(PrA). This team will perform financial planning, management and control; project procurement, contracting 
and contract management and staff evaluation. It will monitor, record and report community and 
government levels.  
Zonal Coordination Unit (ZCU): The ZCUs will be responsible for the zonal operations of AAFORD and will be 
staffed by professionals competitively recruited to manage AAFORD at the ZPCU level on a full-time basis. 
The zonal team will comprise (i) ZCU Project Coordinator (ZPC), (ii) Field Implementation Supervisor (FIS), (iii) 
Monitoring and Evaluation Focal Point (MEF).  
IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints with respect 
to alleged sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA). More information can be obtained from IFAD webpage: 
https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40738506. 
40 Refer to PIM (Annex 10) for details 
Page 63 of 207 
AAFORD Organogram 
Page 64 of 207 
Page 65 of 207 
IMPLEMENTING ENTITY→↓COLLABORATING MINISTRIES→←OVERSIGHT→CPC→Technical SupportOperations Support(i)SMES(i) SFM(ii) SRFS(ii) PA(iii) CGS(iii) AA(iv) CES(iv) PO(v) PA↓→Zonal Coordination Unit (ZCU - Sunyani)Zonal Coordination Unit (ZCU - Tamale)(i) ZPC(i) ZPC(ii) FIS(ii) FIS(iii) MEF(iii) MEFFinancial IntermediariesAg. Market Intermediaries→GIRSAL/GCX/GAIP/Banks↔Offtakers (Aggregators/Nucleus Farmers/Processor)←Agric ProductionAgribusiness→Farmers/FBOs/MSMEs/Youth/Women/Savings & credit groups/etc↔Cooperatives/MSMEs/Input suppliers/Post-farmgate/Youth/Women/savings and credit groups/etc←AAFORD ORGANOGRAMMinistry of FinanceMinistry of Food & Agriculture/Ministry of Trade & IndustryProject  Steering Committee (PSC)Implementation Support Unit (ISU)↓↓(i) Central Project Coordinator (CPC), (ii) Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (SMES), (iii) Senior Rural Finance Specialist (SRFS), (iv) Community Development, Livelihood and Gender Specialist (CGS), (v) Climate and Environment Specialist (CES), (vi) Senior Finance Manager (SFM), (vii) Project Accountant (PA), (viii) Accounts Assistant (AA) (ix) Procurement Officer (PO), and (x) Procurement Assistant (PA), (xi) ZPCU Project Coordinator (ZPC), (xii) Field Implementation Supervisor (FIS), (xiii) Monitoring and Evaluation Focal Point (MEF)MacroPolicy/Legal/RegulatoryMANAGEMENT STRUCTUREBENEFICIARIES (Community Level)MicroTA/Capacity devt/FundingBENEFICIARIES (Intermediaries)MesoTA/Capacity devt/Funding 
Community level implementation: The ZCUs will carry out project implementation at the community level 
with the support of partners in the public and private sectors, such as service providers and NGOs. AAFORD 
will train (through ToTs) a pool of Youth Community Facilitators (YCFs) in each community cluster. Based on 
needs, the partner CIs will engage the YCFs to support AAFORD implementation at the community level and 
pay allowances supported by AAFORD. Additionally, AAFORD will train young graduates in skills identified by 
partner marketing and financial institutions as relevant to increasing their outreach to smallholder farmers 
(especially women and youth), offtakers and other agricultural value chain actors. The trained graduates will 
be supported as (Youth Institutional Interns) in the PFIs, offtaker institutions and in the BACs/BRCs in 
collaboration with REP. AAFORD will then deploy one YIIs in each community cluster to support project 
implementation in coordination with the partner CIs and the YCFs. The YIIs will be capacitated through 
training and technical assistance support, paid allowances, and provided with YII certificate at the end of the 
project. The support to the YIIs will contribute to IFAD’s youth inclusion priority. After their engagement with 
AAFORD the YIIs can join the CIs to continue community-level services, become independent service 
providers, join agribusinesses and enterprises in the project area or be engaged as agents or full time staff of 
financial intermediaries in their delivery of services to value chain actors. The ZCU with the support of SPs, 
YIIs and YCFs will facilitate the development of CODPs in the community/clusters on an annual basis through 
participation of all the implementing partners. The ZCU will monitor and ensure that implementation is 
coordinated in each community according to these plans leading to harmonisation of resources and 
interconnectivity of the components. 
Institutional development and expected outcomes through the use of various service providers: Different 
types of service providers will be used at various levels to develop targeted institutions. At the macro level, 
technical service providers will support ministries, departments and agencies to engage in a constructive 
consultative process with stakeholders leading to the development of agricultural sector policies and closing 
legal and regulatory gaps as necessary to advance an enabling environment for efficient financial and 
agricultural markets. At this level, support might also be required for sensitization on the new policies and 
regulations to promote their adoption and use in a sustainable manner. AGRA, as an AAFORD co-financing 
partner will participate in the implementation of the policy related interventions in collaboration with 
service providers, preferably partners and/or NGOs, with experience in policy development and advocacy 
and a history of practical engagement of communities targeted by AAFORD 
The meso level has institutions such as agricultural market intermediaries and support services such as 
offtakers, input suppliers, financial intermediaries (such as Rural and Community Banks), and market-
enhancing institutions (such as GIRSAL, GCX and GAIP). These institutions will be strengthened with capacity 
building interventions from technical and training services providers to (i) develop and market the services of 
agricultural market intermediaries towards improving the production, productivity, quality and market 
accessibility; and (ii) align the product offerings of financial intermediaries to improve access to their services 
by target beneficiaries along the agricultural value chain, especially those involved in production and 
women, youth and vulnerable groups. The service providers in this category include public institutions such 
as the business advisory and resource centres (BACs/BRCs) and private sector operators, including NGOs. 
Page 66 of 207 
The community or micro level has the primary beneficiaries of AAFORD; the households and micro, small and 
medium enterprises who are active participants along the agricultural value chain. AAFORD will engage 
competent service providers which community development experiences (private sector, NGOs) to 
implement community level activities in coordination with YCF and YIIs. 
Component wise roles and responsibilities: The component wise roles and responsibilities of the project staff 
are presented below; 
Components 
Activity 
Lead responsibility  
Field delivery by 
Component 1: Technical Assistance for Development of Sustainable and  Climate Resilience 
Identification of key technical 
partners and service providers 
Senior Rural Finance 
Specialist (SRFS) 
Sub-component 1.1: 
Develop capacities 
of target groups to 
expand marketable 
surpluses 
Identification and needs 
assessment of community 
clusters 
Mobilization of youth 
community facilitators 
Community Development, 
Livelihood and Gender 
Specialist (CGS) & Climate 
and Environment 
Specialist (CES) 
Community Development, 
Livelihood and Gender 
Specialist (CGS) 
Development of Community 
Outreach Development Plan 
(CODP) 
Community Development, 
Livelihood and Gender 
Specialist (CGS) 
Capacity building of target 
groups 
Senior Rural Finance 
Specialist (SRFS) & Climate 
and Environment 
Specialist (CES) 
Field coordinators 
supported by Capacity 
Building Service 
Providers (CBSPs) and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs & YIIs). 
Field coordinators (FISs) 
supported by CBSPs and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs). 
Field coordinators (FISs) 
supported by CBSPs and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs). 
Field coordinators (FISs) 
supported by CBSPs and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs). 
Capacity Building Service 
Providers (CBSPs) 
supported by field 
coordinators (FIs) and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs & YIIs). Also, MoFA 
Page 67 of 207 
Support to community 
institutions (CIs) 
Community Development, 
Livelihood and Gender 
Specialist (CGS) & Climate 
and Environment 
Specialist (CES) 
Community-based savings and 
credit groups (CSCGs) for 
women and youth 
Community Development, 
Livelihood and Gender 
Specialist (CGS) 
Mapping, needs assessment 
and selection of partner 
institutions 
Sub-component 1.2:  
Capacity building of 
institutional 
partners and 
intermediaries 
Senior Rural Finance 
Specialist (SRFS) & Climate 
and Environment 
Specialist (CES) 
Development of Outreach and 
Linkage Business Plans (OLBP) 
Senior Rural Finance 
Specialist (SRFS) & Climate 
and Environment 
Specialist (CES) 
Capacity-building of selected 
partner intermediaries 
Senior Rural Finance 
Specialist (SRFS) & Climate 
and Environment 
Specialist (CES) 
Youth Institutional Internship 
(YII) Programme 
Senior Rural Finance 
Specialist (SRFS) & Climate 
and Environment 
Specialist (CES) 
extension services unit 
and REP BACs/BRCs. 
Field coordinators (FISs) 
supported by CBSPs and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs). 
Field coordinators 
supported by CBSPs and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs). 
Field coordinators 
supported by Capacity 
Building Service 
Providers (CBSPs) and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs & YIIs). Also, REP 
BACs/BRCs. 
Field coordinators 
supported by Capacity 
Building Service 
Providers (CBSPs) and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs & YIIs). Also, REP 
BACs/BRCs. 
Capacity Building Service 
Providers (CBSPs) 
supported by field 
coordinators (FIs) and 
community facilitators 
(YCFs & YIIs).  
Capacity Building Service 
Providers (CBSPs)/field 
coordinators 
(FIs)/community 
facilitators (YCFs). 
Cluster Linkage Problem-
solving 
Youth Community 
Facilitators (YCFs) & 
YCFs with support from 
CBSPs and YCFs. 
Page 68 of 207 
Climate and Environment 
Specialist (CES) 
Senior Rural Finance 
Specialist (SRFS) 
Sub-component 1.3:  
Outreach of financial and 
agricultural services 
Capacity building of 
institutional 
partners and 
intermediaries 
Component 2: Expanding affordable finance in a conducive environment 
Establishment and operation 
of Blended Finance Facility 
Senior Rural Finance 
Specialist (SRFS) 
Sub-component 2.1:  
Expanding 
affordable finance in 
a conducive 
environment 
Bank of Ghana/ARB apex 
Bank/Field facilitators 
(YCFs, 
YIIs)/Consultants/REP 
BACs and BRCs. 
Bank of Ghana/ARB apex 
Bank/Field facilitators 
(YCFs, 
YIIs)/Consultants/REP 
BACs and BRCs. 
Sub-component 2.2:  
Enhancing the environment 
for market access 
Central Programme 
Coordinator 
Partners/Consultants 
Policy dialogue 
Planning and budgeting 
As far as the day-to-day implementation of AAFORD is concerned, an approved Annual Work Plan and 
Budget (AWPB) will be the most important document in the project, and the principal guide on what to do 
and how to use resources. The AWPB will represent a commitment of project managers and implementing 
partners to carry out a set of activities, produce specific outputs and achieve certain targets. At inception, 
the Logical Framework (project strategy) will be reviewed and validated in a start-up workshop with the 
participation of representatives from all stakeholder groups. This review will help the relevant stakeholders 
to have a clear appreciation of the project strategy as an important aspect of the planning process.  
In order to make planning more goal-oriented, the AWPB for each year in the life of the project will be 
prepared on the basis of the validated Logical Framework. All planned interventions would be implemented 
through an approved AWPB, which will be the primary source of input and output indicators.  Annual work 
plans will specify a detailed description and schedule of activities to be undertaken with implementation 
responsibilities, required inputs, expected outputs, performance indicators and corresponding targets.  The 
AWPB shall also include a procurement plan and a financing plan. Partners involved in the implementation of 
the various components of the project will be responsible for preparing the required work plans and budget 
according to an agreed format. The Implementation Support Unit(ISU) and Zonal Coordination Units (ZCUs) 
will ensure overall coordination and efficiency of the planning process. The ISU will also monitor efficiency of 
targeting, poverty focus, gender focus and youth focus. 
Page 69 of 207 
The work planning process and timelines 
The quality of the annual planning process that leads to an AWPB will greatly influence the quality of 
implementation and project results. There will therefore be a creative planning process to identify the best 
way to achieve project objectives and the most efficient way to use project resources from year to year. The 
AWPB for each year will be prepared at the beginning of the 4th quarter of the preceding year. A 
participatory planning process at cluster level will take place to develop the AWPB for each particular cluster. 
This bottom-up approach will ensure strong stakeholder participation, engender a sense of ownership of the 
programme and, to a large extent, facilitate smooth project implementation.  
The process will be guided by the components and targets set for each expected outcome and output in 
order to ensure contribution to reaching programme objectives. Table 1 summarizes the indicative timelines 
for the AWPB preparation process. 
Work planning will not stop with an annual plan. More is needed to achieve effective project 
implementation. At the time of implementation, each implementing agency will use the approved AWPB as a 
starting point for detailed activity planning, close supervision and coordination of field activities. 
Table 1. Deadlines for Preparation of AWPB 
Level 
Activity 
Northern Zone 
Central Zone 
Strategic review of logical framework/ implementation 
experience and performance assessment at the Zonal 
level 
Deadline  
September (1st 
week ) 
Strategic review of logical framework/implementation 
experience and performance assessment at the Zonal 
level 
September (2nd 
week) 
Cluster Level 
Preparation of proposals that are transferred to Zonal 
Office 
September 30 
Zonal Office 
Consolidation of Cluster contributions at Zonal level 
September 30 
Zonal Office 
Zonal AWPB consolidated and submitted to ISU 
October 10 
National AWPB consolidated and submitted to Project 
Steering Committee (PSC) 
October 24 
Draft AWPB approved  
Draft AWPB sent to external financiers 
October 30  
November 8 
ISC 
PSC 
ISU 
Page 70 of 207 
M and E 
The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will generate comprehensive and reliable information to 
support planning and decision-making for results-based management. It will provide information on 
implementation progress and constant feedback into the Management Information System (MIS) to facilitate 
the identification of problem areas, evaluating the performance of implementing agencies and assessing 
achievements at the level of outcomes and impact.  
An effective M&E system will create an historical overview of efforts made, problems faced, results 
delivered, lessons learned and objectives achieved, which will be used to deepen and share the knowledge 
about factors that influence implementation and project results and thereby help to improve 
implementation approaches. 
The M&E system will facilitate monitoring at activity level and results measurement at higher levels, typically 
of project outputs, outcomes and impact. It will consist of a variety of tools and procedures that can be used 
to accomplish a number of tasks. These include collecting data from the field, recording data in a consistent 
manner, transmitting data to a central place, storing well organized data safely and in an easily accessible 
format, processing data so that it can be used and presenting information to implementing partners and 
other stakeholders in reports and through other means. 
Indicator Selection 
AAFORD will constantly monitor the progress of its achievements against established objectives and 
indicators by ensuring that data collection systems are sufficiently planned and implemented to ensure that 
information on the success and limitations of the project is adequately collected. The relevant set of Core 
Indicators (CIs) from IFAD's Operational Results Management System (ORMS) along with other indicators in 
the project logframe, will be adopted to help assess the projects' outputs and outcomes more accurately. It 
will take gender and youth targeting into account by whenever possible, disaggregating data in gender and 
youth (15-34 years). 
The monitoring framework 
M&E framework for AAFORD will consist of a monitoring framework and an evaluation framework. The 
monitoring function will involve regular collection and analysis of information to assist timely decision 
making, ensure accountability and provide the basis for evaluation and learning. It will be a continuing 
Page 71 of 207 
function that will use methodical collection of data to provide implementing partners and the main 
stakeholders of the project with early indications of progress and achievement of objectives. The monitoring 
function will be integrated within the management structure of each of the project components or initiatives 
at the various clusters since monitoring information generated by the information system has project 
implementation teams as the primary users. All project interventions and initiatives will therefore operate 
and maintain their respective information on inputs and outputs using the platform provided by a web-
based electronic information system. 
The main role of the Senior M&E Manager at the National level and the M&E Officers at the Regional Project 
Coordination Units will be to provide oversight, tools, training and backstopping for other staff on all aspects 
related to M&E. The M&E staff to be recruited by Partner Service Providers will consolidate, check and 
analyze data submitted by field staff and use the information to prepare consolidated plans and reports and 
facilitate learning.  
The main tools to be used for implementing the monitoring framework will include the Annual Work Plan 
and Budget, the Progress Reporting System,  the Beneficiary Contact Information System, follow-up 
diagnostic studies and a web-based platform for data storage, retrieval and reporting. 
The evaluation framework 
Baseline data on beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of the project will be collected within three months 
after the project has come into effect.  The objective of the baseline assessment  will be to provide the 
necessary benchmarks on indicators prior to the project intervention to aide easy and proper impact 
assessment. It will provide quantitative and qualitative data for effective tracking of outcome level 
indicators. The evaluation of the effectiveness and impact of the project will draw on the database created 
at baseline and during the monitoring process, supplementing it as necessary with data on project impact, 
and reviewing the combined information over an extended period to assess achievements. 
The assessment of outcome indicators will be mandatory. Both project-specific outcomes and CI outcomes 
will be assessed on a “contribution” basis, using methodologies that are sound and at the same time 
manageable within the M&E budget as well as existing capacities. The adoption of the methodology or 
approach for Annual Outcome Surveys (AOS) is recommended for assessing the outcomes of the project. A 
combination of secondary data, database analysis and a panel survey with a control group (Randomized 
Control Trial survey) will be used to assess the effectiveness and impact of AAFORD in attaining its medium-
term objectives. The RCT will provide the basis for ascertaining whether improved behavioral changes were 
actually caused by the project's interventions.  
AAFORD will report on its impact through the project completion report. In the event that the project is  not 
covered by IFAD's impact assessment programme, then the project will conduct a project impact assessment 
of some kind (at least by estimating contribution as opposed to attribution), with support provided by IFAD's 
new M&E capacity-building initiatives. For later impact measurement, interim post-implementation 
evaluation studies will be carried out. 
Page 72 of 207 
Independent agencies or consultants would be brought in to conduct evaluations and impact assessments as 
and when they are due.  The chosen agencies will carry out the surveying, checking on the monitoring 
information with a more objective viewpoint not only to assess whether specific interventions have been 
fully implemented but also assess the extent to which indicator targets for expected outcomes and impacts 
have been achieved. 
Information gathering and organization  
The collection and organization of information/data on project operation and performance will be 
participatory to the extent possible. Data on project implementation and outputs will be collected from the 
relevant office, project communities, stakeholders and other relevant sources. Information gathered will be 
matched with project objectives and targets to identify any gaps. This will present a fair assessment of what 
to include in the MIS. 
Details about responsibility for data collection, method and frequency of data collection and synthesis for all 
input, output, outcome and impact indicators will be described in the M&E Plan that will be developed at 
project inception. Appropriate formats for data collection and synthesis will be developed and included in 
the M&E manual to aid information gathering and organization. 
Development of Electronic Management Information System (MIS)  
The development of a web-based platform for data storage, retrieval and reporting would necessarily be 
aligned to the information needs identified in the M&E plan as well as those that will be identified in future. 
The electronic MIS will serve as a centralized repository of data for all operational, performance and impact 
indicators for project interventions. It will serve as a one-stop system on which personnel at various levels 
within the organizational structure can rely for real time data as well as timely, accurate, and consistent 
reports on the status of implementation of interventions. The MIS will provide additional benefits by 
focusing the activities of the various teams, providing visibility on these activities and improving reporting 
capabilities.  
The integration of GIS information in the MIS will improve analysis capabilities and help implementing 
partners gather and use data and generate the necessary indicators required to measure progress or 
otherwise. 
Learning, KM and communication  
Page 73 of 207 
In order that the benefits to be derived from AAFORD is optimized, stakeholders at the district, regional and 
national levels need to know about the achievements of the project and the value it creates. There are 
multiple benefits to be derived from communicating effectively about how the project is addressing the 
needs of the target population. Strategic communication of information about the project to key 
stakeholders will promote dialogue, participation, and a regular flow of information, thereby enhancing 
transparency and recognition. 
The project will therefore develop a Knowledge Management and Communication Strategy, with the related 
activities captured in the AWP&B. Responsibilities for implementing the Knowledge Management and 
Communication Strategy will be assigned to the relevant persons or group of persons. The knowledge 
management strategy will capture and disseminate knowledge at various levels and will focus on issues that 
will be deemed to be critical during project implementation. To begin with, the priority will include the 
following: i) generating linkages among partners through transparency; ii) managing and sharing 
information, knowledge and experiences; and iii) conducting analysis that can provide the evidence base for 
policy interventions.  
The output of the MIS will be will be used to inform knowledge management initiatives and will be 
disseminated within and beyond the intervention zone through existing information sharing networks and 
forums. Periodic knowledge sharing workshops will be organized to share learning among the implementing 
partners. Lessons documented by the National and Regional Project Coordination Units will be shared with 
other project stakeholders including the field staff. Analysis and documentation of lessons and good 
practices from the field will also be fed into the general knowledge management effort. 
Implementation support and supervision missions.  
Implementation support and supervision missions will be carried out by the lead Ministry (MOF) in close 
collaboration with IFAD and other co-financiers, including those to be undertaken at mid-term and project 
completion. Key performance indicators to be assessed will be: (i) programme outcomes; (ii) implementation 
of the AWPB, (i.e. progress in project outputs and activities); (iii) timing and quality of programming and 
M&E; and (iv) financial management and disbursement of funds. A status on these indicators will be 
prepared by the PCU. 
Periodic and regular status and supervision reports will provide data for measuring and monitoring project 
performance during implementation, with results for CIs (and other indicators in the logframe) at output and 
outcome level being regularly measured and reported during supervision and at least once a year.  
Page 74 of 207 
Chapter 5: Project Cost and Financing  
Project costs and financing  
Main assumptions. The project is financed over a six-year (6) period, and it is assumed to start in 2020 
year. Costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing during project design in October 2019.  
Physical and price contingencies. Price contingencies have been applied on all costs, with the exception 
of grants. 
Inflation. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, a high inflation of 9.6 per cent will remain in 
2019, given a weakening currency and strong growth in private consumption.  The rate is expected to 
remain between 6-10 per cent target range for the upcoming few years, for a similar reason41. For the 
purpose of this analysis; annual local inflation rates have been set at between 9 to 6 per cent 
throughout the six project years. For foreign inflation, an average inflation around 4 per cent has been 
retained. Below table 1 is providing more details in regards forecasted local and international inflation 
rate for each year.  
Table 1. Projected inflation rate 
Forecasted inflation Rate 
2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024 
Ghana 
9,1 
8,4 
7,5 
6,8 
6,3 
6 
Emerging market and developing economies  4,9 
4,7 
4,5 
4,4 
4,3 
4,2 
Source: IMF, 2019 42 
41 Retrieved from Economist Intelligence Unit, on Sep, 2019. 
42 International Monetary Fund. Source retrieved from: IMF Inflation rate on Sep 21st, 2019, Inflation 
rate, average consumer prices (Annual percent change). Link retrieved from: 
https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/PCPIPCH@WEO/OEMDC/ 
Page 75 of 207 
Exchange rate. The exchange rate used is 1 US$: GHS 5.5, which is calculated as the prevailing exchange 
rate during design mission that occurred in October 2019. 43 
Taxes and duties. Part of the Government co-financing of the project will be in form of waiving of all 
taxes and duties on goods and services procured under the project. The rates and amounts of the taxes 
and duties in the project’s costs presented below are defined only to determine the Government 
contribution and to value the total project cost.  
The items to be imported for the project attract import and excise duties of varying proportions, and a 
value-added tax (VAT) levied on all imported goods. 44 
Project costs  
The total project costs including physical and price contingencies are estimated at US$ 69.7 million over 
six years implementation period. Project costs by components are summarized in table 1, while a 
complete set of project summary tables and detailed costs tables are presented in attachments 1 and 2 
of this appendix.  
Project costs by components. Project investments are organized into three major components: (i) 
“Technical Assistance for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural Value 
Chains” (41 per cent of the total costs); (ii) “Expanding and Directing Affordable Finance in a Conducive 
Environment (52 per cent of the costs); (iii) “Implementation Support” (IS) (7 per cent of the costs). A 
summary breakdown of the project costs by components and financier is shown in table 2 below.
43 Operational UN exchange rate, retrieved from: 
https://treasury.un.org/operationalrates/OperationalRates.php 
44 The VAT in Ghana is technically 18.125 per cent of which standard VAT is 12.5%, NHIS and GET Fund 
are 2.5% each totaling 5% of the VAT inclusive amount. Assuming the VAT amount is GHS 100, VAT shall 
be GHS 12.5 and NHIS + GET Fund (112.5*5%)= GHS 5.625. Total VAT shall than be 18.125%. 
Page 76 of 207 
Table 2: Project costs by component and Financier (US$’000) 
Page 77 of 207 
Project financing/co-financing. The total project costs of US$ 69.7 million will be financed by i) IFAD 
US$ 15 million ( IFAD Loan US$ 11.5 million and IFAD Green grant US$ 3.5 million) ; ii) AGRA (US$ 1 
million parallel financing); iii) GCF (US$ 9.9 million); iv) GoG (US$ 25.9 millions of which US$ 7.9 million 
as most of the  taxes and duties exemptions, US$11.4 million as contribution through GIRSAL risk sharing 
facility, US$ 6 million as REP revolving funds contribution and GoG (cash) 0.6 million); (v) Partnering 
Financial Institutions (US$ 4.3 million); (vi) ABC Fund (US$ 4.3 million); (vii) AfDB (US$ 3.5 million); and 
(viii) Beneficiaries (US$ 5.8 million cash, casual labour, inputs and equipment).  
The domestic contribution is robust, for instance, for each US$ 1 IFAD investment; domestic 
contribution is US$ 2.4. Similarly, for each US$ 1 IFAD investment, international contribution is US$ 1.3. 
Domestic contribution (US$ 36 million) accounts for a robust 52 per cent of the total project costs and 
includes (i) GoG (taxies and duties) in the amount of US$ 7.9 million, (ii) GoG (REP) in the amount of 
US$ 6 million, (iii) GoG (GIRSAL) in the amount of US$ 11.3 million ;(iv) beneficiaries  (cash & in-kind) in 
the amount of US$ 5.8 million, (v) PFI in the amount of US$ 4.3 million and (vi) GoG (cash) in the amount 
of US$ 0.6 million. The international contribution is contributing 48 per cent of the overall project costs 
(equivalent to US$ 33.65 million) comprising: (i) GCF (US$ 9.9 million), (ii) ABC fund (US$ 4.3 million), (iii) 
AfDB (US$ 3.5 million), (iv) AGRA (US$ 1 million) and (v) IFAD (US$ 15 million, of which IFAD Loan 
US$ 11.5 million and IFAD Green grant US$ 3.5 million) 
Expenditure and disbursement accounts. The project will be rolled out through the project management 
unit -which will manage and coordinate the flow of funds and the expenditures incurred on account of 
the project activities. Financial management and procurement procedures are described in annex 7. A 
summary of the total costs by expenditure accounts and financier is shown in Table 3 and a summary of 
expenditure accounts by components with totals including contingencies is presented in Table 4.  
Expenditure Category Overview. Credit and Guarantee Funds is the major expenditure account, 
estimated at US$ 41.3 million, or about 59 per cent of the total project costs. The other investment 
expenditure accounts are training and workshops for an amount of US$ 9.1 million or 13.1 per cent of 
total costs, followed by grants and subsidies for an amount of US$ 8 million or 12 per cent of total costs, 
Consultancies for an amount of US$ 6.6 million or about 9.4 per cent of the total cost, equipment’s, 
goods and services for an amount of US$ 0.6 million or 1 per cent of total costs. The recurrent costs 
represent 5.7 per cent of total costs at US$ 4 million, comprising salaries and allowances for an amount 
of US$ 3 million or 4.2 per cent of total costs, operations and maintenance for an amount of US$ 1 
million (1.5 per cent of project costs). The breakdown of expenditure accounts by component is 
reflected at the Annex 7. The breakdown of expenditure accounts by component is reflected at the table 
3 and table 4. 
Disbursement flow.  To enable easy monitoring of progress, the below graph forecast the expected 
disbursement per year. This will allow continuously tracking progress during supervisor and following up 
mission.  Around US$ 17 million (24 per cent) of project resources will be disbursed till Year 3 and the 
Page 78 of 207 
remaining US$ 52.7 million (76 per cent) will be disbursed in the last three years of the project. AAFORD 
disbursement pattern is represented below: 
Graph 1. Disbursement flow-AAFORD (US’000) 
Page 79 of 207 
Table 3: Project costs by expenditure account and financier (USD’000) 
Page 80 of 207 
Table 4: Expenditure accounts by Components-Totals including Contingencies (USD’000) 
Page 81 of 207 
Total Cost per Component: Total Project Cost including physical and price contingencies are estimated at 
US$ 69.7 million over a 6-year period. Component 2 on “Expanding and Directing Affordable Finance in a 
Conducive Environment” is the main investment and represents 52 per cent of the total project costs, while 
Component 1 on “Technical Assistance for the Development of Sustainable and Climate-Resilient Agricultural 
Value Chains” representing 41 per cent of total project costs. ‘Implementation Support represent 7 per cent 
of the total project costs.  
Project Financing: The Financing Plan covers i) an IFAD of US$ 15 million, of which IFAD Loan is US$ 11.5 
million and IFAD Green Grant is US$ 3.5 million (21.5 cent), ii) GoG ( most of the taxies and duties) of US$ 7.9 
million (11.3 per cent),  (iii) GCF of US$ 9.9 million (14.3 per cent), iv) contribution from GoG (REP) of US$ 6 
million (8.6 per cent), v) AGRA of US$ 1 million (1.4 per cent), (vi) contribution of GoG (GIRSAL) of US$ 11.4 
million (16.3 per cent), (vii) Partnering Financial Institutions of US$ 4.3 million (6.1 per cent), (viii) ABC of 
US$ 4.3 million (6.2 per cent), (ix) AfDB of US$ 3.5 million ( 5.1 per cent), (x) beneficiaries contribution ( cash 
& in-kind) of US$ 5.8 million ( 8.4 per cent) and (xi) GoG (cash) of US$ 0.6 million ( 0.8 per cent). 
The base costs are calculated at October 2019 prices and include estimated duties and taxes. Total 
contingencies are respectively at US$ 3.4 million or 5 per cent of total costs. 
Investment costs are US$ 65.7 million and represent 94 per cent of total costs. The foreign exchange 
component is at US$ 0.6 million or 1 per cent of the total Project costs. The recurrent cost accounts for US$ 4 
million or equivalent to 6 per cent of the total costs.  The exchange rate used is USD 1.0 = GHS 5.5. The cost 
per direct beneficiary household amounts to about US$ 933 or US$ 129 per beneficiary.  
Below table 5 shows project components by year-total including contingencies in foreign currency 
respectively. 
Table 5:  Project Components by Year –Total including contingencies (USD’000) 
Page 82 of 207 
Chapter 6: Financial Management 
Financial Management Assessment 
A Financial Management (FM) Assessment was conducted in October 2019 for the Ghana Affordable 
Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development (AAFORD) in accordance with the IFAD’s Project 
Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design (2015).  Given that the Financial Services Division of the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) is currently managing the fiduciary functions for World Bank-financed projects, the project 
will build on existing FM arrangements which are assessed as adequate for ensuring: (1) that the funds are 
used only for the intended purposes in an efficient and economical way; (2) the preparation of accurate, 
reliable and timely periodic financial reports; (3) the safeguarding of the entity’s assets; and (4) that 
adequate fiduciary assurances are provided through an independent audit of the project. The control risk is 
assessed as ‘Medium’ and the overall residual FM risk for the project is assessed ‘Medium’ due to the use of 
the GIFMIS which includes  risk mitigating measures such as pre-auditing by the Internal Audit Unit (IAI) of 
MoF. The external auditing function will be performed by Ghana Audit Service.  
Overview of Project and Institutional Arrangements 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the income, food security and resilience of 
smallholder farmers including women and rural youth through skills development, increased access to 
finance and stronger farmers’ organizations. The project will work with (i) GIRSAL to capacitate financial 
intermediaries to secure credit guarantees from the GIRSAL initiative and roll out affordable agricultural 
loans to poor smallholder farmers including women and rural youth; (ii) GAIP, GCX and a range of 
commercial banks, RCBs and rural MFIs and RCBs which express prior commitment to provide GIRSAL-linked 
services in the rural areas identified by AAFORD; (iii) Financial institutions that provide savings accounts to 
rural HHs and lend to agricultural value chain actors (farmers, offtakers, input suppliers), and sources of 
credit for on-lending to agricultural value chains (such as REDF, OVCF, RDF), as well as their apex associations 
(ARB Apex Bank, GHAMFIN). 
The financial management and accounting functions of the project will be undertaken using the GIFMIS 
(GIFMIS is an integrated computerised Financial Management System that facilitates budget preparation and 
execution, accounting and financial reporting, cash management, assets management, human resource and 
payroll management) FM arrangements under the ISU of the MoF(FSD). The GIFMIS Secretariat of the 
Controller and Accountant Generals’ Department (CAGD) shall set up the project’s activity and accounting 
codes as well as customize reports that will show (i) sources of finance; (ii) cost category (iii) cost 
components; (iv cost sub-components, etc. The Implementation Support Unit (ISU) will be responsible for 
preparation and submission of the IFRs every quarter in compliance with the legal agreement for submitting 
audited annual reports and for all the other FM activities of AAFORD. The project will be implemented under 
three components including: i) Building capacities of target groups, intermediaries and market-enhancing 
Page 83 of 207 
institutions; (ii) Expanding and deepening outreach of market facilitators in a conducive environment; and 
(iii) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.  
Detailed Financial Management Arrangements 
Policies and Guidelines. The policies, guidelines and operational procedures required to support 
implementation will be consistent with the Government of Ghana’s financial procedures governed by Public 
Financial Management Regulations 2019 (L.I. 2378), Public Financial Management Act 2016 (Act 921), the 
Public Procurement (Amendment) Act 2016 (Act 914), Public Procurement (Amendment) Act 2016 ( Act 914), 
and Public Procurement Act 2003 (663) and in line with IFAD policies. 
Staffing. The Financial Services (FSD) Division of the Ministry of Finance will be responsible for accurate and 
appropriate financial accounting and management of resources made available to the AAFORD for effective 
execution and budget performance of the AWPB in accordance with IFAD policies and procedures.  
Based on an assessment done in October 2019, the capacity of the Development Finance Unit of FSD (MoF) 
for the proposed project was found to be Moderately Satisfactory. The Finance department of the Unit is 
headed by a senior project accountant who holds an advanced degree (MBA) in Finance and Accounting with 
13 years’ experience in managing project finance and accounts. His experience includes managing World 
Bank-funded projects such as EMCB, NREG, EITI, GEMSTA and FSDP. He is assisted by a project accountant 
who also holds an advanced degree (MBA) in Finance with 10 years’ experience in working on IFAD-funded 
project (RAFIP), World Bank-funded projects (EMCB, NREG, EITI, GEMSTA and FSDP), and USAID-funded 
project.  To ensure adequate segregation of duties, the finance team of the Unit includes an Accounts 
Assistant.  
The operational day-to-day fiduciary functions will be the responsibility of AAFORD Finance Manager in the 
ISU located in Sunyani in the Bono Region of Ghana. The staff members of the finance unit in the ISU will 
comprise (i) Finance Manager; (ii) Project Accountant; and (iii) Accounts Assistant. The finance team will use 
the national financial management system, the Ghana Integrated Financial Management Information System 
(GIFMIS) which is currently used by the FSD in managing all donor-funded project. The FSD and CAGD will be 
involved in the finance staff recruitment of the project. The Director of Finance of MoF will have fiduciary 
oversight responsibilities over the financial management of AAFORD. 
The ISU of the FSD will manage the project funds on behalf of the executing agency (MoF), keep financial 
records according to international standards, implement internal controls, and ensure annual external audits 
to be conducted by Ghana Audit Service as part of the overall project planning, coordination, and 
implementation. The ISU will also be responsible for preparation and submission of the Interim Financial 
Reports (IFRs) every quarter in compliance with the legal agreement, submitting audited annual reports and 
for all the FM activities of AAFORD to project financiers and stakeholders. 
The Director of Finance of MoF will have fiduciary oversight responsibilities over the financial management 
of AAFORD. If, on one hand due to workload, the Development Finance Unit of FSD is not in a position to 
take on the finance functions of AAFORD, then the CAGD will be requested to release staff having the 
Page 84 of 207 
required profile for ISU and zonal offices on secondment. If on the other hand, the CAGD is not in a position 
by start-up to release staff having the required profile for ISU and zonal offices, then an external recruitment 
process will be carried out. 
Budgeting. ISU will submit an annual work plan and budget to IFAD for no objection no later than two 
months before the beginning of each fiscal year of the GoG. The annual work planning and budgeting will be 
prepared by the ISU in collaboration with the Director of Finance. The ISU will monitor the project’s 
implementation progress against the work plan/budget for the planned project expenditures under each 
disbursement categories/components.   
Accounting and maintenance of accounting records.  The Development Finance Unit of FSD (MoF) currently 
uses the GIFMIS in line with government policy for recording its transactions. It is recommended that the ISU 
works closely with the GIFMIS Secretariat of the Controller and Accountant General’s Department to  
generating customized reports such as Withdrawal Applications, Bank Reconciliation Statements, Interim 
Financial Statements, Annual Project Financial Statements, etc.   
The progress in using the system will be monitored closely by the IFAD FM Specialists to maximize the 
benefits of computerized accounting system.  The FM Specialists will identify and provide mitigating 
measures for any challenges that may arise with the accounting system during implementation. It is 
expected that the GIFMIS system will be adequate for accounting purposes for the project. 
GoG and Beneficiaries Contributions. The Finance team will be responsible in identifying, tracking and 
reporting on GOG’s contributions to the project as well as that of the beneficiaries. 
Taxation. IFAD funds will NOT be used to pay VAT, duties or other taxes imposed on the project. The 
exemption of taxes will be considered part of GoG’s contribution to the project.   
Supervision Plan. FM supervision would be conducted consistent with the risk rating for the project. The FM 
supervision missions’ objectives will include reviewing the expenditures for eligibility, availability of 
supporting documentation and adequacy for documentation.  
Funds Flow and Disbursement Arrangements 
The proceeds of the financing will be used for eligible expenditures as defined in the Financing Agreement, 
and in line with the disbursement allocations specified in the relevant section of the Financing Agreement. 
IFAD funds will be disbursed into US Dollars Account at a commercial bank acceptable by the Fund and will 
be operated by the Financial Services Department of MoF. The regular signatories to the Designated 
Accounts will be the Central Programme Coordinator (CPC) and the AFFORD Finance Manager as Cat A and B 
signatories respectively. However, Chief Director of MoF and the Director of Finance (MoF) will be substitute 
Cat A and B signatories respectively in the absence of the regular signatories,   
Page 85 of 207 
Designated Account. (IFAD Loan). The funds will flow into a Designated Account in a commercial bank in 
Ghana acceptable to the Fund. This is to avoid co-mingling of funds as well as ease bank reconciliations. 
Following the duly opening of the Dedicated Account and upon request of the Borrower (Withdrawal 
Application), based on the expenditure forecast for the first six months and may be modified during 
implementation of the programme if justified by treasury requirements, shall be deposited into it from the 
Loan. The proceeds from the Dedicated Account shall be used exclusively to finance the Programme’s 
eligible expenditures as will be stipulated in Schedule 2 of the Programme Loan Agreement. Funds shall be 
periodically transferred from the Designated Account to the Programme Operational Account for the 
purpose of financing the Programme’s eligible expenditures financed by IFAD. Generally, payments for the 
Programme’s eligible expenditures will not be made directly from the Designated Account but through the 
Programme Operational Account except where it becomes necessary to effect the payment in USD such as 
the case of approved foreign official trip by Programme staff, Programme implementation partners, 
collaborators and Beneficiaries.  The ceiling for the Authorised Allocation will be specified in the Letter to the 
Borrower (LTB) issued for AAFORD. 
Government approved fund-flow processing would be used to accelerate cash-flow. The SOE method of 
disbursement will apply for the project. Other methods of disbursement will include advances, direct 
payments, and reimbursements. Payments made against advances would be secured against bank 
guarantees by a commercial bank and or bonds acceptable to IFAD. Training will be provided to accounts 
staff on IFAD procedures and all processes documented as part of the PIM and outlined in MOUs with 
districts. Zonal offices to be responsible for close monitoring of implementing entities, including submission 
of returns with copies of bank statements. 
Periodic Financial Reporting  
The Finance Manager in the ISU will be responsible for preparing the quarterly interim unaudited financial 
reports (IFRs). The IFRs will be submitted to the Fund 45 days after the end of each fiscal calendar quarter. 
The project shall use the revolving fund mechanism and the report-based withdrawal system.  Hence, at a 
minimum, the constituents of the IFRs will be: (a) The FMR, which comprises: (i) a financial report (statement 
of cash balances, sources and uses of funds by expense category, budget-to-actual statement); (ii) a 
procurement report (implementation status of the procurement plan and summary of key procurement 
issues); and (iii) a physical progress report (implementation status of the AWP/B, linking physical outputs to 
financial execution); (b) The DA activity statement (and related bank statements), which includes: (i) 
reconciliation of the DA for the period; (ii) a schedule of cumulative advances received in and expenditures 
made from the DA; and (iii) forecast expenditures for the following two reporting periods; (c) The summary 
SOEs extracted from the DA by expense category, distinguishing between contracts subject to IFAD prior 
review and those subject to post review. In the event that the project’s IFRs fall short of the above details, 
then the project will use other forms of replenishment methods. In such instance, the IFR, at a minimum, 
shall comprise of: (a) A statement of sources and uses of funds for the reported quarter and cumulative 
period from project inception, reconciled to opening and closing bank balances; (b) A statement of uses of 
funds (expenditures) by project activity / component, comparing actual expenditures against budget, with 
Page 86 of 207 
explanations for significant variances for both the quarter and cumulative period; and (c) Designated 
Account Reconciliation Statement.  
The project will also prepare annual financial statements in accordance with International Public-Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS) – cash basis.  The financial statements will comprise, at a minimum, of: (a) 
Sources and uses of funds (summary of Expenditures shown under the main program headings and by main 
categories of expenditures for the period); and (b) Notes to the financial statements, including background 
information on the project, the accounting policies, detailed analysis and relevant explanation of the main 
accounts/major balances, etc.  In addition, the project shall provide, as an annex to the financial statements, 
an inventory of fixed assets acquired according to asset classes, dates of purchase, location, and cost.  
Internal Controls and Audit  
The ISU financial management manual and the provisions of the Public Financial Management Regulations 
(2019) and the Public Financial Management Law (Act 921 of 2016) will govern the project’s internal 
controls. Furthermore, the controls will follow authorisation and approval processes in the Government PFM 
system, the GIFMIS. The internal auditors will undertake internal audit activities on a risks basis and they will 
submit the internal audit reports 45 days after the end of the months of March and September of each 
calendar year. The project will maintain fixed assets for all material assets that will be acquired or created 
using the project funds.  
External Audit Arrangements  
Annual audits will be conducted at the end of each Government of Ghana’s Fiscal Year for the project. In line 
with its mandate as per the Ghana Audit Service Act (Act 584), the Auditor General is solely responsible for 
auditing funds under the Consolidated Fund and all public funds as received by Government ministries, 
agencies and departments. In this regard, and consistent with IFAD’s policy to maximise use of country 
systems where feasible, the Ghana Audit Service (GAS) will conduct the external audit of AAFORD’s financial 
statements and furnish copies to IFAD within six months of the end of the fiscal year. The technical capacity 
of the GAS is considered satisfactory having successfully and timeously audited other IFAD-funded projects, 
namely, RAFIP, GASIP and REP. with qualitative results, If due to work overload, the GAS is unable to carry 
out the audit then some other independent and qualified audit firms, acceptable to the IFAD, would be 
selected to carry out the audit of the project. The selection of auditors other than GAS shall be on 
competitive basis and in accordance with the IFAD's procurement guidelines and would be completed within 
six months of project effectiveness. The ToR of the auditors will be cleared by the Fund. The project financial 
statements including movements in the designated accounts will be audited in accordance with International 
Standards on Auditing (ISA) and a single opinion will be issued to cover the project financial statements in 
accordance with the Fund’s audit policy. The auditors’ report and opinion with respect to the financial 
Page 87 of 207 
statements, including the management letter, will be furnished to the Fund within six months after the end 
of each fiscal year.  
Conclusion. The overall financial management risk is assessed as ‘Medium’ and the overall residual FM risk 
for the project is assessed ‘Medium’ due to the use of the GIFMIS which includes  risk mitigating measures 
such as pre-auditing by the Internal Audit Unit (IAI) of MoF. These include the use of the government’s PFM 
system, GIFMIS, by the Development Finance Unit of MoF(FSD), the managing of finance by a Finance 
Manager with 13 years’ experience in managing Donor-funded projects, the management of the FM 
functions of AAFORD by an existing project finance team who has experience with IFAD-financed and World 
Bank-financed projects, and the strengthening of the on-the-job training to be provided as and when for the 
internal auditors at MoF IAU and the project finance officers in the development Finance Unit of FSD (MoF). 
The project will maintain financial records and will submit to IFAD and GoG, quarterly unaudited interim 
financial reports (IFRs) 45 days after the end of each quarter. Additionally, the project management will 
submit the project-audited accounts six months after the end of each fiscal year, in accordance with the legal 
covenants to be agreed upon for the project.  
Page 88 of 207 
Chapter 7: Procurement and Contracting 
I. Assessment of Procurement Systems  
A. Country Procurement Systems Assessment 
B. Project Specific Assessment 
II. AAFORD Procurement Arrangements 
A. General Considerations 
B. Institutional Arrangements 
C. Applicable Procurement Rules and Regulations 
D. Procurement Planning 
E. Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
F. Definition of the applicable Procurement methods for 
Goods, Works and Non-consulting Services 
G. IFAD Prior Review Thresholds 
Appendix 1: Procurement Procedures 
Assessment of Procurement Systems 
Country Procurement Systems Assessment 
Procurement Regulations applicable to AAFORD: IFAD’s procurement guidelines specify that national 
procurement systems will be used under the conditions that the systems are assessed as satisfactory or 
better. The Project will adopt the Ghana Public Procurement Authority Act 2003 (663) and the Amended Act 
2016 (Act 914), the Procurement Regulations (to be issued soon), and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines 
2010. National systems will apply to all procurement except international competitive bidding (ICB) for 
contracts above an agreed threshold. The IFAD guidelines state that ICB procurement will follow the 
procedures recommended by the World Bank. Ghana national procurement systems can be relied upon to 
undertake procurement below the agreed ICB thresholds. 
Legal Aspects and Procurement Practices: Public procurement in Ghana is regulated by New Ghana Public 
Procurement Authority Act 2016 (Act 914) that amended the Ghana Public Procurement Authority Act 2003 
(663). The Ghana Parliament adopted Law 914 to make governmental procurement more fair and 
transparent by subjecting it to the principals of: 
Open Announcement. 
Governance. 
Free Competition. 
Page 89 of 207 
Equal Opportunity. 
Innovative Approaches. 
Enabling Environment for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
E-Procurement 
Equitable Evaluation.  
Clearly, Act 2016, (Act 914) has improved the competitive nature of governmental procurement in Ghana as 
follows: 
Act 2016, (Act 914) has taken good steps toward aligning the public procurement system with international 
standards. Notable developments include solidifying the scope of application of the law by limiting informal 
exclusions of competitive and transparent procurement procedures, enabling the use of e-procurement, and 
introducing framework agreements. Furthermore, Act 914 includes provisions on institutional arrangements 
in procuring entities by regrouping procurement entities, inclusion of entities that were not in Act 2003 (Act 
663), revising thresholds upwards to reduce bureaucracy, abolishing the Ministerial Tender Review Board, 
adds a code of conduct for public officials and employees and private sector participants. 
The Act 2016, (Act 914) creates the Public Procurement Complaint Board that will be in charge of dealing 
with all complaints submitted to it in relation to the violation of any of the provisions of this Law; where its 
decisions shall be binding on the parties of the complaint. The contracting authority shall then execute the 
decision within 5 days from receiving it without prejudicing the contractor’s right to resort to court. 
Prohibits resorting to the splitting of contracts in order to circumvent the conditions, rules and procedures.  
The Act 2016, (Act 914) kept the methods of public procurement that existed under the Tender Law and 
supplement them with some new and special mechanisms such as the ‘two-stage tender’, framework 
contracts, as well as different procurement methods for complex transactions and contracts of interrelated 
and multilateral nature. 
Obligates the procuring entities to use the Standard Bidding Documents that are issued by the Ghana Public 
Procurement Authority for Governmental services. 
Establish the procedures for determining the cost estimate that includes market survey and previous similar 
purchases (these could be from the procuring entity or other sister organization). 
Establish a standard procedure for evaluating abnormally low bids. 
Obligates procuring entities to publish all tender opportunity on the newly established Electronic 
Procurements portal that include bidding documents, evaluation reports and the recommendations for 
awarding. Moreover, the procuring entities should publish its Procurement Plans on the Ghana Public 
Procurement website. 
The Act 2016, (Act 914) allows the administrative authority to conduct a prequalification check for interested 
bidders to verify their technical, financial, administrative and human resources capabilities. Only prequalified 
participants will be allowed to bid. 
Page 90 of 207 
Obligates procuring entities, before initiate the procurement process to verify the availability of funds 
allocated to them through the Ghana Integrated Financial Management Information Systems (GIFMIS), 
provided that the terms of the proposal include the fact that the contract is within necessary actual 
requirements. 
The Law states that the Public Procurement Authority shall have a registry for the names, details and ranks 
of the suppliers, contractors and consultants according to their financial and technical capabilities, business 
reputation, track record and professional licenses. This registry will be updated annually and it is a 
mandatory eligibility requirement for a company to participate in bidding. In the meantime, the Public 
Procurement Authority also debars companies and individuals who have been debarred by the World Bank. 
Introduces techniques specifically to promote greater opportunities for SMEs in the public procurement 
market, either directly or through subcontracting opportunities. Additionally, the law mandates the 
application and full rollout of e-procurement, an SME-friendly tool that facilitates participation of SMEs in 
public procurement, while boosting transparency. 
At the same time, more improvements could still be made as regulatory framework suffers from a number of 
weaknesses the most important ones being: 
Absence of Delegation: Even though delegation of authority is legally permitted under the law, there are no 
guiding principles on delegation. Lack of these guidelines in practice has directed all procurement decisions 
to the highest authority. This has caused delays and inefficiencies in the implementation of important 
programs. Development and issuance of guidelines on delegation of authority and approval thresholds can 
provide GOE with more efficient procurement. 
The lack of Regulations to attend the Public Procurement Act 2003, (Act 663) as amended Act 2016 (Act 914). 
There are no rules or written guidance that defines the nature of each procurement method and its 
applicability in different procurement actions.  
There are no clear limits on the nature of communications that can occur when bidders are requested to 
provide additional information during the technical evaluation. Permitting broad exchanges of information 
between the bidder and the Evaluation Committee without specific criteria and strict guidelines could affect 
the transparency and fairness of the bid evaluation process. 
The amended Act 2016 (Act 914) is silent on the issue of Community-based procurement. In order to achieve 
social and employment goals and a sustainable delivery of services in situations which are unattractive to 
private enterprises, such as small value health care contracts, agricultural extension and informal education 
services, considerations need to be given to a selection method that draws on the participation of the 
beneficiaries in the communities. 
The Standard Bidding Document for Works and Consultancy Services does not have clauses on Gender-Based 
Violence (GBV) and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA). 
The minimum time allowed for National Competitive Bidding is 2 weeks. This could result in submission of 
non-compliant bids because of lack of sufficient time to prepare and submit bids. 
Page 91 of 207 
Project Specific Assessment 
The review of the procurement system in the Ministry of Finance, the lead implementing agency, indicated 
that the procurement capacity is adequate. However, there is the need to improve in the following areas: (a) 
Low implementation rate of procurement plans due to lack of funds or late release of funds; (b) Shortlisting 
criteria for consultancy services (c) procurement filing; The overall assessment is medium to low. The details 
of the review are as follows: 
Procurement planning: The legal framework provides thorough guidance on procurement planning, linking 
the planning process up with the budgeting process, hence providing an important first step towards actual 
integration of procurement planning in the budgeting process. According to the legal framework, all 
procurement shall be within the approved budget of the Procurement Entity.  
At the same time, the procurement planning process suffers from a number of weaknesses the most 
important ones being:  
The procurement planning is done and submitted a month before the end of the year. However, the budget 
is approved by Parliament in March of the year in which the plan relates. Clearly not less than 2 months are 
lost in the implementation of the procurement plan.  
Where there are budget cuts to some activities in the procurement plan, the plan has to be revised to reflect 
the amounts approved by Parliament. 
Despite agreement on an annual budget and improved predictability of disbursements, gaps remain in the 
system. The release of funds to meet contractual obligations is still irregular. Consequently, payments for 
goods, works, and services are frequently delayed. 
In some instances, many planned activities are not implemented because funds are not released for those 
activities. 
Observations also show that spending units sometimes do not receive funds until the end of the fiscal year. 
The funds must then be disbursed quickly, which strains adherence to procedures. Choices in procurement 
method are limited because of the insufficient time for open tendering. If more restricted procedures are 
not approved (shortage of time being the weak justification), financial resources go unused. 
In some Request for Expression of Interest published, shortlisting criteria are not provided. The Ministry 
determines the shortlisting criteria at evaluation of expressions of interest. 
Some files that were inspected were not up to date. Some documents such as Shortlisting reports were 
missing on files for consultancy services. 
Preparation of bidding documents: The Amended Act 2016 (Act 914) indicated that the Ghana Public 
Procurement Authority will issue the necessary Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) covering procurement 
of goods, works and services. The MoF has the capacity to prepare these SBDs. 
Management of bidding process from advertisement to bid opening: In the procuring entity, compliance 
with the mandatory steps were existed as follows:  
Page 92 of 207 
Advertisement for open tenders is mandated in at least one daily newspapers of wide national circulation 
and in the Electronic Procurements portal. 
The minimum period provided by the current Manual for the preparation of national open tenders. 
However, the permissible time (2 weeks). This is not sufficient for the submission of competent bids. 
Ensure that the place or site where tenders shall be submitted is open and accessible and provided with a 
secured tender box. A tender box exists. 
Carry out public opining immediately after the closing date and time. 
Bid evaluation and contract award: In many cases, evaluation of bids were carried out using criteria disclosed 
in the tender documents.   
Preparation and signing of contract: Based on the recommendation of the evaluation committee the 
contract is signed with the lowest evaluated bidder. Unsuccessful bidders are not usually informed in writing 
that they have not won the contract. 
Contract management during implementation, including dispute resolution methods: The information 
gathered from the assessed procuring entity confirmed that the lack of proper contract management and 
contract administration in place. This results in cost and time overruns.  
Record-keeping: PE recordkeeping practices are generally good. Most files had a checklist of documents on a 
procurement file. However, in some instance, some documents were not on file. In addition, the assessed 
procuring entity confirmed that there is inadequate space for record keeping as a result of accumulated 
documents. 
Staffing: The available expertise at PE level does meets the need for specialised procurement knowledge: 
However, the staff of the procurement department will not be able to add procurement responsibility of 
AAFORD. Therefore, it is recommended that two procurement staff should be employed to handle AAFORD 
Procurement. 
AAFORD Procurement Arrangements 
General Considerations 
The responsibility for the implementation of the Project, and therefore for the award and administration of 
contracts under the Project, rests with the Borrower. The IFAD, for its part, is required to ensure that the 
proceeds of any loan or grant are used only for the purposes for which the loan or grant was granted. While 
in practice the specific procurement rules and procedures to be followed in the implementation of a Project 
depend on the circumstances of the particular case, seven (7) principles generally guide the Fund’s 
requirements: 1) Ethics, 2) Accountability, 3) Competition, 4) Fairness, 5) Transparency, 6) Efficiency, 
Effectiveness & Economy and 7) Value for Money. 
Ethics: The guiding principles of ethical behavior are impartiality, independence and integrity. No person or 
entity shall use his/her/its authority, position or office for personal gain, which will be defined as soliciting, 
accepting or otherwise benefiting from anything of material value, in any form, either in person or indirectly 
Page 93 of 207 
through close relatives or associates, as a result of procurement financed by IFAD. Borrower/Recipient 
officials engaged in procurement activity have a duty to: 
maintain and enhance the reputation of the Borrower/Recipient country by: 
maintaining the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all professional relationships; 
developing the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
maximizing the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are responsible for the purposes for 
which these funds and resources were provided to the Borrower/Recipient country; and 
complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
the financing agreement; 
the laws and regulations of the Borrower/Recipient country; 
accepted professional ethics; and 
contractual obligations; 
declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed by others to affect, 
impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of interest). In a situation of this nature, the 
official concerned should not participate in any way in the procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; 
and 
respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not use such information for 
personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, supplier or contractor. Information given in the course 
of their duties shall be true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
Accountability: The Borrower/Recipient is accountable to IFAD for all actions and decisions in relation to 
Project-funded procurement. This includes, but is not limited to: 
Ensuring that the funds are used solely for the purpose for which they were provided; and 
Ensuring that procurement is undertaken in accordance with IFAD Guidelines. 
Competition: Full, fair and legitimate competition among eligible suppliers and contractors is the foundation 
on which Project-funded procurement activities should be based. The most common method of seeking 
competition is through a competitive bidding process, and, in this regard, IFAD specifies that all goods, works 
and services should be obtained through an agreed procurement process involving at least three separate 
suppliers or contractors whose business is directly related to the procurement being undertaken. It is 
recognized that it is neither practical nor efficient to advertise internationally for low-value contracts for 
goods, works or services, and the degree to which the principle of competition is required for each 
procurement activity will be outlined in the procurement method approved by IFAD within the procurement 
plan. Borrowers/Recipients will be expected to promote genuine competition at every opportunity and 
maybe required to provide evidence of: 
fair and genuine competition in the compilation of shortlists and in the solicitation of bids; and 
Page 94 of 207 
the effectiveness of competition during the bidding process. 
Single sourcing and direct contracting do not provide the elements of competition required by IFAD. Only in 
exceptional circumstances will these approaches be considered and approved in procurement plans agreed 
with IFAD. 
Fairness: IFAD’s expectation is that Project-funded procurement will be open to as many eligible bidders 
from IFAD’s developed and developing Member States as is practicable in order to meet the requirements of 
competition. IFAD expects Borrowers/Recipients to ensure that all prospective bidders are: 
managed with a consistent approach and application of laws, regulations and requirements in respect of the 
procurement process; 
offered a level playing field on which to genuinely compete; and 
treated in a fair, impartial and unbiased way, so that principles of impartiality and equal opportunity can be 
demonstrated in all procurement activities. 
In striving for fairness in its procurement operations, IFAD: 
will not tolerate exclusion of, discrimination, bias or prejudice against, or favouritism or inequality towards 
any potential supplier or contractor, either directly or indirectly through manipulation of any part of the 
procurement process, including, but not limited to, the preparation of technical specifications, evaluation 
criteria or bidding requirements. Where any such activity is suspected or proven, IFAD reserves the right to 
take any preventative, corrective or punitive action it considers appropriate; and  
will seek to address, in consultation with the Borrower/Recipient, any impositions that may deter or impinge 
on the attainment of fairness within the procurement process. 
Transparency: IFAD expects the highest degree of transparency and openness within the procurement 
processes undertaken under its projects. A lack of transparency can be perceived as an attempt to withhold 
information, which in turn may make the fairness and integrity of the procurement process suspect. 
Transparency within procurement relates to disclosing the public domain, information for parties involved, 
interested in or affected by the process, including but not limited to information on: 
the availability of potential and existing procurement opportunities; 
where to access relevant data; 
the processes by which the procurement is being undertaken; 
the mechanisms by which contracts will be awarded; 
contract award data; and 
appeal procedures. 
Modes of communication/publication of such information will vary depending on the nature of the data but 
will generally be through existing means of public information (e.g. government websites, public notice 
boards or media) or in the procurement documentation relevant to an individual procurement activity (e.g. 
Page 95 of 207 
bid notices and bidding documents). Borrowers/Recipients are required at all times to act openly, 
predictably and in accordance with the information provided. 
Efficiency, Effectiveness and Economy: IFAD requires Borrowers/Recipients to demonstrate efficiency and 
economy in undertaking Project-related procurement, to avoid undue implementation delays and to achieve 
value for money. Procurement must be well organized, carried out correctly with regard to quantity, quality 
and timeliness, and at the optimum price, in accordance with the appropriate guidelines, principles and 
regulations. Processes must be proportionate to the procurement activity, so that the overall cost of 
conducting the procurement process is minimized and tailored to the size of the budget for the activity being 
undertaken, while upholding the guiding principles. Efficiencies can be obtained through a combination of 
methods. For instance, a strategic approach can be taken to planning, combining and conducting 
procurement activities so as to minimize loss of time and resources. For this reason, the design of all IFAD-
funded projects must include a procurement plan. 
Value for money: Underpinning all of the above is the need to obtain value for money for all Project 
procurement activities through the optimum combination of several factors, including: 
applying sound, internationally recognized procurement principles; 
ensuring that the goods, works or services procured meet the requirements for the task and are not over-
specified; 
ensuring that the goods, works or services are contracted on the best possible terms, taking into account 
their expected life cycle; and 
ensuring that the provider/supplier of the goods, works or services is qualified, legally entitled and 
competent to execute the contract. 
Best value does not necessarily mean the lowest initial price option, but rather represents the best return on 
investment, taking into consideration the unique and specific circumstances of each procurement activity; 
the balance of time, cost and quality required; and the successful overall outcome of the contract in meeting 
its original objectives. 
Borrower/recipient officials engaged in procurement activity have a duty to: 
Maintain and enhance the reputation of the borrower/recipient country by: 
Maintaining the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all professional relationships; 
Developing the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
Maximizing the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are responsible for the purposes for 
which these funds and resources were provided to the borrower/recipient country; and 
Complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
The financing agreement; 
The laws and regulations of the borrower/recipient country; 
Page 96 of 207 
Accepted professional ethics; and 
Contractual obligations. 
Declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed by others to affect, 
impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of interest). In a situation of this nature, the 
official concerned should not participate in any way in the procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; 
and 
Respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not use such information for 
personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, supplier or contractor. Information given in the course 
of their duties shall be true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
The Project will contribute to building up the in-house procurement capacity of the Ministry of Finance, 
instilling best practices and the required approach and methodology, and monitoring the timeliness and 
quality of the process.  IFAD plans a training Project at AAFORD to familiarise AAFORD staff with IFAD 
Guidelines.  The effectiveness of procurement will be assessed during supervision and alternate 
arrangements put in place if necessary. 
The Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) will be developed by AAFORD to be used for undertaking 
procurement under this Project and consistency with IFAD Procurement Guidelines should be ensured. 
Concepts relating to Accountability, Competition, Fairness, Transparency, Efficiency, Effectiveness & 
Economy and Value for Money contained in IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and which are central to IFAD’s 
Procurement Philosophy are discussed above. 
The Procurement Process involves the purchasing, acquiring, hiring or obtaining of goods, works and services 
by any contractual means and can be defined in more detail as procurement of goods, procurement of works 
and procurement of services. The procurement cycle consists of General Procurement Notice, Tender 
Document Preparation, Pre-Qualification, Advertisement, Receipt of Tenders, Public opening of Tenders, 
Evaluate of Tenders, Award of Contract, Issue of Work Order or Purchase Order and Performance of 
contract. 
Each Annual Procurement Plan will identify procedures which must be implemented by the Borrower in 
order to ensure consistency with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines.  IFAD may require that all bidding 
documents and contracts and other records for procurement of goods, works and services financed by the 
Loans/Grants are: 
Available for full inspection by the Fund of all bid documentation and related records; 
Maintained for ten years after the project completion date; and  
IFAD may also require that the Project cooperate with agents or representatives of the Fund carrying out an 
audit or investigation into procurement issues. 
IFAD’s review of and no objection to procurement plans is compulsory under all financing agreements 
directly supervised by IFAD. AAFORD is one such agreement. 
Page 97 of 207 
IFAD monitoring and review to ensure that the procurement process is carried out in conformity with IFAD 
procurement Guidelines and with the agreed procurement plan, IFAD will review arrangements for 
procurement of goods, works and services proposed by the borrower/recipient, including: 
Contract packaging;  
Applicable procedures and procurement methods;  
Bidding documentation; 
Composition of bid evaluation committees; 
Bid evaluations and award recommendations; and 
Draft contracts and contract amendments. 
The extent to which these review procedures will be applied to the project will be contained in the letter to 
the borrower/recipient and the procurement plan. For full details on the review processes, refer to IFAD 
Procurement Handbook. 
Post-review: All other contracts will be subject to post-review and may be subject to procurement audit by 
the Fund. The Project staff will maintain accurate records of all procurement activities and documents 
related to the Project. The procurement files will be maintained for review by IFAD supervision missions and 
independent audits. The Project staff will also consolidate procurement activities into quarterly and annual 
progress reports. 
Mis-procurement: IFAD will not finance expenditures for goods, works or consulting services that have not 
been procured in accordance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and the financing agreement. In such cases, 
IFAD may, in addition, take other remedial action under the financing agreement, including cancellation of 
the amount in question from the loan and/or grant account by declaring it ineligible. Even if the contract was 
awarded following IFAD’s “no objection” statement, the Fund may still declare mis-procurement if it 
concludes that this statement was issued on the basis of incomplete, inaccurate or misleading information 
furnished by the borrower/recipient, or that the terms and conditions of the contract had been modified 
without IFAD’s approval. 
Institutional Arrangements.  
AAFORD Procurement Activities will be implemented under two institutional arrangements, namely the 
Implementation Support Unit (ISU) and Zonal Offices at Sunyani and Tamale. At the central level, an ISU will 
be established under the Ministry of Finance.  With regard to procurement management, two procurement 
officers (Procurement Officer and Procurement Assistant) with required qualifications and experience will be 
recruited from the market. With additional TA to strengthen procurement capacity, the institutions can 
undertake implementation, facilitation, and coordination of the Project with reduced risk.  
At the central level, the ISU anchored under the MoF will be responsible for implementing procurements 
under all Components. 
Page 98 of 207 
The AAFORD ISU will be responsible to manage and oversee overall Project-related procurement including 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB), National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procurements and selection of 
consultants for larger consultancy contracts as well as National Shopping, though it will require extensive 
support. The majority of the procurement activities under AAFORD will be implemented through the 
application of NCB method; relatively few high-value/specialized procurement packages will attract ICB. 
Appropriate thresholds that can maximize the efficiency of procurement implementation but manage the 
governance risks will be specified in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB).  
The two Procurement Officers (POs) will oversee and carry out AAFORD procurement. The POs will report to 
the Project Coordinator and their main responsibilities are to:  
establish and update procurement procedures for the Project based on the IFAD Procurement Guidelines; 
prepare and update the annual procurement plan (in coordination with relevant staff of the ISU based on the 
AWPB; 
ensure the timely and transparent procurement of goods, works and services as identified in the 
procurement plan and in accordance with the applicable rules and procedures; 
prepare bidding documents and coordinate the preparation of relevant inputs such as TORs, technical 
specifications and bills of quantities by technical staff or consultants;  
supervise the bidding processes including advertisements, bid opening, bid evaluation, negotiation and 
selection of contractors; prepare bid opening minutes and bid evaluation reports;  
draft contracts for signature by authorized Project representatives and contractors; 
manage the procurement monitoring database system; prepare periodic reports on the status of 
procurement for the Project; 
compile and confidentially keep up-to-date reports, documents and records of all procurement activities, 
ensuring proper documentation, transparency and ease of reference; maintain procurement files; 
monitor the administrative implementation of contracts in coordination with the Finance Unit; 
constantly review procurement arrangements in relation to the procurement plan to ensure consistency 
with the financing agreement and identify weaknesses, if any, and measures that should be undertaken to 
mitigate the risks posed by any weaknesses; 
maintain close liaison with IFAD on all issues pertaining to procurement; 
participate in Project management meetings and IFAD supervision missions, including the preparation of all 
information required, in particular the procurement records for facilitating post-procurement reviews;  
train Project and implementing partners staff on procurement issues; and  
carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project management 
AAFORD Special Procurement Committee (SPC) will be established by MoF in order to i) fast track each step 
of AAFORD procurement processes; ii) monitoring on the overall procurement processes of the Project 
Page 99 of 207 
putting in place corrective actions when needed; iii) cooperate with AAFORD in planning procurement 
processes and in preparing procurement documentation in order to assure the right timing of the processes 
and that tender documents are accurately prepared; follow up on the requests of No Objections to avoid 
delays in treatment. 
Works Procurement Arrangements 
No major works is contemplated in AAFORD. However, the following procedures will apply to procurement 
of works. 
Design of works: Design work will be centrally done through the ISU.  
It is proposed that AAFORD specific prequalified list of bidders for use in tendering Works transactions. The 
prequalified list should be updated every two years and will require the IFAD’s No Objection prior to being 
used for limited bidding. 
Development of bidding documents: Bidding documents including pre-qualification documents will be 
prepared by the ISU.  
Advertising: Request for pre-qualification advertisement will be placed in the newspapers and in the UNDB 
website by the IIS directing bidders to download the pre-qualification documents free of charge from specific 
website. Once the pre-qualification process is finalized, the invitation will be sent to the pre-qualified firms 
directing them on how to apply for the tenders.  
Handling of submitted bids: Receipt of completed tenders from bidders will be handled by the ISU. Bid 
opening will also be handled by the ISU in attendance of bidders who choose to attend. As part of a quality 
due diligence review, officials from the ISU will attend bid opening. Bid evaluation and approval will be a 
responsibility of the IIS (PIU, and contracts committees).  
Due diligence reviews, approvals and No Objections: Before the contract is awarded, the ISU will undertake a 
due diligence review and provide comments if they don’t concur with the result. The ISU should provide the 
type of comments used in No Objections. The ISU will request IFAD’s No Objection once the ISU is satisfied 
with the due process.  
Contract administration: The ISU will be fully responsible for the smooth implementation of a works project 
so as to ensure that there are no cost and time overruns. An owner’s engineer will be employed to assist the 
ISU in contract administration. 
Goods and Services Procurement Arrangements  
Goods: Goods and supplies such as vehicles, motorcycles and computers that may be required for the 
project will be procured centrally through the ISU in order to gain the benefits of bulk / quantity purchases. 
Services: Most of the anticipated services will cut across the two zones. These services will be procured 
centrally by the ISU through. 
Service Providers: The Project will be managed by the ISU and implemented by contracted service providers 
on performance related contracts. Service providers will include: (i) preselected public institutions who will 
have the status of Project Parties and be required to ensure that procurement actions undertaken by them 
Page 100 of 207 
and financed by IFAD or Government be undertaken in compliance with the stipulated procedures of IFAD 
and Government; and (ii) non-preselected civil society or private sector entities such as NGOs that will 
participate in the Project. Service providers not pre-selected will be procured on the basis of IFAD 
procurement guidelines. 
Performance based contracts: For Contracts, MoU and Framework Agreements between ISU and the 
vendors, it is suggested that performance-based contracts in the delivery of hardware and software goods 
and services will be adopted. Such contracts will focus on outputs and outcomes of service provision, with 
clear milestones, with triggers for contract extension linked to achievements. There will be no automatic 
extensions in time or scope. All contracts, MOUs and Framework Agreements will include the payment 
schedules with performance incentives and penalties, monitoring and quality assessment, and value-for-
money assessment. They will also define the key responsibilities of the partners at national and field levels, 
and will be jointly monitored and supervised. This is not dissimilar to current government personnel 
procedures which incorporate performance-based assessment. 
Applicable Procurement Rules and Regulations 
Overriding principles 
Procurement of goods, works and services shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 
Borrower/Recipient’s procurement regulations, to the extent such are consistent with the IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines and by observing the following specific principles:  
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with Financing Agreement and any duly agreed amendments 
thereto;  
Procurement will be conducted within the Project implementation period, except as provided under Article 
4.10(a)(ii) of IFAD General Conditions;  
The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated funds as per the Financing 
Agreement;  
Procurement is to be consistent with the duly approved annual work plan and budget (AWP/B) including a 
procurement plan (for the first time, the procurement plan will cover the first 18 months of the Project 
implementation period);  
Procurement is to result in the best value of money and fit for purpose.  
All goods, works and services procured will be exempt from duties and taxes. 
Procurement Planning 
Page 101 of 207 
At the outset of the Project, the Project in conjunction with IFAD, shall establish a procurement plan covering 
the first 18 months of the Project, followed by 12-month successive plans synchronized with the annual work 
plans and budget during implementation. IFAD’s review of and No objection to procurement plan is 
compulsory.  
For each contract to be financed by IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement methods, estimated cost, prior 
review requirements and time-frame would be agreed between the Project and IFAD respectively in the 
Procurement Plan. 
Procurement plan should be divided into goods, works and services and as a minimum, the procurement 
plan must contain the following information: 
A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period or the plan; 
The estimated value of each activity; 
The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity 
The method of review IFAD will undertake for each activity; 
In addition to the minimum information above, it is considered good practice for the procurement plan to 
capture additional information such as: 
Planned timing of the procurement activities; 
Procurement by Project component; 
Dates for IFAD prior review; 
The procurement plan shall be prepared in excel sheets and each procurement category 
(goods/works/consulting services/non-consulting services) in separate excel sheets as follows: - 
For goods, Works and Nom-Consulting Services 
Project title: 
Financiers: 
Period: 
Type of procurement: goods/works/services 
Code as per AWPB 
Component/unit 
Procurement tender number 
Item description 
Plan vs Actual with two rows: 
planned  
Page 102 of 207 
actual  
Contract type: Lumpsum or exact /BQS 
Total amount in USD 
Procurement method 
Prior or post review 
Preparation of tendering process 
bid document preparation and submission to IFAD 
IFAD No objection  
Bidding process 
Publication/invitation/advertisement 
Closing/opening 
Evaluation process 
Technical and financial evaluation and submission of report to IFAD  
IFAD No Objection to award 
Contract 
Award and notification of award 
Signing of the contract 
Contract period 
Contract completion date 
Comments  
For services 
Project title: 
Financiers: 
Period: 
Code AWPB 
Component/unit 
Procurement tender number 
Item description 
Page 103 of 207 
Plan vs Actual with two rows: 
planned  
actual  
Contract type: Lumpsum or time based 
Total amount in USD 
Selection method 
Prior or post review 
Preparation of tendering process (terms of reference) 
Preparation date 
IFAD No objection  
Bidding process/Request for Expression of Interest  
Dated of invitation 
Closing/opening 
Shortlist  
Date proposed for submission of shortlist to IFAD 
Date of IFAD No Objection 
Request for Proposal 
Date prepared and submitted to IFAD 
Date of IFAD No Objection 
Invitation date 
Date of opening 
Evaluation process: 
Technical evaluation 
IFAD No Objection to technical evaluation report 
Date of opening financial proposals 
Date of submission of combined evaluation report 
Date of IFAD No Objection to the report and award 
Contract 
Page 104 of 207 
Award and notification of award 
Signing of the contract 
Contract period 
Contract completion date 
Comments 
Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
Procurement Methods: The methods which are permitted for the procurement of works and goods are: a) 
international competitive bidding (ICB), b) limited international bidding (LIB) or restricted tendering, c) 
national competitive bidding (NCB) or open tender, d) international or national shopping or requests for 
quotations, e) direct contracting, and f) procurement from United Nations agencies. 
The methods which are permitted for the procurement of non-consulting services are: a) international 
competitive bidding (ICB), b) national competitive bidding (NCB) or open tender, c) national shopping or 
requests for quotations, and d) direct contracting. 
The methods which are permitted for the procurement of consulting services are: a) quality and cost-based 
selection, b) quality-based selection, c) selection under a fixed budget, d) selection based on consultant’ 
qualifications, e) least cost selection, f) single-source selection, and g) selection of individual consultants. 
For each contract to be financed by IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement methods, estimated cost, prior 
review requirements and time-frame will be agreed between the Project and IFAD respectively in the 
Procurement Plan. IFAD financed procurement of works, goods and consultancy services. While eventually 
the specific thresholds for procurement financed under the Project will be stipulated in the Letter to the 
Borrower, the recommendations are the following (based on the guidance established by the IFAD 
Procurement Manual): 
Works estimated to cost more than USD 800,000 equivalent will be procured through International 
Competitive Bidding (ICB) method either through pre-qualification or post-qualification procedure using the 
World Bank’s applicable Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs). Works estimated between USD 190,000 and 
USD 800,000 equivalent will be procured through the National Competitive Bidding (open tender). While 
works estimated below USD 190,000 will be procured through National Shopping (request for quotations). 
Direct contracting will have to be identified and approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify 
use of such method. 
Goods estimated to cost more than USD 200,000 equivalent per contract will be procured through the 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World Bank’s applicable SBDs. Goods estimated to 
cost between USD 70,000 and USD 200,000 equivalent per contract will be procured through National 
Competitive Bidding (open tender). Goods estimated to cost less than USD 70,000 equivalent per contract 
will be procured through the Shopping methods (request for quotations). Direct contracting will have to be 
identified and approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of such method.  
Page 105 of 207 
Consultancy services. Quality and Cost Based Selection will be the standard method applied unless otherwise 
approved. The following thresholds and processes will apply: i) International Request for Proposal (RFP)– for 
contracts with a value of USD 100,000 equivalent and above; ii) National Request for Proposal (RFP) – for 
contracts with a value of less than USD 100,000 equivalent and more than USD 10,000 equivalent. Contracts 
with a value of USD 10,000 equivalent or bellow, or procurement of individual consultancy or Technical 
Assistance services, will be based on National Shopping (request for quotation).  
Non-Consultancy services. The following thresholds and processes will apply: i) Services estimated to cost 
more than USD 100,000 equivalent per contract will be procured through the International Competitive 
Bidding (ICB) method, ii) NCB (open tender) method – for contracts with cost between USD 10,000 and USD 
100,000 equivalent. Contracts with a value of USD 10,000 equivalent or bellow, will be National Shopping 
(request for quotation from predetermined shortlist). 
However, these financial thresholds may be adjusted as appropriate, with prior IFAD approval, depending of 
the nature of the assignment. And the method of procurement to be followed will be pre-determined in 
each approved annual procurement plan. 
Definition of the applicable Procurement methods for Goods, Works and Non-consulting Services 
International Competitive Bidding: International competitive bidding (ICB) is a procurement method suited 
to high-value requirements that would be of interest to the international business community. The objective 
of ICB is to provide all eligible prospective bidders located and operating both within the 
Borrower’s/Recipient’s country and abroad with timely and adequate notification of the 
Borrower’s/Recipient’s requirements and an equal opportunity to bid for the required goods and works. 
Where ICB is the identified method of procurement within an approved procurement plan, World Bank 
procedures as set forth in their guidelines will apply. The new Procurement Regulations for Investment 
Project Financing (IPF) Borrowers of the World Bank available at: 
https://policies.worldbank.org/sites/ppf3/PPFDocuments/Forms/DispPage.aspx?docid=4005&ver=current, 
the competitive bidding is now called “Request for Bids (RFB)”. RFB is a competitive method for the 
solicitation of Bids. It should be used when, because of the nature of the Goods, Works, or Non-consulting 
Services to be provided, the Borrower is able to specify detailed requirements to which Bidders respond in 
offering Bids. The minimum period allowed for preparation of Bids/Proposals shall be forty two (42) Calendar 
Days for open international competitive procurement. The Standard Procurement Document for Request for 
Bids is available at: http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/299661509568509693/SPD-Request-for-Bids-GOODS-
1-envelope-OCT-2017.docx  for Goods and at: 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/328641509642865653/SPD-Request-for-Bids-SMALL-WORKS-1-Env-OCT-
2017.docx for works. 
Limited international bidding (LIB) is essentially ICB by direct invitation without open advertisement. It may 
be an appropriate method of procurement where: 
Contract amounts are small; 
There is only a limited number of suppliers or contractors; or 
Page 106 of 207 
Other exceptional reasons exist that may justify departure from full ICB procedures. 
Under LIB, borrowers/recipients should seek bids from a list of potential suppliers or contractors broad 
enough to ensure competitive prices. This list should include all suppliers and contractors when there are 
only a limited number. Domestic preferences are not applicable in the evaluation of bids under LIB. In all 
respects other than advertisement and preferences, ICB procedures apply to procurement under LIB, 
including the publication of the contract award. 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) is the competitive bidding procedure normally used for public 
procurement in the country of the Borrower/Recipient, and may be the most efficient and economical way 
of procuring goods or works that, by their nature or scope, are unlikely to attract foreign competition. NCB 
may be the preferred method of procurement where foreign bidders are not expected to be interested 
because: 
Contract values are small; 
Works are scattered geographically or spread out over time; 
Works are labor-intensive; or 
The goods or works are available locally at prices below those on the international market. 
NCB procedures may also be used where the advantages of ICB are clearly outweighed by the administrative 
or financial burden involved.  Advertising for procurement under NCB may be limited to the national press of 
the Borrower’s/Recipient’s government or, where possible, a free and open-access website. Bidding 
documents may be in an official language of the country, and local currency is generally used for the 
purposes of bidding and payment. The procedures are to provide for adequate competition in order to 
ensure reasonable prices, and the methods used in the evaluation of bids and the award of contracts are to 
be objective and made known to all bidders, and are not to be applied arbitrarily. The procedures will also 
include public opening of bids, publication of results of evaluation and of the award of contract, and 
provisions for bidders to protest. In addition, bidding documents will provide clear instructions on how bids 
should be submitted, how prices should be offered, and the place and time for submission of bids. Adequate 
response time for preparation and submission of bids will be provided. If eligible foreign firms wish to 
participate under these circumstances, they are to be allowed to do so. 
Shopping is a procurement method that entails comparing price quotations from several suppliers or 
contractors (usually at least three) to ensure competitive prices. It is an appropriate method for procuring 
readily available, off-the-shelf goods or standard specification commodities that are small in value, or simple 
civil works of small value. Requests for quotations should indicate the description and quantity of the goods, 
together with desired delivery (or completion) time and place. Quotations may be submitted by mail, 
electronic mail or facsimile. The evaluation of quotations will follow the principles of competition. The terms 
of the accepted offer are to be incorporated in a purchase order or brief contract. Under international 
shopping, the purchaser is to solicit quotations from at least three suppliers in two different countries. 
National shopping may be used where the desired goods are ordinarily available from more than one source 
in the country of the Borrower/Recipient at competitive prices. 
Page 107 of 207 
Procurement from United Nations agencies. There may be situations in which procurement from specialized 
agencies of the United Nations, acting as suppliers and pursuant to their own procedures, may be the most 
economical and efficient way of procuring relatively small quantities of off-the-shelf goods. Use of such 
agencies as supply sources, together with the Project component and the type of goods or works to be 
procured from such sources, are to be expressly and specifically agreed between the Borrower/Recipient 
and IFAD before proceeding with the application of this method of procurement. 
Direct Contracting (for Goods, Works and non-consulting services) consists in procuring goods or works 
without competition (by single or sole-source selection). Due to its non-competitive nature, DC may be only 
permitted in the following exceptional circumstances: 
An existing contract for goods or works awarded in accordance with procedures acceptable to IFAD, may be 
extended for additional goods or works of a similar nature to a maximum of 25 per cent (%) of the original 
contract value, with the prior approval of IFAD, provided that no advantage could be obtained by further 
competition and that the prices on the extended contract are reasonable. Provision for such an extension, if 
considered likely in advance, is to be included in the original contract; 
Standardization of vehicles, equipment or spare parts to ensure compatibility with existing vehicles, 
equipment or machinery may justify additional purchases from the original supplier. For such purchases to 
be justified, the original vehicles, equipment or machinery should be suitable; the number of new items 
should generally be less than the existing number; the price should be reasonable; and the advantages of 
another make or source of equipment are to have been considered and rejected on grounds acceptable to 
IFAD; 
The required equipment is proprietary and obtainable only from one source; 
The contractor responsible for a process design requires the purchase of critical items from a particular 
supplier as a condition of a performance guarantee; and  
Purchases from the original supplier may also be justified in exceptional cases and emergencies, such as in 
response to a natural disaster, conflict and post conflict, or in countries where there are restrictions to free 
markets and enterprises. 
Any request for direct contracting from a Borrower/Recipient must be accompanied by a detailed 
justification, which IFAD will examine carefully to ensure that it is satisfied that no other alternative selection 
methods can be used. 
IFAD Prior Review Thresholds 
In accordance with paragraph 80 of the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, the following will be subject to 
prior review by IFAD:  
First five contracts for goods and equipment and thereafter, award of any contract for goods and equipment 
estimated to cost USD 50,000 equivalent or more; 
Page 108 of 207 
First five contracts for works and thereafter, award of any contract for works estimated to cost USD 100,000 
equivalent or more; 
First five contracts for consultancy services, and thereafter, award to a firm of any contract for consultancy 
services estimated to cost USD 50,000 equivalent or more; 
First five contracts for non-consultancy services, and thereafter, and thereafter, award to a firm of any 
contract for non-consultancy services estimated to cost USD 10,000 equivalent or more; 
First five contracts for individuals, and thereafter, award to an individual of any contract for consulting 
services estimated to cost US$ 5,000 equivalent or more;  
Award of any contract through direct contracting, single source selection, including selection of United 
Nations’ agencies, irrespective of the amount. Furthermore, for consultancy services, all Terms of Reference, 
Short-listing (if applicable) and draft contracts will be subject to IFAD prior review. 
Aforementioned may be modified from time to time as notified by the Fund to the Borrower. 
Register of Contracts: Procurement carried out under the Project will be recorded and registered against the 
Procurement Plan. In addition, all contracts, with or without prior IFAD approval, will be listed in the Register 
of Contracts maintained by the procuring entity with the dates of approval as provided by IFAD. When a 
contract is amended, the amendment will be recorded in the Register of Contracts. If a contract is cancelled 
or declared ineligible for financing by IFAD, this information will be written in the Register of Contracts. As 
this register facilitates the review and approval of payment requests on contracts, it is to be updated and 
submitted to the IFAD country Project director on a monthly basis. The sample form to be used and 
instructions are detailed in Annex 6 of IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook. It will also be necessary that the 
ISU prepare annual statistics disaggregated by type and methods of procurement, for the overall 
procurement transactions carried out for the Project. 
RECORD KEEPING 
The IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing require that Borrower/recipients retain 
documents and records for review by IFAD at any time within a period of three (3) years after completion of 
the bid or contract. The following table shows what procurement files, folders or dossiers should contain: 
Document 
(i) A copy of the published advertisement or shortlist (if applicable) * 
Preferred format 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(ii) A copy of the published pre-qualification and invitation documents and any 
amendments, extensions or clarifications that were requested and issued* 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(iii) A record of tender opening signed by all present 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(iv) A full copy of each bid received and evaluated, plus clarifications requested and 
responses received 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Page 109 of 207 
(v) A copy of the evaluation report* 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(vi) Signed minutes of all meetings relating to the procurement, including pre-bid 
and negotiation meetings where these were held 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(vii) A contract award notice* 
(viii) Any letter of tender acceptance to the supplier, contractor or consultant* 
(ix) The signed contract document and contract acceptance* 
(x) Any contract amendments* 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xi) All contractual correspondence between the procuring entity and a supplier, 
contractor or consultant 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xii) Post-contract documents relating to the fulfillment of contract obligations, in 
particular photocopies of bank guarantees or payment guarantees 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xiii) Signed minutes of any meetings related to contract management, including 
contract progress or review meetings 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xiv) Signed delivery documents evidencing delivery of supplies or signed 
completion certificates in relation to a contract for services or works under the 
contract, including any contract delivery records 
(xv) A copy of all invoices for works, services or supplies, including work papers 
verifying the accuracy of payments claimed and details of the actual payment 
authorized 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xvi) A copy of cumulative payment worksheets/records evidencing management of 
all payments made 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xvii) A copy of all submissions to and all decisions of the appropriate approval 
authority related to the procurement, including the approval of the invitation 
documents, approval of the evaluation report(s), contract award, approval of 
contract documents and contract amendments and any decision to suspend or 
cancel procurement proceedings 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xviii) A copy of any claims made by the procuring entity with respect to any 
warranty, non-warranty, short supply, damage and other claims upon the provider 
or upon the procuring entity 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Page 110 of 207 
(xix) In the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and correspondence in 
relation to the seeking of IFAD’s no-objection 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xx) any other communications relating to the procurement in questions, including 
internal entity correspondence 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
*Ideally, drafts of these published documents and reports should also be retained for completeness and 
to provide a full picture of how the published document evolved. It is, however, accepted that where 
issues of space exist this may not always be possible in practice. 
Appendix 1: Procurement Procedures  
Goods and Works and Non-consulting Services 
International Competitive Bidding 
The procedure for ICB is lengthy to ensure quality of bids and approvals at various stages from IFAD, about 
several steps shall be observed in all cases to safe guard against misuse of the funds.  These are: 
Preparation of bid documents:   
Prepare full documentation that is detailed enough for prospective bidders to make realistic and accurate 
bids.  There will be no use of trade names for vehicles and equipment, (e.g., Toyota Land Cruiser); rather 
request bids for 4x4 LWB, station wagon with 7 to 10 seats, engine size in the range of e.g.  2.0 to 3.0 litres 
etc. plus other requirements such as radio, air-condition etc.  
All bidding documents for the procurement of goods, works and services would be prepared by the 
procurement officer with the support of the technical expert(s), who would supply specifications, terms of 
reference, Bills of Quantities and evaluation and post-qualification criteria as required. 
All bidding documents and contracts for the procurement of goods, works and services financed by IFAD loan 
and grant would include a provision requiring bidders, suppliers, contractors, sub- contractors and 
consultants to permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records or other documents relating to the bid 
submission and contract performance and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors and 
investigators, as appropriate 
Goods and equipment should be grouped into sizeable packages to cater for economies of scale, efficient 
and timely procurement. 
Submit prepared bid documents to IFAD to obtain the no objection. 
Once the no objection is obtained, ISU may proceed to advertise in one or more English-language 
newspapers or other publications that, together, have sufficient circulation outside Ghana to allow effective 
competition for the procurement. Additionally, the ISU should advertise in the UNDB Website. 
The Project shall also advertise in the dedicated government portals or its own website and at least two local 
dailies of nationwide circulation following the format prescribed by IFAD. 
A small fee equal to the cost of printing a Bidding documents should be charged.  
Page 111 of 207 
All bidders will be given enough time to prepare and present their bids. For vehicles and equipment and 
related items, the bidding period shall be 42 days at least while for complex bids such as civil works where 
site inspections are necessary, 60 days will be given. 
The Project should ensure that the tender box where tenders must be submitted is open and accessible and 
that the tender box has two locks, with each key to the lock kept by a different officer and that the tender 
box remains locked until the time for tender opening.   
Each tender that is delivered shall be placed unopened in the tender box by the person delivering the tender 
or by the staff of the Project immediately upon receipt of the tender if it is delivered by post. If a tender is 
too large to be placed in the tender box, it shall be received in the manner determined by the Project if no 
other manner is set out in the tender document. 
Bid opening.    
Once the deadline for receiving bids has passed bids will be opened.   All bidders shall be at liberty to attend 
the opening ceremony in person or through their appointed representatives. The bid prices shall be read out 
lot by lot as stipulated in the bidding documents. Tenders submitted later than the specified period shall be 
rejected and returned unopened. 
A bid opening committee shall be appointed by the Project Coordinator consisting of at least three members. 
The procurement officer or his/her authorized designate shall be the Secretary  
The terms of the committee shall be as follows: 
Immediately after the deadline for submitting bids, the bid opening committee shall open all bids received 
before that deadline. 
Check that the bids are marked for the correct bid opening. 
Check for any withdrawals and confirm that such withdrawal is authentic. Any bid withdrawn in writing shall 
not be eligible for evaluation or consideration in the bid process.  
Check that bid packaging shows no sign of tampering. If there is damage, then this must be stated and 
included in the minutes 
Those submitting bids or their representatives may attend the opening of proposals/bids. All bidders’ 
representatives present must sign a register, detailing their name and the name and address of the company 
they represent. 
The bid opening committee shall assign an identification number to each bid and write it on each copy of the 
bid document. 
As each bid is opened, the following shall be read out loud and recorded in a document to be called the bid 
opening register— 
The name and address of the person submitting the bid; 
Page 112 of 207 
The currency of the bid and total price, where applicable including any modifications or discounts received 
before the deadline for submitting bids.  
The total price of the bid may not be read out where a bid consists of numerous items that are quoted 
separately 
 The total price of the bid shall not be read out where a bid is preceded by a technical evaluation and such 
bid has not met the technical evaluation criteria. Where a bidder has failed the technical evaluation, the 
entity shall return the financial proposal unopened. 
If applicable, what has been given as bid security or whether samples have been submitted where 
applicable; 
The number of pages paginated/serialized by each bidder for each bid submitted 
The number of copies submitted with the original bid 
No bidder shall be disqualified by the procuring entity during opening of bids. 
The Committee shall provide a copy of the bid opening register to a person submitting a bid; 
Each member of the bid opening committee shall — 
(a) Sign each original and copies of bid on one or more pages as determined by the bid opening committee; 
and 
(b)   Initial, in each bid, against the quotation of the price and any modifications or discounts, where 
applicable. 
The bid opening committee shall prepare bid opening minutes which shall set out the following: -  
A record of the procedure followed in opening the bids; and 
The   particulars   of   those   persons   submitting bids, or their Representatives, who attended the opening 
of the bids. 
To acknowledge that the minutes are true reflection of the proceedings held, each member of the bid 
opening committee shall— 
Initial each page of the minutes; 
Append his or her signature as well as initial to the final page of the minutes indicating their full name and 
designation. 
A person who causes the physical loss of bid documents commits an offence. 
The chairperson should close the bid opening meeting, reminding bidders that they must not seek to 
influence the evaluation process and that the successful bid will be communicated in due course. 
Page 113 of 207 
Where bid openings for more than one procurement process are conducted at the same time, they must be 
conducted consecutively, with one opening completed, recorded and bid removed before the next opening 
commences. 
Bid Evaluation.    
This is the process by which the best evaluated bid is selected for award of contract from among all the bids 
received. Bid evaluation is important and any delay at this stage may involve requesting bidders to extend 
validities or lead to price increases.  The evaluation committee should carry out the evaluation and quality of 
goods should be evaluated against costs. The lowest bidders should not necessarily be selected but the best 
value for money bid considering Project needs. Special considerations such as standardizing on model of 
vehicle should be considered at this stage.  The evaluation team must use only the criteria provided for in 
the bid documents and no other criteria should be introduced. 
Evaluation consists of the following stages: 
A preliminary evaluation is undertaken soon after opening bids to ascertain that the bid is responsive and 
conforms to all eligibility and other mandatory requirements in the bid documents and that the bid has been 
submitted in the correct format, has been signed by the authorized person, and that the correct number of 
copies, bid security (if required), validity and any required samples have been provided.  Any bid that does 
not meet the requirements is rejected. 
Technical evaluation is then conducted on bids that pass the preliminary evaluation for technical conformity. 
The technical evaluation precedes the financial evaluation.  If the bid does not meet the technical 
requirements, it is not responsive and does not proceed to financial evaluation. 
Financial evaluation which considers prices read out at bid opening, corrections for arithmetic errors, 
currency, discounts e.t.c is undertaken. Bids are then ranked according to their evaluated price and the 
successful bid is the lowest evaluated price. 
Bid evaluation shall be done by the Evaluation Committee appointed by the Project Coordinator within 
7(seven) days after the opening of the bids.    
Evaluation committee should include members with a relevant type of skills, knowledge and experience 
relevant to the procurement requirement as far as possible, which may include:  
Technical skills; 
End-user representatives; 
Procurement and contracting skills; 
Financial management or analysis skills; 
Legal expertise. 
The procurement officer shall be the secretary. 
The terms of reference for the evaluation committee shall be as follows: - 
Page 114 of 207 
Examine all bids received if they conform to all the eligibility and other mandatory requirements in the bid 
documents  
Evaluate and compare all the responsive bids other than bids rejected as non-responsive. 
Assess the technical and financial aspects of the bids as per criteria in the documents as well as undertake 
the negotiation of the process 
Carry out the evaluation with due diligence if needed. 
No member of the committee shall communicate with the bidder who has submitted a bid that is under 
consideration of the evaluation; 
The evaluation committee shall prepare an evaluation report containing a summary of the evaluation and 
comparison of bids and shall submit the report to the person responsible for procurement for his or her 
review and recommendation and submission to the accounting officer for approval. 
The report prepared under paragraph (f) shall include 
A summary of all bids received and opened 
The results of the preliminary evaluation, with reasons why any bid was rejected; 
details of any minor deviations accepted and the way in which such deviations were quantified and taken 
into account in the evaluation and comparison of the bids;  
The scores awarded by each evaluator for each bid as applicable for services;  
Avoid using point/Score/merit system for evaluation of works and goods procurement. 
A summary of the relative strengths and weaknesses of each bid as applicable;  
The total score for each bid as applicable for services; 
The   evaluated   price   of   each   bid, showing   any discounts, corrections or adjustments to the bid price 
and any conversion to a common currency 
the ranking of the bids each according to its total evaluated price  
the results of any confirmation of qualification conducted and 
A recommendation to award the bid to the lowest evaluated bidder or to the person who submitted the 
proposal with the highest total score and such other recommendation as may be necessary 
The evaluation report shall be signed by each member of the evaluation committee 
The committee in writing may request a clarification of a bid from a bidder to assist in evaluation and 
comparison of bids. The clarification shall not change the terms of the bid; 
The evaluation shall be carried out within a maximum of thirty days after opening. 
Page 115 of 207 
The evaluation committee may, after bid evaluation, but prior to the award of the bid, conducts due 
diligence and present the report in writing to confirm and verify the qualifications of the bidder who 
submitted the lowest evaluated responsive bid to be awarded the contract in accordance with this Act. The 
conduct of due diligence may include obtaining confidential references from persons with whom the bidder 
has had prior engagement. 
To acknowledge that the due diligence report is a true reflection of the proceedings held, each member who 
was part of the due diligence by the evaluation committee shall— 
Initial each page of the report; and 
Append his or her signature as well as their full name and designation. 
Award of Bid 
The evaluation team will make a report and a recommendation for award to the lowest evaluated bidder to 
the Accounting Officer who will award the bid based on the evaluation report. The ISU will then seek for a no 
objection from IFAD before awarding the bid. 
All bids shall be evaluated by the evaluation committee for the purpose of making recommendation 
to the Accounting Officer through the procurement officer to inform the decision of the award of the 
contract to the successful bidders. 
The successful bid shall be the bid with the lowest evaluated price. 
Contract formation and performance.    
Once a no objection has been granted, a contract with the awarded bidder is entered into for performance 
of the contract.  
The existence of a contract shall be confirmed through the signature of a contract document incorporating 
all agreements between the parties and such contract shall be signed by the Project Coordinator and the 
successful bidder. The Project shall enter into a written contract with the person submitting the successful 
bid based on the bid documents and any clarification that emanate from the procurement proceedings. 
The written contract shall be entered into within the period specified in the notification. 
The bid documents shall be the basis of all procurement contracts and shall, constitute at a minimum— 
Contract Agreement Form; 
Notification of Award; 
Bid Form; 
Special Conditions of Contract; 
Page 116 of 207 
General Conditions of Contract; 
Schedule of Requirements; 
Price schedule or bills of quantities submitted by the bidder; 
Technical Specifications. 
If the person submitting the successful bid refuses to enter into a written contract in writing as required, he 
or she shall forfeit his or her bid security and the procurement process shall proceed with the next lowest 
evaluated bidder 
A successful bidder shall submit a performance security equivalent to not more than ten per cent of the 
contract amount before signing of the contract if provided in the bid document. In case the contract is not 
fully or well executed, the performance security shall unconditionally be fully seized by the Project as 
compensation without prejudice to other penalties provided for. The bank or authorized financial institution 
shall also be obliged to pay an additional interest of one percent (1%) for every day of payment delay after 
ten (10) working days   from   the   receipt   of   the   claim   provided   this requirement is disclosed in the 
performance security and if it is necessary to take the matter to courts, and that the court rules in favour of 
the procuring entity, this interest shall continue to accrue up to the time the courts' decision is executed.  
The performance security may not generate interest and it shall be determined in accordance with the form 
provided for in the biding document and may be paid in form of a bank guarantee, issued by an authorized 
financial institution. The bid document shall provide for, if necessary, other forms of performance security 
that may be requested from the successful bidder. The bank or authorized financial institution shall be 
obliged to give to the Project all the amount of the performance security upon claim by the Project. 
If the contractor is foreign, the guarantee shall be issued by a local bank or authorized financial institution 
issued by a corresponding bank in Ghana recognized the Bank of Ghana. 
Payments.   
Under no circumstances, will payments for goods and services be realised before receipt of the goods or the 
services have been delivered and physical verification of the receipt of vouchers and the actual goods 
undertaken. 
The inspection and acceptance shall be done by the Inspection and Acceptance Committee appointed by the 
Project Coordinator to ensure that the correct quantity is received and the technical standards have been 
met. 
Notwithstanding the appointment of a Contract Manager who will manage the procurement subject on a 
day to day basis, it is the Inspection and Acceptance Committee who issue Interim / Progress / Completion / 
Final Certificates as required and who confirm that payment may be made.   
The appointment letter for the Inspection and Acceptance Committee members should make clear the 
duties of those members and insist that they satisfy themselves personally that work has been done in 
accordance with the contract before authorizing payments. 
Page 117 of 207 
The inspection and acceptance committee shall be composed of a chairman and at least two other members, 
including the head of the user component appointed on the recommendation of the Procurement officer. 
The inspection and acceptance committee shall immediately after the delivery of the goods, works or 
services— 
inspect and where necessary, test the goods received; 
inspect and review the goods, works or services in order to ensure compliance with the terms and 
specifications of the contract;  
Accept or reject, on behalf of the Project, the delivered goods, works or services. 
Ensure that the correct quantity of the goods is received; 
Ensure that the goods, works or services meet the technical standards defined in the contract 
Ensure that the goods, works or services have been delivered or completed on time, or that any delay has 
been noted; 
Ensure that all required manuals or documentation has been received; and 
Issue interim or completion certificates or goods received notes, as appropriate and in accordance with the 
contract 
For complex and specialized procurement contract, the Accounting Officer shall appoint a contract 
implementation team which shall include members from the procurement function, and the head of the 
component, the relevant technical department and a consultant where applicable 
For the purpose of managing complex and specialized procurement contracts the contract implementation 
team shall be responsible for— 
Monitoring the performance of the contractor, to ensure that all delivery or performance obligations are 
met or appropriate action taken by the procuring entity in the event of obligations not being met; 
ensure that the contractor submits all required documentation as specified in the biding documents, the 
contract and as required by law; 
Ensure that the procuring entity meets all its payment and other obligations on time and in accordance with 
the contract. 
ensure that there is right quality and within the time frame, where required; 
review any contract variation requests and make recommendations to the Accounting Officer for 
considerations and such reviews for variation shall be clearly justified by the technical department in writing 
backed by supporting evidence and submitted to the head of the procurement function for processing; 
manage handover or acceptance procedures as prescribed; 
make recommendations for contract termination, where appropriate; 
Page 118 of 207 
ensure that the contract is complete, prior to closing the contract file including all handover procedures, 
transfers of title if need be and that the final retention payment has been made; 
ensure that all contract administration records are complete, up to date, filed and archived as required; and 
ensure that the contractor acts in accordance with the provisions of the contract 
Ensure discharge of performance guarantee where required. 
The Project may co-opt a member of the contract implementation team from another procuring entity or 
outsource 
Where a supplier/contractor furnished the Project with a performance security, the Security shall be 
returned to the supplier/contractor within thirty (30) days following the final acceptance by the Project. The 
thirty (30) days referred to shall include the retention period except in cases of procurement for works 
where the period shall commence from the date of practical completion or handover, whichever is earlier. 
No works, goods or services contract shall be paid for before they are executed or delivered and accepted by 
the Project except where so specified in the bid documents and contract agreement. Such an advance 
payment shall not be paid before the contract is signed. Under exceptional circumstances advance payment 
may be granted and shall not exceed twenty per cent (20 %) of the price of the bid and shall be paid upon 
submission by the supplier/contractor to the Project of an advance payment security equivalent to the 
advance itself and that security shall be given by a reputable bank or any authorized financial institution 
issued by a corresponding bank in Ghana recognized by the Bank of Ghana, in case the supplier/contractor is 
a foreigner. 
Supplier/contractor shall use the advance paid only in activities related to the bid. If the supplier/contractor 
uses the entire advance or part of it in other activities that are unrelated to the bid, the advance shall 
immediately be considered as a debt which shall be paid by seizing the entire security or part of it. 
International Competitive Bidding with Prequalification Procedure (Recommended for Civil Works) 
In addition to the above-mentioned procedures, Prior issuing the bidding documents to the pre-qualified 
firms the following steps will be taken: 
Development of bidding documents: Bidding documents including pre-qualification documents will be 
prepared by the ISU.  
Advertising: Request for pre-qualification advertisement will be placed in the newspapers and in the UNDB 
website by the ISU directing bidders to download the pre-qualification documents free of charge from 
specific website. Once the PCU finalise the pre-qualification process, the invitation will be sent to the pre-
qualified firms directing them on how to apply for the tenders. 
National Competitive Bidding 
Page 119 of 207 
For National competitive bidding (NCB), the same principles of ICB apply to NCB, except that publication of a 
Specific Procurement Notice in UNDB Website. The Project shall advertise in the dedicated government 
portals, its own website and at least one local dailies of nationwide circulation. 
National Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) shall be used for undertaking procurement under this Project 
and consistency with IFAD Procurement Guidelines shall be ensured. 
National Shopping 
This method will be applied by obtaining three quotations from various sources. Contracts will be awarded 
on the basis of quotations obtained from 3 qualified contractors/vendors/service providers in response to a 
written invitation (request for quotations). 
Procurement of Consulting Services 
Principles 
The procurement of consulting services under the IFAD will be guided by the following principles: 
The need for high quality services; 
The need for economy and efficiency; 
The aim to give qualified consultants from Ghana and all other eligible IFAD member countries an 
opportunity to compete in providing services; 
The need to encourage the development and use of local consultants; and 
The importance of transparency in the selection process. 
Definition of Consultants 
The term “consultants” includes a wide variety of consulting firms, engineering firms, management firms, 
architectural firms, legal practices, university and research institutions, auditors, banks, UN agencies and 
other multinational agencies, as well as individuals. 
Consultants may associate with each other to complement their respective areas of expertise, or for other 
reasons.  Such an association may be for the long term (independent of any particular assignment) or for a 
specific assignment.  If “association” takes the form of a joint venture or of a sub-consultancy, all members 
of the joint venture shall sign the contract and shall be jointly and severally liable for the entire assignment. 
Selection Methods 
Contracts for the procurement of consultancy services may be awarded on the basis of:  
Page 120 of 207 
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS),  
Quality Based Selection (QBS),  
Fixed Budget Selection (FBS),  
Least Cost Selection (LCS),  
Consultants' Qualification (CQS), 
Individual Consultants' Selection (ICS), and 
Single Source Selection (SSS). 
Quality- and Cost-based Selection (QCBS) 
The QCBS method involves competition among consulting firms in such a manner that the quality of the 
proposal as well as the estimated cost of services are taken into account, and the firm with the highest 
combined quality and cost score is awarded the contract. 
The selection process involves the following steps: 
Preparation of Terms of Reference (TOR); 
Preparation of cost estimate and the budget; 
Advertising for Expression of Interest (EOI) or Statement of Capability; 
Preparation of the short list of consultants based on evaluation of EOI; 
Preparation and issuance of the Request for Proposals (RFP) to the short-listed consultants; RFP consists of: 
(i) Letter of Invitation, (ii) Information to Consultants, (iii) the TOR, and (iv) proposed contract. 
Receipt of proposals; 
Evaluation of technical proposal (i.e., evaluation of quality); 
Evaluation of financial proposal (i.e., evaluation of cost of services); 
Combined quality and cost evaluation; 
Negotiations and award of the contract to the firm with the highest combined quality and cost score. 
Important considerations for implementing each step are discussed briefly below. 
Selection Process 
The Terms of Reference (TOR) shall define the objectives of the assignment, scope of assignment outlining 
services necessary to carry out the assignment, clearly state the expected outputs, and shall include 
Page 121 of 207 
background information which would facilitate the preparation of the proposals.  In general, the TOR should 
clearly state WHAT the client wants done, while it is the responsibility of the consultants to show HOW that 
will be done. 
Cost Estimate:  A realistic cost estimate shall be made to provide the client with reasonable estimate of 
resources needed to carry out the assignment.  Cost estimates shall include cost of personnel (foreign and 
local personnel) broken down into fees and social costs, logistical support, physical inputs (vehicles, 
equipment), and expenses such as airfares, communication, office supplies and production of required 
reports. 
Advertising:  To obtain expressions of interest (EOI) or statement of capability, the assignment shall be 
advertised in Member countries and as required internationally (in case of International REOI) and in local 
newspapers of national circulation.  Sufficient time (at least 14 days) should be allowed for the preparation 
and submission of EOI.  To enable submission of comparable EOIs from prospective consultants, the 
advertisement should specify minimum information to be submitted. This should include: 
Eligibility criteria “evaluated through pass/fail system” 
Company profile, including name of the country in which the firm is registered “evaluated through point 
system”; 
Experience of projects related to the assignment, including brief descriptions of most recent relevant 
assignments (location, client, cost, staff involved) “evaluated through point system”; 
Financial capabilities (for large and complex assignments) “evaluated through point system”. 
Short List of Consultants:  The short list is obtained from evaluation of EOIs submitted in response to the 
advertisement.  The short list shall consist of minimum three firms.  Once the short list is finalized, Requests 
for Proposals (RFPs) are issued and submitted to the shortlisted consultant.  
Preparation and Issuance of the Request for Proposals (RFP):  the RFP will consist of (i) Letter of Invitation, 
(ii) Information to Consultants, the TOR, and (iv) proposed form of contract. The Information to Consultants 
should not indicate the budget (since cost is a selection criterion), but shall indicate the expected 
professional time input for key staff. The standard RFP shall be used with minimum modifications. 
Receipt of Proposals: Sufficient time shall be allowed for preparation and submission of proposals. 
Depending on the complexity of the assignment, 4–6 weeks shall be allowed. The technical and financial 
proposals shall be submitted at the same time but in separately marked envelopes.  Opening of the 
proposals shall take place immediately after the closing time for submission of proposals.  The technical 
proposal shall be opened but the financial proposals shall remain sealed and deposited in a safe place until 
the technical proposals have been evaluated. 
Evaluation of Proposals:  A two stage evaluation shall take place: firstly, the evaluation of technical quality 
and, secondly, the evaluation of cost of services and combination of the technical and financial scores.  
Evaluation shall be by a committee of relevantly qualified individuals in the areas covered by the assignment 
(technical, financial, social and legal).  The evaluation of technical quality is based on the criteria specified in 
Page 122 of 207 
the RFP, but generally covers the following: (i) consultants’ specific experience; (ii) methodology, approach 
and workplan; (iii) proposed key personnel; (iv) transfer of knowledge.  The following weights are indicative 
and may be adjusted for specific circumstances.  The proposed weights shall be disclosed in the RFP. 
Consultant’s specific experience: 
Methodology, approach and workplan: 
Key personnel: 
Transfer of knowledge: 
Total: 
5 to 10 points 
20 to 50 points 
30 to 60 points 
0 to 10 points 
100 points 
The RFP would normally include criteria for combining quality and cost to obtain a single combined total 
score.  For example, Quality and Cost would be combined in proportions 70-80% for quality of proposal and 
30-20% for cost of services. 
Negotiations and Contract Award:  Negotiations shall be carried out with the firm with the highest combined 
technical and financial score.  Objective of negotiations is to reach a common understanding about the TOR, 
the methodology, proposed staffing, client’s inputs, and conditions of contract. The consultants shall not be 
allowed to substitute key staff unless justified by long delays between submission of proposals and award of 
contract.  The consultants should also not be expected to reduce their unit costs since price has already been 
taken into account in the selection. The contract shall be signed after successful negotiations.  
Rejection of All Proposals 
All proposals may be rejected if (i) they are non-responsive to the TOR, or (ii) the costs are substantially 
higher than the estimated cost. In the latter case, measures for increasing the budget should be explored.  In 
any case, the IFAD “No Objection” is required before proceeding with the rejection of the bidding and 
proceeding with an alternative course of action. 
Quality-Based Selection (QBS) 
QBS is appropriate for the following types of consulting assignments: 
Complex or highly specialized assignments with need for demonstrable innovation by the consultants, e.g., 
country economic studies, urban master plan, financial sector reforms; 
assignments with high downstream impact, e.g., policy studies, management studies, engineering design of 
complex infrastructure;  
assignments which could be carried out in different ways, such that it is difficult to compare proposals 
(examples include management advice, policy studies) 
Page 123 of 207 
For these types of assignments, short-listed consultants shall be asked to submit technical proposals and the 
firm with the highest technical proposal invited to submit a financial proposal and negotiate a contract. 
Selection under Fixed Budget 
For assignments which are simple in nature and can be easily defined, the consultants may be selected under 
a fixed budget.  The RFP should indicate that selection will be based on Selection under Fixed Budget.  The 
process takes the following steps. 
Short-listed consultants are requested to submit technical and financial proposals. 
The technical proposals are evaluated without opening the financial proposals.  The technical proposals are 
ranked on basis of technical score. 
All the financial proposals are opened.  The proposals above the budget are rejected. 
The firm that has submitted the highest ranked technical proposal among those below the budget shall be 
awarded the contract. 
Least-Cost Selection 
This is applicable for assignment of a standard or routine nature (e.g., audit) with well-established 
performance standards.  A minimum qualifying score for the “quality” is established.  Technical and financial 
proposals are submitted in two separate envelopes from a short list of consultants.  The firm with the lowest 
price among those scoring above the qualifying score shall be awarded the contract. 
Consultants’ Qualification 
This method is applicable for small assignments for which the need for preparing and evaluating competitive 
proposals is not justified.  The steps in the selection process are: 
prepare TOR; 
request expressions of interest and information on consultants’ experience and suitability for the 
assignment;  
establish a short list; 
select the firm with the most appropriate qualifications; 
invite the selected firm to submit a combined technical and financial proposal; and 
negotiate a contract. 
Single-Source Selection 
This is selection without competition and is most applicable under the following conditions: 
Page 124 of 207 
Continuation of existing or previous contract awarded on competitive basis before; 
Need for rapid selection, such as in an emergency; 
Very small assignments; and 
When only one firm is qualified to handle the assignment. 
The selected firm is asked to submit a technical and financial proposal, and these become the basis of 
negotiations and contract award. 
Project :  Affordable 
Procedure :  Intern 
  Agricultural  Financing for  Resilien t   Rural Development 
I CB for goods, works or non 
  GHANA   ( AAFORD )   
 services) 
- 
national Competitive Bidding ( 
Individual consultants (IC).  
IC are employed on assignments for which (a) a team of experts is not required, (b) no additional outside 
(home office) professional support is required, and (c) the experience and qualifications of the individual are 
the paramount requirement. Advertisement for seeking expressions of interest (EOI) is encouraged, 
particularly when the Borrower does not have knowledge of experienced and qualified individuals or of their 
availability, or the services are complex, or there are potential benefits from wider advertising, or if it is 
mandatory under national law. All invitations for EOIs should specify selection criteria that are solely based 
on experience and qualifications.  
Individual consultants are selected on the basis of their relevant experience, qualifications, and capability to 
carry out the assignment. They do not need to submit proposals and shall be considered if they meet 
minimum relevant requirements which shall be determined by the Borrower on the basis of the nature and 
complexity of the assignment, and assessed on the basis of academic background and relevant specific 
experience, and, as appropriate, knowledge of local conditions such as national language, culture, 
administrative systems, and government organization. The selection shall be carried out through the 
comparison of the relevant overall capacity of at least three qualified candidates among those who have 
expressed interest in the assignment or have been approached directly by the Borrower. Individuals selected 
to be employed by the Borrower shall be the most experienced and best qualified, and shall be fully capable 
of carrying out the assignment. The Borrower shall negotiate a contract with the selected individual 
consultant after reaching agreement on satisfactory terms and conditions of the contract, including 
reasonable fees and other expenses.  
Individual consultants may be selected on a single-source basis with due justification in exceptional cases 
such as:  
Page 125 of 207 
tasks that are a continuation of previous work that the consultant has carried out and for which the 
consultant was selected competitively;  
assignments with a total expected duration of less than 3 (three) months;  
urgent situations; and  
when the individual is the only consultant qualified for the assignment. The Borrower shall submit to IFAD 
for its review and no objection the TOR of the assignment, a sufficiently detailed justification, including the 
rationale for single-source selection instead of a competitive selection process, and the basis for 
recommending a particular individual consultant in all such cases. 
Government officials and civil servants of the Borrower’s country may only be hired under 
consulting contracts in the Borrower’s country, either as individuals or as members of the 
team of experts proposed by a consulting firm, provided that such hiring does not conflict 
with any employment or other laws or regulations, or policies of the Borrower’s country and if 
they (i) are on leave of absence without pay, or have resigned or retired; (ii) are not being 
hired by the agency they were working for before going on leave of absence without pay, 
resigning, or retiring and (iii) their hiring would not create a conflict of interest  
Page 126 of 207 
Project: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development GHANA (AAFORD) 
Procedure: National Competitive Bidding (NCB for goods, works or non-consulting services) 
PROCESS FLOW DIAGRAMS FOR PROCUREMENT UNDER AAFORD 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Preparation of the Bidding Documents  
 (BD) using the WB SBDs 
Including Instruction to Bidders, 
Technical Specifications and contract 
ISU + Tech Divisions of 
MoF 
BD review and clearance 
Submission of BD to IFAD after  
Quality Control 
No- Objection 
No 
Revise BD 
ISU 
ISUU 
IFAD 
Yes 
Advertisement 
Bids Preparation period 
(Minimum 6 weeks) 
Public bid opening 
Bids Evaluation 
Submit Bid Evaluation Report (BER)  
     to 
IFAD 
MoF/CPCU 
Bidders/companies 
Bid Evaluation Committee  
Bid Evaluation Committee  
MoF/CPCU 
Actions 
, 
No- Objection 
No 
Revise 
BER 
Responsibility 
IFAD 
Preparation of the Bidding Documents  
 (BD) Including Instruction 
to Bidders  
Technical Specifications and contract 
Yes 
ISU/ Tech Divisions of 
MoF 
Contract preparation and Signing 
BD review and clearance 
Contract Implementation 
Submission of BD to IFAD after  
and Management 
Quality Control 
CPCU; Firms 
Contract Award 
MoF/ISU 
CPCU 
No- Objection 
No 
Revise BD 
Yes 
Advertisement 
ISU 
CPCU; 
contractor/supplie
r 
IFA
D 
MoF/ISU 
Bids Preparation period 
Bidders/companies 
Page 127 of 207 
Public bid opening 
Technical Evaluation 
Financial Evaluation 
Bid Evaluation Committee  
Bid Evaluation Committee/ 
Technical Committee  
Bid Evaluation Committee  
Submit Bid Evaluation Report (BER)  
MoF/ISU 
Project: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development GHANA (AAFORD) 
Procedure: Shopping (for goods; works or non-consulting services) 
Page 128 of 207 
Project: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development GHANA (AAFORD) 
Actions 
Responsibility 
 Preparation of the Request for Quotations 
Document (RfQ) 
         Request for at least 3 quotations 
(Give at least 7 calendar days to suppliers) 
ISU  
ISU 
Quotations opening 
Evaluation Committee 
Evaluation Committee  
ISU 
ISU- Supplier/ 
Contractor/Service provider 
Quotations Evaluation 
Award 
Purchasing Order/Contract 
Page 129 of 207 
Procedure: Direct Contracting 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Identification of the single 
provider/ 
Contractor 
Request for Quotation from the 
single provider  
Submit the selection procedure+ 
quotation to IFAD for No Objection 
No- Objection 
No 
Revise 
documents 
Yes 
Contract Negotiations 
Contract signing 
Contract Implementation and 
Management 
Page 130 of 207 
ISU  
 ISU 
ISU 
ISU 
ISU; Single Supplier/Provider/ 
contractor 
ISU; Single Supplier/Provider/ 
contractor 
ISUU; Single Supplier/Provider/ 
contractor 
Project: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development GHANA (AAFORD) 
Procedure: Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS for Consulting Services) 
Actions 
Preparation of TORs, Request for 
Proposals (RfP), Establishment of a 
shortlisting following a Request for 
Responsibility 
ISU + Tech Divisions  
of MoF 
Submission of Documents to IFAD 
ISU  
No 
Revise Docs. 
No-
Objection 
Yes 
Send RFP to shortlisted 
consultants 
Proposals Preparation 
Technical Proposals 
opening 
Technical Evaluation 
ISU 
Consultants 
Evaluation Committee  
Evaluation Committee 
Submit Tech. Eval Report to IFAD 
MoF/ISU 
No-Objection 
No 
Yes 
Revise 
Tech. Eval. 
Report 
Evaluation Committee 
Financial Proposals 
Opening + combined 
Evaluation 
Award Proposal 
Submit to IFAD the Combined Eval. Report  
Evaluation Committee 
MoF/ISU 
Page 131 of 207 
Contract Negotiation 
ISU-Consultant 
Send to IFAD the Minutes of Negotiations 
and Negotiated Contract  
ISU 
MoF/ISU-Consultant 
Contract Signing 
Contract 
Implementation and 
ManagementGMth 
Publication of award 
results 
ISU 
MoF/ISU; Consultant 
Project: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development GHANA (AAFORD) 
Procedure: Least Cost Selection (LCS for Consulting Services) 
Actions 
Preparation of TORs, Request for 
Proposals (RfP), Establishment of a 
short-list following a Request for 
Expressions of Interest (REOI) 
Responsibility 
ISU + Tech Divisions  
of MoF 
Submission of Documents to IFAD 
ISU 
No 
Revise Docs. 
No-
Objection 
Yes 
Send RFP to shortlisted 
consultants 
Proposals Preparation 
Technical Proposals 
opening 
Technical Evaluation 
ISU 
Consultants 
Evaluation Committee  
Evaluation Committee 
Submit Tech. Eval Report to IFAD 
ISU 
No-Objection 
No 
Yes 
Revise 
Tech. Eval. 
Report 
Financial Proposals 
Opening + Least Cost 
proposal 
Award Proposal 
Evaluation Committee 
Evaluation Committee 
Send to IFAD the Combined Eval. Report+  
ISU 
Page 132 of 207 
Contract Negotiation 
Send to IFAD the Minutes of Negotiations 
Negotiated Contract  
Contract Signing 
Contract 
Implementation and 
Publication of award 
results 
ISU-Consultant 
ISU 
ISU-Consultant 
ISU 
MoF/ISU; Consultant 
Project: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development GHANA (AAFORD) 
Procedure: Consultant’s Qualification-based Selection (CQS) 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Preparation of TORs, Establishment of a shortlist 
following a Request for Expressions of Interest 
(RfEOI) 
ISU + Tech Divisions  
of MoF 
Evaluation Committee 
Submission of Portfolios 
and shortlist (at least 3 
qualified firms) 
to IFAD 
No Objection 
No 
Revise documents 
Yes 
Request for information 
(experience 
and qualification from at 
Selection of the Best 
least 3 firms 
Qualified 
Firm 
Submission of the 
Evaluation Report to IFAD 
Request for full technical and financial 
proposal 
Preparation and submission 
of proposal 
ISU 
ISU 
Evaluation Committee 
ISU 
ISU 
Consulting firm 
Evaluate proposals 
Evaluation Committee 
Contract Negotiations 
Submission of 
evaluation 
reports and 
negotiated 
Contract Signing 
Contract Implementation 
and  
Management 
Page 133 of 207 
ISU, Consultant 
ISU 
MoF/ISU; Consultant 
Project: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development GHANA (AAFORD) 
Procedure: Selection of Individual Consultants (IC) 
Actions 
Responsibilit
y 
Preparation of TORs and 
ISU + Tech Divisions  
Cost estimate 
Submit TORs to  IFAD 
for No Objection 
of MoF 
ISU 
No - Objection No  Revise 
Documents 
Yes 
Request for CVs from at least 
3 consultants 
Selection of the Best 
Qualified Consultant 
Contract Negotiations 
IFAD No-
Objection 
ISU 
Evaluation Committee 
ISU 
IFAD 
Contract Signing 
ISU, Consultant 
Contract Implementation and  
Management 
ISU; Consultant 
Page 134 of 207 
Project: Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development GHANA (AAFORD) 
Procedure: Single Source Selection (SSS) 
Actions 
Preparation of TORs and 
Responsibilit
y 
ISU + Tech Divisions  
of MoF 
Identification of the 
consultant 
Request for Technical and Financial 
Proposal from the Consultant 
Submission of  TORs and  justification 
of SSS to IFAD 
ISU 
ISU 
ISU 
No-Objection  No 
Revise 
Documents 
Yes 
Contract Negations 
IFAD 
No-Objection 
Contract Signing 
Contract Implementation 
and Management 
ISU, 
Consultant 
IFAD 
ISU, Consultant 
ISU, Consultant 
Page 135 of 207 
Chapter 8: Environment and Social Management Plan 
Parameter 
Activity 
Performance 
Indicator 
Target 
Responsibility 
for monitoring 
during project 
implementation 
Monitoring 
means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Recommended 
Enhancement 
measures 
Risk associated 
with fertilizer 
application 
ISU in collaboration 
with MoA extension 
officers 
As part of sub-
project 
approval 
Annual reports, 
mid-term reports, 
closing 
Soil test has 
been done to 
determine 
quality of 
fertilizer 
(Yes/No) 
All PO’s test 
representativ
e soil samples 
of production 
sites 
136 
Limit nitrate use in sensitive 
watersheds serving urban areas. 
Select non-ammonium sources of 
nitrogen such as urea. 
Is the organic 
alternative being 
applied (Yes/No) 
All PO’s apply 
organic 
Alternative 
ISU in collaboration 
with MoA extension 
officers 
As part of 
project 
environmental 
Annual reports, 
mid-term report, 
closing 
monitoring by 
ISU 
137 
All 
stakeholders 
are trained in 
sustainable 
practices 
ISU in collaboration 
with MoA extension 
officers 
As part of 
project 
environmental 
Annual reports, 
mid-term report, 
closing 
monitoring by 
ISU 
Encouraging zero-deforestation 
value chains and developing 
certification schemes 
Physical monthly 
inspections. 
Supporting landscape planning 
involving local communities and 
the strengthening of local 
governance capacity; 
Identifying areas that should not 
be cleared (e.g., streams and 
bodies of water) and limit the 
clearing of land to the areas that 
are most suitable for agricultural 
production and avoiding the use 
of fire as a land clearing method; 
Increasing awareness and 
education on sustainable forest 
management; 
Promoting forest-based 
alternative livelihoods involving 
women. 
Risk of 
deforestation 
and Land 
degradation 
138 
Capacity 
building to 
stakeholders 
Prepare training 
material adapted to the needs of 
each stakeholder 
Stakeholders 
trained 
All 
stakeholders 
are trained in 
sustainable 
practices 
ISU in collaboration 
with local 
governments and 
Department of 
Environment 
As part of 
Before 
project 
implementation 
approval 
of activities 
Involvement of 
women and 
youth 
In order to increase participation 
of youth and women, the 
Project’s field extension agents 
should give priority to women 
and youth in training activities 
related to nursery 
implementation and 
management, food storage and 
processing, seed selection and 
breeding, marketing, organization 
and negotiation skills. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Women and 
youth trained 
50% Women 
and 40% 
Youth 
As part of 
Bi-annually 
project 
approval 
ISU in collaboration 
with local 
governments and 
Department of 
Environment. 
Ministry of Women, 
Children and Social 
Protection and 
Ministry of Youth 
and Sports, 
Include capacity 
building material 
for sustainable 
development 
practices as part of 
subcomponents 
training 
Include capacity 
building material 
for sustainable 
development 
practices as part of 
subcomponents 
training 
139 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
affecting  
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
Monitoring & indicators 
the 
Environment 
140 
reduction 
 Land 
preparation – land 
clearing, cultivation 
and other issues 
 Forest and 
Woodland loss 
 Land & soil 
degradation 
 Use of earth- moving 
machines, e.g. tractors 
for clearing 
 Water and soil 
pollution 
 Use of agro- 
chemicals 
 Flooding 
 Use of pesticides 
 Erosion 
Ensure that dressings 
do not exceed 
recommended doses. 
Reduce leaching 
through appropriate 
choice of fertilizer to 
suit soil conditions, 
split applications and 
fertilizer placement. 
 Bush fire 
 Biodiversity loss 
 Waste 
management 
issues 
141 
Reduce run-off through 
incorporation of 
fertilizer into soil, 
timing of applications 
to avoid erosive rains, 
and soil and water 
conservation measures. 
 GHG emission 
 Increased youth, 
women and men 
employment directly 
and indirectly  
 Increased sense of 
pride and 
responsibility by 
participating youth 
and women 
Increased household income 
and reduced poverty 
 As much as possible, 
discourage the opening of 
virgin forests 
 Number of farmers that 
received training on 
sustainable land preparation 
 Increased youth employment 
and social well-being 
 Train farmers in sustainable 
 Improved nutrition and food 
security 
 Resource conflicts 
 Possible agitation 
from youth not 
presently included in 
the programme  
 Increased ability of women 
and youth to manage their 
enterprises in productive and 
profitable manner, 
thereby increasing GDP and 
manpower development 
land management practices 
and agrochemical 
management  
 Deliver training and 
agricultural inputs to farmers 
on-time to enable them to 
adjust and adapt their 
planting and harvesting 
methods and timing 
 Increased import substitution 
especially of rice 
 Adopt and enforce health, 
safety and environment rules 
at production sites  
 But increasing associated 
environmental and social costs 
 Encourage full exploration 
of the value chain including 
soil testing and agrochemical 
services  
 Social exclusion - 
women and youth 
and PLWD 
Use of child labour 
Possible loss of 
cultural assets  
 Change in forests area 
 Results from periodic soil 
and water analysis 
 Heath, safety and 
environment manual 
 Number of value chain 
enterprises around soil 
testing and agrochemicals 
management  
 Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan 
 Conflict resolution 
committee meetings 
 Develop     a     clear     and     
simple Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), incl.  
grievance mechanism, to 
manage expectations 
 Lists of approved projects 
and their beneficiaries 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
Processing 
affecting  
 Use of 
the 
processing machine 
Environment 
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
 Waste 
generation 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
 Unsafe and non- 
 Increased sales and 
healthy working 
conditions 
household income 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
 Encourage the use of 
renewable and low-carbon   
energy   sources   during 
processing operations 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Number of operators 
adopting renewable low 
carbon technologies 
Parboiling of Rice  
 Air, water and 
land pollution 
 GHG emission 
from machines 
 Increased youth 
Possible use of child 
Labourers 
employment and social 
 Adopt health, safety and 
 Number of enterprises 
well-being 
environment rules at 
processing sites 
established focusing on 
processing 
Migration influx  to 
processing sites  
Use of wood for 
heating/parboiling 
 Improved processing 
capacity, value additions and 
value chain development 
 Train farmers in sustainable 
agro- processing practices to 
reduce environmental 
impacts 
 Number of entrepreneurs 
adopting sustainable 
processing operations 
 Improved nutrition and food 
security 
 Step up knowledge 
 Knowledge management 
management and 
information dissemination to 
showcase the achievement of 
the project 
/communication plans, 
stakeholder meeting reports, 
communication project 
flyers/leaflets 
 Increased ability of youth to 
manage their enterprises in 
productive and profitable 
manner, thereby increasing 
142 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
affecting  
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
the 
Environment 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
GDP and manpower 
development 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
Monitoring & indicators 
 Increased import substitution 
of Rice 
 But increasing associated 
environmental and social costs 
143 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
Marketing 
affecting  
 Construction 
the 
of market 
Environment 
infrastructure 
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
 Dust, smoke, 
noise, ground 
movement / 
vibration 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
 Better access to 
 Improved market 
market 
penetration 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
 Use construction 
Monitoring & indicators 
 Observation of construction 
equipment with moderate 
decibel during construction 
equipment for dust, noise, 
smoke, vibration, etc. 
 Better access to 
 Access to market information 
 Deforestation 
production and 
processing sites by 
supervisory agencies 
and market linkage and 
support services 
 Water pollution 
 Strengthened market value 
 Improved access to 
rural communities 
chain, with more profitable 
enterprises 
 Flooding and 
erosion  from 
poorly 
constructed 
culverts, roads, 
etc. 
 Conflict over land 
 Improved storage and 
reduced waste and postharvest 
losses 
and demand for 
compensation where 
infrastructure is to be 
constructed 
 Develop/adopt and enforce 
health, safety and 
environment rules at 
construction sites 
 Lawful and willing consent 
of community/or individuals 
on land site for market 
infrastructure 
Roads must be constructed 
with drainages 
 Work inspection report on 
the environmental quality of 
market infrastructure 
 Health, safety and 
environment plans 
 Copy of consent of 
community /individuals on 
market infrastructure land 
site 
Labor and working 
conditions 
Develop  contingency plans 
for dykes/spillways to 
manage  unexpected  
circumstances. 
144 
Part in 
Key issue 
value chain 
affecting  
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
Monitoring & indicators 
the 
Environment 
Transportatio
n 
 Use of motorized and 
 GHG emission 
 Influx of rural 
 Increased ownership of 
heavy transportation 
machines 
from 
transportation 
Migrant workers  to 
agri- enterprise sites 
and processing areas 
motorized and other transport 
system 
 Organize transport 
entrepreneurs into an 
association for easy 
management 
 Code of conduct for 
transport operators 
 Increased number 
of service providers, 
which boost the 
economy 
 Increased number of service 
providers 
 Increased GDP 
 Develop a code of conduct, 
and health, safety and 
environment regulation for 
transport operators 
 Minutes of meetings of 
transport operators’ 
association 
145 
 But increasing associated 
environmental and social costs 
Part in 
Key issue 
Potential impact 
Environmental 
(negative) and 
positive) 
Reduce negative 
impacts on 
environment  
affecting  
Prepare training 
the 
material adapted to the 
Environment 
needs of each 
stakeholder 
Social & Institutional  Economic 
Change in behavior 
and attitudes 
Increased revenues due to 
good practices  
Monitoring & indicators 
Project reports 
Standard Mitigation 
Measures  
Include capacity building 
material for sustainable 
development practices as 
part of subcomponents 
training 
 Gender and youth gap   More pressure on 
resources , 
migration  
Gender and 
inequality, poverty  
More revenues  
 Targets for youth and 
women with disaggregated 
data 
Project reports/ M&E 
value chain 
Capacity 
building to 
stakeholders 
Involvement 
of women 
and youth 
146 
147 
Table  Environmental and Social/ Climate  Monitoring Plan  
Parameter 
Activity 
Monitoring 
Indicator 
Responsibility for 
monitoring 
Monitoring means 
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring 
Estimated Monitoring 
Costs (USD) 
ENVIRONMENTAL/ SOCIAL/ CLIMATE MONITORING  
Compliance 
reports 
PMU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
ESIA reports 
Adherence to laid 
legal and policy 
requirements 
Once business 
plans are 
developed and 
submitted for 
approval  
100,000 
ISU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
 Project reports, 
banks MFIs reports, 
stakeholder surveys  
Baseline on 
status of the 
sustainability 
principles of 
the financial 
system  
Annually  
150,000 
Sub projects/ 
business plan  
Environmental 
Screening for  
Environmental 
Screening and 
impact 
assessment for 
sub project 
financed by 
the facility and 
financial 
institutions  
Strengthened 
capacity and 
business planning  
for FOs and or 
cooperatives, 
MSMEs 
( disaggregated by  
gender and Youth ),  
to design business 
plans  and  access 
green lines 
products  from 
Banks, MFIs 
supportive 
and adopt 
tools and 
methods 
developed  
etc. to 
respond to 
climate 
change and 
variability 
148 
ISU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
Project reports, 
banks MFIs reports, 
stakeholder surveys 
Baseline on 
status of the 
sustainability 
principles of 
the financial 
system 
Annual 
250,000 
financial 
institutions  and 
other MFIs and 
commercial banks 
and   implement 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options. 
Improved 
readiness and 
capacities of 
financial 
institutions on 
green lending   
Technical 
Assistance to 
enhance 
governance 
and 
management 
of loan 
products and 
green lines 
policy gap 
(identification, 
definition, gap 
assessment 
including 
gender and 
closing the 
gap.) 
149 
Number of 
those trained 
ISU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
Field observation 
Once  
200,000 ( included in 
the capacity building 
budget) 
Activities of 
conflict 
resolution 
committee 
Organize 
land 
governance 
dialogue 
Activities of 
Targeting 
committee  
ISU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
Conflict resolution 
and land governance 
dialogue  reports  
Once  
ISU, financial 
institutions, EPA 
Social Surveys, 
Beneficiaries 
assessment  
Annual 
75,000 
50,000 
Training on 
sustainable 
agriculture -
includes training of 
spraying gangs, 
draining of rice 
paddies; and 
construction of 
water harvesting 
structure for dry 
season irrigation 
Training of 
spraying gangs 
integrated 
pest and 
agrochemical 
management 
Training of 
farmers on 
water 
harvesting for 
dry season 
farming 
Support for conflict 
resolution -  
include support for 
stakeholders 
dialogue on conflict 
management and 
land governance 
Conflict 
resolution 
stakeholders 
support and 
land 
governance 
dialogue 
Other Social 
monitoring  
Include gender 
and People 
living with 
disabilities 
150 
(PLWD) 
mainstreaming  
Labor and 
working 
conditions 
Health and Safety 
Number of 
farmers sign 
unto health 
insurance  
Health 
Insurance and 
outreach  
Total  
ISU, SPU,  
SPC Reports  
Annual 
75,000 
900,000 
151 
Guiding questions for environment and social 
screening 
Yes/No 
Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily 
remedied adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
Would the project develop any wetlands? (Guidance 
statement GS1) 
No 
Would the project cause significant adverse impacts 
to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services (e.g. 
conversion of more than 50 hectares of natural forest, 
loss of habitat, erosion/other form of land 
degradation, fragmentation, and hydrological 
changes)? (GS 1, 2 and 5) 
Does the proposed project target area include 
ecologically sensitive areas,45 areas of global/national 
significance for biodiversity conservation and/or 
biodiversity-rich areas and habitats depended on by 
endangered species? (GS1) 
Is the project location subjected to major destruction 
as a result geophysical hazards (tsunamis, landslides, 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions)? 
Natural resources 
Would the project lead to unsustainable natural 
resource management practices (fisheries, forestry, 
livestock) and/or result in exceeding carrying capacity. 
For example, is their development happening in areas 
where little up-to-date information exists on 
sustainable yield/carrying capacity? (GS 4, 5 and 6) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
45 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, 
biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity 
conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal 
ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most 
vulnerable to climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and 
other forms of land degradation and areas that include physical cultural resources (of 
historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social 
vulnerability. 
152 
Would the project develop large-scale46 aquaculture 
or mariculture projects, or where their development 
involves significant alteration of ecologically sensitive 
areas? 
Would the project result in significant use of 
agrochemicals which may lead to life-threatening 
illness and long-term public health and safety 
concerns? (GS 14) 
Does the project rely on water-based (ground and/or 
surface) development where there is reason to 
believe that significant depletion and/or reduced flow 
has occured from the effects of climate change or 
from overutilization? (GS7) 
Does the project pose a risk of introducing potentially 
invasive species or GMOs which might alter genetic 
traits of indigenous species or have an adverse effect 
on local biodiversity? (GS1) 
Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. 
industrial, mining, sewage effluent)? (GS7) 
Infrastructure development 
Does the project include the construction/ 
rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s)/reservoir(s) meeting 
at least one of the following criteria? (GS8) 
more than 15 metre high wall or  
more than 500 metre long crest or  
more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity or  
incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes 
rehabilitation/development (above 100 hectares per 
scheme)?47 (GS7) 
No 
46 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may 
vary based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have 
regulations on minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these 
will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to 
use 25 hectares as an aquaculture unit size to trigger ESIA. 
47 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may 
vary based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have 
regulations determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be 
153 
Does the project include 
construction/rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that 
entail a total area being cleared above 10 km long, or 
any farmer with more than 10 per cent of his or her 
private land taken? (GS10) 
Does the project include drainage or correction of 
natural water bodies (e.g. river training)? (GS7) 
Does the project involve significant 
extraction/diversion/containment of surface water, 
leaving the river flow below 20 per cent 
environmental flow plus downstream user 
requirements? (GS7) 
Social 
Would the project result in economic displacement48 
or physical resettlement of more than 20 people, or 
impacting more than 10 per cent of an individual 
household’s assets? (GS13) 
Would the project result in conversion and/or loss of 
physical cultural resources? (GS9) 
Would the project generate significant social adverse 
impacts to local communities (including 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and indigenous 
people) or other project-affected parties? (GS13) 
Other 
Does the project include manufacture and 
transportation of hazardous and toxic materials which 
may affect the environment? (GS2) 
Does the project include the construction of a large or 
medium-scale industrial plant? 
 Does the project include the development of large-
scale production forestry? (GS5) 
Rural finance 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 
hectares as an irrigation development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
48 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or 
means of livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
154 
Does the project support any of the above (Q1 to Q22) 
through the provision of a line of credit to financial 
service providers? (GS12) 
No 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social 
implications which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
Does the project involve agricultural intensification 
and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive 
areas that may have adverse impacts on habitats, 
ecosystems and/or livelihoods? (GS1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
Do the project activities include rangeland and 
livestock development? (GS6) 
Does the project involve fisheries where there is 
information on stocks, fishing effort and sustainable 
yield? Is there any risk of overfishing, habitat damage 
and knowledge of fishing zones and seasons? (GS4) 
Would the project activities include aquaculture 
and/or agriculture in newly introduced or intensively 
practiced areas? Do project activities include 
conversion of wetlands and clearing of coastal 
vegetation, change in hydrology or introduction of 
exotic species? (GS4) 
Do the project activities include natural resources-
based value chain development? (GS 1, 6 and 12) 
Do the project activities include watershed 
management or rehabilitation? 
Does the project include large-scale soil and water 
conservation measures? (GS 1 and 5)  
Infrastructure 
Does the project include small-scale irrigation and 
drainage, and small and medium (capacity < 3 million 
m3) dam subprojects? (GS 7 and 8) 
155 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
The project will support 
Cereal production(maize, 
millet, sorghum, rice) and 
vegetable crop (onion, 
garlic, cabbage etc,) 
The project will develop 
small scale hydro-
agricultural and water 
Does the project include small and microenterprise 
development subprojects? (GS 12 and 13) 
Yes 
Does the project include the development of 
agroprocessing facilities? (GS 2, 6 and 12) 
Would the construction or operation of the project 
cause an increase in traffic on rural roads? (GS10) 
Social 
Would any of the project activities have minor 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? (GS9) 
Would the project result in physical resettlement of 
less than 20 people, or impacting less than 10 per cent 
of an individual household’s assets (GS13)? 
Would the project result in short-term public health 
and safety concerns? (GS14) 
Would the project require a migrant workforce or 
seasonal workers (for construction, planting and/or 
harvesting)? (GS13) 
Rural finance 
Does the project support any of the above (Q24 to 
Q37) through the provision of a line of credit to 
financial service providers? (GS12) 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
mobilisation 
infrastructure. 
The project will target 
youth and women leaded 
microenterprises.  
The project will support 
improved storage and the 
development of small 
processing units for 
income generation. 
The project will establish 
partnership relationships 
with microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) to 
finance the activities of 
farmers 
organization/cooperatives. 
156 
Annex 1 – Eligibility Screening Form 
Letter of Interest (Eligibility Screening Form) 
Please complete all the required spaces in this form 
1. Name: Surname -------------------------------------------------Other Names:---------------------------------
-----Maiden name (for married women):------------------------------------------------------ 
2. Sex: (a) Male {      }         (b)  Female {       } 
3. Date of birth: ---------------------------------------------------- 
4. Highest Education Level: (a) No formal education {    }      (b) Primary School {    }   (c) 
Secondary School {   } (d) Vocational school   (e) Tertiary Education {    } 
5. Which community do you belong to: -------------------------------------------------------------- 
6. How long have you lived in this community: -------------------------------------------------------- 
7. How do you belong to this community: (a) by birth {    }    (b) by marriage {   } (c) other 
(specify):---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
8. Local Government Area (LGA): ----------------------------------------------- State: -------------------------
------ 
9. What enterprise are you interested in (see list of selected enterprises for the LGA): ------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
157 
10. Do you have any experience in this enterprise: (a) Yes  {   }     (b) No {   }. If yes, how many 
years: -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
11. Do you belong to any youth or women organization: (a) Yes {   }   (b) No  {  }. If yes, what is 
the name: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------ 
12. Do you belong to any cooperative society: (a) Yes {  }   (b) No {  }. If yes, what is the name: --
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------  
13. Do you have access to any land for the enterprise: (a) Yes  {  }  (b) No  {  }.  
14. If yes to question 13, where is the land located-------------------------------------------------------; 
and what is the area size of the land? ----------------------------------------------------- 
15. What kind of title to you have to the land: (a) Government paper {  }  (b) Inheritance from 
parent {  }   (c) husband or wife’s consent {    }  (d) family allocation {  }  (e) community’s 
allocation {  } (f) Others (specify):----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- 
 Endorsements: 
Applicant: I certify that the information provided here is correct  
Name: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Signature: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Date: --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Community/traditional leader:  
Name: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Sign: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Verifications:  
Comments by the Local Government Liaison Office:---------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
158 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------ 
Name of Officer: ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Designation: ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Sign and date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Comments by the RCU Office:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Name of Officer: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Designation: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-- 
Sign and date: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Screening:   
Comments by service providers:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------Categorical comments (a) Applicant Eligible {    }  (b) Applicant Ineligible  {   } 
159 
Annex 2 - Environmental and Social Screening Forms for Subprojects 
A: Screening Form for Agri-Enterprise Projects 
General Information 
Project Name: 
Name of incubator / applicant: 
Name of Cooperative: 
Contact person’s details:  
Name of Apex Group: 
Contact person’s details: 
Project Location: 
Project sector (e.g. rice farming, vegetable 
processing, etc.) 
Estimated Cost: 
Proposed Date of Commencement:  
Expected Project duration: 
Site (estimated area in ha): 
Any equity/contribution brought into the 
project: 
Any plan for new construction: 
A1. Screening for Environmental and Social Issues 
Question 
Will the sub-project develop any wetlands? 
Would the sub-project result in economic displacement49 
(loss of assets or access to resources) or physical resettlement  
Yes  No 
Additional explanation 
of ‘Yes’ response  
49 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or 
means of livelihoods (see SECAP Procedure Guidance Statement 13) 
160 
Question 
Yes  No 
Additional explanation 
of ‘Yes’ response  
Would the sub-project result in conversion and/or loss of 
physical cultural resources? 
Will the sub-project have significant social adverse impacts 
(affecting access to and/use rights to land, access to potable 
water and water for other uses) on local communities or other 
project-affected parties? 
Will the project trigger unsustainable natural resource 
management practices (fisheries, forestry, livestock, and 
significant increase in use of agrochemicals) that exceed the 
carrying capacity? 
Does the sub-project include conversion of significant areas 
(above 50 ha) of natural forests/other wild lands? 
Would the project potentially cause significant adverse 
impacts to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services (e.g. 
habitat loss, erosion/ other form of land degradation, 
fragmentation, hydrological changes)? 
Does the proposed project target area include ecologically 
sensitive areas50; areas of global significance for biodiversity 
conservation and/or biodiversity-rich area; habitats depended 
on by endangered species? 
Does the project involve fisheries development in situations 
where little information exists on sustainable yield? 
Could the project pose a risk of introducing invasive alien 
species? 
Does the project involve the transfer, handling or use of 
genetically modified organisms/living modified organisms that 
may have an adverse effect on threatened biodiversity? 
50 ‘Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, 
biosphere  reserves); areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including 
coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate 
change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land 
degradation and areas that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, 
archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to 
poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
161 
Question 
Yes  No 
Additional explanation 
of ‘Yes’ response  
Is the project site close to any oil and gas installation such as 
flow stations, oil terminal, oil or gas pipeline right of way? 
Has oil spill/ or pipeline fire ever been recorded around 
project site? 
Does the project involve land use changes (agricultural 
intensification and/or expansion of the cropping area) and 
resources that may have adverse impacts on habitats, 
ecosystems, and/or livelihoods? 
Will the project result in increased use of agrochemicals which 
may affect the natural environment/human health? 
Does the project include small-scale irrigation and drainage 
projects, and water impoundment including small dams 
(except in wetlands)? 
Does the project involve agricultural intensification and/or 
expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas? 
Do the project activities include rangeland and livestock 
development? 
Does the project involve artisanal fisheries where there is 
information on sustainable yield? 
Do the project activities include aquaculture and/or 
mariculture? 
Do the project activities include watershed management or 
rehabilitation? 
Does the project include large-scale soil and water 
conservation measures? 
Does the project include small and micro enterprise 
development sub-projects? 
Does the project involve credit operations through financial 
service providers, including credit for pesticide/other 
agrochemicals, livestock purchasing, irrigation, etc.? 
Do the project activities include natural resources-based value 
chain development? 
Would any of the project activities have minor adverse 
impacts on physical cultural resources? 
162 
Question 
Yes  No 
Additional explanation 
of ‘Yes’ response  
Would the project have low probability to have physical 
resettlement or economic displacement? 
Does the project include development of agro-processing 
facilities?  
Will the project require a migrant workforce during 
construction? 
Will the project require seasonal workers to plant and/or 
harvest produce? 
Will the construction or operation of the project cause an 
increase in traffic on rural roads? 
Guidance for sub-project categorization 
"Yes" response to any 
of questions 1-13 
"Yes” response to 
questions 14-31 
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
Sub-project 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
Sub-project 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Subproject 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
ESIA is required for subproject  
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the 
general ESMF 
No further analysis is required 
B: Screening Form for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-Projects 
Name of market infrastructure: 
Infrastructure type: 
Location: 
Proposed Date of Commencement:  
Expected Project duration: 
Estimated cost: 
163 
Estimate number of communities to be 
served: 
Estimated number of entrepreneur to be 
served:  
B1: Screening for (Market) Infrastructure Sub-projects 
Question 
Yes  No 
Will the project activities include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads or 
other rural infrastructure in protected/sensitive areas51? 
Does the project include construction of roads or other infrastructure that 
entail the total area being cleared of 50 ha or above? 
Does the project include construction of dam (s)/reservoir (between 5-15 m 
high with a reservoir exceeding 2 million m3)? 
Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes rehabilitation/ 
development (above 100 ha)? 
Does the project involve significant extraction of ground water (significantly 
above recharge capacity)? 
Does the project include water-based (ground or surface) development where 
it is believed that significant depletion due to climate change or overutilization 
has occurred? 
Does the project involve significant extraction, diversion or containment of 
surface water? 
Does the project include drainage or correction of natural water bodies (e.g. 
river draining)? 
51 ‘Sensitive areas’ include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, 
biosphere  reserves); areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including 
coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate 
change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land 
degradation and areas that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, 
archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability due to 
poverty, disease, ethnicity and race. 
164 
Will the project include construction/rehabilitation of rural roads that pass 
through oil infrastructure locations such as flow stations, tank farms or oil and 
gas pipelines? 
Would any of the project activities have minor adverse impacts on physical 
cultural resources? 
Does the project include development of agro-processing facilities?  
Will the project require a migrant workforce during construction? 
Will the construction or operation of the project cause an increase in traffic on 
rural roads? 
Has the government or community guaranteed the lease of the land for the 
(market) infrastructure? 
Is there any plan in place for sustainability of the infrastructure during the 
project life time? 
Does the project include specific measures to protect against dust (such as dust 
masks and water spraying)? 
Has arrangement been made to pay adequate compensation for private 
property that may be affected by the construction of the project? 
Will construction equipment with moderate decibels be used and the timing of 
use be so that people will experience less discomfort? 
Will tree and vegetation replanting be carried out to stabilize slopes and re-
green road sides? 
Guidance for categorization 
"Yes" response to any 
of questions 1-9 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
ESIA is required  
"Yes" response to 
questions 10-13 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Sub-project to adopt the general ESMP in 
the ESMF  
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
1-13 and ‘Yes’ to 
questions 14-19 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
No further analysis is required 
C: Climate Screening Form for Sub-Projects 
To be used with the environmental and social screening forms. 
Screening for Climate Issues   
165 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional Explanation of 
'Yes' response* 
Is the project area subject to extreme climatic 
events such as flooding, drought, tropical storms, or 
heat waves?  
Do climate scenarios for the project area foresee 
changes in temperature, rainfall or extreme 
weather that will adversely affect the project 
impact, sustainability or cost over its lifetime? 
Will the project make investments in low-lying 
coastal areas/ zones exposed to river flooding and 
coastal storm surge? 
Will the project promote agricultural activity in 
marginal and/or highly degraded areas that have 
increased sensitivity to climatic events (such as on 
hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
  Is the project located in areas where rural 
development projects have experienced significant 
weather- related losses and damages in the past?  
Will the project develop/ install infrastructure in 
areas with a track record of extreme weather 
events? 
Is the project target group entirely dependent on 
natural resources (such as seasonal crops, rain-fed 
agricultural plots, and migratory fish stocks) that 
have been affected by in the last decade by climate 
trends or specific climatic events? 
Will climate variability likely affect agricultural 
productivity (crops/ livestock/fisheries) or the 
associated incidence of pests and diseases for the 
project target groups?   
Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes 
likely adversely impact upon key stages of identified 
value chains in the project (from production to 
markets)? 
Is the project investing in climate-sensitive 
livelihoods that are diversified?  
Is the project investing in infrastructure that is 
exposed to infrequent extreme weather events? 
166 
Is the project investing in institutional development 
and capacity building for rural institutions (such as 
farmer groups, cooperatives) in climatically 
heterogeneous areas? 
Does the project have the potential to become 
more resilient through the adoption green 
technologies at a reasonable cost? 
Does the project intervention have opportunities to 
strengthen indigenous climate risk management 
capabilities? 
Does the project have opportunities to integrate 
climate resilience aspects through policy dialogue to 
improve agricultural sector strategies/policies?   
Does the project have potential to integrate climate 
resilience measures without extensive additional 
costs (e.g. improved crop variety, capacity building; 
or including climate risk issues in policy processes) 
Based on the information available would the 
project benefit from a more thorough climate risk 
and vulnerability analysis to identify additional 
complementary investment actions to manage 
climate risks? 
Guidance for categorization 
"Yes" response to any 
of questions 1-9 
Sub-project Climate 
risk is High  
Climate risk Analysis is required for sub-
project  
"No" response to 
almost all questions 
Sub-project climate 
risk is moderate 
Sub-project to adopt the ESMP in the 
general ESMF 
167 
Annex 3 - Environmental and Social Guidelines for contractors52 
(for reference in contractor agreements/contracts) 
Sound environmental and social management of construction projects can be achieved only 
with adequate site selection and project design. As such, the ESMP for projects involving any 
new construction, or any rehabilitation or reconstruction for existing projects, should provide 
information as to screening criteria for site selection and design including the following:  
Site Selection  
Sites should be chosen based on community needs for additional projects, with specific lots 
chosen based on geographic and topographic characteristics. The site selection process 
involves site visits and studies to analyze: (i) the site’s, sub-urban, or rural characteristics; (ii) 
national, regional, or municipal regulations affecting the proposed sites; (iii) accessibility and 
distance from inhabited areas; (iv) land ownership, including verification of absence of 
squatters and/or other potential legal problems with land acquisition; (v) determination of site 
vulnerability to natural hazards, (i.e. intensity and frequency of floods, landslides, etc.); (vi) 
suitability of soils and sub-soils for construction; (vii) site contamination; (viii) flora and fauna 
characteristics; (ix) presence or absence of natural habitats and/or ecologically important 
habitats on site or in vicinity (e.g. forests, wetlands, rare or endangered species); and (ix) 
historic and community characteristics.  
The rules (including specific prohibitions and construction management measures) should be 
incorporated into all relevant bidding documents, contracts, and work orders.  
Prohibitions  
The following activities are prohibited on or near the project site:  
Cutting of trees for any reason outside the approved construction area;  
Hunting, fishing, wildlife capture, or plant collection;  
52 Adapted from Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development, Republic of 
Malawi (2015) Environmental and Social Management Framework for Programme for Rural 
Irrigation Development in Malawi, pp.76-80. 
168 
Use of unapproved toxic materials, including lead-based paints, asbestos, etc.  
Disturbance to anything with architectural or historical value;  
Building of fires;  
Use of firearms (except by authorized security guards); 
Use of alcohol by workers.  
Construction Management Measures  
Solid, sanitation, and hazardous wastes must be properly controlled, through the 
implementation of the following measures:  
Waste Management:  
Minimize the production of waste that must be treated or eliminated; 
Identify and classify the type of waste generated. If hazardous wastes (including health care 
wastes) are generated, proper procedures must be taken regarding their storage, collection, 
transportation and disposal;  
Identify and demarcate disposal areas clearly indicating the specific materials that can be 
deposited in each;  
Control placement of all construction waste (including earth cuts) to approved disposal sites 
(>300 m from rivers, streams, lakes, or wetlands). All garbage, metals, used oils, and excess 
material generated during construction should only be dispose in authorized areas, 
incorporating recycling systems and the separation of materials.  
Maintenance:  
Identify and demarcate equipment maintenance areas (>15m from rivers, streams, lakes or 
wetlands); 
Ensure that all equipment maintenance activities, including oil changes, are conducted within 
demarcated maintenance areas; never dispose spent oils on the ground, in water courses, 
drainage canals or in sewer systems; 
Identify, demarcate and enforce the use of within-site access routes to limit impact on site 
vegetation; 
Install and maintain an adequate drainage system to prevent erosion on the site during and 
after construction.  
Erosion Control  
169 
Erect erosion control barriers around perimeter of cuts, disposal pits, and roadways; 
Spray water on dirt roads, cuts, fill material and stockpiled soil to reduce wind-induced 
erosion, as needed; 
Maintain vehicle speeds at or below 10mph within the work area, 15mph or below within 
200m of the site, and abide by the relevant speed limits at all times to / from the work area.  
Stockpiles and Borrow Pits  
Identify and demarcate locations for stockpiles and borrow pits, ensuring that they are 15 
meters away from critical areas such as steep slopes, erosion-prone soils, and areas that drain 
directly into sensitive water bodies; 
Limit extraction of material to approved and demarcated borrow pits.  
Site Cleanup  
Establish and enforce daily site clean-up procedures, including maintenance of adequate 
disposal facilities for construction debris.  
Safety during Construction  
The Contractor’s responsibilities include the protection of every person and nearby property 
from construction accidents. The Contractor shall be responsible for complying with all 
national and local safety requirements and any other measures necessary to avoid accidents, 
including the following:  
Carefully and clearly mark pedestrian-safe access routes; 
If school children are in the vicinity, include traffic safety personnel to direct traffic; 
Maintain supply of supplies for traffic signs (including paint, easel, sign material, etc.), road 
marking, and guard rails to maintain pedestrian safety during construction; 
Conduct safety training for construction workers prior to beginning work; 
Provide personal protective equipment (PPE) and clothing (such as goggles, gloves, respirators, 
dust masks, hard hats, steel-toed and –shanked boots, etc.,) for construction workers and 
enforce their use; 
Post Material Safety Data Sheets for each chemical present on the worksite; 
Require that all workers read, or have read, all Material Safety Data Sheets. Clearly explain the 
risks to them and their partners, especially when pregnant or planning to start a family. 
Encourage workers to share the information with their physicians, when relevant; 
Ensure that the removal of asbestos-containing materials or other toxic substances be 
performed and disposed of by specially trained workers; 
170 
During heavy rains or emergencies of any kind, apply construction safeguards guidelines; 
Brace electrical and mechanical equipment to withstand unexpected events during 
construction.  
Nuisance and Dust Control  
To control nuisance and dust the Contractor should:  
Maintain all construction-related traffic at or below 15 mph on streets within 200 m of the 
site; 
Maintain all on-site vehicle speeds at or below 10 mph; 
To the extent possible, maintain noise levels associated with all machinery and equipment at 
or below 90db;  
In sensitive areas (including residential neighborhoods, health centers, schools, etc.) more 
strict measures may need to be implemented to prevent undesirable noise levels; 
Minimize production of dust and particulate materials at all times, to avoid impacts on 
surrounding families and businesses, and especially to vulnerable people (children, elderly); 
Phase removal of vegetation to prevent large areas from becoming exposed to wind; 
Place dust screens around construction areas, paying particular attention to areas close to 
housing, commercial areas, and recreational areas; 
Spray water as needed on dirt roads, cut areas and soil stockpiles or fill material; 
Apply proper measures to minimize disruptions from vibration or noise coming from 
construction activities.  
Community Relations  
To maintain cordial community relations, the Contractor should:  
Following the country and ESMP requirements, inform the population about construction and 
work schedules, interruption of services, traffic detour routes, as appropriate; 
Limit construction activities at night. When necessary ensure that night work is carefully 
scheduled and the community is properly informed so they can take necessary measures; 
At least five days in advance of any service interruption (including water, electricity) the 
community must be advised through clearly visible posters at the project site and at central 
community locations; 
171 
Where possible, particularly for tasks that can also be performed through low-skilled manual 
labor (such as digging of shallow trenches, etc.), make use of labor from the local community. 
Chance Find Procedures for Culturally Significant Artifacts  
In case culturally valuable materials (incl. shrines, graves, etc.) are uncovered during 
excavation:  
Stop work immediately following the discovery of any materials with possible archeological, 
historical, paleontological, or other cultural value, announce findings to project manager and 
notify relevant authorities;  
Protect artifacts as well as possible using plastic covers, and implement measures to stabilize 
the area, if necessary, to properly protect artifacts; 
Prevent and penalize any unauthorized access to the artifacts; 
Restart construction works only upon the authorization of the relevant authorities.  
Environmental Supervision during Construction  
The bidding documents should indicate how compliance with environmental rules and design 
specifications would be supervised, along with the penalties for non-compliance by 
contractors or workers. Construction supervision requires oversight of compliance with the 
manual and environmental specifications by the contractor or his designated environmental 
supervisor. Contractors are also required to comply with national and state regulations 
governing the environment, public health and safety. 
172 
Annex 4 – Checklist for Construction Works  
Based on the National Environmental (Construction Sector) Regulations (2011), at every 
construction facility the following checklist should be implemented:53 
(1) Every facility shall implement programmes on best practices as set out in Schedule I of the 
Regulations. 
(2) Every facility shall provide base for ancillary equipment and bund wall for containment of 
waste oil in the event of any unanticipated discharge or spillage. 
(3) Every operator of construction facility/site shall ensure: 
(a) it has a functional, adequate and appropriate drainage system for the project; 
(b) the separation or diversion of clean water runoff to prevent it from mixing with water 
containing high solid particle content; 
(c) it minimizes the volume of water to be treated prior to release (same as storm water 
control system); 
(d) the use of color coding for the drainage system such as blue for surface water drains and 
red for foul water drains; 
(e) safe movement of materials and fuel to and from site; 
(f) tanks are clearly labelled with their contents and storage capacity; 
(g) workers are trained to carry out the outlined procedures in the Emergency Response Plan 
as specified in Schedule II to the Regulations; 
(h) absorbent materials and other containment equipment (e.g. spill kits) suitable for the 
construction type, are available in adequate quantity on site; and 
(i) all tanks are properly covered. 
(4) The operator shall ensure: 
(a) high standard of housekeeping; 
(b) that dust/particulate matter arising from loaded trucks entering or leaving the site is kept 
to a minimum level by the use of tarpaulin materials as cover and that water sprays or other 
53 National Environmental (Construction Sector) Regulations (2011). S.I. No.19. 
173 
dust suppression or collection methods are used at every dusty place where work is carried 
out; 
(c) appropriate use of Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) by all persons at construction site 
as in Schedule VI to the Regulations; 
 (5) Every facility shall have an Emergency Response Plan in accordance with the guide 
template specified in Schedule II to these Regulations. 
174 
Annex 5 - Social Inclusion Strategy  
“In every country, certain groups (..) Confront barriers that prevent them from fully 
participating in their nation’s political, economic, and social life. These groups are branded by 
stereotypes, stigmas, and superstitions. They often live with insecurity. And such 
disadvantages not only preclude them from capitalizing on opportunities to lead a better life, 
they also rob them of dignity.”54 
Social inclusion means different things to different people. In its flagship publication on the 
topic, the World Bank defines social inclusion as “the process of improving the ability, 
opportunity, and dignity of people, disadvantaged on the basis of their identity, to take part in 
society.”55 A strategy for social inclusion should therefore both address the above-mentioned 
‘barriers’ as well as strengthen the capacities that disadvantaged groups in society require to 
make the most of development opportunities and realize their full potential. 
PADRIR  will directly contribute to social inclusion by actively focusing on unemployed youth 
and women, which together with people with disabilities and widows remain among the most 
disadvantaged groups . Using the World Bank’s advice to focus on three critical ‘inclusion 
domains’ of markets, services and spaces, PADRIR can help promote social inclusion in the 
project area through the following instruments and policies: 
Markets (Land, Regulatory Framework) 
Negotiate with traditional authorities in local communities for long-term land access by 
women and youth for agri-enterprise activities; 
Negotiate with state governments to allocate larger plots of unused (but suitable) farmland 
and provide security of tenure for women and youth associations for agri-enterprise activities; 
Support legislative reform establishing gender parity in land ownership and inheritance; 
Closely monitor project progress, hold regular meetings with leaders/representatives of 
women and youth organizations to discuss project challenges, and provide additional 
(technical) support where needed. 
Services (Training, Financial, Labour, ICT) 
54 World Bank (2013) Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity (WB: 
Washington, D.C.), p.xv. 
55 Idem, p.4. 
175 
Provide refresher, advanced and/or top-up skills training on-site for women and youth (on any 
relevant topic that hinders progress in their agri-enterprises) in combination with intensive 
mentoring support; 
Support opportunities for information sharing, whereby women and youth who are currently 
not part of the project can visit the agri-enterprise sites and whereby entrepreneurs can share 
their experiences (including reasons for failure and success); 
Negotiate with agricultural banks to provide preferential credit arrangements for high-
potential women or youth agri-entrepreneurs; 
Encourage contractors / service providers to give employment preference to local community 
members (e.g. via ‘code of conduct’); 
Organize a ‘hackathon’ together with a technology-oriented innovation centre to develop a 
special app for rural youth in the project area to promote farming and facilitate market access 
as well as create an online platform that allows women and youth to showcase their 
achievements and experiences with wider society and other relevant actors (e.g. government 
and donor agencies). 
Spaces (Physical, Cultural, Social) 
Liaise with local police to ensure security in farming areas, markets and access routes; 
Organize public awareness-raising campaigns in consultation with local CSOs to promote 
farming, encourage inclusive community-level decision-making, prevent intra-community 
conflict and reduce gender-based violence; 
In general, ensure that initial screening, selection and support to project beneficiaries by 
community leaders and others at the grassroots level is based on merit and need rather than 
lingering primordial considerations; 
To prevent climate-induced exclusion, recommended climate change adaptation and 
mitigation measures should be given priority. Many beneficiaries may not be able to bounce 
back once they are affected by hydro-meteorological disasters such as flooding and erosion. 
176 
177 
Annex 1: Terms of reference of Key staff 
IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT UNIT (ISU)  
Central Project Coordinator (CPC) 
Key Responsibilities  
The Central Project Coordinator (CPC) will be responsible for the overall management of 
AAFORD; oversight of implementing agencies; developing partnerships; and leadership of 
coordination mechanisms for agricultural systems and financing. The CPC will report to the 
Chief Director, MoF. The person will coordinate activities and ensure AAFORD implementation 
according to the terms and conditions of the loan financing agreement, the Project Design 
Report (PDR) and the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). S/he needs to ensure effective 
and timely implementation of the project, with special attention to providing overall inter-
agency coordination and facilitation at various levels. (S)he will have the initial responsibility of 
coordinating pre-programme activities and have overall responsibility of the day to day 
activities of AAFORD when it becomes effective. S/He will report directly to the Chief Director 
of the Ministry of Finance.  
The CPC will have responsibilities broadly categorised into implementation readiness, 
leadership, coordination and management.  
Implementation readiness 
Oversee the establishment of the implementation support unit (ISU) and the two zonal 
coordination units (ZCUs) 
In consultation with MoF facilitate the establishment of the Programme Steering Committee 
(PSC). 
Initiate the design of the M&E system for the Project   
Finalize the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM), Finance and Administration Manual 
and other guidelines; 
In collaboration with Mo,F facilitate the effective promotion of the AAFORD at the national, 
zonal  and district levels across the country through stakeholder workshops and mass media. 
Coordinate training workshops on project strategy and approaches 
178 
In consultation with key stakeholders, ensure the preparation of zonal annual work plans and 
budgets (AWPBs) and a consolidated AWPB and procurement plan. 
Leadership and Coordination:  
The CPC shall have overall leadership and coordination responsibilities, such as: 
Act as Secretary to and support the Chair of the Programme Steering Committee (PSC)  
Engage in policy dialogue, networking and coordination with a broad range of stakeholders 
including parliamentarians, government officials at various levels, development partners, 
banks and private sector operators and implementation consultants 
Proactively engage with current and potential partners to support effective programme 
implementation and impact, either through direct linkage under a memorandum or 
coordination of complementary programmes 
Promote knowledge sharing and learning within the programme and with other partners. 
Contribute to country programme management through membership of the IFAD Country 
Programme Management Team (CPMT)  
Liaise with the IFAD Country Director on any matters relating to implementation 
Coordinate preparation of Annual Work Plan & Budgets (AWPBs) with implementing agencies 
Oversee the effective and efficient implementation of the programme at the central and zonal 
offices.  
Ensure the holistic implementation of the programme as well as the programme outcomes 
and levels are seamlessly joined in the pursuit of market-led poverty alleviation amongst poor 
rural households 
Direct, strategize and supervise the day-to-day operations of the programme, guided by the 
PDR, PIM and the AWPB, providing any necessary amendments to ensure smooth 
performance 
Identify and engage Implementation Partners and relevant technical assistance.  
Management: The management responsibilities of the CPC shall include: 
Prepare, arrange approvals and sign contracts for all project activities in line with stated 
guidelines 
179 
Manage and monitor project progress, in particular through regular interaction with 
implementing agencies (Financial industry intermediaries eg GIRSAL, GCX, GAIP, FIs, 
agricultural product market intermediaries eg GCX, etc and implementing consultants) 
Day-to-day coordination of project activities 
Manage procurement activities in accordance with the rules of IFAD and GoG 
Oversee the monitoring and evaluation function to ensure a results-oriented M&E and 
reporting system, and undertake periodic studies and consultancies to evaluate project 
outcomes and impacts and objectives  
Recommend modifications to project implementation modalities as needed to overcome 
constraints and achieve objectives  
Facilitate the recruitment of project supporting staff and management staff of the ISU office 
and zonal offices.  
Develop and regularly appraise staff and provide feedback and support to enable them 
perform their jobs.  
Carry out any other project activities to be assigned from time to time. 
Programme Management and Coordination 
Oversee the preparation of AWPBs of the Programme with the participation and inputs of all 
key stakeholders. 
Ensure the design and establishment of a participatory results based Monitoring and 
Evaluation and its effective operation.  
Ensure that all contractual obligations are adhered to. 
Develop and regularly appraise staff and provide feedback and support to enable them 
perform their jobs. Reward innovation in critical reflection, problem solving and learning 
Establish and maintain good working relationships with all programme participants and 
stakeholders – including MoF and other Government agencies, development partners, private 
sector and NGOs 
Promote collaboration among Development Partners (DPs) and the private sector on value 
chain development. 
Take full responsibility for procurement of goods and services and approve contracts for all 
transactions after obtaining the necessary no objections. 
Take full responsibility to implement the activities in annual work plan and budget  
Ensure timely preparation and submission of mandatory reports e.g. M&E data and reports 
and their wide access and distribution.  
Promote knowledge sharing and learning within the programme and with other partners.  
180 
Commission mandatory and ad hoc evaluation studies to gain insights necessary to reorient 
programme implementation as necessary.  
Mobilize relevant technical assistance in a timely manner, with clearly demarcated 
responsibilities that are based on the participatory and demand-driven principles of the 
programme 
Support external missions to foster joint learning process that improves programme 
implementation to achieve impact.  
Undertake any other responsibility that will ensure smooth and effective implementation of 
the Programme. 
B: Qualifications and Experience 
Advanced degree in Business Administration, Agriculture, Project Management, Agricultural 
Economics or other relevant academic background (essential) 
Other related professional courses 
At least 10 years of relevant work experience in agricultural development issues including 
policy design and implementation of agricultural value chain programmes. Experience working 
with the private sector (essential). 
Experience in working for International Financial Institutions or donor-funded programmes or 
similar market-oriented rural development interventions (essential);  
Knowledge of Government and IFAD or donor-funded policies and procedures on gender, 
environment and general programme finance and administration management (essential); 
Ability to develop and foster partnerships (essential); 
Prior experience in project management is a plus  
Possess high managerial experience and knowledge of strategic planning approaches; 
Staff management experience including recruitment, appraisals and managing performance 
(essential). 
C: Skills 
Good level of proficiency in Microsoft Applications including MS Project; 
Demonstrated ability to train and build capacity of others; 
Experienced in electronic data processing and analysis and data base development; 
Strong partnership building skills from both the private and the public sector; 
Strong analytical and market oriented skills 
Basic understanding of the public procurement procedure is a plus  
181 
D: Core competencies: 
Attentive to detail while also keeping the bigger picture in sight; 
Ability to share ideas and learn from others to enhance the program delivery and overall 
performance;  
Highly self-motivated and sets a higher bar for stronger performance;  
High sense of integrity and trustworthiness 
Senior Rural Finance Specialist (SRFS) 
The Senior rural Finance Specialist (SRFS) shall function as the chief operating officer and be in 
charge of the operational implementation of AAFORD. The SRFS will report to the Central 
Project Coordinator (CPC). 
Key Responsibilities  
The Senior Rural Finance Specialist (SRFS) will be responsible for the operational 
implementation of AAFORD and managing its field operations; oversight of technical 
assistance activities of implementation consultants; coordination of operations with 
implementation partners including agric product market institutions, financial intermediaries, 
community operations and coordination with beneficiaries and supporting institutions; 
oversight of zonal implementation operations such as liaising with zonal level implementation 
partners; fund management of the BFF including its establishment and implementation; 
overall planning of technical inputs into annual work planning process, supervision of 
implementation and controlling of agreed activities; operational reporting for effective 
implementation, among others. 
Technical Leadership and Operational Implementation: The SRFS shall have overall leadership 
and coordination responsibilities including the following: 
Oversee the finalization of the various ToRs for the selection of partners for the delivery of 
interventions such as capacity building service providers (CBSPs), community development 
agents like the community youth facilitators (YCFs) and youth institutional interns (YIIs) 
Contract administration for all technical partners including signing off on inception reports, 
workplans, monitoring and reporting mechanims 
Ensure effective oversight for community development, livelihoods and mainstreaming of 
gender, youth and climate resilience in the implementation of the project activities 
182 
Develop and/or finalise relevant documentation to ensure the (i) establishment of bank 
accounts with BoG and ARB Apex Bank to operationalise the BFF and (ii) operate the BFF in 
line with its policies and procedures manual. The BFF policies and procedures manual shall be 
one of the relevant documentations to be finalise by the SRFS. 
Oversee the effective and prudent management of the BFF to ensure it achieves its defined 
objectives  
Coordinate all technical input for the preparation of Annual Work Plan & Budgets (AWPBs) key 
technical staff and in cooperation with implementing agencies 
Management: The management responsibilities of the SRFS shall include: 
Support the CPC to manage and monitor project progress, in particular through regular 
interaction with implementing agencies (Financial industry intermediaries eg GIRSAL, GCX, 
GAIP, FIs, agricultural product market intermediaries eg GCX, etc and implementing 
consultants) 
Day-to-day technical coordination of project implementation activities 
Monitoring and controlling of technical operations and to use the feedback to support the 
M&E team to ensure a results-oriented M&E and reporting system  
Recommend modifications to project implementation modalities as needed to overcome 
constraints and achieve objectives  
Oversee and lead the zonal implementation team (staff and consultants) to ensure successful 
achievement of set targets 
Carry out any other project activities to be assigned by the CPC from time to time. 
183 
Senior M&E and Knowledge Management Specialist 
Line Management: Reports to the Central Project Coordinator (CPC) and has close working 
relationships with all officers and implementing partners on the Project. 
The Senior M&E and Knowledge Management Specialist will be responsible for monitoring and 
evaluation and knowledge management. (S)he will be responsible for guiding the overall 
M&E/Knowledge Management and Communication Strategies and implementation of related 
activities within the project as well as providing timely and relevant information to the CPC 
and project stakeholders including staff of implementing partners and consultants of external 
M&E related missions.   
A. Functions and Responsibilities shall include: 
M&E System Development and Management in close collaboration with Regional M&E 
Officers, cluster-based value chain actors, Youth community facilitators, and staff of 
implementing partners; 
Facilitating the development of the Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), 
ensuring alignment with the project logframe, Community Outreach Development Plans and 
related targets; 
Assessing M&E capacity of the project, implementing partner staff and primary stakeholders, 
ensuring that the required capacity is in place; 
Critically assess achievement of outcomes and results, gather and analyze data to enhance 
management’s efforts towards effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of the project; 
Supporting the NPC to monitor efficiency of targeting, poverty focus, gender focus and youth 
focus of the project; 
Prepare timely and appropriate reporting on progress and problems of program 
implementation including quarterly and annual operational and financial progress report on 
AAFORD activities; 
Facilitating external supervision and evaluation missions; 
Establishment of a functional knowledge management system that involves thematic studies, 
analysis, documentation and dissemination of information and lessons learned. 
Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Central Project Coordinator. 
B. Qualifications and Skills  
Essential 
184 
At least a Masters’ degree in Agricultural Economics, Project Management, Social Sciences or 
other related fields; 
At least 10 years of relevant work experience in M&E System design, planning and 
implementation of development projects; 
Possess excellent understanding of rural development issues related to markets, private sector 
development, decentralization and participation of the poor; 
Ability to use M&E methods and approaches including quantitative and participatory 
approaches in surveys, surveillance systems, and evaluations; 
Possess high managerial experience and knowledge of strategic planning approaches; 
A solid understanding of public policies, development approaches with a focus on 
participatory processes, market economy management, and gender issues.  
Ability to produce high-quality briefs and reports. 
C.   Desirable  
Good level of proficiency in Microsoft Applications including MS Project; 
Demonstrated ability to train and build capacity of others; 
Experience in electronic data processing, analysis and data management; 
Strong analytical and market-oriented skills. 
D. Duration 
The position will be on a contract basis for two (2) years with the possibility for extension 
depending on satisfactory performance and availability of funds. 
Institutional Development and Gender/Youth Mainstreaming Officer 
The Institutions and Gender/youth Mainstreaming Officer will be responsible s for the sub-
component ‘Develop capacities of target groups to expand marketable surpluses’ and for 
ensuring performance of service providers that may be contracted to implement activities 
under this sub-component. His/her specific duties include: 
Responsible for coordination of activities of the sub-component 
Provide guidance to service providers that may be hired to implement the activities of the sub-
component 
Oversee selection of target FOs and beneficiaries in collaboration with relevant officers of the 
programme 
Liaise with other relevant programmes and government technical departments 
Liaise with financial institutions for linkage arrangement between them and FOs 
Contribute to the design of training programmes and enlightenment campaigns and other 
activities of the programme 
185 
Provide periodic report of the activities of the sub-component 
Contribute to the annual work plan and budget for the sub-component 
Report to the Programme Coordinator and carry out any other activities assigned by him/her 
QUALIFICATION 
Masters or higher University degree in Sociology, Economics or other relevant discipline 
Minimum of five years post qualification experience with implementation of similar project 
Practical knowledge of participatory approaches and gender/youth mainstreaming 
186 
CLIMATE FINANCE AND NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT OFFICER 
The Climate finance and Natural Resources Management Officer will assist the AFFORD Team 
in the implementation of Component 1 and 2 activities related to green lending and capacity 
building of beneficiaries on climate smart agriculture.  
Specific duties and responsibilities:  
Assist the overall implementation and monitoring of the Blended Financing Facility (BFF) and 
related extension programming. Responsibilities include assisting with:  
Planning, implementation and quality assurance of the BFF and market enabling institutions, 
financial institutions to enhance governance and management of loan products and green 
lines policy gap (identification, definition, gap assessment including gender/ youth and closing 
the gap) 
Provide technical assistance on green lending and climate risk management, development of a 
package of tools and instruments (smart credit-scoring tool combining detailed cash flow 
estimates with risk assessments - similar to the ones used by the IFIs, to assess social, 
environmental and climate risks and to define an improved course of action for assessing 
social, environmental and climate risks to enhance sustainability, loan agreement 
requirements for climate-smart agricultural and land management practices, CO2 
measurement etc., and compliance tool) and energy for agriculture to more comprehensively 
calculate the credit worthiness and projects submitted in the context of climate change risk; 
gender considerations to be included.  
Awareness raising and training on climate resilient agriculture to beneficiaries (FBOs, MSMEs, 
nucleolus farmers, financial institutions, off takers, market enabling institutions)  
Coordination, guidance and quality assurance of Component 1 and 2 activities related to 
climate change and sustainable management of natural resources 
Coordination and support to the service providers or specialists hired for implementation, 
specifically those responsible for pre-service and in-service training and the training of FBOs; 
(FBOs, MSMEs, nucleolus farmers, financial institutions, off takers, market enabling 
institutions)  
Providing technical support to the field  teams; 
Performs other related duties as assigned by the project coordinator 
Qualifications:  
Education: Minimum of a B.Sc., preferably M.Sc., in Rural Development, Environmental 
Sciences, Climate Change and climate finance, Agronomy, Economics, Agricultural Economics, 
Anthropology, Sociology, Forestry or other related fields with sound knowledge of 
187 
contemporary issues in the rural finance, agriculture and food security in Ghana and natural 
resource management; 
Experience: Prior experience in rural finance, climate finance agronomy, agricultural 
adaptation to and mitigation of climate change; experience green lending, with preferable 
knowledge and experience value chain development   
Skills and knowledge: Experience with project implementation activities; good interpersonal 
communications skills; computer literacy and good command of spoken and written English; 
documented writing skills; ability to work independently and in multi-ethnical environments. 
188 
Community/Institution Development, Gender and Social Inclusion Officer 
The Community/Institutions Development and Social Inclusion Officer will be responsible for 
the sub-component ‘Develop capacities of target groups to expand marketable surpluses’, 
mainstreaming of IFAD’s target segment; namely, women, youth and disables, and ensuring 
performance of service providers that may be contracted to implement activities under this 
sub-component. His or her specific duties include: 
Responsible for coordination of activities of the sub-component 
Provide guidance to service providers that may be hired to implement the activities of the sub-
component 
Oversee selection of target Farmer Organizations (FOs) and beneficiaries in collaboration with 
relevant officers of the programme 
In coordination with the ZCU,  
liaise with other relevant programmes and government technical departments and build 
synergies where relevant  
Liaise with financial institutions to build linkage among the financial institution and FOs 
Contribute to the design of training programmes and enlightenment campaigns and other 
activities of the programme 
Periodically review the progress of mainstreaming activities and make relevant adjustment 
when deemed necessary   
Provide periodic report of the activities of the sub-component  
Contribute to the annual work plan and budget for the sub-component 
Report to the Programme Coordinator and carry out any other activities assigned by him/her 
QUALIFICATION 
Masters or higher University degree in Sociology, Economics or other relevant discipline 
Minimum of five years post qualification experience with implementation of similar project 
Practical knowledge of participatory approaches and gender/youth mainstreaming 
189 
Programme Financial Manager 
Line Management: Report to to the Central Programme Coordinator (CPC), and have close 
liaison with the Regional  Programme Offices 
The Financial Manager (PFM) will be responsible for the planning, directing and controlling the 
financial functions for the AAFORD. This will include preparation of Programme budget, 
conducting financial analysis and preparing financial reports/statements, developing and 
implementing an effective and efficient financia  accounting, managing the payroll system and 
maintaining accurate and current records.   
A. 
Duties and Responsibilities shall include: 
Manage AAFORD’s  financial, accounting and monitoring and reporting systems, using 
acceptable accounting principles, concepts and conventions with due consideration to 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS);  
Ensure that all financial transactions within and involving the AAFORD is done in accordance 
with the Financial Agreement, IFAD’s Financial Management Guidelines, General Conditions of 
Financing, Letter to the Borrower (LTB), and all other relevant Government of Ghana 
regulations, e.g. Financial Administration Act, 2003 (Act 654), Internal Audit Agency Act, 2003 
(Act 658), Financial Administration Regulation, 2004 (L.I. 1802); Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 
663), etc.  
Manage AAFORD’s Budgets and Control the disbursement of Funds 
Ensure that the Programme Management is informed of on-going financial 
transactions/activities and that Zonal  Coordinators and officers and Implementation Partners, 
know their financial responsibilities in line with prevailing Government of Ghana practices, 
IFAD and other Cooperating Institutions (CIs);  
Ensure that finance and other relevant Programme staff are fully appraised of the contents of 
the Programme Finance and Administration Manual (FAM); A counter-signatory to programme 
fund releases as required for Programme financial transactions and also sign as witness to all 
contracts as much as possible; 
Oversee the establishment and maintenance of an acceptable computerized accounting 
system 
Ensure preparation and submission of withdrawal applications to IFAD and/or cooperating 
institutions (CIs), and follow up to ensure that the Programme does not encounter liquidity 
challenges. 
Oversee preparation of quarterly, half-yearly and annual consolidated statements of 
Programme accounts as an integral part of the Management Information System for 
submission to the PSC, MoFA, IFAD and other CIs;  
190 
Ensure that Designated Accounts, Operational Accounts, and Zonal Bank Accounts have been 
maintained in accordance with the provisions of the loan agreement LTB and Finance and 
Administration Manual (FAM). 
Ensure the fiduciary capacity assessment of participating district assemblies; 
Facilitate the conduct of internal audit missions by the MoFA Internal Audit unit on the basis 
of agreed AWPB. 
Ensure the smooth implementation of the annual external audit of programme funds, under 
TOR agreed by IFAD and in accordance with IFAD’s audit guidelines, for timely submission to 
IFAD in accordance with provisions of the LTB. 
Ensure that goods and services have been procured in accordance with the loan agreement, 
LTB, FAM and in accordance with the GoG and IFAD rules and procedures. 
Offer professional advice on AAFORD’s financial arrangements and performance; 
Undertake any other responsibility that will ensure smooth and effective implementation of 
the Programme and commensurate with this role. 
B. 
Qualifications and Experience 
Have advanced degree (in Accounting/Finance or a related field of specialization)-essential 
Qualified Accountant with ACCA, CIMA, ICA (Ghana), CA (England and Wales), CPA or related 
financial management qualification (essential). 
Experience in setting up and maintaining a computerized accounting system (essential). 
At least 7 years of relevant post-qualification working experience of which 3 years must in a 
senior management position in a reputable organization.(essential). 
Practical working experience with Government of Ghana, donor-funded projects, and auditing 
experience (essential). 
Have a good understanding of tax and statutory requirements 
Skills 
Presentation of highly complex financial and non-financial information  
Inspiring confidence and developing highly working relationships with finance and non-finance 
colleagues within Programme, Cooperating Institutions and implementing partners. 
191 
Procurement Officer:  
The Procurement reports directly to the Central Project Coordinator, and is responsible for 
managing procurement processes and contract administration aspects. As head of the 
procurement unit, the incumbent will be tasked to ensure compliance with Government of 
Ghana Public Procurement Regulations and ensure due diligence to comply with IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines and handbook. 
Installation of appropriate procurement systems and procedures for effective planning and 
monitoring of procurements under the project;   
Oversee preparation and consolidation of inputs to the Annual Procurement Plan;  
Finalize, within three months after start of duty, a draft manual on procurement; 
Continuously coordinate and train (on the job if necessary) ISU staff or consultants in the 
preparation of terms of reference, specifications and proactive follow-up of these inputs in the 
bidding processes;  
Prepare bidding documents based on acceptable bidding standards;  
Ensure all prior review requirements such as obtaining of the No Objections from IFAD are 
complied with in a timely manner;  
Ensure that all the due bidding processes are adhered to: sufficient publications, strict 
adherence to deadlines, transparency in communications with bidders, publication of bid 
results, etc.;  
Ensure acceptable record keeping in procurement with at least a complete procurement file 
for each procurement from start to contract finalization. Maintain all procurement records in a 
form appropriate for regular auditing and spot checks by supervision missions;  
Communicate to all implementing entities and service provider their responsibilities and 
requirements with respect to procurement in keeping with prevailing government practices 
which are acceptable to IFAD;  
Oversee the contracting process, including ensuring that Evaluation Committees have people 
with appropriate expertise;  
Monitor implementation of contracts: report status and problems to the Project Coordinator 
on a monthly basis; and intervene to address problem upon request by the Coordinator;  
Ensure that goods and services financed have been procured in accordance with the loan 
agreement and the Government of Ghana procurement regulations;  
Work with the Finance Manager to ensure that tax exemptions for the procurement of goods 
for the project are secured at the appropriate time;   
192 
Prepare quarterly reports of progress with implementation of the Procurement Plan, and 
regularly inform the Project Coordinator of problems and make proposals to overcome 
bottlenecks;  
Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Coordinator.  
Minimum Qualifications  
The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in procurement and supply and must be a 
member of the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply or equivalent.  
Skills and Experience  
At least seven years of relevant work experience, preferably including experience in 
procurement in government/donor projects or large institutions;  
Appreciation of the evolution of the public sector procurement reforms in Ghana;  
Ability to work well in teams and to interact with a wide range of private sector partners and 
government representatives;  
Knowledge and experience of matching grant processes;  
Knowledge of work planning and reporting;  
Excellent quantitative and analytical skills;  
Computer-literate and well-versed in the use of Excel and Word. 
193 
Procurement Assistant 
Reporting to the Project Procurement Officer, the Project Procurement Assistant will handle a 
variety of tasks that include: assisting in procurement, preparation of procurement plans, 
market survey and research in accordance with laid down regulations and procedures; and 
preparation of periodic and annual Procurement Management Reports and any other related 
duties as may be assigned from time to time.   
Academic and Professional Qualifications  
The Project Procurement Assistant MUST;   
Be in possession of a minimum of a Higher National Diploma (HND) Certificate in  Business, 
Accounting, Mathematics or its equivalent qualification from a recognized institution;  
Have level six (6) Diploma in Purchasing and Supply Management from the Chartered Institute 
of Procurement & Supply or its approved equivalent from a recognized  institution;   
Have a Valid Membership to the Ghana Chapter of the Chartered Institute of Procurement and 
Supply (CIPS) or its approved equivalent from a recognized  Institution;  
A bachelor’s degree in any of the following field:  Procurement, Logistics, Finance, Business 
Administration, Economics, Project Planning and Management, Commerce or any other 
relevant discipline will be an advantage;    
Have a minimum of five (5) years of experience in public procurement of Goods, Works and 
Services, three (3) of which must be in a donor-funded project;  
Be Computer literate with  practical working knowledge of e-procurement 
194 
ZONAL COORDINATION UNIT (ZPU) 
Zonal  Project Coordinator (ZPC) 
Key Responsibilities  
The Zonal Project Coordinator (ZPC) will manage zonal activities and ensure AAFORD is 
implemented in accordance with the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) and related 
documents. In particular, the ZPC will ensure effective and timely implementation of the 
project with special attention to providing overall inter-agency coordination and facilitation at 
the zonal level. The ZPC will have overall responsibility of the day to day activities of AAFORD 
in the relevant zone. 
The ZPC will report to the Central Project Coordinator (CPC). 
The ZPC will be responsible for zonal leadership, coordination and management.  
Zonal Leadership and Coordination: The ZPC shall have overall leadership and coordination 
responsibilities including: 
Act as Secretary to and support the Chair of the Zonal Programme Steering Committee (ZSC) 
Function as a member of the project management team 
Establish and maintain good working relationship with all project participants and 
stakeholders-including MoFA, MoTI and other Government agencies, development partners 
and private sector at the zonal level 
Oversee the effective and efficient implementation of the programme at the zonal level 
Identify and engage implementation partners and relevant technical partners such as the 
capacity building service providers 
Promote knowledge sharing and learning within the project with other partners at the zonal 
level in coordination with the CPC. 
Support external missions to foster joint learning process that improves project 
implementation to achieve the desired impact 
Management: The management responsibilities of the ZPC shall include: 
Ensure timely preparation and submission of mandatory reports e.g. M&E data and reports 
and their wide access and distribution 
Direct and supervise the day to day operations of the programme, guided by the PDR,PIM and 
the AWPB 
Regularly appraise staff and provide feedback and support to enable them perform their jobs 
Ensure a participatory results-based Monitoring and Evaluation 
195 
Carry out any other project activities to be assigned by the Central Project coordinator (CPC) 
from time to time.  
196 
FIELD IMPLEMENTATION SUPERVISOR (FIS) 
The Field Implementation Supervisor (FIS) will oversee field operations in a designated 
AAFORD zone. The FIS will report to the Zonal Project Coordinator (ZPC). 
Key Responsibilities  
The Field Implementation Supervisor (FIS) shall facilitate the work of all AAFORD partners in a 
given zone, coordinate and harmonise their operations in line with the annual workplans. 
Thus, the FIS will provide input into the works and oversee the zonal activities of technical 
partners including implementation consultants; coordination of operations with 
implementation partners such as agric product market institutions, financial intermediaries, 
community institutions and beneficiaries. The FIS will supervise the implementation and 
controlling of agreed activities, monitor progress towards achieving agreed targets, reporting 
on these activities for efficient and effective outcomes. 
The responsibilities of the FIS shall include the following: 
Identify zonal plans of each implementation partner such as the capacity building service 
providers 
Ensure the harmonisation and effective coordination of the zonal, community and institutional 
level activities of implementation partners to promote synergies 
Provide support to partners as needed regarding getting the cooperation of institutions 
(government, private and public sectors, consultants, etc) and beneficiaries at all levels 
Support the monitoring and evaluation function by providing monthly reports highlighting 
weaknesses and opportunities for impact enhancement and making appropriate 
recommendations 
In particular, provide support to the work of capacity building service providers (CBSPs), 
community development consultants such as the community youth facilitators (YCFs) and 
youth institutional interns (YIIs) 
Liaise with the zonal monitoring and evaluation officer to ensure timely reporting and problem 
resolution by the Zonal Project Coordinator as well as management. 
Carry out any other project activities to be assigned by the ZPC from time to time. 
197 
Position Title: M&E Focal Point 
Line Management:Reports to the Coordinator, Regional Project Coordination Unit with a 
dotted technical  reporting line to the Senior M&E and Knowledge Management Specialist at 
the ISU. 
A. 
Functions and Responsibilities shall include: 
Review and manage the project M&E to ensure a proper flow of information to and from the 
ZCU to the ISU and especially the provision of timely and adequate information for decision 
making; 
Ensure that appropriate M&E procedures are prepared, established and implemented at the 
Regional level so as to provide sufficient basis for review of project implementation progress 
and for recommendations on necessary changes in emphasis;  
Review on regular basis the status of Project implementation with a view to adopting 
corrective measures and bringing to the attention of the ZCU any problems/issues arising 
thereof which may impede the implementation of the Project; 
Facilitate the development and consolidation of the Regional Annual Work Plan and Budget 
(AWPB), ensuring alignment with the project logframe, Cluster specific Community Outreach 
Development Plans and related targets; 
Prepare quarterly, semi-annual and annual Monitoring Reports on all aspects of Project 
implementation and progress, including but not limited to services in the areas of training, 
strengthening of producer organizations, marketing, financial services and technology 
promotion; 
Coordinate and facilitate field surveys and provide technical backstopping to Project 
implementers; 
Coordinate and consolidate progress reports from implementation partners/service providers 
on the implementation of project-related activities;  
Responsible for facilitating Annual Review Workshops and other such related activities aimed 
at assessing project progress; 
Documentation and dissemination of lessons learnt/good practices as part of the knowledge 
management and communication strategy;  
Coordinate the monitoring of efficiency of targeting, poverty focus, gender focus and youth 
focus in the implementation of Community Outreach Development Plans; 
Facilitate external supervision and evaluation missions; 
Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Regional Programme Coordinator. 
B.  Qualifications: 
198 
At least a Bachelor's Degree in Social Science or Agricultural Economics or any related 
discipline; 
At least 5 years M&E working experience in a donor-funded project; 
Computer Literate especially in software of Microsoft Office, MS Excel, MS Access and MS 
Project; 
Familiarity with the deployment of M&E tools for strategic planning and performance 
monitoring; 
Highly organized with methodological approaches to data management (in manual and 
computer based forms); 
Data analysis and strong background with spreadsheets & databases (Excel & Access) 
Excellent writing and presentation skills.  
C.  Skills 
Good level of proficiency in Microsoft Applications including MS Project. 
Demonstrated ability to train and build capacity of others. 
Experienced in electronic data processing and analysis as well as data base management. 
Ability to synthesize and present information in a structured manner.  
Strong analytical and market oriented skills. 
D. Duration 
The position will be on a contract basis for two (2) years with the possibility for extension 
depending on satisfactory performance and availability of funds. 
199 
TOR FOR SERVICE PROVIDERS 
CONSULTANCY SERVICES FOR CAPACITY-BUILDING OF AAFORD COMMUNITY FACILITATORS 
Background information:  
Community Facilitators 
In order to ensure effective and sustained engagement at the community level and facilitate 
transactions made possible through capacity-building, a pool of 4-5 community facilitators 
(CFs, including one to focus on climate change resilience) from the selected communities will 
be engaged for each of about 30 clusters of communities in the AAFORD Project areas. They 
will be expected to facilitate community mobilization and interaction with AAFORD. The CFs 
will comprise young women and men from the communities with social skills for community 
mobilization, as well as educational background to understand and interpret project 
objectives.  
A service provider (SP) is required to help recruit the CFs and build their skills on strengthening 
community institutions, gender mainstreaming, youth mobilization, nutrition sensitivity, and 
climate-resilient agricultural practices. They will be responsible for ensuring inclusion of target 
groups (especially women and youth) in the relevant CIs; facilitating development of 
Community Outreach Development Plans (see below) and outreach of the project-supported 
activities to the target groups; community-level data collection and reporting; monitoring, 
identifying and reporting community-level implementation issues and assisting to solve these 
problems; and facilitating the outreach of marketing and financial institutions, project SPs and 
other VC actors and facilitators. They will interact with the Youth Institutional Interns (YIIs) 
that are being trained under a different sub-components and attached to partner institutions 
in or serving the communities. The CFs will provide a clear community-level focal point of 
interaction for other project stakeholders such as input suppliers and other value chain actors, 
financial intermediaries and project SPs, ensure smooth implementation at the cluster level, 
and facilitate the ability of youth to work in public service and development institutions.  
Community Outreach Development Plan (CODP) 
The SP will also support and oversee the CFs to develop a 7-10 page Community Outreach 
Development Plan (CODP) in each project cluster. The objective is to facilitate both 
implementation and sustainability of project interventions by building community consensus 
around clear road maps for sustaining and scaling up good practices, strengthening 
community institutions and engaging with external ones, and enhancing access to product 
200 
markets and financing. The desired social, economic and productive changes envisioned in the 
community through AAFORD implementation will be presented in the CODPs along with the 
specific project interventions, which will help to achieve these changes. Although the CF will 
have primary responsibility for the initial draft of the CODP, the SP will be responsible for 
assuring the quality and standardization of the final products. 
The CODP will define the specific project target groups in the community, the projected 
outreach of AAFORD activities to these target groups over the project duration, the approach 
for reaching the target groups, and an overall budget estimate for capacity building. It will 
include the scope for strengthening offtaker-outgrower models. It will also present needs for 
nutrition awareness raising and how training on healthy diets can be included in capacity 
building activities for different groups. Similarly, it will include specific climate-related risks to 
the community and mitigation measures to be integrated in project implementation activities, 
in particular to complement TA for improved agricultural technologies and practices to raise 
productivity.   
The CODPs will serve as inputs to the regional ZCUs to prepare detailed annual cluster work 
plans and budgets in coordination with the SPs and CFs, presenting the physical and financial 
targets to be achieved in each community cluster during the year. AAFORD will direct support 
to the communities based on the activities identified in the CODPs. 
Institutional Business Plans (IBPs) 
The AAFORD SP will capacitate the CFs to work together with the YIIs based in the Business 
Advisory and Resource Centres (BACs/BRCs), to develop Institutional Business Plans (IBPs) for 
those community institutions (CIs) in each cluster that have met the selection criteria and 
expressed a desire for capacity-building or to seek financing (either individually or together). 
Each IBP will detail the areas of investment chosen by the CIs for improving the knowledge, 
skills and livelihoods of the members. The first part of the IBP (3-5 pages) will detail how the CI 
will strengthen their governance and management systems and address issues relating to 
inclusion of women, youth and other vulnerable groups; climate change; nutrition; financing; 
and linkages with external market and financial institutions. This will include how the CI 
intends to expand access to financial services, including savings mechanisms, credit (in kind 
and/or cash), reinvesting earnings, agricultural insurance, and digital financial services (DFS). 
The second part (4-6 pages) will focus on the details of the specific business area in which the 
CI members decide to collaborate, including: description of the business concept or model; 
market opportunities; strategic, operational and financial details such as projected 
profitability, financing plan and reinvestment plan; direct and indirect beneficiaries 
(particularly women and youth); outreach of benefits; measures to improve productivity, meet 
required market standards and address the effects of climate change.  
201 
Although the YCF and YII will have primary responsibility for the initial drafts of the IBPs, the 
SP will be responsible for assuring the quality and standardization of the final products. 
Assignment Objectives 
AAFORD will engage consultancy services to recruit, train and manage 4-5 YCFs in each of 30 
clusters, facilitate them in preparing CODPs and IBPs, and assure the quality and 
standardization of the results. YCFs will typically be engaged for three years.  
Duties and responsibility of Service Provider  
To Community Facilitators 
Develop a recruitment strategy and criteria for recruiting CFs from the communities in 
AAFORD clusters to ensure that they have the social skills for community mobilization, as well 
as educational background to understand and interpret project objectives, and will be 
accepted by the community as focal points for interaction with institutions and other SPs 
serving the communities. CFs could include youth who are from but not presently residing in 
the communities and who are willing to return to live there during their service. 
Undertake the recruitment in consultation with the AAFORD ZCUs. 
Develop a training strategy and guidelines, including to ensure that there is at least one CF in 
each cluster with a special focus on and knowledge of (i) finance; (ii) business skills; and (iii) 
good agricultural practices for increased productivity and climate change resilience. All CFs 
should be sensitized on issues of gender, youth, climate change, and nutrition.  
Provide support and oversight to the CF, reporting to the AAFORD ISU semi-annually. 
Recruit replacements if needed when CFs resign before their terms are up. 
Community Outreach Development Plans and Institutional Business Plans 
Develop a simple format for CODPs and IBPs (see discussion of their content above); 
Develop a training strategy and guidelines for CFs in preparing CODPs and IDPs in close 
collaboration with the communities/cluster and the CIs;  
Train the CFs and facilitate them in several initial preparations of draft CODPs and IBPs until 
they are able to continue on their own;  
Review draft CODPs and IBPs, provide feedback, and edit revised versions as needed to 
produce final versions of acceptable quality. 
Duration of Assignment 
202 
4 years [needed to oversee CFs for 3 years after recruitment & training the first year] 
Qualification and Experience of the Firm and of staff 
The firm has proven capacity and track record in training and working with youth in the areas 
of agricultural practices, finance and business skills; in working with rural communities in 
Ghana; and in business planning. 
Staff requirements include…....  
Deliverables 
A recruitment strategy and training guidelines for CFs; 
CFs recruited and trained; 
Formats for CODPs and IBPs; 
Final CODPs and IBPs for each cluster; 
Semi-annual monitoring reports to ISU. 
203 
Ghana Agricultural Finance Sector Review  
Terms of Reference  
Background 
Ghana has a long history of attempting to channel credit to the agricultural sector. Specialized 
rural finance institutions in Ghana date from Bank of Ghana (BoG) regulations in 1976 
permitting “Rural Banks”56 serving local communities to be established with much lower 
minimum capital than commercial banks. Rural Banks were expanded in the 1980s with 
government/BoG support to service the introduction of “akuafo checks” to pay cocoa farmers. 
Establishment of the ARB Apex Bank in 2002 under the IFAD-supported Rural Financial 
Services Project (RFSP) strengthened the Rural and Community Banks (RCBs) into a network 
serviced by a central agency. The Agriculture Development Bank (ADB) was established in 
1965 to counter commercial banks’ risk aversion to the agricultural sector, but suffered from 
poor repayment and economic conditions in the 1970s and 1980s. After restructuring in 1988, 
the share of smallholders in ADB agricultural loans rose from 15% to 24% over the decade, but 
restructuring in 2004 as a universal bank led to a decline in its agricultural loan portfolio in 
order to comply with prudential requirements (although it remained subsidy-dependent).57 
In the 1980s, the Government of Ghana (GoG) abandoned earlier policies that mandated the 
share of bank loans going to agriculture and maximum interest rates. However, high interest 
rates have persisted in Ghana’s financial system (due to a combination of high inflation, 
government borrowing and non-performing loans, and weak competition and efficiency). 
Commercial interest rates in excess of returns to agricultural production stifle demand for 
credit, and more profitable and less risky lending opportunities in other sectors divert supply.  
Although the share of agriculture in Ghana’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has declined over 
time, it remains a critical source of livelihood for 45% of the workforce and hence for poverty 
reduction through development of the rural economy. Efforts to promote agriculture have 
persistently included lines of credit at interest rates or spreads set below market levels, to 
make them more affordable for agricultural production and rural enterprises. Whether 
through the ADB, the Export Trade, Agricultural and Industrial Development Fund (EDAIF), or 
projects supported by development partners, these lines of credit have faced challenges in 
both uptake and recovery. 
As a basis for the Affordable Agricultural Finance and Resilient Rural Development (AAFORD) 
Project to introduce a Blended Finance Facility (BFF) for lending to agriculture at affordable 
rates, a review is needed of lessons learned from past attempts, and of the current status of 
universal banks, Rural and Community Banks (RCBs), and other microfinance institutions 
56 Later extended to include “Community Banks,” which may serve fishing and other non-
agricultural communities and tend to be more urban-based.  
57 World Bank, “Ghana’s Development Finance Institutions: Review of Current Status and 
Principles for Reform,” Washington DC, The World Bank, Finance and Markets, 2016.  
204 
(MFIs), following consolidation and clean-up by the BoG, with respect to their capacity to lend 
to agricultural value chains. 
Affordable Agricultural Finance for Resilient Rural Development (AAFORD) Project 
 << insert boilerplate on GoG has funds from IFAD for this project, etc….>> 
As part of AAFORD’s mandate to promote consultations among relevant stakeholders and to 
improve the policy environment for agricultural value chain financing, it intends to prepare a 
strategic framework and action plan for agricultural and rural finance that could serve as a 
foundation for development and marketing of financial products suitable for agricultural 
producers and value chain actors in Ghana, as well as for improvements in the policy, legal and 
regulatory environment. This will include a two-day Stakeholder Workshop that would draw 
on the approach and methodology undertaken in Ghana in 2008 and in Uganda in 2005,58 as 
well as on various studies and documentation on programmes and institutions related to 
agricultural value chain financing in Ghana. A small technical team will then draw on the 
findings and recommendations of the workshop to prepare the Agricultural Finance Strategy 
and Action Plan (AFSAP). AAFORD wishes to procure a consultant to facilitate the Workshop 
and lead the preparation of the AFSAP. 
The Assignment 
The overall objective is to lay the groundwork for implementation of a Blended Finance Facility 
to increase the supply of affordable finance and risk mitigation instruments for agricultural 
production and value chains – supported by capacity building both on the demand side 
(smallholder farmers, offtakers associated with them, and rural households) and the supply 
side (adaptation of products suited for and outreach to those target groups).  
In particular, the consultant is expected to:  
Review the current status of existing credit lines targeted to agricultural value chains and rural 
enterprises and the challenges regarding their uptake and recovery, specifically: Outgrower 
and Value Chain Fund (OVCF); Rural Development Fund (RDF); Rural Enterprises Development 
Fund (REDF); and EXIM Bank (former EDAIF). 
Review lessons learned with respect to concessional lines of credit, mandated interest rate 
spreads, matching grants; in particular, challenges for increasing uptake of credit lines, 
insurance, guarantees and warehouse receipts; including experiences with credit and recovery 
under the Millennium Development Authority (MiDA), Root and Tuber Improvement and 
Marketing Programme (RTIMP), and Rural Enterprise Development Fund (REDF). 
Review the current status (following measures by BoG to raise minimum capital requirements 
and strengthen the financial sector) of financial institutions (FIs) with respect to their liquidity, 
58 Dialogue Seminar on Agricultural Finance :Richard L. Meyer, Richard Roberts, Adam 
Mugume, “Development Rural Financial Markets in Uganda: The Way Forward,” Kampala: 
Bank of Uganda/KfW/GTZ/Side Financial Systems Development Programme, 2004; 
“Agricultural Finance Action Plan Matrix,” BoU/KfW/GTZ/Side Financial Systems Development 
Programme, 2004 
205 
capital adequacy, and capability to lend to agricultural value chains – especially universal 
banks, RCBs and other MFIs that serve rural households; 
Undertake a sample survey of about 20-30 FIs to (a) validate the above analysis; (b) assess 
their demand for funds to on-lend to agriculture and for accompanying risk mitigation 
instruments (in particular, insurance through GAIP and guarantees from GIRSAL or RDF) and 
their readiness to lend against warehouse receipts; (c) estimate the ratios of operational costs, 
loan losses and profit margins to loan portfolios, and their evolution over time;59 as a basis for 
determining reasonable spreads for on-lending to agriculture; and (d) estimate the additional 
costs and risks they would incur to increase their loan portfolios to smallholder farmers (either 
directly or as outgrowers  secured by their offtakers, such as nucleus farmers, processors and 
aggregators).  
Deliverable Outputs 
Inception report specifying methodology for the sample survey. 
Interim report, including first draft of lessons learned and status of financial institutions.  
Draft report on results of survey.  
Organization of stakeholder workshop and presentation of findings. 
Final report incorporating comments and feedback from workshop. 
Qualifications  
The consultant is expected to demonstrate  
At least 10-15 years of experience in rural/agricultural/micro financial sector development;  
Demonstrated standing in the field, including relevant reports and publications;  
Familiarity with rural and agricultural finance policies, projects and experience in Ghana; 
Experience with surveys of financial institutions and analysis of financial data;  
Strong presentational, interpersonal and writing skills;  
An advanced degree in economics, management or finance, or business. 
59 With reference to the baseline study for the Rural and Agricultural Finance Programme 
(RAFiP); GHAMFIN’s Performance Monitoring and Benchmarking Reports; and the 2006 
GHAMFIN study on Microfinance Poverty Outreach and Performance Assessment: A Study of 
Rural Microfinance Institutions and Government Programmes in Ghana. 
206 
207 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Medium
Medium
Government is stable and democratic elections have
resulted in peaceful changes. Election of the president
and members of parliament is planned in 2020.
2. Macroeconomic
Medium
Medium
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Medium
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Medium
High
Major currency fluctuations pose problems for enterprises,
farmers and their organizations and critically affect prices
of agricultural exports and imported inputs. These are
however outside the control of the programme.
Sector strategies and policies provide support for
agriculture, inclusive finance, rural development and
enterprise development, set strategic direction and policy
formulation, contribute to policy dialogue, and strengthen
financial institutions and FBOs.
AAFORD will address these constraints by i) focusing on
a limited geographical area (two zones), ii) partnering with
other ongoing IFAD projects, e.g. REP supported
BAC/BRCs, GASIP supported Farmers Based
Organisations (FBOs) in the project areas; iii) enhancing
target groups’ access to rural finance by focusing on both
demand side interventions (increasing production,
productivity, value addition, post-harvest techniques,
institutional capacities) and supply side pathways e.g.
setting up the Blended Finance Facility (BFF) and
supporting the delivery of the BFF resources in
partnership with Ghana Incentive-based Risk Sharing
System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL), Ghana
Agricultural Insurance Pool (GAIP) and Ghana
Commodities Exchange (GCX).
Farmers indeed tend to be risk-averse and to perceive
borrowing as an avoidable risk. The primary target,
therefore, will be semi-subsistence and market-oriented
farmers who wish to expand their marketable surplus,
whether by adding some additional acreage or through
productivity-raising inputs. AAFORD will also try to expand
the use of available risk-mitigation instruments, including
insurance to offset production risks, guarantees to offset
PFIs’ default risks, and warehouse receipts to permit
taking advantage of higher off-season prices.
Whereas farmers tend to avoid the risk of borrowing
against their existing land holdings and crops, they have
proven more willing to borrow for a marginal expansion, in
collaboration with an offtaker who can provide the market
as well as secure and manage the financing. Indirect
access to credit through the offtaker also helps insulate
the FBOs against risk of crop failure, as it is easier to
renegotiate terms with the offtakers (who are often paid in
kind rather than in cash) than with financial institutions. In
some cases, the offtaker may actually be a legally
constituted cooperative consisting of both producers and
processors, which can both represent their mutual
interests and satisfy the collateral requirements of the
PFIs. The model has also worked to enable larger nucleus
farmers (especially in the northern part of the country) to
expand with minimal direct investment by borrowing to
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/4
Risk
Impact
provide inputs and services (e.g., tractor) to outgrowers
Mitigations/comments
who can expand the scale of production.
AAFORD will focus on a successful model that has
emerged both from RTIMP experience (as well as USAID
and other projects) and from recent observations in the
field: building on an on-going relationship between an
offtaker (usually a processor or nucleus farmer;
sometimes an aggregator) and FBOs of outgrowers, and
borrowing for an expansion of operations.
One reason that PFIs (especially RCBs) are interested in
working with FBOs is to gain their members as clients.
AAFORD will provide capacity-building in financial literacy
and VSLAs to encourage them to save in formal financial
institutions. Nevertheless, there is a risk that such
savings, and other assets held by smallholders, will be
insufficient to meet the security requirements for loans
from those institutions. This risk is mitigated in part by
focusing on the offtaker-FBO model, in which a nucleus
farmer or processor is much more likely to be able to
provide the required security to take a large loan that is
then passed on in bits (in-kind) to his farmers .
To help close any remaining gap between assets and
collateral requirements, working with GIRSAL is especially
important. A GIRSAL guarantee can serve as collateral for
50% of the investment amount.
When inputs are provided free or on credit, there is always
a risk that people will come forward to receive them in
order to sell at a profit, rather than utilize them directly for
production. This risk will be mitigated by (a) working with
existing FBOs that have an on-going relationship with
offtakers; and (b) focusing on expansion of existing
production. This will tend to exclude new entrants and
‘free riders.’ The offtaker provides the inputs and
associated services (such as plowing) in stages, not all at
once. Members of FBOs who divert the additional inputs
may jeopardize their on-going relationship with the buyer.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
3/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
AAFORD will mitigate this risk by i) establishing the
Implementation Support Unit (ISU) in the project area itself
and strengthening the ISU’s implementation support and
monitoring capacity by establishing Zonal Project
Coordination Units (ZPCUs) in each of the two project
zones; ii) AAFORD will not rely solely on ISU and ZPCU
staff for implementation. The project will also partner with
implementation service providers (SPs), deploy
community facilitators and youth interns to support the
partnerships between the project communities and the
local private/public project partners. The ISU and ZPCU
staff will be responsible for capacity building, monitoring,
quality control and technical backstopping. Even in the
case of temporary delays in staff replacement,
implementation will not be delayed. 
Although the AAFORD implementation structure has
many parts, the function of each part is well defined. The
ISU will be responsible for overall coordination, financial
management procurement, technical backstopping and
developing the national level stakeholder partnerships;
ZPCUs will be responsible for implementation support to
the service providers (SPs), field level monitoring and
quality control. ZPCUs will report to the ISU; SPs will carry
out direct implementation at community level (through the
facilitators), develop partnerships at the intermediary level,
coordinate with the ZPCUs and report the ISU;
The clarity of the roles will facilitate reporting and flow of
information. The location of the ISU in the project area will
facilitate close coordination between different
implementation stakeholders and swift attention to
challenges. The physical proximity between the ISU and
the Zonal Steering Committee will develop regular
communication and strong relation between them and
ZSCs involvement in resolving local challenges which may
be impeding implementation. At the macro or national
level, the Development Finance Unit of Ministry of
Finance’s Financial Sector Division will coordinate
AAFORD’s implementation and ensure its consistency
with wider national objectives and synergies with GoG
activities to increase and expedite the flow of credit to the
agricultural sector.
Public Financial Management systems at country level is
considered sufficiently solid and accompanied by a skilled
civil service. The ongoing portfolio is showing moderately
satisfactory FM performance. The utilization as lead
implementing agency of a newly established office
(GIRSAL was created in 2017) poses a number of
fiduciary challenges that will need to be addressed during
the detailed programme design.
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Medium
High
6. Financial management
Medium
High
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
4/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
AAFORD will mitigate the risks through the following
steps:
i) Relevant training will be provided to the procurement
staff during project start-up workshops. The training will
also contribute to building up the procurement capacity of
the Project staff to follow the required procurement
approach and methodology, orient staff members to best
practices and train them to monitor the quality and
timeliness of documents submitted to IFAD for supervision
missions and for prior review; ii) s management and
monitoring teams will be formed, led by the Central
Project Coordinator (CPC) and including the technical and
the procurement teams, and beneficiaries (if necessary).
These teams will be responsible for contract supervision,
monitoring, and application of the conditions of contract.
Close monitoring will be done to prevent poor
performance of service providers by ensuring their
adherence to contract documents; iii) Procurement clinics
on procurement record keeping will be provided to
AAFORD procurement staff to ensure that the complete
procurement documentation, including a procurement
filing checklist, is kept on procurement files at the ISU; iv)
Provide contract management training to all AAFORD
staff.
AAFORD will be built on to the on-going IFAD projects to
complement its activities where possible. As a part of the
design mission, the project objectives will be discussed
and understood by the key stakeholders (relevant
ministries, financial Institutions, development partners and
beneficiaries).
Project's environmental and social category is B and
climate risk assessment is medium with the risk mitigation
measures incorporated in the project. Financing from the
Green Climate Fund will be sought recognizing the higher
costs that climate change imposes on the development
efforts and investments.
This risk is mitigated by a range of measures such as
capacity building on climate resistant agricultural
practices, facilitating climate proof agricultural loans and
enabling greater outreach of agricultural insurance
services (details in SECAP review note).
7. Procurement
Low
High
8. Stakeholders
Low
Medium
9. Environment and social
Medium
Medium
Overall
Medium
High
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
AAFORD’s exit strategy is built on  
i) profitable linkages between private-sector buyers/offtakers and target 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
1. 
2. 
households (producers) 
3. 
business linkages between offtakers and producers 
4. 
5. 
6. 
strengthening AAFORD’s achievements. 
ii) successful engagement of financial institutions in supporting the pro-poor 
iii) strengthened community level institutions and human capacities  
iv) successful linkages of community institutions to external resources; and 
v) increasing the presence of a network of technical service providers to continue 
Profitable, pro-poor linkages between private-sector offtakers and target 
7. 
households: AAFORD will support the development of profitable linkages between 
private-sector offtakers and target households (producers). It will orient the offtakers to 
the potential of the smallholder farmers (which will be realised through project support) 
to meet the offtakers’ requirements. AAFORD will also facilitate the development of win-
win contracts between the offtakers and FBOs (on behalf of individual farmers). AAFORD 
will provide capacity building and training inputs to target households to assist them to 
respond to the requirements of the contracts with the offtakers. Thus, the capacity 
building inputs to the target households will focus on increasing the quality and quantity 
of produce to meet the offtakers requirements. The target households’ success in 
producing the quality and the standards required by the offtakers will result in the 
successful implementation of the win-win contracts resulting in profits both for the target 
household and the offtakers. Once these profitable linkages are active and bottlenecks 
are removed through project support, the business relationship will continue based on 
market demand and supply principles. With the growth in this business relationship, the 
offtaker will increase the business volumes in the community to achievement economies 
of scale which will increase the outreach of these linkages to new smallholder farmers.  
Successful engagement of financial institutions in supporting pro-poor 
8. 
business linkages between offtakers and producers  
AAFORD will assist a range of partner financial institutions to provide financial 
9. 
support to the pro-poor business linkages between offtakers and producers unlocked 
through AAFORD interventions. When these business ventures are successful the 
financial institutions will continue supporting the continuation and growth of these 
businesses. Thus, the successful engagement of the financial institutions will develop the 
pathway for AAFORD to make a smooth exit. Further, the success of the pro-poor 
business partnerships in the AAFORD clusters will motivate the financial institutions to 
tap into this business segment even outside the AAFORD supported clusters. 
Consequently, the financial institutions will automatically engage in the scaling up of the 
AAFORD supported pro poor business models in other communities outside the AAFORD 
clusters and even in other regions in the future.  
Revolving nature of the blended finance facility: The IFAD contribution to 
10. 
the blended finance facility will be perpetually revolving in nature and the reflows will 
immediately available for extending fresh loans. This measure will help to perpetuate the 
BFF beyond the life of the project. 
11. 
Strengthening community level institutions and human capacities 
AAFORD will strengthen community institutions (CI), mainly FBOs, VSLAs and 
12. 
youth and women enterprise groups by  
focusing on their institutional development;  
i. 
ii.  enabling their financial sustainability; and  
iii.  developing their technical capacity to ensure that they can continue providing 
services to target households even after AAFORD.  
Institutional development of the CIs: This will involve strengthening the 
13. 
governance and management roles in the CIs and ensuring transparent financial 
management practices within them. Capacity building and training will be supported 
focusing on governance, management and leadership aspects, project management 
areas, book keeping and financial management areas and a range of other technical 
areas to develop the human capacities necessary for their transparent and robust 
management. AAFORD will also develop the pro-poor orientation of the CIs and enhance 
their focus on increasing membership to include at least 60% members from semi-
subsistence smallholder household categories, women and youth. Clear protocols for 
consultative decision-making and conflict resolutions will be established. These inputs 
will provide a strong platform for pro-poor focus and institutional continuity of the CI’s 
even after AAFORD. Where relevant, AAFORD will support the registration of these 
institutions and the opening of their bank accounts.  
Financial sustainability of the CIs: The financial sustainability of CIs will enable 
14. 
them to continue nurturing and guiding the AAFORD supported activities in the 
communities and will set the stage for AAFORD to make a smooth exit. AAFORD will 
assist the CIs to develop their financial sustainability plans which will outline how they 
can meet the future costs of their developmental services to the target households even 
after AAFORD. Broadly, the CI’s will be encouraged to meet these costs through the 
following arrangements,  
●  Mobilising member savings with the mandate to invest this capital in revenue 
generating activities. AAFORD will promote savings culture within all 
institutional levels.  
●  Earning a slender commission on the volume of business brokered by the 
FBOs between the marketing actors and the members. AAFORD will facilitate 
the development of transparent norms for the FBOs for the collection and 
utilisation of such financial revenue;  
●  Where relevant, earning a slender financial margin by intermediating credit 
support from financial institutions to the target households;  
●  Collecting fees for training, technical assistance and capacity building inputs 
to member households 
●  Retaining a part of the revenue earned during the current season for 
supporting members’ productive investments in the following season. AAFORD 
will facilitate discussion sessions to develop consensus amongst members to 
allow the FBOs to retain a part of the revenue for supporting investment 
activities in the following season. AAFORD will also develop the capacity of the 
FBOs to manage these funds. The contracts between the FBOs and the 
offtakers will be so structured to facilitate retained earning at FBO level. 
15. 
Linking community level institutions to external resources 
AAFORD will link the FIs to three categories of external resources in order to build 
16. 
their capacity to continue providing community level services after AAFORD; These 
categories are  
i. 
ii. 
iii.  linkages to technical service providers.  
linkages to financial institutions (only where relevant);  
linkages to marketing and production development actors; and  
Linkages to financial institutions: The strong engagement of the CI’s and 
17. 
financial institutions (only where relevant) will enable AAFORD to make a smooth exit.  
Linkages to marketing and production development actors: Strong 
18. 
connection of the CI’s to marketing and production development actors will facilitate 
AAFORD to make a smooth exit. During AAFORD implementation the CIs will be at the 
centre stage of business plan development, negotiations and the contractual 
arrangements to solidify partnerships with marketing. The CIs will be linked to 
production support actors such as input suppliers, suppliers of machinery services and 
advisory services (private sector, agriculture universities and research centres) for 
supporting production improvement. They will also be linked to marketing actors 
comprising both export and domestic market oriented agribusinesses. The involvement 
of the CIs in developing marketing and production support linkages to the target 
households will develop their capacity to continue with these functions even after the 
first six years and will enable AAFORD to make a smooth exit.  
Linkages with technical service providers: AAFORD will link the CIs to 
19. 
AAFORD technical service providers active in delivering technical support related to 
institutional, community and business development areas. The technical service 
providers will be drawn from private consultancy firms as well as large NGOs active in 
the area. AAFORD will capacitate the CIs to establish direct lines of communication with 
these service providers. This will empower the CIs to engage these service providers 
even after AAFORD completion based on requirement. 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex: AAFORD Assessment Questionnaire & FM Risk Summary Table
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ASSESSMENT QUESTIONNAIRE (FMAQ)1 
Project # / Name Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural 
Development (AAFORD) 
Date : 04/10/2019 
Implementing Entity:  Ministry of Finance 
Self-assessment  completed by  - Paul Kwesi Agbo 
Date : 04/10/2019 
Review completed by _____Daniel Pasos, FMS___________________  Date : 9/10/2019 
 Implementing Entity: Ministry of Finance, Ghana 
Topic 
Response 
Remarks 
1. 
Organization  and Staffing 
Implementing Entity  
NOTE: 
In the case of a Government Department, the FMS should initially focus on the status of the country PFM 
systems in order to gauge level of fiduciary risks to which the proposed project may be exposed.  
Once an understanding of the PFM environment has been ascertained, the FMS should switch focus down 
to project level and focus on the department(s) or unit(s) that will financially administer the project. 
1.1  Which entity is the LPA? 
What is the entity’s legal status? 
Ministry of Finance 
Public(Government of Ghana 
Establishment 
1.2  Will financial management of the project be the 
PIU 
responsibility of the LPA or be undertaken within the-
PIU?  
1 This questionnaire should be used as guidance for and in support of the Summary Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment 
@ Design (Annex III). 
Topic 
Response 
Remarks 
1.3 
Has the entity implemented a donor financed project 
in the past - if so, please provide details? 
Staffing 
1.4  What is the (proposed) organizational structure of the 
accounting department? Attach an organization chart. 
1.5 
Identify the (proposed) accounts staff, including job 
title, responsibilities, educational background and 
professional experience. Attach job descriptions and 
CVs of key accounting staff. 
Yes 
Economic Management 
&Capacity Building Project 
(EMCB), Ghana Extractive 
Industry Transparency 
Initiative Project (GEITIP), 
Natural Resource & 
Environmental Governance 
Project (NREGP), Rural and 
Agricultural Finance Project 
(RAFIP), Ghana Economic 
Management Strengthening 
Project (GEMSP), Financial 
Sector Development Project, 
(FSDP) 
Hierarchical Structure with the 
head being the Finance 
Manager, supported by a 
Project Accountant who 
supervises an Accounts 
Assistant 
The Senior Project 
Accountant- 
Prepares the yearly budget 
with the Technical officers of 
the beneficiary Implementing 
Agencies. Assign request for 
payment to respective officers 
for processing. Review and 
processed request for 
payment before submission to 
authorized signatories. 
Reviews all cash forecast prior 
to the preparation of 
Withdrawal application/ 
reimbursement od designated 
project accounts. Analyse 
expenditure variances to 
inform management on the 
process of all activities, etc  
Yes for the proposed staff 
1.6 
1.7 
Are written position descriptions that clearly define 
duties, responsibilities, lines of supervision, and limits 
of authority for all of the officers, managers, and staff? 
Is the finance and accounts staff adequately qualified 
and experienced? 
Yes 
Topic 
Response 
Remarks 
1.8 
1.9 
Are the project accounts and finance staff trained in 
IFAD procedures? 
Yes 
Are any Finance Staff appointed on contract  
What is the duration of the contracts  
Indicate key positions not contracted yet, and the 
estimated date of appointment 
No position is contractual. The 
staffs are permanent 
Government staff. 
We may need 
refresher training 
The PIU  intends 
to contract the 
accounting 
positions (staff) 
due to the 
location of the 
CPCU outside of 
MoF Head Office 
1.10  What is training policy for the finance and accounting 
staff? 
1.11 
Is there evidence that finance staff are regularly 
transferred to other Government departments 
At what frequency are personnel transferred? 
They are sponsored by the 
Ministry of Finance or Projects 
that they work on to attend 
both local and Foreign 
trainings 
None of the finance staff have 
been transferred to other 
department  since 2007 
1.12 
Is the project finance and accounting function staffed 
adequately? 
Yes 
Summary of Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design 
Project #__ 
AAFORD, GHANA 
Implementing Entity: _Ministry of Finance________________ 
Inherent Risk 
  1. TI Index 
  2. RSP Score 
Control Risks 
  1. Organization and Staffing 
  2. Budgeting 
  3. Funds flow and Disbursement Arrangements 
  4. Internal Controls 
  5. Accounting Systems, Policies & Procedures 
  6. Reporting and Monitoring 
  7. Internal Audit 
  8. External Audit 
Project Fiduciary Risk @ Design 
Initial Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed  
Mitigation 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
- 
- 
To be well 
documented 
and shared 
Customize 
GIFMIS  
financial 
reports for 
project-specific 
report 
Audit unit of 
MoF to 
regularly audit 
the project 
Prompt audit will 
requested 
M 
M 
L 
M 
L 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
L 
M 
L 
M 
L 
L 
M 
L 
M 
Ghana
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development
Project Design Report
Annex: Gasip Ccva Revision. July Final
Document Date:
10/12/2019
Project No.
2000002672
Report No.
5177-GH
West and Central Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
CLIMATE CHANGE VULNERABILITY 
ASSESSMENT IN NORTHERN, UPPER 
EAST, UPPER WEST AND SELECTED 
DISTRICTS IN BRONG-AHAFO REGIONS 
FOR GASIP CLIMATE CHANGE 
ADAPTATION 
Climate Change Team 
Department of Geography and Resource Development 
University of Ghana 
Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (GASIP) 
CLIMATE CHANGE VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT IN 
NORTHERN, UPPER EAST, UPPER WEST AND SELECTED 
DISTRICTS IN BRONG-AHAFO REGIONS FOR GASIP 
CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION 
FINAL REPORT 
JULY 2018 
b 
COVER PHOTOS: Courtesy of Assessment Team 
c 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ............................................................................................................................ i 
LIST OF FIGURES ................................................................................................................................... iv 
LIST OF TABLES ................................................................................................................................... viii 
LIST OF PHOTOS .................................................................................................................................. viii 
LIST OF ACRONYMS ............................................................................................................................. ix 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ..................................................................................................................... xii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................................................................................................................xiii 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 BACKGROUND: VULNERABILITY OF NORTHERN GHANA TO CLIMATE CHANGE 2 
1.2 CONTEXT ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
1.3 SCOPE OF THE ASSIGNMENT. .................................................................................................. 8 
1.4 ASSESSMEMNT AREAS (SPATIAL UNIT) ................................................................................ 9 
1.5 METHODOLOGY ......................................................................................................................... 13 
1.5.1 Study Design .............................................................................................................................. 13 
1.5.2 Implementation Strategy ......................................................................................................... 14 
1.5.2.1 Sampling Strategy: .................................................................................................................. 14 
1.5.2.2 Primary Data Collection ....................................................................................................... 15 
1.5.2.3 Statistical Downscaling of Global Climate Models ............................................................ 20 
1.5.2.4 Risks and Hazards Mapping ................................................................................................ 22 
1.5.2.5 Training of Enumerators ...................................................................................................... 24 
1.5.2.6 Data Handling and Analysis ................................................................................................. 25 
CHAPTER 2: ASSESSMENT FINDINGS ........................................................................................................ 26 
2.1 DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS BY DISTRICTS ...................................................... 27 
2.1.1 Household Size ......................................................................................................................... 27 
2.1.2 Gender of Household head ...................................................................................................... 27 
2.2.3 Educational background ......................................................................................................... 27 
2.1.4 Major economic activities ........................................................................................................ 28 
2.1.5 Monthly Income ....................................................................................................................... 29 
2.1.6 Out-migration pattern and trends .......................................................................................... 31 
2.1.7 Household asset ownership ..................................................................................................... 37 
2.2 BIOPHYSICAL RISKS, HAZARDS AND POTENTIAL IMPACT ON VULNERABILITY 
OF THE ASSESSMENT AREAS. ....................................................................................................... 39 
2.2.1 Baseline Climatic Conditions ......................................................................................................... 39 
2.2.2 Climate-related Risks and Hazard Mapping ............................................................................. 47 
2.2.2.1 Flood Risk ............................................................................................................................... 47 
2.2.5 Bushfires .................................................................................................................................... 48 
2.2.6 Climate-Induced Soil Erosion .................................................................................................... 49 
2.2.7 Drought ...................................................................................................................................... 50 
2.3 HOUSEHOLDS VULNERABILITY TO CLIMATE RELATED HAZARDS ........................ 52 
2.3.1 Exposure Analysis ........................................................................................................................ 52 
2.3.2 Gender-Based Exposure .............................................................................................................. 66 
2.3.2 Sensitivity Analysis ...................................................................................................................... 88 
2.3.2.1 District-based sensitivity ......................................................................................................... 88 
2.3.2.2 Gender-based Sensitivity ...................................................................................................... 100 
2.3.2.3 Social Group (Youth and Young Adults) Sensitivity ........................................................... 102 
2.3.2.4 Sensitivity of Crops to climate-related hazards ................................................................... 107 
2.3.3 Adaptive Strategies ........................................................................................................................ 113 
2.3.3.1 On-farm adaptive strategy .................................................................................................... 113 
2.3.3.2 Off-farm adaptive strategies ................................................................................................ 120 
CHAPTER 3: CLIMATE CHANGE SCENARIOS AND FUTURE VULNERABILITY ....................................... 127 
3.1 Projected Climatic Scenarios ........................................................................................................... 128 
3.1.1 Minimum Temperature ............................................................................................................. 128 
3.1.2 Maximum Temperature .......................................................................................................... 129 
3.1.3 Annual Precipitation ............................................................................................................... 131 
3.1.4 Number of rainy days (Wet spells) .......................................................................................... 133 
3.1.5 Number of Rainy Days above 10mm ...................................................................................... 134 
3.1.6 Dry spells ................................................................................................................................. 135 
3.2 Practical Implications ....................................................................................................................... 137 
3.3 Effects of Projected Climate Change on Gender and Age Groups under Different Scenarios . 137 
CHAPTER 4: RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADAPTATION OPTIONS ....................................................... 140 
4.0 RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADAPTATION OPTIONS ......................................................... 141 
4.1 ADAPTATION OPTIONS ............................................................................................................... 141 
4.1.1 ON-FARM ADAPTATION OPTIONS ...................................................................................... 142 
(a). Conservation agriculture ............................................................................................................ 142 
(c) Sustainable, affordable and innovative water resource use ........................................................ 143 
ii 
(d). Community-based agroforestry and woodlot schemes ............................................................... 145 
(e). Adaptive trials ............................................................................................................................ 145 
(f). Demonstration sites ..................................................................................................................... 146 
4.1.2 PRIORITIZED ON-FARM ADAPTATION OPTIONS ........................................................... 147 
4.1.3. OFF-FARM ADAPTATION OPTIONS ................................................................................... 160 
(a). Access to financial support ......................................................................................................... 160 
(b). Awareness and knowledge on climate change and adaptation strategies .................................. 160 
(c). Capacity development for agricultural extension officers .......................................................... 160 
(d). Access to weather information and early warning systems for agriculture ............................... 161 
4.1.4 PRIORITIZED OFF-FARM ADAPTATION OPTIONS ......................................................... 161 
4.1.3 Costs and Benefits of Proposed Adaptation Options .................................................................. 170 
4.1.3.1 On-Farm ............................................................................................................................... 170 
4.1.3.2 Off-Farm ............................................................................................................................... 173 
4. 3 NATIONAL CONTEXT FOR CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTION AND AGRICULTURE ......... 176 
4.4 INSTITUTIONAL COLLABORATION FOR EFFECTIVE ADAPTATION ................................ 176 
REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................................ 179 
APPENDIX 1: Household Questionnaire Instrument. ........................................................................ 183 
APPENDIX 2: Focus Group Discussion Guide .................................................................................... 208 
APPENDIX 3: Total number of households interviews for the Assessment ..................................... 210 
APPENDIX 4: Land Use/ Land Cover Map of the Assessment area ......................................... 212 
APPENDIX 5 ............................................................................................................................................ 213 
iii 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1. 1 Framework for assessing climate change vulnerability within socio-ecological systems ........................... 3 
Figure 1. 2 Agro-ecological zones of Ghana ................................................................................................................. 5 
Figure 1. 3 Change in annual rainfall for Ghana from 1950 to 2012. The dashed line is a nonsignificant linear trend 
line (y = -1.65 + 4430; R2 = 0.05; p = 0.08) .................................................................................................................. 6 
Figure 1. 4 Change in annual temperatures for Ghana from 1950 to 2012. The dashed line is a significant linear trend 
line (y = 0.01 – 1.33; R2 = 0.50; p < 0.01). ................................................................................................................... 7 
Figure 1. 5 Map showing the focal areas for the Assessment. ..................................................................................... 10 
Figure 1.6 Methodology employed for the Assessment .............................................................................................. 14 
Figure 1. 7 Annual spread of rainfall over the Assessment area from uncorrected and bias corrected projections of 
ensemble mean ............................................................................................................................................................ 21 
Figure 1. 8 Monthly variation and spread of rainfall the Assessment area from uncorrected and bias corrected 
projections of ensemble mean ..................................................................................................................................... 21 
Figure 2. 1 Gender of surveyed respondents in the Assessment locations .................................................................. 27 
Figure 2. 2 Educational attainments of surveyed households by Assessment region .................................................. 28 
Figure 2. 3 Major economic activities of surveyed households by region ................................................................... 29 
Figure 2. 4 Monthly income of respondents in the household survey across regions .................................................. 30 
Figure 2. 5 Monthly income of respondents in the household survey across regions .................................................. 31 
Figure 2. 6. Percentage of seasonal and permanent migrants by districts in Brong-Ahafo Region ............................. 33 
Figure 2. 7 Percentage of seasonal and permanent migrants by districts in Northern Region ..................................... 34 
Figure 2. 8 Percentage of seasonal and permanent out-migrants by districts in the Upper West Region .................... 35 
Figure 2. 9 Percentage of seasonal and permanent migrants by districts in the Upper East Region ......................... 36 
Figure 2. 10 Household asset ownership across the Assessment regions. ................................................................... 38 
Figure 2. 11 Mean minimum temperature with trend line and p-values showing statistical significance at 95% 
confidence level. .......................................................................................................................................................... 39 
Figure 2. 12 Mean minimum temperature baseline map ............................................................................................. 40 
Figure 2. 13 Mean maximum temperature with trend line and p-values showing statistical significance at 95% 
confidence level ........................................................................................................................................................... 41 
Figure 2. 14 Mean Maximum Temperature Baseline Map .......................................................................................... 42 
Figure 2. 15 Mean annual rainfall with trend line and p-values showing statistical significance at 95% confidence 
level ............................................................................................................................................................................. 43 
Figure 2. 16 Annual Precipitation Baseline Map ......................................................................................................... 44 
Figure 2. 17 Number of rainy days with trend line and p-values showing statistical significance at 95% confidence 
level ............................................................................................................................................................................. 45 
Figure 2. 18 Number of days with rainfall exceeding 10m with trend line and p-values showing statistical 
significance at 95% confidence level........................................................................................................................... 46 
iv 
Figure 2. 19. Dry spell duration within the rainfall season JJAS with trend line and p-values showing statistical 
significance at 95% confidence level........................................................................................................................... 47 
Figure 2. 20 Map indicating flood risk locationons in the Assessment area ................................................................ 48 
Figure 2. 21 Map indicating bushfire prone locations in the Assessment area ............................................................ 49 
Figure 2. 22 Map indicating climate-induced soil erosion locations in the Assessment area ...................................... 50 
Figure 2. 23 Map indicating drought-prone locations in the Assessment area ............................................................ 51 
Figure 2. 24 Flood: percentage of household exposure by districts ............................................................................. 52 
Figure 2. 25 Percentage of households exposed to drought by districts ...................................................................... 54 
Figure 2. 26 Dry spells: percentage of household exposure by districts ...................................................................... 55 
Figure 2. 27 Pests and diseases: percentage of household exposure by district ........................................................... 58 
Figure 2. 28 Bushfires: percentage of household exposure by districts ....................................................................... 59 
Figure 2. 29 Windstorms: percentage of households’ exposure by  districts ............................................................... 60 
Figure 2. 30 Climate-induced erosion: percentage of household exposure by districts. .............................................. 61 
Figure 2. 31 Changes in rainfall pattern: percentage of household exposure by districts ............................................ 63 
Figure 2. 32 Seasonal temperature change: percentage of household exposure by districts ........................................ 64 
Figure 2. 33 Climate-induced soil infertility: percentage of household exposure by districts ..................................... 65 
Figure 2. 34 Increases in temperature: percentage of household exposure by districts ............................................... 66 
Figure 2. 35 Percentage of exposure to flood by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts ................................ 67 
Figure 2. 36 Percentage of exposure to flood by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts .............................. 68 
Figure 2. 37 Percentage of exposure to drought by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts ............................ 69 
Figure 2. 38 Percentage of exposure to drought by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts .......................... 70 
Figure 2. 39 Percentage of exposure to dry spells by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts ......................... 71 
Figure 2. 40 Percentage of exposure to dry spells by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts ....................... 72 
Figure 2. 41 Percentage of exposure to pests and diseases by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts ............ 73 
Figure 2. 42 Percentage of exposure to pests and diseases by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts .......... 74 
Figure 2. 43 Percentage of exposure to bushfires by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts .......................... 75 
Figure 2. 44 Percentage of exposure to bushfires by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts. ....................... 76 
Figure 2. 45 Percentage of exposure to windstorms by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts ...................... 77 
Figure 2. 46 Percentage of exposure to windstorms by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts .................... 78 
Figure 2. 47. Percentage of exposure to climate-induced erosion by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts . 79 
Figure 2. 48 Percentage of exposure to climate-induced erosion by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 80 
Figure 2. 49 Percentage of exposure to changes in rainfall pattern by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts
 ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 81 
Figure 2. 50. Percentage of exposure to changes in rainfall pattern by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts
 ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 82 
Figure 2. 51 Percentage of exposure to seasonal temperature changes by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern 
districts ........................................................................................................................................................................ 83 
v 
Figure 2. 52 Percentage of exposure to seasonal temperature changes by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern 
districts ........................................................................................................................................................................ 84 
Figure 2. 53. Percentage of exposure to climate-induced soil infertility by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern 
districts ........................................................................................................................................................................ 85 
Figure 2. 54. Percentage of exposure to climate-induced soil infertility by gender in Upper West and Upper East 
districts ........................................................................................................................................................................ 86 
Figure 2. 55 Percentage of exposure to increase in temperature by gender in Brong Ahafo and in Northern districts87 
Figure 2. 56 Percentage of exposure to increase in temperature by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts .. 88 
Figure 2. 57 Flood Sensitivity across district .............................................................................................................. 89 
Figure 2. 58 Drought sensitivity across districts .......................................................................................................... 90 
Figure 2. 59 Dry spells sensitivity across districts ....................................................................................................... 91 
Figure 2. 60 Pests and diseases sensitivity across districts .......................................................................................... 92 
Figure 2. 61 Bushfires sensitivity across districts ........................................................................................................ 93 
Figure 2. 62 Windstorm sensitivity across districts ..................................................................................................... 94 
Figure 2. 63 Climate-induced erosion sensitivity across districts ................................................................................ 95 
Figure 2. 64 Changes in rainfall patterns sensitivity across districts ........................................................................... 96 
Figure 2. 65 Seasonal temperature changes sensitivity across districts ....................................................................... 97 
Figure 2. 66 Climate-induced soil infertility sensitivity across districts ...................................................................... 98 
Figure 2. 67 Increase in temperature sensitivity across districts .................................................................................. 99 
Figure 2. 68. Perception of sensitivity to flood, drought, dry spells, pests and diseases by gender ........................... 100 
Figure 2. 69 Sensitivity to bushfires, windstorms, climate-induced erosion and changes in rainfall pattern by gender
 ................................................................................................................................................................................... 101 
Figure 2. 70 Magnitude of effect of seasonal temperature change, climate-induced soil infertility and increase 
temperature by gender ............................................................................................................................................... 101 
Figure 2. 71: Percentage of Brong Ahafo districts youth sensitivity to climate-related hazards ............................... 102 
Figure 2. 72. Percentage of Northern Region districts youth sensitivity to climate-related hazards ......................... 103 
Figure 2. 73 Percentage of Upper West Region districts’ youth sensitivity to climate-related hazards .................... 103 
Figure 2. 74 Percentage of Upper East Region districts’ youth sensitivity to climate-related hazards ...................... 104 
Figure 2. 75. Percentage of Brong Ahafo Region districts’ young adults’ sensitivity to climate-related hazards ..... 105 
Figure 2. 76. Percentage of Northern Region districts young adults’ sensitivity to climate-related hazards ............. 105 
Figure 2. 77. Percentage of Upper West Region districts young adults’ sensitivity to climate-related hazards ........ 106 
Figure 2. 78. Percentage of Upper East Region districts young adults’ sensitivity to climate-related hazards ......... 106 
Figure 2. 79 Households use of on-farm adaptive strategies ..................................................................................... 113 
Figure 2. 80 Households’ use of on-farm adaptive strategies in Brong Ahafo Region by districts ........................... 116 
Figure 2. 81 Farmers’ use of on-farm adaptive strategies in Northern Region by districts ....................................... 117 
Figure 2. 82 Farmers’ use of on-farm adaptive strategies in Upper West Region by districts................................... 118 
Figure 2. 83. Farmers’ use of on-farm adaptive strategies in Upper East Region by districts ................................... 119 
vi 
Figure 2. 84 Farmers’ use of off-farm adaptive strategy ........................................................................................... 120 
Figure 2. 85. Households in Brong Ahafo Region use of off-farm adaptive strategy by districts ............................. 123 
Figure 2. 86 Households’ in Northern Region use of off-farm adaptive strategy by districts ................................... 124 
Figure 2. 87. Households in Upper West Region use of off-farm adaptive strategy by districts ............................... 125 
Figure 2. 88. Households in Upper West Region use of off-farm adaptive strategy by districts ............................... 126 
Figure 3.1 Time series of averaged minimum temperature between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the Assessment 
area for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between present day and 
future trends. .............................................................................................................................................................. 128 
Figure 3. 2 Averaged minimum temperature for 2030 and 2050 in the Assessment area for the RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 
scenarios. ................................................................................................................................................................... 129 
Figure 3. 3 Time series of averaged maximum temperature between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the Assessment 
area for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between present day and 
future trends. .............................................................................................................................................................. 130 
Figure 3. 4 Averaged maximum temperature for 2030 and 2050 in the Assessment area on of Ghana for the RCP2.6 
and RCP8.5 scenarios. ............................................................................................................................................... 131 
Figure 3. 5 Time series of total precipitation between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the Assessment area for the 
RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between present day and future trends.
 ................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 
Figure 3. 6 Total Annual Precipitation for 2030 and 2050 in the Assessment area for the RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 
scenarios. ................................................................................................................................................................... 133 
Figure 3. 7 Time series of the number of rainy days between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the Assessment area for 
the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between present day and future 
trends. ........................................................................................................................................................................ 134 
Figure 3. 8 Time series of number days with precipitation exceeding 10mm between 1961 and 2080 over stations in 
the Assessment area for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between 
present day and future trends. .................................................................................................................................... 135 
Figure 3. 9 Time series of dry spell duration in the rainfall season JJAS between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the 
Assessment area for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between 
present day and future trends. .................................................................................................................................... 136 
vii 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Key characteristics of physical, social, economic and livelihood systems of the Assessment Areas ............. 12 
Table 2.Climate-related hazards and their description................................................................................................. 16 
Table 3 Spatial data for mapping risks and hazards in the Assessment area ............................................................... 22 
Table 4 Summary of methods and criteria used for hazard/risk mapping ................................................................... 24 
Table 5. Major pests and diseases affecting crops, poultry, livestock and humans ..................................................... 56 
Table 6. Summary of Sensitivity of Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Assessment Area .............................. 108 
Table 7 Sensitivity of Major Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Brong Ahafo Region .................................... 109 
Table 8 Sensitivity of Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Northern Region ..................................................... 110 
Table 9 Sensitivity of Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Upper East Region. ................................................ 111 
Table 10 Sensitivity of Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Upper East Region ............................................... 112 
Table 11. Likely effect on gender and age group of projected climate change impacts under two scenarios ........... 138 
Table 12. Measures for pests and diseases control and management ........................................................................ 143 
Table 13. Water development options in the Assessment areas ................................................................................ 144 
Table 14. Prioritized on-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Brong Ahafo Region ................ 148 
Table 15 Prioritized on-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Northern Region ....................... 150 
Table 16 Prioritized on-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in the Upper West Region ............. 154 
Table 17 Prioritized on-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in the Upper East Region .............. 156 
Table 18. Farm-level scenarios for adaptation options, constraints and knowledge gaps ......................................... 159 
Table 19 Prioritized off-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Brong Ahafo Region ................ 162 
Table 20 Prioritized off-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Northern Region ....................... 163 
Table 21 Prioritized off-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Upper West............................... 166 
Table 22 Prioritized off-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Upper East ................................ 168 
Table 23 Potential costs and benefits of adaptation strategies ................................................................................... 170 
Table 24 Potential costs and benefits of off-farm adaptation strategies .................................................................... 173 
Table 25 Gender-based indicators to monitor vulnerability reductions and sustainability of adaptation measures .. 175 
Table 26 Institutional collaboration for coping and adapting to climate-related hazards .......................................... 177 
LIST OF PHOTOS 
Photo 1 Men focus group discussion at Kajeji in Sene West ....................................................................................... 18 
Photo 2 Youth focus group discussion at Parambo Sawaba in Pru district.................................................................. 18 
Photo 3 Women focus group discussions at Kwame Danso, Sene East of the Brong Ahafo Region .......................... 19 
Photo 4 Women focus group discussions at Parambo Sawaba, in the Pru District of the Brong Ahafo Region ......... 19 
Photo 5 Eroded landscapes in the Sene West district .................................................................... 62 
viii 
LIST OF ACRONYMS 
ALP 
CAADP 
CAPI 
CBOs 
CCVA 
CLMcom 
CM5A-LR 
CMIP5 
Adaptation Learning Programme 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 
Computer Assisted Personal Interview 
Community-based Organisations 
Climate Change Vulnerability Assesssment 
Climate Limited-area Modelling Community 
Climate Model version 5A Low resolution 
Climate Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 
CNRM-CM5 
Centre National de Recherches Météorologiques 
CORDEX 
Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Experiment 
CSOs 
CWSA 
DCEs 
DDA 
DEM 
DP 
EPA 
FC 
FGDs 
GASIP 
GCMs 
GES 
Cicil Society Organisations 
Community Water and Sanitation Authority 
District Chief Executives 
District Directorate of Agriculture 
Digital Elevation Model 
Development Partners 
Environmental Protection Agency Ghana 
Forestry Commission 
Focus Group Discussions 
 Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme 
Global Climate Models 
Ghana Education Service 
GFDL-ESM2G 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory- Earth System Model 
GIS 
GH-NDC 
GIDA 
GIRSLA 
GIS 
GloVis 
Geographic Information System 
Ghana Nationally Determined Contribution 
Ghana Irrigation Development Authority 
Ghana Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural 
Lending 
Geographic Information System 
Global Visualization Viewer 
ix 
GLSS 
GMet 
GNFRS 
GPS 
GSGDA 
GSS 
HH 
IFAD 
IPCC 
ITCZ 
JJAS 
LULC 
METASIP 
MIROC5 
MMDAs 
Ghana Living Standards Survey 
Ghana Meteorological Agency 
Ghana National Fire and Rescue Service 
Global Positioning System 
Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda 
Ghana Statistical Service 
Household 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone 
June July August September 
Land Use Land Cover 
Medium Term Agriculture Sector Investment Programme 
Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate, version 5 
Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies 
MODIS NDVI 
MODIS Normalized Differential Vegetation Index 
MOFA 
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
MPI-ESM-LR 
Max Planck Institute-Earth System Model low resolution 
NADMO 
NCCAS 
NCCP 
NCCMP 
NGOs 
NOAA 
RCMs 
PHC 
RCP 
REMO 
SADA 
SMCA 
SMHI 
National Disaster Management Organization 
National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 
National Climate Change Policy 
National Climate Change Master Plan 
Non-Governmental Organisations 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
Regional Climate Models 
Population and Housing Census 
Representative Concentration Pathways 
Regional Model 
Savannah Accelerated Development Authority 
Spatial Multi-Criteria Analysis 
Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute 
x 
SPSS 
TNC 
TOR 
UNHCR 
UNFCCC 
USGS 
VCI 
Statistical Package for Social Sciences 
Third National Communication 
Terms of Reference 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
United States Geological Survey 
Vegetation Condition Index 
xi 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This  assignment  was  commissioned  by  GASIP  and  undertaken  by  a  team  of  researchers  and 
scientists from the University of Ghana. The Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment Report 
was written by the research team at the Climate Change Section, Department of Geography and 
Resource Development,  University  of Ghana. The team  would like to  thank enumerators,  field 
research  assistants  and  District  Directorate  of  Agriculture  staff  for  the  support  during  data 
collection. 
xii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The  Ghana  Agricultural  Sector  Investment  Program  (GASIP)  set  out  to  undertake  a  Climate  Change 
Vulnerability Assessment to comprehensively understand vulnerabilities of local livelihood strategies to 
climate change in the Northern, Upper East, Upper West and selected districts in the Brong-Ahafo region 
of Ghana. The Assessment was mainly done to identify and confirm perceived climate risks and existing 
adaptation options. A key aspect of this Assessment was an analysis based on gender and age vulnerabilities 
to  climate  change.  The  Assessment  also  captures  future  climate  change  vulnerability  scenarios  of  the 
Assessment area. This Assessment, therefore, provides information for decision-making and a baseline for 
project interventions and implementation. 
The Assessment employed an integrated and participatory approach combining secondary and primary data. 
Additionally, a qualitative assessment was conducted to determine the more detailed perceptions of change 
in climate stresses, sensitivity and the corresponding  behavioural responses. The  methodology included 
stakeholder  mapping,  household  surveys,  focus  group  discussions,  key  informant  interviews,  climate 
projections and vulnerability mapping.  
This  document  gives  in-depth information  on the current  state  of  climate change  impacts  on livelihood 
vulnerabilities.  It  also  contains an  analysis  of  current  and  potential  exposure and  sensitivity  to  climate-
related  risks  and  hazards  in  the  Assessment  area  differentiated  on  gender  and  age  basis.  Effective  and 
sustainable  adaptation  options  are  proposed as  a  set of  recommendations  to  be implemented  within  the 
national context of climate change adaptation. 
The  baseline  information  generated  indicates  an  increase  in  both  the  mean  minimum  and  maximum 
temperature for all the stations across the Assessment area. A slight increase in annual total rainfall and the 
number of rainy days was observed for the entire assessment area. All the districts in the Assessment area 
were found to be exposed to flood, drought, dry spells, bushfires, pests and diseases, changes in rainfall 
pattern,  windstorm,  climate-induced  erosion  and  seasonal  temperature  changes  with  varying  degrees  of 
sensitivity. The districts of the three northern regions were mainly found to be more exposed and sensitive 
to the assessed climate-related risks and hazards compared with the selected districts in the Brong-Ahafo 
region.  There  was  a  slight  gender-based  exposure  observed  for  flood,  pest  and  diseases,  bushfires  and 
climate-induced erosion. Some coping and adaptation measure employed by people in the Assessment area 
include dry season farming using irrigation, multiple cropping, alternating food crop use, use of improved 
crop varieties, construction of fire belts, migration, reducing the quantity of food consumed and sale of 
firewood. 
xiii 
Projected climatic scenarios indicate that average annual temperature is likely to increase between 1°C and 
2 °C by 2050. A slight increase in annual rainfall with high variability and reduction in the number of rainy 
days  is  projected  for  the  Assessment  area  over  the  same  period.  This  will  make  communities  in  the 
Assessment  area  especially  those  along  the  Black  and  White  Volta  Rivers  and  their  tributaries  highly 
vulnerable to floods. 
The vulnerability maps provide information on district-specific exposure and sensitive to climatic risks and 
hazards that could be targeted to build the resilience of communities and households most of whom are 
smallholder  farmers.  The  identified  on-farm  adaptation  options  that  could  be  employed  to  address  the 
vulnerability challenge are conservation agriculture, irrigation schemes, water use efficiency, agroforestry, 
adaptive trials and establishment of demonstration sites for climate-resilient varieties of planting materials. 
In  addition,  off-farm  adaptation  options  such  as  access  to  financial  support,  awareness  and  knowledge 
creation,  capacity  building  for  agricultural  extension  officers,  access  to  seasonal  climate  and  weather 
information and institutional support will be needed.  
Strengthening the integration of gender-specific adaptation options into GASIP programs and projects 
will  be  useful  in  its  adaptation efforts  in  the  Assessment area.  There is  the need to  promote active 
involvement and participation of women, youth, aged and other vulnerable persons in the formulation 
and implementation of climate change adaption projects in the districts. Provision of resources to the 
women  and  youth  will  also  enhance  the  adaptation  measures  in  the  four  regions.  Effective  climate 
change adaptation option requires the provision of requisite human, financial and material resources to 
climate  change  vulnerable  persons.  Adequate  financial  resources  such  as  soft  loans,  insurance 
packages, grants and livelihood support financial programmes must be provided to smallholder women 
farmers to enable them to adapt to the effects of climate change. 
xiv 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 BACKGROUND: VULNERABILITY OF NORTHERN GHANA TO CLIMATE 
CHANGE 
Vulnerability, within the context of climate change, is defined as “the degree to which a system is 
susceptible  to,  or  unable  to  cope  with,  adverse  effects  of  climate  change,  including  climate 
variability and extremes.” In this sense, vulnerability is a function of (1) the degree of the system’s 
exposure  to  climate  hazards;  (2)  its  sensitivity  to  such  hazards;  and  (3)  its  adaptive  capacity 
(IPCC,2007a,  2007b; 2014). Specifically, the three components are defined as follows: 
  Exposure:  the  nature  and  degree  to  which  a  system  is  exposed  to  significant  climatic 
variations.  According  to  the  IPCC,  global  warming  impacts  will  continue  due  to  the 
probability of droughts, severe heat waves, heavy rain, and sea level rise increases over 
time (Parry et al., 2005). 
  Sensitivity: the degree to which a system is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by 
climate-related stimuli. The effect may be direct or indirect. Indicators of sensitivity may 
be  linked  to  demographic  characteristics,  geographical  location  and  land  use  systems 
among others.  
  Adaptive capacity: the ability of a system to adjust to climate change – including climate 
variability  and  extremes  –  to  moderate  potential  damages,  to  take  advantage  of 
opportunities, or to cope with the consequence. 
These three  components form  the parameters  for assessing vulnerability to climate change  and 
providing the necessary information for promoting resilience (Figure 1.1). This is critical because, 
within any socio-ecological systems, groups, households, and individuals respond differently to 
climate  impact  based  on  the  available  information  and  abilities  to  develop  and  implement 
appropriate strategies (Ludena & Yoon, 2015). 
2 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
Potential Impact 
Adaptive Capacity 
Vulnerability 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND VARIABILITY 
Figure 1. 1 Framework for assessing climate change vulnerability within socio-ecological systems 
Source: Adopted from IPCC, 2007b 
Northern  Ghana  has  been  identified  by  numerous  studies  (Owusu,  2018;  Saito  et  al.,  2018; 
Acheampong et al., 2014; Armah et al., 2011) as more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change 
than  the  southern  portion  of  the  country  due  to  the  combination  of  climatic  and  non-climatic 
stressors. The Third National Communication (Government of Ghana, 2015) identified long dry-
spells,  frequent  flooding,  erratic  rainfall  and  rising  temperatures  as  the  main  climatic  stressors 
prevalent in the area. Poverty and out-migration of the youth are the non-climatic stressors that 
exacerbate the climatic vulnerability of the Northern Ghana (Songsore, 2010). Vulnerability is a 
function of the character, magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed, 
its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity. The majority of the population in Northern Ghana lives in 
abject poverty and their livelihoods revolve around rainfed subsistence agriculture (Laube et al., 
2012) rendering them more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. 
Various  projection  on  the  climate  of  Northern  Ghana  as  summarized  by  the  Ghana’s  Third 
National Communication indicates that mean annual rainfall totals relative to 1980-2010 is likely 
to decrease by 3% in 2014, 1% in 2060 and 3% in 2080. Over the same period, the mean monthly 
3 
maximum  temperature  is  likely  to  rise  by  about  2ºC,  3ºC  and  4ºC  in  2040,  2050  and  2080 
respectively. A combination of a rise in temperature and a reduction in rainfall implies that climate 
change  will  ominously  aggravate  water  scarcity  and  droughts  in  Northern  Ghana.  Yaro  (2013) 
observed that, because of climate change, rivers, ponds, and streams are drying up, groundwater 
layers are shrinking and the availability of potable water is decreasing. Extreme weather events 
associated  with  climate  change  projection  also  implies  that  flooding  could  even  become  more 
severe and frequent (McSweenet et al.2010). Currently, flooding has been identified as a major 
hazard  for  Northern  Ghana  with  devastating  effect  on  communities.  According  to  Armah  et  al 
2010,  the  Ministry  of  Food  and  Agriculture  (MOFA)  estimates  indicated  that  floods  destroyed 
70,500 hectares of land and 50,000 people in Northern Ghana were directly and indirectly affected 
with 20 deaths recorded in 2007. In the following year, more than 325,000 people were directly 
affected, needing external livelihood support (Bonye and Godfred, 2011).  In 2010, the National 
Disaster Management Organization (NADMO) reported that approximately 700,000 people were 
displaced and 23,588 acres of farmland were destroyed by floods in the Central Gonja District in 
the Northern Region when flooding affected 55 rural communities (NADMO, 2010; 2011).  
Rising temperatures, increasingly erratic rainfall patterns and more droughts that are frequent and 
floods  create  challenges  for  food  security  and  management  of  land,  water  and  other  natural 
resources (Adaptation Learning Programme ALP, 2014). These challenges are particularly critical 
for rural communities, where rainfed agriculture and livestock rearing are the primary livelihood 
strategies. These strategies are strongly dependent on rainfall and other climatic variables, making 
them highly sensitive to climate change. For the poorest women, youth and men, this sensitivity 
coupled with the low capacity to adapt, results in a high vulnerability. 
This Assessment report is divided into four chapters. The first chapter gives an overview of the 
scope of work, the context and Assessment area. The second chapter explores baseline information 
on the exposure, sensitivity and adaptation to climatic hazards in the Assessment areas. The third 
chapter  presents  the  scenario  of  climate  change  and  analysis  of  future  vulnerability  to  climate 
hazard. The fourth and concluding chapter presents possible local adaptation options that could be 
employed within the national context to build community resilience.  
4 
1.2 CONTEXT 
Based on climate, soil and vegetation conditions, Ghana is divided into six main agro-ecological 
zones, including Sudan savannah, Guinea savannah, Transition zone, Deciduous forest, Evergreen 
forest  and  Coastal  savannah  (Figure  1.2).  Over  the  past  50  years,  rainfall  and  temperature 
conditions across these six agro-ecological zones of Ghana have experienced varying degrees of 
change (Minia, 2008). Rainfall seasons in Ghana are dictated by the  Inter-tropical convergence 
zone (ITCZ) shifting annually between the northern and southern hemispheres. 
Figure 1. 2 Agro-ecological zones of Ghana 
5 
From  available  data,  annual  rainfall  shows  significant  inter-annual  and  inter-decadal  variations 
(Figure 1.3). Temperature data indicate a warming climate in Ghana with the drier northern area 
warming more rapidly than southern Ghana. The mean annual temperature of Ghana has risen by 
approximately 1 ̊C, over the past 50 years (Government of Ghana, 2015) representing an average 
rate of increase of ~0.14 ̊C per decade between 1950 and 2012 (Fig. 1.4). 
. 
)
m
m
(
l
l
a
f
n
a
r
i
l
a
u
n
n
a
n
a
e
M
1,700
1,600
1,500
1,400
1,300
1,200
1,100
1,000
900
800
1950
1960
1970
1980
Year
1990
2000
2010
Figure 1. 3 Change in annual rainfall for Ghana from 1950 to 2012. The dashed line is a nonsignificant linear trend 
line (y = -1.65 + 4430; R2 = 0.05; p = 0.08) 
Data Source: http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/index.cfm. 
6 
)
C
̊
(
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
l
a
u
n
n
a
n
a
e
M
28.4
28.2
28.0
27.8
27.6
27.4
27.2
27.0
26.8
26.6
26.4
26.2
1950
1960
1970
1980
Year
1990
2000
2010
Figure 1. 4 Change in annual temperatures for Ghana from 1950 to 2012. The dashed line is a significant 
linear trend line (y = 0.01 – 1.33; R2 = 0.50; p < 0.01). 
Data Source: http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/index.cfm 
The Government of Ghana acknowledges climate change to be a major sustainable development 
challenge (Government of Ghana, 2015). Efforts continue to be made together with stakeholders 
at multiple levels to ensure that climate change issues are mainstreamed into the country’s main 
development blueprint — Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda (GSGDA1 and 2). The 
agricultural sector, which contributes approximately 44.7% of Ghana’s Gross Domestic Product 
(GLSS 6, 2014) is presently among the most vulnerable sectors to climate change impacts. With 
future climatic change projections indicating more negative impacts on Ghana’s agriculture, urgent 
government-led, multi-sectoral and multi-agency action is needed. 
The  Ghana  Agricultural  Sector  Investment  Programme  (GASIP)  was  launched  in  2016  with 
financial support from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to promote 
agricultural  development  in  the  country.  The  goal  of  GASIP  is  to  provide  a  framework  and 
institutional basis for a long-term engagement and financing for scaling up investments in private 
sector-led pro-poor agricultural value chain development. GASIP is expected to contribute to the 
realization  of  Ghana’s  Medium  Term  Agriculture  Sector  Investment  Programme  (METASIP), 
which provides the road map for the CAADP compact in Ghana. MOFA is implementing GASIP 
7 
with the aim to promote a “standard setting approach” that will drive its policy, serve as a core 
investment  for  value  chain  development  in  Ghana,  and  for  aligning  parallel  financing  to 
complement, following the modalities that each of the Development Partners (DP) prefer. 
The GASIP in its effort to fully understand and comprehend the climate change vulnerabilities of 
local livelihoods strategies established a Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment focusing on 
the  Northern,  Upper  East  and  Upper  West  Regions  and  Selected  Districts  in  the  Brong  Ahafo 
Region  of  Ghana.  This  Climate  Change  Vulnerability  Assessment  hereafter  called  “the 
Assessment”  was  designed  to  provide  accurate  and  reliable  baseline  data  on  climate  change 
vulnerability to inform GASIP’s adaptation and mitigation options. Based on identified climate-
related risks and hazards from this Assessment with emphasis on the agricultural sector, strategies 
for adapting to the identified risks and hazards across social groups and classes are recommended. 
1.3 SCOPE OF THE ASSIGNMENT. 
The present Assessment was commissioned by GASIP and prepared by a team of researchers and 
scientists from the Climate Change unit of the Department of Geography and Resource 
Development, University of Ghana. Through needs assessment with communities in the selected 
target areas, the Assessment team was tasked to undertake a vulnerability analysis to include 
gender and youth using a suitable methodology. Additionally, the Assessment was to determine 
the main climate risks being faced by women, men, youth (15-24 years), and young adults (25-35 
years) in the selected communities and their priorities to manage these risks. According to the 
TOR, the Assessment was specifically expected to: 
  Carry out multi-stakeholder consultations in the selected communities to identify and 
confirm perceived climate risks, existing adaptation options, including their costs, 
benefits and challenges or constraints for adoption; 
  Collect and synthesize available biophysical and socio-economic maps and data at the 
targeted level; 
  Based on available information, provide baseline analysis/maps outlining the exposure of 
the target groups (women, men, youth (15-24 years), and young adults (25-35 years) to 
prevalent climate shocks and stresses; 
8 
  Source available regional climate models, downscaled based on statistical or dynamic 
simulations;  
 
Identify gender-based indicators to monitor vulnerability reductions and sustainability of 
adaptation measures based on age groupings and in the context of the project 
implementation; 
  Conduct an analysis of potential impacts and vulnerabilities in the project area 
(differentiated on gender and age basis) using climate scenarios from a representative 
ensemble of climate models for the period up to 2030/2050. 
  Formulate recommendations to adapt to climate change, based on the climate simulation 
and the analysis of possible impacts on women, men, youth (15-24 years), and young 
adults (25-35 years in the target communities 
1.4 ASSESSMEMNT AREAS (SPATIAL UNIT)  
The spatial unit of this Assessment is the three northern regions (Northern, Upper East and 
Upper West) and eight selected districts that fall within the Savanna Agricultural Development 
Agency (SADA) zone of the Brong-Ahafo region of Ghana (See Figure 1.5) 
1.4.1 Brong-Ahafo Region. 
The Brong-Ahafo Region covers an area of approximately 39,557 square kilometres. In terms of 
land  size,  it  is  the  second  largest  region  in  Ghana  (16.6%).  The  Brong-Ahafo  region  shares 
boundaries with the Northern Region to the north, the Ashanti and Western Regions to the south, 
the Volta Region to the east, the Eastern Region to the southeast and Cote d’Ivoire to the west. 
Brong-Ahafo has 27 administrative districts, with District Chief Executives (DCEs) as the political 
heads like all other districts in the country. Eight of these districts that fall within the Savannah 
SADA  zone,  namely  Kintampo  North,  Kintampo  South,  Sene  West,  Sene  East,  Pru,  Atebubu 
Amantin, Banda and Tain Districts were the focal areas for this assessment in this region.  
Brong-Ahafo region has a tropical climate, with high temperatures averaging 23.9°C and a double 
maxima rainfall pattern. Rainfall ranges from an average of 1000 mm in the northern parts to 1400 
mm  in  the  southern  parts.  Two  main  vegetation  types  the  moist  semi-deciduous  forest  (in  the 
9 
southern  and  southeastern  parts)  and  the  guinea  savannah  woodland  (in  the  northern  and 
northeastern parts) dominate the local ecosystem. The region contributes about 30 percent of the 
local food requirements of Ghana (Ghana Statistical Service, 2013). It is also a major cocoa and 
timber producing area. 
Figure 1. 5 Map showing the focal areas for the Assessment.  
1.4.2 Northern Region 
The Northern Region, which occupies an area of about 70,383 square  kilometres, is the largest 
region in Ghana in terms of land area. It shares boundaries with the Upper East and the Upper 
West  Regions  to  the  north,  the  Brong  Ahafo  and  the  Volta  Regions  to  the  south,  and  two 
10 
neighbouring countries, the Republic of Togo to the east, and the Ivory Coast to the west. The land 
is mostly low lying except in the northeastern corner with the Gambaga escarpment and along the 
western  corridor.  The  Black  and  White  Volta  rivers  and  their  tributaries  drain  the  region.  The 
Northern region presently has 26 administrative districts. 
The climate of the region is relatively dry, with a single rainy season and over 90% of the rainfall 
occurring between May  and October (Owusu, 2018). The amount of rainfall recorded annually 
varies between 750 millimetres and 1,050 millimetres. The dry season usually starts in November 
and ends in March/April with maximum temperatures occurring towards the end of the dry season 
(March-April)  and  minimum  temperatures  in  December  and  January  (Ghana  Meteorological 
Agency  (GMet),  2012).  The  harmattan  winds,  which  occur  from  December  to  early  February, 
have a considerable effect on temperatures in the region, making them vary between 140C at night 
and 400C during the day. The rather harsh climatic conditions adversely affect economic activity 
in the region and in the health sector, enable cerebrospinal meningitis to thrive, almost to endemic 
proportions. The region also falls in the onchocerciasis zone. The main vegetation is grassland, 
interspersed  with  guinea  savannah  woodland,  characterised  by  drought-resistant  trees  such  as 
acacia, (Acacia longifolia), mango (Mangifera indica), baobab (Adansonia digitata Linn), shea nut 
(Vitellaria paradoxa), dawadawa, and neem (Azadirachta indica). The majority of people in the 
region are engaged in agriculture. The major crops they produce include yam, maize, millet, guinea 
corn, rice, groundnuts, beans, soya beans and cowpea (GLSS 6, 2014; Ghana Statistical Service, 
2013). 
1.4.3 Upper East Region 
Upper East  is  geographically located in  the northeastern  corner of Ghana.  It  is  bordered to  the 
north by Burkina Faso, the east by the Republic of Togo, the west by the Upper West Region and 
the  south  by  the  Northern  Region.  The  total  land  area  is  about  8,842  square  kilometres.  The 
landscape is relatively flat with a few hills to the East and southeast. The soil in this area is shallow 
and low in fertility, weak in organic matter, making it prone to erosion. The vegetation found here 
is that of the savannah woodland, characterized by short scattered drought-resistant trees and grass 
that  is  burnt  by  bushfire  or  scorched  by  the  sun  during  the  long  dry  season.  The  mean  annual 
rainfall ranges between 800 mm and 1100 mm. Rainfall is highly erratic across the region. There 
11 
is a long spell of dry season from November to mid-February, characterized by cold, dry and dusty 
harmattan winds. The main occupations in the region  are agriculture and its related work. The 
main produce are millet, guinea-corn, maize, groundnut, beans, sorghum, tomatoes, and onions in 
the dry season. Livestock and poultry production are also important (Ghana Statistical Service, 
2013). 
Table 1 Key characteristics of physical, social, economic and livelihood systems of the Assessment Areas 
Characteristic  
Geographic location 
Brong-Ahafo 
Latitude: 
7° 45′ 0″ N 
Longitude: 
1° 30′ 0″ W 
Upper East 
Spatial unit of Assessment 
Northern 
Latitude: 
9° 30′ 0″ N 
Longitude: 
1° 0′ 0″ W 
latitudes 10° 
30′ 11´´ N 
Longitude 0° 1° 
Upper West 
Latitude: 
10° 20′ 0″ N 
Longitude: 
2° 15′ 0″ W 
Population (2012/2013)a 
2,265,434 
2,445,061 
1,034,688 
688,328 
Agriculture labour force 
(%)b 
566,066 
(69.1%) 
523,278 
(71.2%) 
242,077 
(67.1%) 
176,600 
(73.2%) 
Population in poverty1 
648,367 
1,079,494 
474,818 
477,631 
Mean annual average 
temperature (▫C) 
Mean annual rainfall 
(mm) 
26.7 
27.6 
1,230 
1,112 
28.0 
970 
27.6 
1,013 
a= Ghana Statistical Service, 2015 
b= GLSS6, 2014 
1.4.4 Upper West Region 
The Upper West region covers a geographical area of approximately 18,478 square kilometres. 
This constitutes about 12.7 per cent of the total land area of Ghana. Upper West is bordered to the 
North by the Republic of Burkina Faso, on the East by Upper East Region, to the South by Northern 
Region and to the West by the Ivory Coast. The region is located in the guinea savannah agro-
ecological  zone.  The  vegetation  in  the  region  consists  of  grass  with  scattered  drought-resistant 
trees such as acacia, (Acacia longifolia), mango (Mangifera), baobab (Adansonia digitata Linn), 
shea  nut  (Vitellaria  paradoxa),  dawadawa,  and  neem  (Azadirachta  indica).  The  heterogeneous 
collection of trees provides all domestic requirements for fuel wood and charcoal, construction of 
12 
houses,  cattle  kraals  and  fencing  of  gardens.  The  shorter  shrubs  and  grass  provide  fodder  for 
livestock. Over 80% of the economically active population are engaged in agricultural production. 
The major crops grown in the region are maize, millet, groundnut, okro and rice (Ghana Statistical 
Service, 2013). 
1.5 METHODOLOGY 
 1.5.1 Study Design 
The  Assessment  was  undertaken  using  an  integrated  and  participatory  approach  combining 
secondary and primary data in response to  the TOR. Figure 1.6 is  a  flow chart that shows the 
methodological steps used for the present Assessment. Secondary data were collected from annual 
reports  of  decentralized  departments  in  the  district  as  well  as  the  Regional  Directorate  of 
Agriculture,  Ghana  Health  Services  (GHS),  Ghana  Education  Service  (GES)  and  GMet.  Other 
sources of secondary data were collected from the 2010 Population and Housing Census (PHC); 
Ghana  Living  Standard  Survey  (GLSS),  Ghana  Statistical  Service  (GSS)  reports;  Ghana 
Demographic Health Reports; and District Human Development reports.  
The secondary data review output helped the Assessment Team in identifying and implementing 
key  questions  and  themes  into  the  primary  data  collection  instruments  including  household 
questionnaires  (administered  to  households),  focus  group  discussion  guides,  baseline  risks  and 
hazard  and  future  climate  scenario  mapping  for  the  Assessment  area.  Under  the  vulnerability 
framework,  climate  variability  and  change  impacts  are  usually  experienced  at  the  household 
level—either directly through household production systems or indirectly through the ecosystem 
value. At the same time, a qualitative assessment was conducted to determine the more detailed 
perceptions of change in climate stresses and the corresponding behavioural responses. In this way, 
the outcomes of the qualitative focus group discussions provide in-depth insights into the patterns 
emerging from the quantitative work. 
13 
STAKEHOLDER 
MAPPING 
Public and private 
sector agencies, 
departments, NGOs at 
national, regional and 
district levels 
CLIMATE 
LIVELIHOODS  
AGRICULTURE 
SECTOR 
Analysis of historical 
records; climate 
modelling and 
downscaling; mapping 
risks and hazards 
Household surveys; 
focus groups; key 
informant interviews,  
Household surveys, 
key informant 
interviews, MOFA 
data 
Perceived climate-
related risks and 
adaptation data 
Climate projections, 
maps, and graphs 
Vulnerability to climate 
related hazards and 
livelihood strategies 
Crop yields and 
sensitivity 
Data to formulate recommendations to adapt to climate change, based on the climate 
simulation and the analysis of possible impacts across social groups and gender 
Figure 1.6 Methodology employed for the Assessment 
1.5.2 Implementation Strategy 
1.5.2.1 Sampling Strategy: 
A multistage stratified sampling method was used to collect primary data for this Assessment. 
This sampling approach helped the Assessment Team capture relevant stakeholders and target 
groups for the analytical framework. Overall, there were four (4) levels of stratification: 
14 
  Level 1: Administrative regions: Sampling was done by proportional representation across 
the four regions: Northern, Upper West, Upper East and Brong-Ahafo 
  Level 2: Administrative districts: District Level – To adequately capture the situation on the 
ground across all the regions for this Assessment, all the districts in the focus regions were 
visited. Subsequently, the sample frame consisted of 8 SADA districts in the Brong Ahafo, 
26 districts for Northern, 15 districts in Upper East and 11 districts in the Upper West.  
  Level 3: Localities: Localities within each district were classified for sampling purposes into 
urban and rural. In selecting localities for the survey, particular attention was paid to the 
inherent, yet significant variability concerning their agro-ecological features and livelihood 
systems.  
  Level 4: Households: Using available census data and most recent estimates of localities 
population size, a proportional representative sampling technique was adopted. The focus 
was on the head of household. The selection was based on every Nth household depending 
on the number of houses. Where there were compound housing with more than one 
household, one household out of the lot was selected for each housing compound. Due to 
the importance of gender in climate change vulnerability, emphasis was placed on gender 
and youth. Female-headed households were therefore purposely targeted and interviewed. 
The sample size decision was based on traditional criteria for external validity, time, 
resources, and logistics. 
1.5.2.2 Primary Data Collection 
Household Survey: All households within the same geographical area may be exposed to a particular 
climate-related shock or stressor, but the levels of sensitivity and adaptive capacity vary from one 
household to another. To capture this individual variation, a quantitative household questionnaire 
survey was designed to classify typical groupings of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity 
and reveal variations in patterns based on household characteristics and decision making across all 
of  the  groups  surveyed  (Appendix  1).  The  household  survey  collected  information  on  socio-
demographic  characteristics,  access  to  basic  services  including  electricity,  energy,  water  and 
sanitation, households perception of exposure and sensitivity to identified climate related risks and 
hazards  (Table  2),  agriculture  (crops)  sector  vulnerability  to  climate-related  risks  and  hazards, 
15 
source  of  climate  information,  local  adaptation  strategies  to  identified  climate-related  hazards. 
Overall, 1829 household interviews were conducted across the study area (Appendix 3). 
Table 2.Climate-related hazards and their description 
Climate-related hazard 
Flood 
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
Climate-induced erosion 
Changes in rainfall 
pattern 
Seasonal temperature 
changes 
Definition in the context of this assessment 
A temporary overflowing of a large amount of water beyond its 
normal confines, especially over what is normally dry land. 
A drought is a prolonged period of below-average precipitation in a 
given region; resulting in prolonged shortages in the water supply, 
whether atmospheric, surface water or groundwater.  
 Drought is unavoidable result of climate variability —– that 
sometimes leaves areas far short of their average water supplies for 
months or years at a time. Drought is the result of a complex 
interplay between natural precipitation deficiencies on varying time 
and space scales and can be exacerbated by human water demand 
and inefficiencies in water distribution and usage. 
The economic, social, and environmental impacts suffered because 
of drought are the product of both natural event and the 
vulnerability of society to extended periods of precipitation 
deficiency. 
Period of abnormally dry weather, shorter and less severe than a 
drought. Available evidence indicated that dry-induced natural 
disasters have increased due to climate change effects with their 
temporal and spatial coverage. 
An organism that has a detrimental effect on crops, livestock, and 
forestry. Pests can stunt a plant's growth, especially smaller ones, 
disturb the soil, harm the foliage’s appearance, and drastically 
reduce the overall quality of fruits and vegetables. When left 
untreated, pests often result in the plant’s death. Ants, snails, slugs, 
caterpillars, spider mites, whiteflies, fungus gnats, and aphids are 
the most common types. 
A bushfire is an uncontrolled fire that burns grass, bush or 
woodland, scrubland and can threaten life, property and the 
environment. 
A storm with very strong wind or violent gusts but little or no rain. 
The action of climate change causing surface processes that remove 
soil, rock, or dissolved material from one location on the Earth's 
crust, and then transport it away to another location. 
Change in the incidence of rainfall due to climate change. 
A process whereby the degree of hotness of the atmosphere 
changes. 
16 
Climate-induced soil 
infertility 
The inability of a soil to sustain agricultural plant growth due to 
change in climate elements including precipitation, temperature, 
sunshine. Most of the processes responsible for soil infertility such 
as soil organic matter mineralization and erosion are enhanced by 
higher temperature and more intense precipitation. 
Increase in temperature  An abnormal rise in the degree of hotness of a body or atmosphere. 
Focus  Group  Discussions:  To  gather  local  communities’  concerns  on  climate  change  risks  and 
household  adaptation  strategies,  we  organized  focus  group  discussions  (FGDs)  at  the  sampled 
communities. In each locality, three FGDs were conducted separately, one with men and one with 
women  and  one  with  the  youth  (ages  between  15-24  where  is  the  25-35  group?),  Each  group 
consisted of between eight and 13 participants who were identified with the assistance of local 
(informal)  leadership  and  chosen  because  they  represented  different  socioeconomic  groups 
residing within the community. A topical interview guide (Appendix 2) was used to structure these 
informal  discussions,  and  each  session  included  at  least  one  facilitator  and  one  recorder.  The 
interview guide covered local perceptions of changes in climate over the previous 20 years, the 
impact of severe weather events on agriculture and socioeconomic well-being in general in the last 
5 years, and responses to perceived climate change. The group discussion enabled the study to gain 
more insight and compliment the use of the household survey in taking information on the generality 
of  issues  within  the  agro-ecological  system  and  vulnerability  indicators.  This  tool  was  effective  in 
generating  the  participation  of  respondents  and  enhanced  the  researcher-target  group  interaction. 
Photos 1, 2, 3 and 4 show participants in FGDs. 
17 
Photo 1 Men focus group discussion at Kajeji in Sene West 
Photo 2 Youth focus group discussion at Parambo Sawaba in Pru district. 
18 
Photo 3 Women focus group discussions at Kwame Danso, Sene East of the Brong Ahafo Region  
Photo 4 Women focus group discussions at Parambo Sawaba, in the Pru District of the Brong Ahafo Region  
19 
1.5.2.3 Statistical Downscaling of Global Climate Models  
The study used daily rainfall, minimum and maximum temperature data obtained from the GMet 
covering the period between 1980 to 2014,- thirty-three (33) years of records. Eight stations were 
selected for the study based on the quality and completeness of data (Atebubu and Wenchi in the 
Brong Ahafo region, Bole, Tamale and Yendi in the Northern region, Bolga and Navrongo in the 
Upper East region and Wa in the Upper West region). The selected stations, although limited are 
a good representation of the Assessment area because of their spread and the fact that the rainfall 
mechanism is the same (Owusu 2018). All the other gauge stations in the region had huge missing 
gaps. The stations with at least 80 percent data availability were selected for the study. Stations, 
which did not meet minimum criteria for all the relevant variables, were eliminated. All the stations 
were subjected to rigorous quality control checks to eliminate influences in the data other than the 
climate.  
For  the  development  of  the  climate  change  scenarios,  five  regional  climate  models  (RCMs) 
emanating from three global climate models (GCMs) namely: SMHI, CLMcom, and REMO from 
the CORDEX Africa domain datasets were used in the study. The climate change projections were 
produced  by  downscaling  the  simulations  of  three  GCMs  from  the  new  CMIP5  global  climate 
projections, namely: the Max Plank Institute MPI-ESM-LR, National Centre for Meteorological 
research CNRM-CM5, GFDL-ESM2G of NOAA, CM5A-LR of REMO and MIROC5 of SMHI. 
The  simulations  were  done  for  the  emission  scenarios  pathways  RCP  2.6  and  RCP  8.5  for  the 
selected  RCMs.  The  simulated  precipitation  and  temperature  (minimum  and  maximum)  of 
GCM/RCMs combination were extracted for each of the eight selected locations in the Assessment 
area for the analysis.  
The downscaled RCMs for the selected stations in the Assessment area were transformed such that 
the magnitude and distribution of the transformed variable come as close to the gauged points. The 
quantile-quantile  statistical  technique  was  applied  to  make  the  statistical  distribution  of  the 
downscaled variables as close as possible to the statistical distribution of historical observation. 
Further to the quantile-quantile, transformation was done for the removal of the residual bias. A 
delta change correction was applied to allow the downscaled data and the gauge data to have the 
same mean on the historical period. 
20 
For each station, the ensemble mean of the projections (Figure 1.7 and 1.8) from the models were 
used in the analysis. A comparison of the uncorrected and bias-corrected projections  was done 
with the annual and monthly spread of data to demonstrate the effect of bias correction. 
Figure 1. 7 Annual spread of rainfall over the Assessment area from uncorrected and bias corrected projections of 
ensemble mean 
Figure 1. 8 Monthly variation and spread of rainfall the Assessment area from uncorrected and bias corrected 
projections of ensemble mean 
Time series of rainfall, minimum and maximum temperatures averaged for eight (8) stations in the 
Assessment  area  were  analyzed  from  1960  to  2080.  Rainfall  characteristics  analyzed  include 
number  of  days  of  rainfall,  heavy  rainfall  events  and  dry  spell.  Number  of  days  with  rainfall 
21 
amount  exceeding  0.85mm  is  considered  as  a  rainy  day  and  the  number  of  days  with  rainfall 
amount exceeding 10mm is considered as a heavy rainfall event. Dry spell duration is defined here 
as three or more consecutive days without rainfall within the rainfall season (June, July, August, 
September-JJAS). 
1.5.2.4 Risks and Hazards Mapping 
Spatial data used for the mapping exercise are summarized in Table 3. 
Table 3 Spatial data for mapping risks and hazards in the Assessment area 
Spatial Data 
Landsat 8  
MODIS NDVI data 
SRTM 90-m DEM 
Soils 
Waterbodies 
Type 
Raster 
Raster 
Raster 
Source  
USGS Global Visualization Viewer (GloVis). 
LPDAAC, USGS 
NASA 
shapefile 
RS/GIS Lab 
shapefile 
RS/GIS Lab 
Administrative boundary 
shapefile 
RS/GIS Lab 
Communities 
shapefile 
Fieldwork 
Climate (rainfall & temperature) 
statistics 
Ghana Meteorological Agency  
Data Preprocessing  
Landsat8: Land cover map for the area was generated from the Landsat images. Based on this 
objective, Band 6, 5, 4 was retrieved and stacked for each image. Stacked images were mosaicked 
and classified using the maximum likelihood supervised classification algorithm into four map 
classes; Agricultural land, Savanna, Bare/Built up, and Waterbodies. The Land use/land cover Map 
is shown in Appendix 4 
MODIS NDVI Data – MODIS NDVI data are available as 16-day NDVI composites with spatial 
resolution of 250-m and pixel values ranging from 0-255 (8-bit unsigned integer greyscale). Thus, 
pixel values were first rescaled to standard values of NDVI, which is within a range of -1 to 1. 
Rescaled images where stacked and subset to the region of interest. DEM Processing – The ‘fill’ 
geoprocessing  tool  in  ArcGIS  was  used  to  fill  data  voids  in  the  DEM  before  using  for  further 
analysis. The filled DEM data was used to generate slope percent and elevation map.  
22 
DEM Processing – The ‘fill’ geo-processing tool in ArcGIS was used to fill data voids in the 
DEM before using for further analysis. The filled DEM data was used to generate slope percent 
and elevation map. 
Mapping Methods 
The mapping methods used in this exercise were grouped in three. Table 4 provides a summary of 
the methods used to generate hazard/risk map for each indicator specified.  
Spatial Multi-Criteria Analysis (SMCA): The SMCA mapping procedure involves three main steps in 
mapping  risks:(a)  selection  of  suitable  criteria  that  influence  the  phenomena,  (b)  determining  and 
applying  weights  of  influence  based  on experts’  judgement,  (c)  overlaying  using  a  weighted  linear 
combination. This procedure was used to prepare flood risk, bushfire and climate-induced erosion base 
maps for the Assessment area.  
Vegetation Condition Index (VCI): VCI is a remote sensing based method for mapping agricultural 
drought in areas with varying ecological conditions (Liu & Kogan, 1996; Quiring & Ganesh, 2010; 
Seiler, Kogan, & Sullivan, 1998; Wang, 2001). It provides information on drought-related vegetation 
stress and measures intensity, time of onset, duration, dynamics and impacts of drought on the overall 
vegetation condition. Long-term (2000-2014) satellite data from MODIS was used to compute the VCI 
for agricultural drought assessment within the Assessment area. VCI was computed using the following 
formulae;  
Vegetation Condition Index (VCI) = (NDVIj – NDVImin)/ (NDVImax – NDVImin) 
Equation 1 VCI Computation 
Where NDVImax and NDVImin represent maximum and minimum NDVI of each pixel calculated for 
each year and j represents the index of current year. The output value for VCI range from 0 to 1 with 
0  indicating  extreme  drought  conditions  and1  indicating  above  normal  vegetation  condition  or  no 
drought (Kogan, 1995). The mean for the 14-year VCI computed was used to generate final drought 
hazard map for the Assessment area.  
Kriging: Kriging is a method used to interpolate spatial data. In this mapping exercise, climate data 
was converted to point spatial data. Then the kriging algorithm was used to predict the unknown 
values of other geographical locations based on the point data. This method was used to generate all 
climate baseline maps and projections.  
23 
Table 4 Summary of methods and criteria used for hazard/risk mapping  
Method  
Criteria/factors used  
Output Maps 
  Slope percent 
  Elevation  
  Soil Texture  
  Land use/land cover  
  Potential fire weather 
  Slope 
  Potential fuel load 
  Rainfall 
  Land cover/land use 
  Soils 
  Slope 
Flood risk Map 
Bushfire prone map 
Erosion map 
  Mean Annual VCI 2000-2014  Drought Hazard Map 
  Rainfall records 1980-2014 
  Ensemble mean of projections 
(1960 – 2050)  
Baseline Precipitation Map 
2030 & 2050 projections 
Maps 
Risk/ Hazard 
Indicator 
Flood 
Spatial Multi-Criteria 
Assessment (SMCA)  
Bushfire  
Spatial Multi-Criteria 
Assessment (SMCA)  
Spatial Multi-Criteria 
Assessment (SMCA)  
Vegetation Condition 
Index (VCI)  
Kriging  
Climate 
Induced 
Erosion  
Drought 
Changes in 
Rainfall 
pattern & 
Projections 
Seasonal 
Temperature 
Change & 
Projections 
Community 
Vulnerability 
Sensitivity 
Kriging  
  Minimum/maximum 
temperature records 1980-
2014 
  Ensemble mean of projections 
(1960 – 2050) 
Distribution analysis  
  Field data 
Baseline 
minimum/maximum 
temperature maps 
Climate-induced hazards 
sensitivity maps for 11 
indicators 
1.5.2.5 Training of Enumerators 
The Assessment Team was divided into two groups — one from Accra and the other in Tamale. 
The Accra team undertook their fieldwork in the selected districts in the Brong Ahafo  Region. 
This team comprised of the project leaders, field supervisors and enumerators recruited from the 
University of Ghana. The Tamale team undertook all Assessment related fieldwork in the three 
northern regions. Before the fieldwork began, the team (field supervisors and enumerators) were 
trained  about  both  the  contents  of  the  questionnaire,  specifics  of  the  research  sample,  logistics 
24 
including tablet and GPS use and sampling strategies. The training included question-by-question 
evaluation to enable enumerators to understand the logic behind them and the practical exercise 
(enumerators practised the questionnaire with one-another) using a CSS-Pro CAPI enabled tablet. 
Both  teams  liaised  with  the  District  Directorate  of  Agriculture  and  local  assembly  persons  to 
conduct the interviews.  
1.5.2.6 Data Handling and Analysis 
Throughout  the  course  of  the  assessment,  the  Assessment  Team  applied  its  standard  rigorous 
management  procedures  that  it  applies  in  all  its  research  projects,  while  at  the  same  time 
accommodating  the  specific  aspects  of  this  Assessment  exercise  within  this  framework.  Field 
enumerators  had  a  specific  interview  sample  broken  down  by  location,  and  other  stratification 
criteria.  On  the  field,  each  completed  questionnaire  was  automatically  synced  into  an  online 
database and this allowed for screening and monitoring to check for quality. A GPS monitor was 
activated to track the location and time of interview. Daily reviews of transmitted interviews were 
checked to identify anomalies for correction.  
Overall,  data  analysis  was  guided  by  the  objectives  of  the  study.  Data  were  analysed  using 
qualitative  and  quantitative  techniques  with  the  aid  of  analytical  computer  software  including 
Statistical  Package  for Social Sciences (SPSS) and ArcGIS. Spatial  data  used as metadata was 
done in ArcGIS 10. The Assessment Team also analysed the relevant impacts and vulnerabilities 
in the Assessment area using climate scenarios from a representative ensemble of climate models 
for the period 2030 and 2050. 
25 
CHAPTER 2: ASSESSMENT FINDINGS 
26 
2.1 DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS BY DISTRICTS 
The  Assessment  found  a  number  of  social  and  demographic  variation.  This  section  presents  a 
picture of the different  levels  of exposure, sensitivity  and adaptive  capacity to  climate  change-
related shocks and stresses. The key demographic characteristics of the assessed households are 
discussed below. 
2.1.1 Household Size 
On  average,  household  size  for  the  Assessment  was  found  to  be  7  members.  Localities  in  the 
Northern region appeared to have larger households sizes (8) compared with those surveyed in the 
other regions– Brong Ahafo (6), Upper East (7), Upper West (7). 
2.1.2 Gender of Household head  
 Overall, 65.7% of sampled households were male-headed with the remaining 34.3% being 
female-headed. The regional variations are shown (Figure 2.1) 
Gender of surveyed households  by Assessment region
s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
34.6
41.5
29.7
31.2
65.4
Northern
Male
Female
58.5
70.3
68.8
Brong Ahafo
Upper West
Upper East
Assessment area
Figure 2. 1 Gender of surveyed respondents in the Assessment locations  
2.2.3 Educational background 
The educational attainment of the households are presented and discussed (Figure 2.2)  
27 
Brong Ahafo region: Non-formal education (36.75%) and a few households that have 
completed college/pre-university/university (4.56%).  
Northern region: No formal Schooling (71.92%) and Completed primary schooling (3.78%) 
were recorded in the Northern Region in terms of the level of education attained by households 
surveyed. 
Figure 2. 2 Educational attainments of surveyed households by Assessment region 
Upper West Region had the least completion of primary education (2.38%), no formal schooling 
(50.02%). 
Upper East region: Non-formal schooling (52.33%) and completed college/pre-university/university 
(6.1%) were recorded in terms of education.  
2.1.4 Major economic activities 
 In terms of primary economic activities engaged in by respondents in the household survey, 
farming was found to be the dominant activity across the regions as shown in Figure 2.3.  
28 
Brong Ahafo region: Farmers are the majority (68%) of respondents, followed by self-
employed (9%). Labourers make up the smallest group (2%) in terms of economic activities. 
Northern region:  The overwhelming majority (76%) mentioned farming as their primary 
livelihood activity followed by labourers (5%) and retirees (5%). 
Upper West region: Farmers constituted 79% of the total respondents in the Upper West region 
with artisans (1%) and retirees (1%) making up the lowest. 
Upper East region: Here, the majority of respondents (80%) are farmers. Retired, artisan and 
others respondents were all 1%. 
Figure 2. 3 Major economic activities of surveyed households by region  
2.1.5 Monthly Income  
Figure 2.4 shows the monthly income of respondents across the four regions. The Brong Ahafo 
Region shows a slightly higher average monthly income (GHS 392) as compared to the Northern 
29 
(GHS 342), Upper East (GHS 337) and Upper West (GHS 279) Regions; a trend similar to 
findings of the GLSS6, (GSS, 2015). There is also an observably wide gender gap concerning 
average monthly income (as explained below).  
Brong Ahafo Region: Figure 2.4 shows that the male average monthly salary (GHS 485) is higher 
than the female average monthly income (GHS 299).  
Northern  Region:  Male  average  monthly  income  (GHS  393)  is  high  compared  with  female 
average monthly income (GHS 292).  
Upper  East  Region:  Male  average  monthly  income  (GHS  414)  is  higher  than  female  average 
monthly income (GHS 261).  
Upper  West  Region:  There  is  an  extremely  wide  gap  between  male  average  monthly  income 
(GHS 403) and female average monthly salary (GHS 155). This region has the widest salary gap 
in terms of ‘gender’ earnings.  
GHS 450
GHS 400
GHS 350
GHS 300
GHS 250
GHS 200
GHS 150
GHS 100
GHS 50
GHS 0
Monthly income by Assessment region
392
342
337
279
Brong Ahafo
Northern
Upper East
Upper West
Figure 2. 4 Monthly income of respondents in the household survey across regions 
30 
Figure 2. 5 Monthly income of respondents in the household survey across regions 
2.1.6 Out-migration pattern and trends 
Several studies indicate that population growth, climate change, environmental degradation, and 
urbanization have become the major drivers of migration in Ghana. Our survey aimed to 
investigate the pattern and trend of migration based on the perception of people interviewed in 
the studied locations. The analyses at regional and district levels are shown in Figures 2.6-2.9 
Brong  Ahafo  Region:  As  shown  in  Figure  2.6,  Banda  district  (81.5%)  reported  the  highest 
migration incidence followed by Tain (78.5%) with Pru (29.7%) reporting the lowest incidence of 
migration. Atebubu Amantin (97.6%) had the highest percentage of permanent migrated household 
whiles Kintampo South has more seasonal migrants (33%). 
31 
 Northern Region: The West Gonja district (4.8%) reported the lowest incidence of migration in 
the Northern Region, whereas East Gonja (61.9%) reporting the largest rate. In terms of permanent 
migrated  households  in  the  Northern  Region,  Nanumba  North  (100%)  and  Zabzugu  (100%) 
recorded  the  highest.    Conversely,  Kumbungu  has  the  highest  percentage  of  seasonal  migrants 
(100%) (Figure 2.7). 
Upper West Region: Out of the eleven (11) districts surveyed in the Upper West Region, Sissala 
East (76.2%) reported the highest migration incidence. The lowest migrating district in the region 
is Daffiema-Bussie-Issa (4.8%). Daffiema-Busie-Issa (100%) and Wa East (100%) reported the 
highest percentage of permanent migrants with Wa West district reporting the highest percentage 
for seasonal migrant (67.7%) (Figure 2.8).  
Upper East Region: Builsa North (85.7%) is the district with the largest migration incidence in 
the Upper East Region, the lowest migration incidence in the region was recorded in the Nabdam 
District (28.6%). In terms of migration patterns, permanent migration is high in Bongo (75%) and 
Builsa south (64%) districts (Figure 2.9). 
32 
Figure 2. 6. Percentage of seasonal and permanent migrants by districts in Brong-Ahafo Region 
33 
Figure 2. 7 Percentage of seasonal and permanent migrants by districts in Northern Region 
34 
. 
Figure 2. 8 Percentage of seasonal and permanent out-migrants by districts in the Upper West Region 
35 
Figure 2. 9 Percentage of seasonal and permanent migrants by districts in the Upper East Region 
36 
2.1.7 Household asset ownership 
Brong-Ahafo Region: The chart (Figure 2.10) shows that a majority of households make use of 
a mobile telephone (85%). A little over 78% of households have electricity with 61% making use 
of  radios.  Approximately  60%  of  respondents  indicated  they  own  bicycles  while  51%  own 
television sets. 27% of households have a motorbike/scooter, and tricycle. Refrigerators are owned 
by 22% of respondents. Approximately 2% of households have trucks.  
Northern  Region:  Almost  85%  of  households  in  the  Northern  region  own  mobile  telephone. 
Again  approximately  50%  have  a  motorbike  while  85%  of  respondents  have  bicycles.  Radio 
owners  constitute  almost  68%  with  motorbike/scooter/tricycle  owners  making  up  50%. 
Approximately 41% of households own television sets. 12% of households have trucks and almost 
7% have refrigerators (Figure 2.10).  
Upper West Region: 76% of respondents have a bicycle. Additionally, electricity is being used 
by 74% of households. Mobile telephone owners constitute almost 85% of households and radio 
owners  make  up  68%  of  respondents.  45%  of  households  have  motorbike/scooter/tricycle  and 
television sets are owned by 45% of households. 8% of respondents have refrigerators. Truck and 
car owners constitute 8% and approximately 3%, respectively (Figure 2.10).  
Upper  East  Region:  The  majority  of  households  own  mobile  telephone  (88%).  80%  of 
respondents have bicycle and radio owners make up 80% of respondents. 64% of households use 
electricity and 44% have television sets. 34% of households have motorbike/scooter/ tricycle and 
11%  of  respondents  own  refrigerators.  1%  of  households  have  cars  and  a  little  below  1%  of 
households have trucks (Figure 2.10).  
37 
Figure 2. 10 Household asset ownership across the Assessment regions.  
38 
2.2 BIOPHYSICAL RISKS, HAZARDS AND POTENTIAL IMPACT ON 
VULNERABILITY OF THE ASSESSMENT AREAS. 
2.2.1 Baseline Climatic Conditions 
Mean Minimum Temperature 
The mean minimum temperature for all the stations are observed to be significantly increasing 
but Bolga and Wenchi observed a statistically non-significant increase (Figures 2.11 and 2.12).  
Figure 2. 11 Mean minimum temperature with trend line and p-values showing statistical significance at 95% 
confidence level. 
39 
Figure 2. 12 Mean minimum temperature baseline map  
Mean Maximum Temperature  
Mean maximum temperature is observed to have increased significantly over all stations but over 
Navrongo, the observed mean maximum temperature is a non-significant increase (Figures 2.13 
and 2.14). 
40 
Figure 2. 13 Mean maximum temperature with trend line and p-values showing statistical significance at 95% 
confidence level  
41 
Figure 2. 14 Mean Maximum Temperature Baseline Map 
Annual Precipitation 
All the stations observed a non-significant increase in annual rainfall except for Atebubu, Wa 
and Yendi which observed a significant increase (Figures 2.15 and 2.16). 
42 
Figure 2. 15 Mean annual rainfall with trend line and p-values showing statistical significance at 95% confidence 
level  
43 
Figure 2. 16 Annual Precipitation Baseline Map  
Wet Spells (Number of Rainy Days) 
The number of days of rainfall is observed to have increased over all the stations but only 
Atebubu recorded a significant increase (Figure 2.17). 
44 
Figure 2. 17 Number of rainy days with trend line and p-values showing statistical significance at 95% confidence 
level  
Number of Rainy Days above 10mm 
The number of days with rainfall above the threshold of 10mm is observed to have increased 
over all the stations with the exception of Bolga. In either case, the trends are not significant 
(Figure 2.18). 
45 
Figure 2. 18 Number of days with rainfall exceeding 10m with trend line and p-values showing statistical 
significance at 95% confidence level  
Dry Spell (Duration of Dry spell over JJAS) 
Dry spell duration is defined here as three or more consecutive days without rainfall within the 
rainfall season (JJAS). All the stations are observed decreasing trends in Dry spell duration but 
statistically non-significant except for Atebubu. On the contrary, Wenchi observed an increasing 
trend in Dry spell duration though not significant (Figure 2.19). 
46 
Figure 2. 19. Dry spell duration within the rainfall season JJAS with trend line and p-values showing statistical 
significance at 95% confidence level 
2.2.2 Climate-related Risks and Hazard Mapping 
2.2.2.1 Flood Risk 
The flood map for the Assessment area highlights different levels of susceptibility to  flooding. 
Districts surrounding the Black and White Volta River, its tributaries and other waterbodies have 
47 
very high flood risks.  Increasing incidence of flood is expected to create important changes in 
various  aspects  of  livelihoods  and  social  life  of  communities  and  households,  especially  those 
within the high and very high-risk areas (Figure 2.20). 
Figure 2. 20 Map indicating flood risk locationons in the Assessment area 
2.2.5 Bushfires  
The bushfire map (Figure 2.21) indicates areas in the three Northern regions to be more prone to 
bushfires compared with the areas in the Brong Ahafo region. 
48 
Figure 2. 21 Map indicating bushfire prone locations in the Assessment area 
2.2.6 Climate-Induced Soil Erosion 
The climate-induced soil erosion map indicates that areas in Upper West and parts of Northern 
regions have high risks to erosion than areas in Upper East and Brong Ahafo regions (Figure 
2.22). 
49 
Figure 2. 22 Map indicating climate-induced soil erosion locations in the Assessment area  
2.2.7 Drought  
District in the Upper East and Upper West and the North part of the Northern region are more 
prone to extreme drought conditions than areas in Brong Ahafo region and southern and western 
parts of the Northern region (Figure 2.23). 
50 
Figure 2. 23 Map indicating drought-prone locations in the Assessment area 
51 
2.3 HOUSEHOLDS VULNERABILITY TO CLIMATE RELATED HAZARDS  
2.3.1 Exposure Analysis 
 (a). Flood  
Several studies and reports indicate the northern regions of Ghana to be highly susceptible to flood 
(Acheampong et al. 2014). Results from the flood exposure survey stratified across districts in the 
Assessment area show a high household views of flood exposure (Figure 2.24). 
Brong Ahafo Region: Households in the Kintampo north and Sene East districts reported a high 
exposure to flood whilst those in the Tain and Atebubu Amantin districts reported a considerably 
low exposure to flood hazards. 
Figure 2. 24 Flood: percentage of household exposure by districts  
52 
Northern  Region:  Flood  exposure  for  households  was  reported  to  be  very  high  across  all  the 
districts. Gushegu, Kumbungu and Tolon districts households had the highest response rate with 
100% whilst West Gonja (45%) and Sawla-Tuna-Kalba (44%) districts have the lowest response 
rate. 
Upper West Region: The overwhelming majority of interviewees in the Wa East and Daffiama-
Bussie-Issa districts had the highest perception scores for flood exposure with approximately 90%. 
Upper East Region:  Bolgatanga Municipal and Bawku West districts in the Upper East region 
reported high exposure to flood with over 80% response rate.  
 (b). Drought 
The Assessment results showed that the reported exposure to drought is high in all the surveyed 
districts with 80% of interviewees reporting it as a climate-related hazard (Figure 2.25).  
Brong  Ahafo  Region:  In  the  surveyed  districts  of  the  Brong  Ahafo  region,  Banda,  Kintampo 
north, and Kintampo south households perceived high exposure to drought, while those in Tain 
and Pru districts perceived moderate exposure.  
Northern  Region:  Central  Gonja,  Kumbungu  and  Tatale  Sangule  households  in  the  northern 
region reported themselves to have the highest exposure to drought.  
Upper West Region: Households in the Sissala West and Lawra districts reported that they are 
highly  exposed  to  drought  with  Nadowli  district  households’  responses  indicating  moderate 
exposure to drought.  
Upper East Region: Bolgatanga district households’ reported their exposure to drought to be very 
high while Talensi district interviewees reported low exposure to drought. 
53 
Figure 2. 25 Percentage of households exposed to drought by districts 
 (c). Dry spells 
Studies in the northern regions of Ghana show that a signiﬁcant decrease in the number of rain 
days and the probability of dry spells up to 11 days in the ﬁrst four weeks of the planting season 
is common. In the Assessment region, the communities visited were found to be highly exposed 
to dry spells (Figure 2.26). The most exposed districts in the Brong Ahafo Region from the 
household surveys are Atebubu Amantin and Banda with Tain households perceiving low 
exposure. 
54 
Figure 2. 26 Dry spells: percentage of household exposure by districts 
In the Northern Region, households in the Bole (100%), West Mamprusi (90%) and Tatale Sangule 
(90%)  reported  the  highest  scores  for  exposure  to  dry  spells.  In  the  Upper  West  region,  the 
Daffiema-Bussie-Issa and Jirapa districts reported the highest levels of exposure. In the Upper east 
region, households in the Bawku West (100%) and Bongo (92%) perceived high exposure to dry 
spells. 
(d). Pests and Diseases 
Pests and diseases are often triggered by climate variability and change, agricultural intensification 
and trade liberalization. In recent years, for instance, armyworm (Spodoptere exempta) outbreak 
has become a major constraint to crop production in Ghana. Occurrences in 2002 and 2006 left 
large expanses of farmlands destroyed. In the 2002 outbreak, the Upper East Region was impacted 
the  most.  In  2006,  the  outbreak  occurred  in  five  regions  namely  Brong  Ahafo,  Ashanti,  Volta, 
Northern and Eastern Regions.   
55 
More recently in 2017, farmers in the Assessment area lost were  severely affected. In addition, 
invasive  alien  species  including  larger  grain  borer  (Prostephenus  truncates),  Siam  weed 
(Chromolaena  odorata),  Mango  mealybug,  (Rastracoccus  invadens)  and  invasive  fruit  fly 
(Aleurodicus) have had a great adverse effect on the production of major staple food crops such as 
maize, plantain and cassava in the study areas (MOFA, 2015). Table 5 shows the major pests and 
diseases and the crops they affect in the Assessment area.  
Table 5. Major pests and diseases affecting crops, poultry, livestock and humans 
No.  Major pests and diseases 
Crops  and animals affected 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
Crops and plants 
Armyworms (Spodoptera exempta) 
Maize, Rice, Millet, Sorghum 
Larger grain borers (Prostephanus truncatus) 
Maize 
Greater grain weevil (Sitophilus spp.) 
Maize, Sorghum 
fusca,  Sesamia  calamistis,  Eldana 
Stem  borers  (Busseola 
saccharina, Chilo spp, Maliarpha separatella,) 
Maize  streak  virus  (virus  transmitted  by  insects  known  as  leaf 
hoppers) 
Striga  (witchweed)  (Striga  hermonthica,  S.  asiatica,  Striga 
gesnerioides ) 
African gall midges (Orseolina oryzivora) 
Stalked-eye shoot flies (Diopsis spp) 
Rice blast (Pyricularia oryzae) 
Rice brown leaf spot (Helminthosporium oryzae) 
Rice yellow mottle virus (RYMV) 
Downy  mildew  (Sclerospora  graminicola,  Sclerospora  sorghi, 
Peronospora destructor) 
Ergot (Claviceps sp. /Sphacelia sp.) 
Sorghum shoot flies (Atherigona soccata) 
Sorghum midges (Contarinia sorghicola) 
Aphids (Aphis craccivora, Aphis gossypii and other species) 
Cowpea storage weevils (Callosobruchus maculates) 
Flower thrips (Megalurothrips sjoestedtii) 
Pod borers (Maruca vitrata, Euchrysops sp.) 
Sucking  bugs  (Anoplocnemis  spp.,  Clavigralla  spp.  And  other 
species) 
Anthracnose disease (Colletotrichum lindemuthianum) 
Cowpea mosaic virus diseases 
Cowpea wilt disease (Fusarium oxysporum) 
Maize, Rice, Millet, Sorghum 
Maize 
Maize, Millet, Sorghum, Cowpea 
Rice, 
Rice, 
Rice 
Rice 
Rice 
Millet, Sorghum, Onion 
Millet 
Sorghum 
Sorghum 
Cowpea,  Groundnut,  Soya  bean, 
Tomatoes, Pepper 
Cowpea 
Cowpea  
Cowpea 
Cowpea 
Cowpea 
Cowpea 
Cowpea 
Brown groundnut hopper (Hilda patruelis) 
Groundnut 
56 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
Pod-sucking bugs (Elasmolomus sordidus, Leptoglossus sp.) 
Groundnut 
Storage  beetles  (Tribolium  castaneum)  and  storage  caterpillars 
(Trogoderma grenarium and other species) 
Groundnut rosette virus disease 
Leaf spot (Cercospora spp) 
Storage moths (Ephestia cantella, Corcyra cephabonica) 
Storage weevils (Callosobruchus maculates) 
Sucking  bugs  (Anoplocnemis  spp.,  Clavigralla  spp.  and  other 
species) 
Anthracnose disease (Colletotrichum truncatum) 
Onion flies (Delia antique) 
Onion thrips (Thrips tabaci) 
Bacterial soft rot (Erwinia carotovora) 
Pepper wilt disease (Fusarium oxysporum) 
Groundnut 
Groundnut 
Groundnut 
Soya bean 
Soya bean 
Soya bean 
Soya bean 
Onion 
Onion 
Onion 
Pepper 
Root-knot nematodes (Meloidogyne spp) 
Pepper, Tomatoes 
White flies (Bemisia tabaci)  
Tomato mirid bugs (Cyrtopeltis teriuis) 
Pepper 
Tomatoes 
Poultry and livestock  and humans 
Swine flu 
Avian flu 
Anthrax 
Cerebro Spinal Meningitis (CSM) 
Cholera 
Yellow Fever 
Livestock, humans, 
Mainly poultry, humans 
Livestock, poultry, humans 
Humans 
Humans 
Humans 
Source: Literature review, key informant interviews 
Exposure to pest and diseases appears to be a pervasive hazard in all the districts in the Assessment 
area  (Figure  2.27).  Household  exposure  to  pest  and  diseases  was  found  to  be  highest  in  the 
Northern Region followed by Upper East, Brong-Ahafo and Upper West. In the Northern region, 
Chereponi, Gushegu, East Gonja and Nanumba South reported the highest perception response on 
pest and disease exposure. Pusiga (Upper East), Banda (Brong-Ahafo), and Nadowli, Sissala East 
and Wa West (Upper West) are the districts where the household perception of exposure to pest 
and diseases were highest.  Post-harvest losses of many crops were mentioned by households and 
agriculture extension officers interviewed as a negative effect of pests and diseases 
57 
Figure 2. 27 Pests and diseases: percentage of household exposure by district  
A participants in the FGD in Chietanga in the Wa West district of the Upper West region 
remarked: 
“Yes in the past, there were no pests attacking our corn, yam and other crops but now, you 
do not even get to see the pests. You will harvest and by the time you cut the crop open, 
alas, it would be spoilt or what might be left will be very small”. 
 (e). Bushfires 
Bushfires are perennial occurrences in most districts of Ghana as studies have shown (Appiah-
Damnyag  et  al.  2010).  The  survey  results  indicate  that  majority  of  households  perceived 
themselves and their livelihood systems to be exposed to bushfires (Figure 2.28). The Banda and 
Sene east districts in the Brong Ahafo Region have 100% response rate for exposure to bushfires. 
58 
Figure 2. 28 Bushfires: percentage of household exposure by districts  
In the Northern Region, Sawla/Tuna/Kalba, Chereponi, Zabzugu and Tatale Sangule all have high 
exposure to bushfires according to household heads interviewed. In the Upper West region, Sissala 
East  and  Lambussie-Karni  districts  perceived  their  exposure  to  bushfires  to  be  very  high. 
Households in the Bongo and Pusiga districts of the Upper east region have a high perception of 
exposure to bushfires. 
(f). Windstorms 
Windstorms  exposure  perception  scores  did  not  vary  significantly  across  the  Assessment  area 
(Figure  2.29).  From  the  household  survey,  exposure  to  windstorms  reporting  was  highest  for 
Gushegu (Northern Region), Jirapa (Upper West), Kassena Nankana Municipal (Upper East) and 
Sene  West  (Brong-Ahafo).  Districts,  where  lower  reporting  for  windstorms  exposure  were 
recorded,  are  Savelugu-Nanton  (Northern  Region),  Nandom  (Upper  West),  Kintampo  North 
(Brong-Ahafo), and Bawku Municipality (Upper East). 
59 
Figure 2. 29 Windstorms: percentage of households’ exposure by  districts 
 (g). Climate-induced erosion 
Climate-induced  erosion  is  perceived  by  households  across  the  Assessment  area  to  affect 
livelihood  strategies  (Figure  2.30;  Photo  5).  Households’  reporting  of  exposure  to  climate-
induced erosion was highest among most districts in Northern Region, followed by Upper East, 
Upper  West  and  Brong-Ahafo  Region.  Households  in  Bunkprugu-Yunyoo,  Nanumba  South, 
Zabzugu,  Mamprugu-Mogduri,  Chereponi  districts  reported  the  highest  perception  levels  for 
exposure to climate-induced erosion in the Northern Region. 
60 
Figure 2. 30 Climate-induced erosion: percentage of household exposure by districts. 
Households  in  the  Builsa  South  and  Talensi  districts  of  the  Upper  East  reported  the  highest 
perception  scores  for  exposure  to  climate-induced  erosion.  Daffiema-Bussie-Issa  district 
households within the Upper West region reported high scores for exposure to  climate-induced 
erosion.  In the Brong Ahafo  Assessment districts, Sene West  district  households  reported high 
exposure to climate-induced erosion. 
61 
Photo 5 Eroded landscapes in the Sene West district 
(h). Changes in rainfall pattern 
The perceived exposure of households to changes in rainfall pattern varied across districts in the 
Assessment  area  (Figure  2.31).  The  reporting  on  exposure  to  changes  in  rainfall  pattern  was 
highest for households in West Mamprusi, Central Gonja, Saboba, Sagnari, Tolon, Mion and West 
Gonja districts  of  the  Northern Region.  In the Upper East  Region,  Binduri and Talensi  district 
households had the highest perception of exposure to changes in rainfall pattern. Daffiema-Bussie-
Issa in the Upper West Region households reported the highest exposure compared with the other 
districts in the region. Kintampo North district households reported their exposure to changes in 
rainfall pattern to be high, out of the eight selected districts of the Brong Ahafo Region. 
62 
Figure 2. 31 Changes in rainfall pattern: percentage of household exposure by districts 
The chief of Mirigu elaborated on the patterns of rainfall and its impact on their livelihood 
systems: 
“The rain do not start on time. At first, we could get our first rains by February or March but 
now, we get the rains in June or July. Additionally, the rains stop very early. We no longer 
have the two seasons we used to have in the past- when it stops then that is it! This has caused 
the crops of most farmers to be destroyed, especially maize” 
(i). Seasonal temperature change 
Perception on exposure to seasonal temperature change was very high across all districts in the 
Assessment  area  (Figure  2.32).  The  East  Gonja,  Nanumba  North,  Gushegu,  Chereponi,  West 
Mamprusi districts households’ in the Northern Region reported extremely high perception of their 
exposure to  seasonal  temperature  changes.  Households within the Kassena Nankana Municipal 
and Pusiga districts of the Upper East Region reported the highest perception scores for exposure. 
63 
In the Upper West Region, Jirapa district households’ reported the highest exposure scores. In the 
Brong  Ahafo  Assessment  area,  Atebubu  Amantin  district  households’  have  high  exposure  to 
seasonal temperature changes. 
 Figure 2. 32 Seasonal temperature change: percentage of household exposure by districts 
(j). Climate-induced soil infertility 
Climate-induced soil infertility from the Assessment findings affects livelihood systems. Figure 
2.33  shows  household  heads  perception  of  their  exposure  to  this  hazard.  In  the  Brong  Ahafo 
Region,  households  in  the  Kintampo  South  and  Tain  districts  reported  the  highest  exposure 
perception  scores.  In  the  Northern  Region,  Chereponi,  Karaga,  Kumbungu  and  Tolon  districts 
reported  100%  response  rate  for  exposure  to  climate-induced  soil  infertility.  The  Nabdam  and 
Kassena Nankana Municipal in the Upper East Region reported 100% response rate for exposure 
64 
to climate-induced soil infertility. Households from the Wa East district of the Upper West Region 
reported the highest exposures scores. 
Figure 2. 33 Climate-induced soil infertility: percentage of household exposure by districts 
(k). Increase in temperature 
Increase  in  temperature  presents  major  problems  to  households  in  the  Assessment  area  as 
illustrated  by  the  perception  scores  (Figure  2.34).  From  the  household  surveys,  households  in 
Chereponi,  Saboba,  and  Central  Gonja  reported  the  highest  perception  levels  of  exposure  to 
temperature  increase  in  the  Northern  Region.  Daffiema-Bussie-Issa  and  Wa  Municipal  (Upper 
West Region), Nabdam and Binduri (Upper East Region), and Sene West and Kintampo North 
(Brong-Ahafo  Region)  are  the  districts  with  the  highest  household  perception  of  exposure  to 
temperature increases. 
65 
Figure 2. 34 Increases in temperature: percentage of household exposure by districts 
2.3.2 Gender-Based Exposure 
This section presents the exposure levels to the different climate-related hazards stratified across 
gender (women and men). The results are compiled according to the districts in each region. 
(a). Flood  
Brong Ahafo Region: More women were reported to be exposed to flooding than men in Banda 
(56%), Kintampo South (60%), Sene West (55%) and Atebubu Amantin (68%) while more men 
were reported to be exposed in Kintampo North (71%), Pru (52%) and Tain (59%) (Figure 
2.35). 
66 
Northern Region: Fifteen (15) of the twenty-six (26) districts in the Northern region showed 
high women exposure to flood with Gushegu and Bole districts having the highest exposure 
levels (60%). Comparatively, men have a fairly lower exposure to flood than women as thirteen 
(13) of the districts surveyed showed high male exposure to flood (Figure 2.35). 
Figure 2. 35 Percentage of exposure to flood by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
Upper West Region: Women were reported to be more exposed to flood in most districts; Wa 
West (60%), Nadowli (62%),  Sissala West (51%), Jirapa (54%), Lawra (50%), Nandom (52%), 
67 
Wa  Municipal(55%)  for  exposure  to  flood  while  men  were  reported  to  be  more  exposed  in 
Daffiema-Busie-Issa (65%), Wa East (64%), Sissala East (61)%  (Figure 2.36) 
Upper East Region: Men exposure to flood was very high for Talensi (70%), Kasena Nankana 
East (61%), Kassena Nankana Municipal (64%) while women were very high in Tempane (60%), 
Bawku West (61%), Bawku Municipal (60%), Binduri (57%) (Figure 2.36). 
Figure 2. 36 Percentage of exposure to flood by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 
(b). Drought  
Brong Ahafo Region: Drought exposure was reported to be highest for women in Tain (60%), Sene 
West  (58%),  Kintampo  North  (56%)  and  Pru  (52%),  with  similar  exposure  levels  for  men  in 
Atebubu  Amantin  (61%),  Sene  East  (55%),  Banda  (53%)  and  Kintampo  South  (51%)  (Figure 
2.37).  
68 
Northern  Region:  Comparatively,  men  were  reported  to  be  more  exposed  to  drought  in  the 
Northern region as fourteen districts (14) show exposure responses above average as opposed to 
women in eight (8) districts (Figure 2.37).  
Figure 2. 37 Percentage of exposure to drought by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
Upper West Region: Women were reported to be more exposed to drought in Sissala West (60%), 
Sissala East (62%), Jirapa (60%) and Nadowli (67%) while men were more exposed in Wa West 
(62%) and Wa Municipal (65%) (Figure 2.38). 
69 
Upper East Region: Six (6) of the fifteen (15) districts in the Upper East region showed high women 
exposure to drought with Talensi (62%) and Nabdam  (61%) having the highest exposure levels. 
Comparatively,  men  have  higher  exposure  to  drought  than  women  in  eight  (8)  of  the  districts 
surveyed (Figure 2.38).  
Figure 2. 38 Percentage of exposure to drought by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 
(c). Dry Spells 
Brong Ahafo Region: Men have a slightly higher exposure level to dry spells compared to women. 
Out of the eight districts surveyed men were reported to be the majority exposed in four: Sene East 
(60%), Tain (57%), Kintampo North (53%), and Banda (51%). Women were the majority in Sene 
West (61%), Atebubu Amantin (60%) and Kintampo South (56%) (Figure 2.39). 
70 
Northern Region: Women were the majority in sixteen (16) out of the twenty six (26) districts in 
terms of sensitivity to dry spells with men reporting majority in the eight. Figure 2.39 provides 
more details on the sensitivity to dry spells.  
Figure 2. 39 Percentage of exposure to dry spells by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
Upper West Region: Women reported higher exposure to dry spells with the majority in the Wa 
West (60%), Jirapa (54%), Wa Municipal (54%) and Nadowli (56%). Men were the majority in 
terms of reported exposure in the Daffiema-Busie-Issa (65%), Wa East (64%) and Sissala East 
(57%) districts (Figure 2.40). 
Upper East Region: Men’s exposure to drought spells was the majority in nine (9) of the fifteen 
(15)  districts.  The  districts  with  men  majority  included  Bolgatanga  Municipal  (52%),  Kassena 
Nankana West (55%), Talensi (63%), Builsa South (60%), Kassena Nankana Municipal (60%). 
71 
Women’s majority were reported Bawku West (57%), Bawku Municipal (56%), Binduri (61%), 
Bongo (55%), and Nabdam (55%) (Figure 2.40). 
Figure 2. 40 Percentage of exposure to dry spells by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 
(d). Pests and Diseases 
Brong Ahafo Region: Women were reported to be more exposed to pests and diseases in Banda 
(59%), Kintampo South (60%), Pru (56%), and Tain (55%). Men were the majority in Sene West 
(64%), Kintampo North (55%), Atebubu Amantin (60%) districts (Figure 2.41). 
Northern  Region:  Men  reported  high  exposure  to  pests  and  diseases  in  thirteen  (13)  districts 
compared to ten (10) for women.  Districts with men majority include Chereponi (62%), Gushegu 
(56%),  Nanumba  South  (65%),  East  Mamprusi  (62%)  and  Mion  (64%).  Districts  with  women 
72 
majority  include  North  Gonja  (62%),  Mamprugu-Mogduri  (66%),  Yendi  Municipal  (55%)  and 
Saboba (60%) (Figure 2.41). 
Figure 2. 41 Percentage of exposure to pests and diseases by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern 
districts 
Upper West Region: Districts with majority female exposure included Nadowli (56%), Wa West 
(55%), Lambussie Karni (56%), Wa East (56%) whilst men reported the highest exposure to pests 
and diseases Sissala West (63%), Jirapa (67%), Lawra (73%), Wa Municipal (55%) and Daffiema-
Busie-Issa (53%) (Figure 2.42). 
Upper East Region: Men were the majority in the Talensi (65%), Bongo (72%), Kassena Nankana 
West (60%), Bawku West (80%), and Bolgatanga Municipal (63%) districts in terms of exposure 
73 
to pests and diseases. Women were the majority in Binduri (60%), Garu Tempane (70%), Kassena 
Nankana East (60%) and Bawku Municipal (67%) districts (Figure 2.42). 
Figure 2. 42 Percentage of exposure to pests and diseases by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 
(e). Bushfires 
Brong  Ahafo  Region:  Women  reported  high  exposure  to  bushfires  than  men  in  the  Banda  (66%), 
Kintampo  South  (60%),  Kintampo  South  (60%)  and  Atebubu  Amantin  (57%)  districts.  Men  were  the 
majority in the Kintampo North (60%), Pru (58%) and Tain (59%) districts (Figure 2.43). 
Northern Region: Women were the majority in terms of exposure to bushfires in thirteen (13) districts 
and these include Tatale Sangule (60%), Yendi Municipal (61%), and Bole (60%). Men were the majority 
74 
in eleven (11) districts, including Nanumba South (60%), North Gonja (58%) and Karaga (57%) (Figure 
2.43). 
Figure 2. 43 Percentage of exposure to bushfires by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
Upper West Region: Women were the majority in seven (7) of the eleven (11) districts surveyed. Men 
were the majority in only three (3) districts including Sissala West (51%), Sissala East (59%) and Nandom 
(60%)  (Figure 2.44). 
Upper East Region: Men were the majority in most of the districts surveyed including the Tempane (63%), 
Talensi (60%), Kassena Nankana East (64%), and Kassena Nankana Municipal (61%). Women majority 
were reported in the Bawku West (60%), Bawku Municipal (60%) and Nabdam (57%) (Figure 2.44). 
75 
Figure 2. 44 Percentage of exposure to bushfires by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts. 
(f). Windstorms 
Brong Ahafo Region: Women were reported the majority exposed to windstorms in five (5) out 
of the eight (8) districts. They include Kintampo North (59%), Sene East (54%), Sene West (56%), 
Tain (54%) and Atebubu Amantin (55%) (Figure 2.45) 
Northern  Region:  Women  were  majority  exposed  to  windstorms  in  thirteen  (13)  districts 
compared  to  eight  (8)  for  men.  Women  dominated  districts  include  Tolon  (51%),  Tamale 
Metropolitan (56%) and Nanumba South (56%) whilst men dominated districts include Sagnarigu 
(53%), East Gonja (57%) and Kpandai (60%) (Figure 2.45). 
76 
Figure 2. 45 Percentage of exposure to windstorms by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
Upper West Region: Female majority for exposure to windstorms was reported for six (6) 
districts whilst male majority was reported in four (4) districts (Figure 2.46). 
Upper East Region: Men were highly exposed in the region with the majority being reported in 
eight (8) out of the fifteen (15) districts. Women were the majority in six (6) districts in this 
region (Figure 2.46). 
77 
Figure 2. 46 Percentage of exposure to windstorms by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 
(g). Climate-induced erosion 
Brong Ahafo Region: Women were majority in four (4) districts: Kintampo North (54%), 
Kintampo South (60%) and Atebubu Amantin (57%). The remaining districts reported majority 
for men: Banda (58%), Sene East (57%), Pru (52%), and Sene West (57%) (Figure2.47). 
Northern Region: Men were the majority in terms of exposure to climate-induced erosion in 
fifteen (15) out of the twenty-six (26) districts (Figure 2.47). 
78 
Figure 2. 47. Percentage of exposure to climate-induced erosion by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
Upper  West  Region:  Men  were  the  majority  exposed  to  climate-induced  erosion  in  five  (5) 
districts. Four districts reported majority scores for women in terms of exposure to climate-induced 
erosion (Figure 2.48). 
Upper  East  Region:  Men  were  the  majority  exposed  to  climate-induced  erosion  in  Tempane 
(63%), Kassena Nankana East (61%) and Kassena Nankana Municipal (64%). Women were the 
majority in Pusiga (60%) and Nabdam (62%) (Figure 2.48). 
79 
Figure 2. 48 Percentage of exposure to climate-induced erosion by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 
(h). Changes in rainfall pattern 
Brong Ahafo Region: Overall, men were the majority in five (5) of the eight (8) districts in the 
Brong Ahafo  assessment area.  Districts  with  high men exposure to  changes in  rainfall pattern 
included Kintampo North (59%), Sene East (62%), and Sene West (65%). Women were reported 
to  be  more  exposed  changes  in  rainfall  patterns  the  Banda  (66%)  and  Kintampo  South  (55%) 
districts (Figure 2.49). 
Northern  Region:  Women  were  reported  to  be  the  majority  of  people  exposed  to  changes  in 
rainfall pattern in the Tolon (60%), Yendi Municipal (61%) and Bole (60%) districts. Men who 
are  exposed  are  the  majority  in  districts  such  as  Gushegu  (63%),  Mamprugu-Mogduri  (60%), 
Central Gonja (63%), West Gonja (62%) and Sawla-Tuna-Kalba (63%) (Figure 2.49). 
80 
Figure 2. 49 Percentage of exposure to changes in rainfall pattern by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
Upper West Region: Women were reported to be more exposed to changes in rainfall pattern in 
five (5) districts namely Wa West (56%), Wa East (61%), Sissala East (60%), Jirapa (54%) and 
Nadowli  (62%).  Men  were  also  the  majority  exposed  to  changes  in  rainfall  pattern  in  five  (5) 
districts including Daffiema-Busie-Issa (60%), Lambussie Karni (57%), Lawra (60%), Nandom 
(55%) and Wa Municipal (60%) (Figure 2.50). 
Upper East Region: Women were reported to be the majority of people exposed to changes in 
rainfall pattern in eight (8) districts. Men were the majority in six (6) districts in this region (Figure 
2.50). 
81 
Figure 2. 50. Percentage of exposure to changes in rainfall pattern by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 
(i). Seasonal temperature changes 
Brong  Ahafo  Region:  Majority  of  people  exposed  to  seasonal  temperature  changes  in  Banda 
(56%), Kintampo South (60%), Pru% (61%), Sene West (55%) and Atebubu Amantin (68%) were 
women. The remaining districts had men reported majority for exposure to seasonal temperature 
temperatures (Figure 2.51). 
Northern  Region:  Men  were  reported  as  the  most  exposed  to  seasonal  temperature  changes  in 
thirteen (13) out of the twenty six (26) districts in the Northern region. Women were the majority 
in eleven (11) districts (Figure 2.51).  
82 
Figure 2. 51 Percentage of exposure to seasonal temperature changes by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern 
districts 
Upper West Region: Women were reported to be more exposed to seasonal temperature changes 
in five (5) of the eleven districts including Daffiema-Busie-Issa (57%), Sissala West (51%) and 
Jirapa (54%). Men were the majority in four districts with the remaining being even (Figure 2.52). 
Upper East Region: Women were reported to be the most exposed in eight  (8) districts whilst 
men were reported to the majority exposed to seasonal temperature changes in seven (7) districts 
(Figure 2.52). 
83 
Figure 2. 52 Percentage of exposure to seasonal temperature changes by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
(j). Climate-induced soil infertility 
Brong Ahafo Region: Women were reported to be the majority of people exposed to climate-
induced soil infertility in five (5) districts including Kintampo North (54%), Sene East (67%) and 
Pru (61%). Men were the majority in three (3) districts including Banda (58%), Kintampo South 
971%) and Sene West (52%) (Figure 2.53). 
Northern  Region:  In  fourteen  (14)  districts,  women  were  reported  as  the  majority  exposed  to 
climate-induced  soil  infertility.  The  districts  include  Tatale  Sangule  (52%),  Nanumba  South 
(56%),  Bunkprugu  Yunyoo  (59%)  and  Central  Gonja  (58%).  Men  were  the  majority  in  the 
remaining districts as illustrated in Figure 2.53. 
84 
Figure 2. 53. Percentage of exposure to climate-induced soil infertility by gender in Brong Ahafo and Northern districts 
Upper West Region: Men were reported as the majority exposed to climate-induced soil infertility 
in seven districts. In comparison, women were reported to be the most exposed in four (4) districts 
(Figure 2.54). 
Upper East Region: Nine (9) districts reported high exposure for women as the most exposed to 
climate-induced soil infertility. The districts included Builsa North (67%) and Binduri (64%). Men 
were also reported to be the majority exposed to climate-induced soil infertility being the majority 
in five (5) districts (Figure 2.54).  
85 
Figure 2. 54. Percentage of exposure to climate-induced soil infertility by gender in Upper West and Upper East 
districts 
(k). Increase in temperature 
Brong Ahafo Region: Women were reported to be the majority exposed to increase in temperature 
in six (6) out of the eight (8) districts with men being the majority in the remaining two (2) districts 
of Pru (52%) and Atebubu Amantin (51%) (Figure 2.55).  
Northern Region: Men were reported to be the majority in fourteen (14) districts of the Northern 
region. Women were the majority exposed to increase in temperature within ten (10) districts with 
the remaining districts being evenly represented by women and men (Figure 2.55). 
86 
Figure 2. 55 Percentage of exposure to increase in temperature by gender in Brong Ahafo and in Northern districts 
Upper West Region: More women were reported to be highly exposed to increase in temperature 
in six (6) districts including Sissala West (51%), Sissala East (53%), Lawra (59%) and Nandom 
(55%).    Men’s  majority  were  reported  in  Wa  West  (58%),  Wa  East  (64%)  and  Jirapa  (56%) 
(Figure 2.56). 
Upper East Region: Women were reported to be more exposed with their majority in nine (9) 
districts including Bawku West (60%), Binduri (57%) and Nabdam (52%). Men’s majority were 
reported in six (6) districts including Garu Tempane (60%) and Builsa South (67%) (Figure 2.56). 
87 
Figure 2. 56 Percentage of exposure to increase in temperature by gender in Upper West and Upper East districts 
2.3.2 Sensitivity Analysis 
2.3.2.1 District-based sensitivity 
This  section  integrates  the  findings  from  households  questionnaire  survey,  with  key 
socioeconomic  and  biophysical  indicators  of  the  Assessment  areas  to  generate  district-based 
hazard sensitivity maps. Based on the household survey, interviewees were asked to evaluate the 
88 
extent  to  which  their  various  livelihood  systems  were  sensitive  to  the  various  climate-related 
hazards. Data generated was aggregated with and used to map sensitivity based on the following 
scale: 0-20%, (very low), 21-40% (Low), 41-60% (Moderate), 61-80% (high) and 81-100% (very 
high). 
 (a). Flood 
Overall, sensitivity to flood ranged from very low to moderate across the Assessment area. 
Figure 2.57 indicates that only households in the Mion, Gushegu and Kpandai districts in the 
Northern Region perceived their sensitivity to flood to be very high.  
Figure 2. 57 Flood Sensitivity across district 
In the Brong Ahafo Region, Banda and Kintampo North households perceived their sensitivity to 
flood to  be high compared with  interviewees  in  the  remaining selected  districts  who perceived 
their livelihood systems to be moderately sensitivity. In the Northern region, districts with high 
sensitivity according to the survey results include North Gonja, Kumbungu, West Gonja and Bole. 
Central Gonja households perceived their sensitivity to flood to be low. In the Upper East region, 
Pusiga  district  households’  indicated  that  their  sensitivity  to  flood  is  high  with  Bongo  district 
89 
households’ perceiving low flood sensitivity. Sissala West district households’ in the Upper West 
perceived low sensitivity to flood. 
(b). Drought 
Generally,  drought  sensitivity  as  perceived  by  households  across  the  Assessment  area  can  be 
categorized  as  high  (Figure  2.58).  In  the  Brong  Ahafo  Region,  Atebubu  Amantin  district 
households’ indicated that their sensitivity to drought is very high whilst Tain district households’ 
perceived their sensitivity to be moderate. 
Figure 2. 58 Drought sensitivity across districts 
 In  the  Northern  Region,  the  districts  with  very  high  sensitivity  perception  include  Gushegu, 
Chereponi,  East  Gonja  and  Kpandai.  West  Gonja  district  households  perceived  their  drought 
sensitivity to be low.  In the Upper West Region, Sissala East, Sissala West and Wa Municipal 
households  ranked  their  sensitivity  to  drought  to  be  high.  In  the  Upper  East,  Kasena-Nankana 
district households ranked their drought sensitivity to be high. 
90 
(c). Dry spells 
Majority of households in the Assessment area reported high sensitivity to dry spells as shown on 
the map (Figure 2.59). In the Brong Ahafo, Tain district is the only area with moderate sensitivity 
perception.  Sene  East  and  Sene  West  both  ranked  their  sensitivity  to  be  high.  The  remaining 
districts reported very high sensitivity to dry spells. 
Figure 2. 59 Dry spells sensitivity across districts 
In  the  Northern  Region,  Sawla/Tuna/Kalba  and  West  Gonja  are  the  only  districts  reporting 
moderate sensitivity. The rest of the districts in this region either ranked their sensitivity to be high 
or very high. Similarly, Builsa South, Talensi and Garu Tempane districts in the Upper East region 
perceived their dry spells sensitivity to be moderate.  In the Upper West region, all the districts 
perceived their sensitivity to dry spells to be very high, except Wa Municipal, Lawra and Nandom. 
91 
(d). Pests and Diseases 
Pest and diseases sensitivity is very high in the Northern, Upper West and Upper East Regions. 
Apart  from  constraining  crop  production  and  livestock,  many  households  indicated  pests  and 
diseases to have negative human health effects. All the districts in the Upper West Region reported 
their sensitivity to pests and disease to be very high (Figure 2.60).  
.  
Figure 2. 60 Pests and diseases sensitivity across districts 
In the Upper East Region, Bawku municipality households reported their sensitivity to be moderate 
unlike the rest of the districts who reported either high or very high sensitivity. The Mion district 
in the Northern Region reported their sensitivity to pests and diseases to be high. 
 (e). Bushfires 
Most districts in the Assessment area reported their sensitivity to bushfires to be very high (Figure 
2.61).  Jirapa  district  in  the  Upper  West  perceived  their  sensitivity  to  bushfires  to  be  very  low. 
92 
Karaga,  Kumbungu  and  Bunkpurugu-Yunyoo  all  in  the  Northern  Region  perceived  their 
sensitivity to bushfire to be moderate.  
Figure 2. 61 Bushfires sensitivity across districts 
(f). Windstorms 
As natural hazards, windstorms are noted for causing damage to properties and agriculture assets. 
Figure 2.62 maps the sensitivity hotspots from the Assessment area. The response rate indicated 
that very high sensitivity areas dominate are evenly spread across the Assessment area. However, 
the  Northern  Region  has  more  moderately  sensitive  districts.  Similarly,  all  the  low  sensitivity 
districts  including  Mion,  Karaga,  Mamprusi  East  and  Kumbungu  are  found  in  the  Northern 
Region.  
93 
Figure 2. 62 Windstorm sensitivity across districts 
(g). Climate-induced erosion 
From the present Assessment, climate-induced erosion appears to be an environmental degradation 
concern  in  the  Assessment  area  (Figure  2.63).  The  Upper  East  Region  as  shown  on  the  map 
reported  the  highest  sensitivity  with  the  Builsa  North,  Bawku  West  and  Pusiga  districts 
households’ perceiving very high sensitivity. 
94 
Figure 2. 63 Climate-induced erosion sensitivity across districts 
For the Upper West Region, Daffiema-Bussie-Issa and Lawra districts reported high sensitivity. 
In  the  Northern  Region,  Bunkprugu-Yunyoo,  East  Gonja.  West  Mamprusi  and  Zabzugu  also 
reported their sensitivity to be high. In Brong Ahafo Region, Kintampo North, Sene West, Sene 
East,  Atebubu  Amantin  reported  high  sensitivity  with  Tain  and  Banda  households  reporting 
moderate sensitivity.  
(h). Changes in rainfall pattern 
Households’ perception of their sensitivity to changes in rainfall pattern was very high across the 
Assessment area (Figure 2.64). This may be indicative of the importance of rainfall to the people 
in the Assessment area where livelihood systems revolve around rainfed agriculture and reliance 
on ecosystem services.  
95 
Figure 2. 64 Changes in rainfall patterns sensitivity across districts 
The  West  Gonja,  Mion,  and  Nanumba  North  districts  in  the  Northern  Region  reported  their 
sensitivity to changes in rainfall patterns to be moderate. In the Garu Tempane and Nankana East 
districts of the Upper East Region households reported moderate sensitivity to changes in rainfall 
patterns.  
(i). Seasonal temperature changes 
Sensitivity to seasonal temperature changes was reported to be very high by many households in 
the Northern, Upper East and Upper West Regions. Figure 2.65 below shows the sensitivity 
hotspots as perceived by households.  
96 
Figure 2. 65 Seasonal temperature changes sensitivity across districts 
Overall, very high sensitivity districts to seasonal temperature changes is reported in the Jirapa, 
Sissala East, Wa East, Nadowli-Kaleo (Upper West), Pusiga, Bongo, Bawku West (Upper East), 
East Gonja, Tolon, Nanumba South and North (Northern Region) and Kintampo North, Banda 
and Atebubu Amantin (Brong Ahafo). The Tain (Brong Ahafo), Tatale (Northern) and Binduri 
(Upper East) reported moderate sensitivity to seasonal temperature changes. 
(j). Climate-induced soil infertility 
Climate-induced soil infertility appears to be a major environmental concern for households across 
the Assessment area. Figure 2.66 illustrates many areas of very high sensitivity to the phenomena. 
97 
Figure 2. 66 Climate-induced soil infertility sensitivity across districts 
In the Northern Region, Bole, Sawla/Tuna/Kalba, Saboba, Nanumba South are among the districts 
perceiving their sensitivity to be high. The remaining districts in the Region reported very high 
sensitivity. Households in the Binduri and Builsa South districts of the Upper East Region reported 
high sensitivity whilst the rest reported very high sensitivity. In the Brong Ahafo, Sene West and 
Pru are the only districts reporting high sensitivity. 
(k). Increase in temperature 
Perception of sensitivity to increase in temperature is reported between very high, high, moderate 
and low in the Assessment area as indicated on the map (Figure 2.67) 
98 
Figure 2. 67 Increase in temperature sensitivity across districts 
Sene West and Kintampo North are the two districts in the Brong Ahafo with very high sensitivity 
to increase in temperature reporting. In the same Region, Kintampo South, Atebubu Amantin and 
Tain  districts  reported moderate sensitivity while  households in  the  Pru district perceived their 
sensitivity to increase in temperature to be low. In the northern Region, Sawla/Tuna/Kalba, Mion, 
North  Gonja  and West  Mamprusi reported moderate sensitivity. The  Wa East  and Sissala East 
districts  households’  of  the  Upper  West  Region  perceived  moderate  sensitivity  to  increase  in 
temperature. In the Upper East Region, Pusiga and Garu Tempane  districts ranked their sensitivity 
to be moderate.
99 
2.3.2.2 Gender-based Sensitivity 
Despite the critical role played by different men and women in improving human livelihood 
systems, huge disparities exist in terms of decision-making, access to economic opportunities 
and assets. The Assessment, therefore, found it necessary to examine gendered variations in 
sensitivity to climate-related risks and hazards. 
Concerning  flood,  the  majority  of  female  interviewed  reported  their  sensitivity  to  be  high 
whiles majority of male respondents perceived their sensitivity to flood to be medium (Figure 
2.68). Both male (59%) and female (58%) respondents’ rated their sensitivity to drought to be 
high.  Male  (54%)  and  female  (50%)  perception  of  their  sensitivity  to  dry  spells  were  high, 
followed by medium sensitivity ranking (male: 40%, female: 44%). In terms of sensitivity to 
pests  and  diseases,  both  male  and  female  reported  high  sensitivity  with  males  (63%)  being 
slightly higher than male (60%). It must be emphasized that the fieldwork for this Assessment 
was undertaken at the period when armyworm (spondoptera exempta) infestation in many parts 
of Ghana including the Assessment area was being reported in 2017. 
Figure 2. 68. Perception of sensitivity to flood, drought, dry spells, pests and diseases by gender 
From  the  Assessment,  both  male  and  female  ranked  their  sensitivity  to  bushfire  to  be  high 
although females (55%) compared with male (52%) were slightly higher. Majority of female 
100 
(50%) and male (44%) interviewees rank windstorms sensitivity as medium. Similarly, both 
groups ranked sensitivity to climate-induced erosion as medium (female:  54%, male: 43%). 
Male and female interviewees perceived their sensitivity to changes in rainfall  pattern to be 
high with over 50% response across both groups. Figure 2.69 provides more detail. 
Figure 2. 69 Sensitivity to bushfires, windstorms, climate-induced erosion and changes in rainfall pattern by 
gender 
Figure 2. 70 Magnitude of effect of seasonal temperature change, climate-induced soil infertility and increase 
temperature by gender 
101 
According to the majority of female (65%) and male (54%) respondents, their sensitivity to 
the effect of seasonal temperature change is high. The significantly higher perception by 
females (Figure 2.70) may be corroborating existing evidence on limited opportunities and 
resources needed to adapt to climate-related risks for most women (Wrigley-Asante et al. 
2017)  
2.3.2.3 Social Group (Youth and Young Adults) Sensitivity  
Based on the request of the TOR for this assignment, this section explored the sensitivity of 
youths (15-24) and young adults to the various climate-related hazards. In the context of this 
assessment,  youth  fall  into  the  15-24  age  group  whilst  young  adults  consists  of  25-35  age 
groups.  
(a). Youth groups 
The effects of the various climate-related hazards on youths in the studied areas, though 
negative was not too significant in terms of numbers.   Results from the districts in the Brong 
Ahafo, Northern, Upper West and Upper East Regions are displayed in Figures 2.71, 2.72, 
2.73 and 2.74 
Figure 2. 71: Percentage of Brong Ahafo districts youth sensitivity to climate-related hazards 
102 
Figure 2. 72. Percentage of Northern Region districts youth sensitivity to climate-related hazards 
Figure 2. 73 Percentage of Upper West Region districts’ youth sensitivity to climate-related hazards 
103 
 Figure 2. 74 Percentage of Upper East Region districts’ youth sensitivity to climate-related hazards 
 (b). Young Adults 
Young adults (aged 25-35) sensitivity to the different climate-related hazards based on the 
results from the household surveys are illustrated graphically in Figures 2.75, 2.76, 2.77 and 
2.78. 
104 
Brong Ahafo 
Figure 2. 75. Percentage of Brong Ahafo Region districts’ young adults’ sensitivity to climate-related hazards 
Northern 
Figure 2. 76. Percentage of Northern Region districts young adults’ sensitivity to climate-related hazards 
105 
Upper West 
Figure 2. 77. Percentage of Upper West Region districts young adults’ sensitivity to climate-related hazards 
Upper East 
Figure 2. 78. Percentage of Upper East Region districts young adults’ sensitivity to climate-related hazards 
106 
2.3.2.4 Sensitivity of Crops to climate-related hazards 
The  vulnerability  of  the  agriculture  sector  to  climate  change  is  obvious  in  developing 
economies  like  Ghana,  where  the  majority  of  the  sector  is  dominated  by  rainfed  and 
smallholder systems. Studies have been undertaken to explore the current and potential effect 
of climate change on crop yields (Challinor, Wheeler et al. 2007). Low yield of staple crops 
during  drought  periods  are  observed  in  parts  of  the  Guinea  and  Sudan  savanna  Regions  of 
Ghana. According to farmers surveyed for this Assessment, major staple crops including maize, 
sorghum, rice, millet, groundnut, okra, cassava and yam are sensitive to climate-related risks 
and hazards. Tables 6 (Overall), 7 (Brong Ahafo), 8 (Northern), 9 (Upper West), and 10 
(Upper East) illustrates farmers views on the sensitivity of major staple crops sensitivity to 
different climate-related hazards. 
107 
Table 6. Summary of Sensitivity of Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Assessment Area 
Major crops surveyed 
Climate- 
related risks 
and hazard 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and 
diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
Maize 
Sorghum  
Rice 
Tomatoes 
Millet 
Groundnut 
Okra 
Cowpea 
Cassava 
Cotton 
Cashew 
Mango 
Yam  
High 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Low 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
low 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Climate-
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
induced erosion 
Changes in 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
High 
rainfall pattern 
Seasonal 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
temperature 
changes 
Climate-
induced soil 
infertility 
Increase in 
temperature 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Source: Field Survey, 2017 
80-100% 
41-79% 
0-40% 
108 
Table 7 Sensitivity of Major Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Brong Ahafo Region  
Major crops surveyed 
Climate-related 
Maize 
Rice 
Tomatoes 
Groundnut 
Okra 
Cowpea 
Cassava 
Cashew 
Mango 
Yam  
hazard 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Climate-induced 
Low 
erosion 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Low 
Low 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Changes in rainfall 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
low 
Low 
pattern 
Seasonal temperature 
changes 
Climate-induced soil 
infertility 
Increase in 
temperature 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
80-100% 
41-79% 
0-40% 
109 
Table 8 Sensitivity of Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Northern Region  
Climate-related hazard 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
Climate-induced erosion 
Changes in rainfall pattern 
Seasonal temperature changes 
Climate-induced soil infertility 
Increase in temperature 
80-100% 
41-79% 
0-40% 
Maize 
Sorghum  
Rice 
Millet 
Groundnut 
Okra 
Cowpea 
Cassava 
Major crops surveyed 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Mango 
Yam  
High 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
110 
Table 9 Sensitivity of Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Upper East Region. 
Major crops surveyed 
Climate-related 
Maize 
Sorghum  
Rice 
Millet 
Groundnut 
Okra 
Cowpea 
Cashew 
Mango 
Yam  
hazard 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
Climate-induced 
erosion 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
Changes in rainfall 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
pattern 
Seasonal temperature 
changes 
Climate-induced soil 
infertility 
Increase in 
temperature 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
80-100% 
41-79% 
0-40% 
111 
Table 10 Sensitivity of Crops to Climate-related Hazards in the Upper East Region 
Major crops surveyed 
Climate-related hazard 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
Climate-induced erosion 
Changes in rainfall pattern 
Seasonal temperature changes 
Climate-induced soil infertility 
Increase in temperature 
Maize 
Sorghum  
Rice 
Millet 
Groundnut 
Okra 
Cowpea 
Tomato 
Cashew 
Mango 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Yam  
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
80-100% 
41-79% 
0-40% 
112 
2.3.3 Adaptive Strategies 
The adaptive capacity of a household (or a livelihood system) enables it to recover from a shock 
or stress and to return to a pre-shock level of security. Adaptive capacity may be equated with 
household or community resilience (e.g., the assets and institutions that allow households to 
absorb shock and to build local  defences against subsequent stressors). The findings of this 
Assessment categories adaptation strategy into on-farm and off-farm options.  
2.3.3.1 On-farm adaptive strategy 
 The major on-farm adaptation strategies reported included the use of extension services, dry 
season farming, multiple cropping on farmlands, irrigation, soil and water conservation and 
use of improved crop variety (Figure 2.79). Majority of households in the Upper East Region 
(75%) uses improved crop variety as an adaptation strategy on their farms. In Northern Region, 
dry  season  farming  is  mentioned  by  64%  of  households.  Multiple  cropping  is  the  most 
important on-farm adaptation strategy for households in the Brong Ahafo (60%) and Upper 
West (64%) Regions. Use of improved crop variety is common in all the Assessment areas but 
highest in Upper East (75%) and Northern Regions (68%). 
Households use of on-farm adaptive strategies
contract farming
4
use extension services
y
g
e
t
a
r
t
s
e
v
i
t
p
a
d
a
m
r
a
f
-
n
O
dry season farming
multiple cropping
irrigation
soil and water conservation
improved crop variety
27
34
25
33
29
19
14
18
38
32
55
64
64
60
43
43
51
48
51
23
29
34
40
41
45
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Percentage of households
Upper East
Upper west
Northern
Brong Ahafo
75
80
68
70
Figure 2. 79 Households use of on-farm adaptive strategies 
113 
Brong Ahafo Region: Banda (35%) and Sene East (33%) districts’ households’ reported the 
highest  scores  for  use  of  contract  farming  whereas  Pru  (10%)  and  Kintampo  North  (15%) 
districts households’ reported the lowest scores. Extension service use is highest in Kintampo 
South (52%) even though dry season farming is carried out more in Pru (56%). Kintampo South 
(81%) and Atebubu Amantin (75%) top the scores for use of multiple cropping techniques with 
Banda  scoring  lowest  (55%),  despite  all  scores  being  above  average.  Banda  again  scores 
highest for irrigation strategies/adoption across the Region (55%). Soil and water conservation 
practices are lowest in Kintampo South (23%) and highest in Sene East (52%). Use of improved 
crop varieties is laudable in Banda (71%) as opposed to Kintampo North (48%) (Figure 2.80).  
Northern  Region:  The  analysis  indicated  Kumbungu  makes  high  use  of  contract  farming 
options (63%), while Saboba and Nanumba South undertake a great deal of dry season farming 
(73% for both). Regarding the use of extension services, West Mamprusi scores the highest 
(59%)  with  Saboba  also  scoring  highest  for  the  adoption  of  multiple  cropping  techniques 
(65%). Irrigation option is highly considered by households Kumbungu (62%), while Karaga 
scores highest (61%) for soil and water conservation strategies.  It is observed that Zabzugu 
households  reported  the  the  highest  scores  adoption  of  improved  crop  variety  usage  (76%) 
followed by West Gonja (69%) (Figure 2.81).  
Upper West Region: Contract farming is highly used in Daffiema-Busie-Issa (55%) compared 
to Wa Municipal where its lowest (20%). 68% of respondents in Lawra agree to making high 
use of extension services available to them even though Nadowli and Lambussie Karni record 
highest dry season farming levels (55% for both). Multiple cropping is lowest in Wa Municipal 
and Sissala East (16% and 20% respectively), with Nadom recording the highest score for use 
of irrigation (71%) followed by Sissala East (59%). Soil and water conservation techniques are 
highly considered by Sissala West (59%) and improved crop variety technology is well used 
in Nandom (50%) (Figure 2.82).  
Upper East Region: Comparatively, Bawku West (63%) and Builsa South (63%) make use of 
more contract farming options than Bolgatanga Municipal (26%). Tempane records highest use 
of  extension  services  while  Kassena  Nankana  Municipal  records  the  lowest  (55%  and  23% 
respectively). Dry season farming is common for all districts but lowest in Pusiga and Kassena 
Nankana Municipal (29%) and highest for Garu Tempane (81%). Multiple cropping is largely 
carried out in Pusiga and Kassena Nankana Municipal (55% for both). Bolgatanga Municipal 
114 
records highest irrigation option usage (61%) while Binduri records the lowest (8%). Soil and 
water conservation techniques remain well practised in Tempane (60%), Builsa South (56%) 
and Garu Tempane (55%) as opposed to Pusiga (18%). Results from Talensi shows good use 
of improved crop variety (81%) while that of Bawku municipal shows a rather lower outcome 
(41%)  indicating  a  high  disparity  regarding  adoption  of  this  on-farm  adaptation  strategy 
(Figure 2.83).  
115 
Figure 2. 80 Households’ use of on-farm adaptive strategies in Brong Ahafo Region by districts 
116 
Figure 2. 81 Farmers’ use of on-farm adaptive strategies in Northern Region by districts 
117 
Figure 2. 82 Farmers’ use of on-farm adaptive strategies in Upper West Region by districts 
118 
Figure 2. 83. Farmers’ use of on-farm adaptive strategies in Upper East Region by districts 
119 
2.3.3.2 Off-farm adaptive strategies 
Off-farm activities for adaptation to climate-related risks and hazards from  this Assessment 
finding  include  the  use  of  ecosystem  services,  market  options,  social  capital,  institutional 
support, petty trading and migration. Ecosystem services use is high among respondents in all 
three Regions: Upper West (76%), Northern (65%), Upper East (59%) and Brong Ahafo (56%).  
Due to the prevailing poverty condition in the northern Regions, the majority of people rely on 
different forms of institutional support (Figure 2.84). 
Figure 2. 84 Farmers’ use of off-farm adaptive strategy 
Migration  is  also  a  widely  used  off-farm  adaptation  strategy  according  to  respondents. 
Respondents in all the Regions cited migration as a reliable source of remittances including 
money, food and clothes among others. On the other hand, community members mentioned the 
weakening of active labour force and unsustainable agriculture production as some of the costs 
of  migration.  Comments  from  focus  group  participants  in  Kwame  Danso  in  the  Sene  East 
district of the Brong-Ahafo Region clarifies these issues much better: 
120 
“In our community, all the young and able-bodied population have moved to 
Accra and Kumasi. Old men now dominate our community and we cannot 
cultivate the land. Our yam farms are not yielding much like in the past 
because we do not have young men to make mounds and clear the weeds” 
Brong Ahafo Region: Atebubu Amantin heavily relies on ecosystem services (55%) compared 
to Banda, where such off-farm adaptation strategy is minimal (34%). Generally, there is good 
Market  access  across  all  districts  in  the  Region  with  the  least  response  being  a  little  below 
average (49% - Sene East). Reliance on social capital is relatively high in Atebubu Amantin 
(61%)  and  Kintampo  North  (61%)  and  low  in  Pru  (41%).  Pru  scored  highest  responses  for 
institutional support (51%) while Sene East scored the lowest (25%). Petty trading is very high 
in Sene East (62%) and low for Kintampo North and Sene West (39% for both). Banda (85%) 
scored highest for out-migration strategy and Pru scored lowest (33%) (Figure 2.85).  
Northern Region: Overall, reliance on ecosystem services across districts is commendable, 
despite  the  wide  gap  between  highest  and  lowest  scores  (Gushegu  -  81%  and  Tamale 
Metropolitan - 33%). Market options are lowest for West Gonja (19%) as compared to Tolon 
(80%) which scored the highest. Reliance on social capital is high for Bole and Saboba (71% 
for both) and low in Kpandai (35%) and Yendi  Municipal (38%). Kumbungu (81%) scored 
highest  for  responses  regarding  institutional  support  while  Sawla-Tuna-Kalba  scored  the 
lowest  (33%).  Petty  trading  is  very  evident  in  Mion  (82%)  as  compared  to  East  Mamprusi 
(38%). Generally, out-migration strategy across districts is very low with only four districts 
producing  responses  above  average  (East  Gonja  -  70%,  Bunkprugu-Yunyoo  -  63%,  East 
Mamprusi - 68%, Savelugu-Nanton - 55%) out of twenty-six districts (Figure 2.86).  
Upper West Region: Wa West (75%) scores highest for reliance on ecosystem services while 
Wa Municipal scored lowest (29%). Market options are low for Wa West (33%) and high for 
Wa  East  (71%).  Reliance  on  social  capital  is  generally  commendable  as  only  two  districts 
produced  below  average  responses  (Lawra  –  45%,  and  Nandom  –  22%).  Regarding 
institutional support, Daffiema-Busie Issa showed high scores (60%) as compared to Jirapa and 
Lawra (38% for both). Petty trading is a more common off-farm option for Sissala East (70%) 
compared to Lambussie Karni (22%). Overall, Out-migration within the Region can be said to 
be considerably high across all districts (Figure 2.87).   
121 
Upper East Region: Garu Tempane (81%) scored highest for reliance on ecosystem services 
while Nabdam (33%) scored lowest. Market options are more available in Kassena Nankana 
West  (85%) and quite low in  Pusiga  (29%). Tempane  (76%) and Talensi  (62%) show high 
scores  for  Reliance  on  social  capital  while  Bolgatnaga  Municipal  (39%)  and  Builsa  North 
(41%) score lowest. Institutional support is high for Tempane (65%) and low for Builsa South 
(33%).  In  Bawku  Municipal  (78%),  petty  trading  is  largely  an  off-farm  adaptation  strategy 
while  not  so  largely  adopted  in  Binduri  (33%).  Out-migration  is  a  highly  used  adaptation 
strategy in Talensi (85%) as opposed to Builsa North (22%) where it is not largely adopted 
(Figure 2.88).  
122 
Figure 2. 85. Households in Brong Ahafo Region use of off-farm adaptive strategy by districts 
123 
Figure 2. 86 Households’ in Northern Region use of off-farm adaptive strategy by districts 
124 
Figure 2. 87. Households in Upper West Region use of off-farm adaptive strategy by districts 
125 
Figure 2. 88. Households in Upper West Region use of off-farm adaptive strategy by districts 
126 
CHAPTER 3: CLIMATE CHANGE SCENARIOS 
AND FUTURE VULNERABILITY 
127 
3.1 Projected Climatic Scenarios 
3.1.1 Minimum Temperature  
For  minimum  temperatures,  almost  an  increase  of  2.5  °C  above  that  of  the  present  day  is 
projected under RCP8.5 for all stations but under RCP2.6, a projected increase of about 0.5°C 
is expected by the year 2080.  
 Figure 3.1 Time series of averaged minimum temperature between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the 
Assessment area for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between 
present day and future trends. 
128 
2022242628197519952015203520552075Average Temperature (degC)Average Minimum Temperature over Atebubu2022242628197519952015203520552075Average Minimum Temperature over Bole2022242628197519952015203520552075Average Temperature (degC)Average Minimum Temperature over Bolga2022242628197519952015203520552075Average Minimum Temperature over Navrongo2022242628197519952015203520552075Average Temperature (degC)Average Minimum Temperature over Tamale2022242628197519952015203520552075Average Minimum Temperature over Wa2022242628197519952015203520552075YearsAverage Temperature (degC)Average Minimum Temperature over Wenchi2022242628197519952015203520552075YearsAverage Minimum Temperature over YendiRCP2.6_TminRCP8.5_Tmin 
Figure 3. 2 Averaged minimum temperature for 2030 and 2050 in the Assessment area for the RCP2.6 and 
RCP8.5 scenarios. 
For Tamale and Wenchi, warmer temperatures are projected under RCP2.6 than RCP8.5 in 
present day and the future until 2050 where temperature from RCP8.5 is warmer (Figures 3.2; 
3.3). 
3.1.2 Maximum Temperature 
For  maximum  temperature,  projected  increases  of  about  2  °C  above  present  day  is  under 
RCP8.5 by 2080 in all stations but are constrained to less than 1 °C under RCP2.6. For Tamale 
and Wenchi, warmer temperature is projected under RCP2.6 than RCP8.5 until 2050. However, 
towards 2080, maximum temperature is projected to be warmer in RCP8.5 than RCP2.6.  
129 
Figure 3. 3 Time series of averaged maximum temperature between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the 
Assessment area for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between 
present day and future trends. 
130 
3032343638197519952015203520552075Average Temperature (degC)Average Maximum Temperature over Atebubu3032343638197519952015203520552075Average Maximum Temperature over Bole3032343638197519952015203520552075Average Temperature (degC)Average Maximum Temperature over Bolga3032343638197519952015203520552075Average Maximum Temperature over Navrongo3032343638197519952015203520552075Average Temperature (degC)Average Maximum Temperature over Tamale3032343638197519952015203520552075Average Maximum Temperature over Wa3032343638197519952015203520552075YearsAverage Temperature (degC)Average Maximum Temperature over Wenchi3032343638197519952015203520552075YearsAverage Maximum Temperature over YendiRCP2.6_TmaxRCP8.5_Tmax 
Figure 3. 4 Averaged maximum temperature for 2030 and 2050 in the Assessment area on of Ghana for the 
RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 scenarios. 
3.1.3 Annual Precipitation  
The  projected  annual  total  rainfall  generally  shows  an  inter-annual  variability  than  an 
established  trend  under  both  RCP2.6  and  RCP8.5.  Tamale,  Yendi,  Wa  and  Navrongo  will 
experience a slight increase in total rainfall amounts under RCP8.5.  
131 
Figure 3. 5 Time series of total precipitation between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the Assessment area for 
the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between present day and future 
trends. 
132 
6001000140018002200197519952015203520552075Total Precipitation (mm)Total Precipitation over Atebubu6001000140018002200197519952015203520552075Total Precipitation over Bole6001000140018002200197519952015203520552075Total Precipitation (mm)Total Precipitation over Bolga6001000140018002200197519952015203520552075Total Precipitation over Navrongo6001000140018002200197519952015203520552075Total Precipitation (mm)Total Precipitation over Tamale6001000140018002200197519952015203520552075Total Precipitation over Wa6001000140018002200197519952015203520552075YearsTotal Precipitation (mm)Total Precipitation over Wenchi6001000140018002200197519952015203520552075YearsTotal Precipitation over YendiRCP2.6RCP8.5 
Figure 3. 6 Total Annual Precipitation for 2030 and 2050 in the Assessment area for the RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 
scenarios. 
3.1.4 Number of rainy days (Wet spells) 
The number of rainy days is projected to decrease under RCP2.6 and a marginal increase under 
RCP8.5. Over Wenchi, the projected number of rainy days is similar both RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 
emission scenarios.  
133 
Figure 3. 7 Time series of the number of rainy days between 1961 and 2080 over stations in the Assessment area 
for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary between present day and 
future trends. 
3.1.5 Number of Rainy Days above 10mm 
The  number  of  heavy  precipitation  days  (R10mm)  is  projected  to  have  a  clear  increase  in 
Navrongo,  Tamale,  Wa  and  Yendi  up  to  2080.  This  signifies  an  increase  in  days  of  heavy 
precipitation. The difference in projection in heavy rainfall is minimal under both RCPs over 
Atebubu, Bole, Bolga and Wenchi.  
134 
90120150180210240197519952015203520552075DaysNumber of Rainy Days over Atebubu90120150180210240197519952015203520552075Number of Rainy Days over Bole90120150180210240197519952015203520552075DaysNumber of Rainy Days over Bolga90120150180210240197519952015203520552075Number of Rainy Days over Navrongo90120150180210240197519952015203520552075DaysNumber of Rainy Days over Tamale90120150180210240197519952015203520552075Number of Rainy Days over Wa90120150180210240197519952015203520552075YearsDaysNumber of Rainy Days over Wenchi90120150180210240197519952015203520552075YearsNumber of Rainy Days over YendiRCP2.6RCP8.5 
Figure 3. 8 Time series of number days with precipitation exceeding 10mm between 1961 and 2080 
over stations in the Assessment area for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the 
boundary between present day and future trends. 
3.1.6 Dry spells  
The projected duration of dry spells during the rainfall season (JJAS) will be similar to the 
present day under both scenarios over Atebubu and Bolga, with more dry spells under RCP2.6 
and less dry spells under RCP8.5  
135 
102540557085197519952015203520552075DaysNumber of Rainy Days above 10mm over Atebubu102540557085197519952015203520552075Number of Rainy Days above 10mm over Bole102540557085197519952015203520552075DaysNumber of Rainy Days above 10mm over Bolga102540557085197519952015203520552075Number of Rainy Days above 10mm over Navrongo102540557085197519952015203520552075DaysNumber of Rainy Days above 10mm over Tamale102540557085197519952015203520552075Number of Rainy Days above 10mm over Wa102540557085197519952015203520552075YearsDaysNumber of Rainy Days above 10mm over Wenchi102540557085197519952015203520552075YearsNumber of Rainy Days above 10mm over YendiRCP2.6RCP8.5 
Figure 3. 9 Time series of dry spell duration in the rainfall season JJAS between 1961 and 2080 over stations in 
the Assessment area for the RCP2.6 (orange) and RCP8.5 (purple). Dashed lines represent the boundary 
between present day and future trends. 
Dry spell duration is projected to decrease over Navrongo, Tamale, Wa and Yendi under 
RCP8.5. Wenchi, on the other hand, will experience an increase in dry spell duration of about 
10 days maximum under RCP8.5. 
136 
0102030197519952015203520552075DaysDuration of Dry spell over Atebubu (JJAS)0102030197519952015203520552075Duration of Dry spell over Bole (JJAS)0102030197519952015203520552075DaysDuration of Dry spell over Bolga (JJAS)0102030197519952015203520552075Duration of Dry spell over Navrongo (JJAS)0102030197519952015203520552075DaysDuration of Dry spell over Tamale (JJAS)0102030197519952015203520552075Duration of Dry spell over Wa (JJAS)0102030197519952015203520552075YearsDaysDuration of Dry spell over Wenchi (JJAS)0102030197519952015203520552075YearsDuration of Dry spell over Yendi (JJAS)RCP2.6RCP8.5 
3.2 Practical Implications 
Present rainfall and temperature levels are suitable for agriculture throughout the Brong Ahafo 
Region districts.  In the Northern, Upper West and Upper East  Regions, current rainfall and 
temperature levels is detrimental to agriculture. In the long term, local rainfall seasonality and 
temperature variation is expected to negatively affect crop cultivation and livestock rearing. 
Rainfall  is  projected  to  increase  slightly  over  the  Assessment  area  with  a  high  variability. 
However, the number of rainy will decrease whereas heavy rainfall events over the area will 
increase. Dry spell duration within the rainfall season will not have much change until 2080 
but a marginal decrease will be experienced at some stations. For temperatures, a  generally 
increasing trend is projected for both minimum and maximum temperatures. 
3.3 Effects of Projected Climate Change on Gender and Age Groups under Different 
Scenarios 
The effects climate change impact on women, men, youth and young adults under this climate 
change scenario from our analysis is expected to be highly disproportional in the Assessment 
area.  Table 11 presents the likely effect of climate on women, men, youth and young adults 
under two scenarios: (1) Scenario 1: 1.5ºC temperature increase with slightly higher rainfall 
than present by the year 2030  and  (2) Scenario 2: 2.0ºC temperature increase with frequent 
rainfall extremes by the year 2050.  
Considering  that  majority  of  the  population  in  the  Assessment  area  work  in  the  agriculture 
sector, known for its high susceptibility to risks of drought, flood and uncertain precipitation; 
this  means  that  climate change  endangers  food  security  as  well  as  families’  well-being  and 
capacity to survive climate change is expected to aggravate the vulnerabilities of all groups. 
The  gap  between  men,  women  in  terms  of  access  to  resources,  opportunity,  safety,  and 
wellbeing. Women are more likely to live in fragile housing in disaster-prone areas. They also 
receive much less government and community support for recovery. Studies based on IPCC 
data indicate that the impacts of 1.5ºC temperature increase with slightly higher rainfall than 
present by the year 2030 are likely detrimental. Generally, concerns have been raised about 
effects  such  as species  extinction, regional and local  food security  and loss  of provisioning 
ecosystem services. 
137 
With  more  men  and  young  adults  migrating  out  of  the  Assessment  areas,  increasingly 
households are headed by women and need youth to help out with family work. This prevents 
youth from attending school. With a 2.0º C temperature increase with frequent rainfall extremes 
as projected to occur by the year 2050, there will be a loss of critical ecosystem services.  
Even though men and women are both likely to be affected by ecosystem services loss soil 
infertility and bushfires women’s disadvantages may increase. Erosionand flooding will reduce  
the land availble for sowing crops and causing young men and women to migrate to the cities.  
Table 11. Likely effect on gender and age group of projected climate change impacts under two scenarios 
Women are also more likely to go without food in the event of food shortages because of crop 
failure and drought. Water stress means that women and youth have to travel huge distances 
for  to  collect  water.  Women  and  youth  in  the  Assessment  area  are  responsible  for  fetching 
water and firewood for the family, which can place them under increasing stress. Walking long 
138 
distances for water and fuel also affects the academic performance of youth especially girls as 
they are usually the ones kept at home to help with household duties. 
Climate change is also likely to cause an increase in health problems in the Assessment area. 
Diseases  such  as  cholera,  cerebro  spinal  meningitis  and  malaria  may  aggravate  health 
conditions  of all especially  women,  youth  as well  as  young adults. Disruptions in  food and 
water supplies could increase malnutrition among youth. Due to patriarchal societal structures, 
women are often placed in the traditional role of caring for the sick and elderly. It is likely that 
women’s caring workloads will increase further as climate change impacts worsen.  
139 
CHAPTER 4: RECOMMENDATIONS AND 
ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
140 
4.0 RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
The  findings  from  this  Assessment  highlight  the  well-established  fact  that  climate  change 
impact is experienced differently across and within locations, social groups and gender. Based 
on the climate-related hazards evaluated, risks and future vulnerabilities revealed across the 
Regions and districts, a number of specific adaptation options that would increase the resilience 
of the target  areas have  been recommended  for implementation by GASIP.  The subsequent 
sections provide details of the adaptation options. The chapter also presents the national context 
for adaptive agriculture, costs and benefits associated with the proposed adaptation options, the 
institutional  collaborations  for  effective  adaptation  actions,  livelihood  strengthening  and 
diversification and gender-based vulnerability reduction strategies.  
The Assessment found smallholder farmers in the three northern regions and selected districts 
in the Brong-Ahafo Region to be particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change and 
related  extreme  events.  This  can  be  attributed  to  their  over-reliance  on  rainfed  agriculture 
which  is  highly  exposed  and  sensitive  to  climate  variability  and  change.  In  addition,  the 
generally high incidence of poverty and low adaptive capacity means farmers will not be able 
to adapt effectively to projected climate-related risks and hazards. Smallholder farmers already 
face risks, including pest and disease outbreaks, extreme weather events and market shocks to 
their agricultural production value chain. These work together to undermine their household 
food and income security. Extreme weather events and climate-induced vulnerabilities such as 
dry  spells,  floods,  bushfires,  pests  and  diseases  were  identified  to  have  significant  negative 
impacts on livelihoods systems.  
Addressing  the  challenges  identified  in  the  Assessment  area  will  require  an  integrated  and 
participatory approach. Adaptation measures that have the desired result in terms of minimizing 
the  climate-related  risks  and  hazards  or  exploiting  potential  opportunities  with  social, 
environmental and economic co-benefits have been discussed in the proceeding sections. 
4.1 ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
Across  the  study  areas,  most  smallholder  farmers  live  in  precarious  conditions  and  are 
intrinsically vulnerable to shocks that affect their agricultural systems. Climate change-related 
risks and hazards are likely to have significant negative livelihood impacts on the farming and 
related livelihood systems.  
141 
The future climate scenarios and projections suggest that the four regions will experience an 
increase in mean temperature of up to 2 °C, above present levels by 2050, as well as decrease/or 
increase in rainy days is projected under RCP2.6 and a marginal increase under RCP8.5 across 
the  regions.  Smallholder  farmers  face  multiple,  recurring  and  substantial  risks  to  their 
agricultural production and livelihoods including risks related to extreme weather events.  
Based on our findings, a number of on-farm and off-farm adaptation options and strategies, 
which should be implemented to respond to minimize household and communities’ sensitivity 
to changes in climatic risks and hazards and boost agriculture productivity in the studied areas 
are proposed below. 
4.1.1 ON-FARM ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
The  on-farm  adaptation  options  that  could  be  adopted  across  the  focal  area  for  the  CCVA 
include conservation agriculture, provision of irrigation schemes, agroforestry, implementation 
of adaptive trials and establishment of demonstration plots and crop insurance schemes.   
(a). Conservation agriculture 
The  promotion  of  conservation  agricultural  practices  in  the  four  regions  will  improve  soil 
quality and agricultural output. Conservation agriculture practices will improve the utilization 
of arable lands for farming by improving soil fertility, composition and natural biodiversity. 
These practices will improve food security, livelihoods and increase profit margins of farmers 
in  the  four  regions.  Key  conservation  agriculture  management  practices  that  could  be 
implemented include but not limited to: 
 
Improving soil management through the application of organic and mineral 
fertilizers/manures 
  Efficient application of fertilizers/manures 
 
Improving, maintaining and managing permanent soil cover through the planting of 
cover crops and practising crop rotation  
  Application of conservation tillage such as no-till, ridge- till and mulch-till 
  Reducing the burning of crop residues and weeds 
(b). Application of integrated disease and pest management 
Damage to crops and the environment as a whole in the four regions of this CCVA can be 
minimized if farmers observe and follow some of the recommendations proposed in Table 
12. 
142 
Table 12. Measures for pests and diseases control and management  
Category of pests 
Proposed Action 
and disease 
Rodents 
Migratory and 
outbreak pests (birds, 
red locusts etc) 
  Regular surveillance. The earlier the presence of rodents is observed, 
the cheaper and simpler any subsequent action will be and losses will 
remain negligible 
 Sanitation. It is much easier to notice the presence of rodents if the 
environment is clean and tidy  
 
  Proofing i.e. making the store rat-proof in order to discourage rodents 
from entering  
  Use recommended rodenticide. For instance, bait poisons should be 
used only if rats are present. In stores or buildings, use single-dose 
anticoagulant poisons, preferably as ready-made baits.  
 
  Regulated insecticides use 
  Scarecrows 
  Regular inspection of farms/fields for signs of infestation 
  Farmer-to-farmer dissemination of information on farm infestations 
  Setting and regular monitoring of insect traps 
  Use resistant crop varieties  
  Destroy (burning or burying) crop debris after harvesting. 
  Practice plant rotation with non-host (e.g. cereals, cassava, pulses 
etc.)  
  Avoid infected soils, grown with host crops before (e.g. tomato, 
garden eggs, okra, carrots, etc) 
Intercropping with pulses 
 
  Use approved short-term persistence pesticides to spray young 
caterpillars 
  Plant recommended  early maturing varieties of crops 
  Proper fertilization 
  Apply wood ash in case of a heavy attack of aphids 
(c) Sustainable, affordable and innovative water resource use   
In  collaboration  with  Ghana  Irrigation  Development  Authority,  existing  but  non-functional 
irrigation  schemes  could  be  rehabilitated  to  provide  sustainable,  innovative  and  affordable 
water for smallholder farmers and also for domestic use. Provision and maintenance of small-
scale irrigation dams (already in the three northern regions) in communities with poor access 
to water for agriculture purposes will improve on-farm activities during the drying seasons and 
when  dry  spells  occur.  A  number  of  irrigation  methods  such  as  irrigation  booms,  irrigation 
pivots, irrigation guns, sprinklers, pump set packages, power units, soft hose and other fittings 
and  accessories  are  available  locally  to  support  irrigation  schemes.  Farmers  would  need 
capacity  building  in  managing  irrigation  schemes  and  ensuring  sustainable  and  efficient 
utilization of water for farming activities. 
143 
For  instance,  drip  irrigation  is  known  to  save  water  and  fertilizer  by  allowing water to  drip 
slowly to the roots of plants, either onto the soil surface or directly into the root zone, through 
a network of valves, pipes, tubing, and emitters.  Drip irrigation and the use of wetting front 
detectors for scheduling water application can enhance water use efficiency during dry season 
irrigation from groundwater. Availability of adequate water for irrigation is vital for improved 
and sustainable farming. The establishment and management of small-scale irrigation schemes 
is  therefore  important  to  increase  agricultural  productivity.    Studies  by  Blench  and  Dendo 
(2007) have provided a number of water development options (Table 13) for the Assessment 
regions. 
Table 13. Water development options in the Assessment areas 
Water options 
Current status 
Small-scale dams  
Extensively  promoted  by  the  government,  donor  projects,  and 
NGOs throughout the North. Generally successful, but the cost is 
high  and  maintenance  pathways  (for  larger  repairs)  not  well 
established. Poor mitigation of health and environmental impacts. 
Dugouts 
Generally  successful,  but  poor  mitigation  of  health  and 
environmental impacts. Rises in numbers of migrant cattle could 
make these sites sources of friction. 
Culverts/bridges for 
This technology works well with high maintenance and extensive 
water  retention  as  an 
supervision.  However,  post-project  community  maintenance  is 
add-on for feeder roads 
extremely  poor  and  this  technology  will  not  work  unless  much 
greater training investments are made. 
Pumping from rivers 
This is being tried informally on some river systems in Northern 
Ghana and undoubtedly produces the best return (in terms of land 
cultivated  per  dollar)  of  any  of  these  technologies.  Although 
collective  pumps  theoretically  have  economic  advantages,  in 
practice households prefer small individual pumps because (a) they 
control  refuelling  and  maintenance,  and  (b)  they  can  easily  be 
moved  by  bicycle.  One  of  the  objections  to  pumps  is  that  they 
introduce inequity. 
Natural flood-plain 
This technology is not well established in Ghana, although it works 
irrigation 
well  in  some  neighbouring  countries  (Mali,  Nigeria)  and  has 
potential  along  the  White  Volta.  Advantages  are  that  it  makes 
144 
maximum  use  of  natural  fish  production  and  is  environmentally 
beneficial (limited standing water and river-bank protection). 
The disadvantage is that it requires significant initial investment in 
earthworks, community training, and cooperation (does not work 
for an individual household). 
Source: Blench and Dendo 2007 
(d). Community-based agroforestry and woodlot schemes  
Agroforestry  practices  should  be  promoted  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  farmers  and 
communities to boost agricultural production in the four regions. Promoting agroforestry will 
improve  soil  fertility,  promote  food  security  and  increase  incomes  of  the  people.  Climate-
resilient tree species that are drought tolerant, are highly recommended because they are able 
to withstand extreme climate events. Agroforestry practices would also help to support farmers 
during crop failure by selling of fuelwood and timber or processing of shea butter. Agroforestry 
also protects water bodies from excessive evaporation. Different agroforestry system such as 
agrisilviculture, agrosylvopastoral  and silvopastoral  systems  could  be implemented to  boost 
food production and income generation. To promote and sustain agroforestry, it is necessary to 
encourage farmers to actively participate in the planting of short rotation trees and crops in a 
manner that ensures there is  minimal conflict  with land use systems. The knowledge of the 
farmers  and  other  community  members  on  agroforestry  must  be  improved  to  reduce  land 
degradation,  reduce  erosion,  improve  soil  fertility  and  boost  agricultural  productivity.  It  is 
recommended that GASIP initiates collaboration with existing institutions such as the Forestry 
Commission, Savannah Agricultural Research Institute at Nyankpala and other local NGOs for 
the provision of tree seedlings and species that can grow well in each of the Assessment areas. 
These tree species selected must be income-generating trees, easy to maintain, drought  and 
climate tolerance, acceptable to the local people and fast-growing trees. 
(e). Adaptive trials 
Commercially  viable  adaptive  trials  can  also  be  implemented  with  climate  resilient  crop 
varieties that can withstand the effects of climate change such as droughts, dry spells, climate-
induced erosion, pest and diseases, among others. These adaptive trials could include technical 
approaches that are designed with in-built climate change adaptation strategies that promote 
improved  agricultural  production  technologies  for  households  and  communities  in  the 
145 
Assessment  area.  Different  types  of  adaptive  trials  could  be  implemented  at  selected  sites 
within the GASIP project area. The successful results from the adaptive trials could then be 
used in demonstration sites as evidence to support smallholder farmers’ adoption of improved 
varieties of crops and planting materials as well as good agronomic practices.  
(f). Demonstration sites 
It  will  be  relevant  to  establish  pilot  plots  within  the  project  sites  to  provide  practical  and 
technical training to farmers and other community members. Demonstration sites would help 
to create awareness of farmers on climate change adaptation activities. These demonstration 
sites could be developed to enable farmers — women, men and youth to effectively implement 
climate  change  adaptation  research  findings  and  recommendations  from  Ghana  and  other 
countries.  
 (g). Crop Insurance schemes 
Whilst  agricultural  insurance is  still not  fully  functional  in  Ghana, there is  the potential for 
implementing it in the studied areas. Crop insurance will enable poor households to better deal 
with  the effects  of climate-related events  when they occur.  It  is  also  expected to  help  them 
improve their welfare in the short run and their opportunities for income growth in the long 
run.  
Crop insurance schemes have the potential to support smallholder farmers’ adaptation to 
climate change impacts. Currently, there is an innovative model of financing agriculture 
called the Ghana Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL). 
It supports smallholder farmers through six major pillars: 
  Risk sharing: Bank of Ghana  provides 75% risk guarantee to commercial banks to 
motivate them to lend to Ghanaian smallholder farmers  
  Digital finance: Support farmers in communities with no banking service 
 
Insurance: Farmers are required to subscribe to agricultural insurance to minimize 
investment risk.  
  Technical assistance: Technical support for banks and other stakeholders  
  Bank incentive mechanisms: Make agricultural financing affordable and accessible to 
farmers 
In addition, the Ghana Agricultural Insurance Programme (GAIP) also supports farmers with 
insurance schemes. The GAIP was established to benefit:  
146 
1.  Farmers  by  protecting  them  from  crop  losses  due  to  extreme  and  adverse  weather 
conditions;  enabling  farmers  to  have  access  to  bank  credit  and  input  support;  and 
helping them to commercialize their farming operations.  
2.  Financial  institutions  by  protecting  their  agriculture  loans  portfolio;  and  expanding 
agricultural lending  
3.  Agricultural-input  suppliers  by  protecting  their  investment  in  agricultural-input 
supplied to farmers; and increasing their access to finance. 
Governments  (national,  regional,  district  level)  and  other  public  institutions  can  play  an 
important role in ensuring insurance markets are developed in a way that provides high-quality 
products to poor farming households.  
4.1.2 PRIORITIZED ON-FARM ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
Beyond the general adaptation options recommended and discussed above for evaluation and 
implementation at the national and regional level, specific actionable adaptation options at the 
district level are prioritized below based on gender and age (Tables 14-17). These farm-level 
adaptation options can go a long way in moderating the negative effect of climate-related risks 
and  vulnerabilities.  In  drawing  up  these  specific  adaptation  options,  we  acknowledge  that 
different gender and age groups are affected differently and will require attention at different 
scales.  The  adaptation  options  will  also  require  substantial  investment  by  GASIP.  For  this 
reason, we have carefully prioritized which gender and age group should be given the needed 
attention  using  the  following  priority  rankings:  highest  (topmost  priority),  high  (second 
priority) and medium (third priority).  
Other  specific  on-farm  adaptation  options  which  from  our  Assessment  findings  should  be 
evaluated further for implementation by GASIP are listed in Appendix 5. 
147 
Table 14. Prioritized on-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Brong Ahafo Region 
District 
Priority 
target 
group 
Drip 
irrigation 
in 
smallholder 
farms  
Provision 
of  
vegetable 
crops for 
dry 
seasoning 
farming 
Training  
farmers in 
conservation 
agriculture 
(agroforestry, 
woodlots, 
afforestation 
 Rain 
Water 
harvesting 
(channel 
rainwater 
from 
gutters to 
farms) 
Priority adaptation options 
Planting 
drought-
resistant 
crops 
Crop 
insurance  
Crop and  
livestock 
diversification  
Setting up 
Community-
based grain 
banks 
Creation 
of fire 
belts 
Planting 
(maintaining) 
shade trees 
Stone 
bunding  
Planting 
in 
upland 
areas 
and 
mounds 
Atebubu 
Women  
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Highest 
Highest 
Amantin 
Men 
Highest 
Medium 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Banda 
Women  
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Kintampo 
Women  
Highest 
Highest 
North 
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Kintampo 
Women  
Highest 
South 
Men 
Youth 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Highest  Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium  Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest  Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium  Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest  Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium  Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest  Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium  Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest  Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium  Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium  Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
148 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Young 
adults 
Pru 
Women  
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium  Medium  Medium 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium  Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium  Highest 
Highest 
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Sene East  Women   Medium 
Medium 
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Sene 
West 
Women   Medium 
Medium 
Men 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium  Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Youth 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Young 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
adults 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Priority for action (social/gender group should be top priority for application of this adaptation strategy due to their high vulnerability based on results from our survey) 
Highest 
High  
Medium 
149 
Creatio
n of fire 
belts 
Planting 
(maintaining
) shade trees 
Stone 
bundin
g  
Table 15 Prioritized on-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Northern Region 
District 
Priorit
y target 
group 
Drip 
irrigation 
in 
smallholde
r farms  
Chereponi 
East Gonja 
Gushegu 
Kpandai 
Nanumba 
Saboba 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Provision 
of  
agricultura
l inputs for 
vulnerable 
households 
for dry 
season 
farming 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Priority adaptation options 
Planting 
drought
-
resistant 
crops 
Crop 
insuranc
e  
Crop and  
livestock 
diversificatio
n 
Setting up 
Community
-based grain 
banks 
Training  
farmers in 
conservation 
agriculture 
(agroforestry
, woodlots, 
afforestation 
 Rain 
Water 
harvestin
g 
(channel 
rainwater 
from 
gutters to 
farms) 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
150 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Plantin
g in 
upland 
areas 
and 
mounds 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest  Medium 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Sagnarigu 
Tolon 
Yendi 
Municipal 
Zabzugu 
Bunkrugu-
Yunyoo 
East 
Mamprusi 
Karaga 
Mamprugu-
Mogduri 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
151 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Sawla-Tuna-
Kalba 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
West Gonja  Women  
Bole 
Central 
Gonja 
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Kumbungu  Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Mion 
Nanumba 
North 
Savelugu-
Nanton 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
152 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Tamale 
Metropolita
n 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
North Gonja  Women  
Tatale 
Sangule 
West 
Mamprusi 
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
PRIORITY FOR ACTION (social/gender group should be top priority for application of this adaptation strategy due to their high vulnerability based on results from our survey) 
Highest 
High  
Medium 
153 
Table 16 Prioritized on-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in the Upper West Region  
District 
Priority 
target 
group 
Drip 
irrigation 
in 
smallholder 
farms 
Daffiema-
Busie-Issa 
Jirapa 
Nadowli 
Sissala 
East 
Sissala 
West 
Wa West 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Women   Highest 
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women   Medium 
Medium 
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Provision 
of  
agricultural 
inputs for 
vulnerable 
households 
for dry 
season 
farming 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Training  
farmers in 
conservation 
agriculture 
(agroforestry, 
woodlots, 
afforestation 
 Rain 
Water 
harvesting 
(channel 
rainwater 
from 
gutters to 
farms) 
Priority adaptation options  
Crop 
insurance  
Crop and  
livestock 
diversification 
Planting 
drought 
resistant 
crops 
Setting up 
Community-
based grain 
banks 
Creation 
of fire 
belts 
Planting 
(maintaining) 
shade trees 
Stone 
bunding  
Planting 
in 
upland 
areas 
and 
mounds 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium  Medium 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
154 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Wa East 
Lambussie 
Karni 
Lawra 
Nandom 
Wa 
Municipal 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Medium  Medium 
Highest  Medium  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium  Highest 
Medium  Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
PRIORITY FOR ACTION (social/gender group should be top priority for application of this adaptation strategy due to their high vulnerability based on results from our survey 
Highest 
High  
Medium 
155 
Table 17 Prioritized on-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in the Upper East Region 
District 
Priority 
target 
group 
Drip 
irrigation 
in 
smallholder 
farms 
Provision 
of  
agricultural 
inputs for 
vulnerable 
households 
for dry 
season 
farming 
Training  
farmers in 
conservation 
agriculture 
(agroforestry, 
woodlots, 
afforestation 
 Rain 
Water 
harvesting 
(channel 
rainwater 
from 
gutters to 
farms) 
Priority adaptation options 
Planting 
drought-
resistant 
crops 
Crop 
insurance  
schemes 
Crop and  
livestock 
diversification 
Setting up 
Community-
based grain 
banks 
Nabdam 
Kassena 
Nankana 
Municipal 
Bawku 
Municipal 
Bawku 
West 
Bongo 
Builsa 
North 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
156 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Creation 
of fire 
belts 
Planting  
and 
maintaining 
shade trees 
Stone 
bunding  
Planting 
in 
upland 
areas 
and 
mounds 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest  Medium 
Highest  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Pusiga 
Talensi 
Builsa 
South 
Binduri 
Bolgatanga 
Municipal 
Kassena 
Nankana 
West 
Kassena 
Nankana 
East 
Tempane 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
157 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Medium  Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Garu 
Tempane 
Young 
adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young 
adults 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
PRIORITY FOR ACTION (social/gender group should be top priority for application of this adaptation strategy due to their high vulnerability based on 
results from our survey 
Highest 
High  
Medium 
158 
Table 18. Farm-level scenarios for adaptation options, constraints and knowledge gaps 
Climate 
change related 
scenario 
Climate change 
impact and adaptation 
options 
Selected climate change 
adaptation technologies 
Production 
techniques to 
improve yields 
Scenario 1. 
Extreme drought  
Scenario 2: 
Increased 
  Conservation 
agriculture 
 
 Irrigation 
  Agroforestry 
  Adaptive trials 
(demonstration plots) 
temperature  
  Financial 
support/agriculture 
insurance schemes 
  Climate change 
awareness  
  Climate change 
adaptation research 
  Agricultural extension 
services  
Scenario 3: 
Unpredicted 
rainfall patterns 
Scenario 4: 
White Volta and 
Black Volta 
overflowing their 
bounds  
Scenario 5: 
Excessive bush 
fire  
  Climate change planning 
(climate change 
monitoring, early 
warning system) 
  Efficient water use and 
management (irrigation, 
rainwater harvesting, 
dams) 
 
  Good soil management 
(soil conservation, 
erosion control, soil 
nutrient management)  
 Efficient crop 
management (pest 
management, seed 
storage, biotechnology) 
  Livestock management 
(disease and pest 
management, selective 
breeding) 
  Access to and 
application of 
weather 
information 
  Crop rotation  
  Mixed cropping 
and farming   
Improved seedlings 
 
  Good planting 
techniques and 
inputs 
  Deployment of 
agricultural 
extension officers  
Irrigation  
 
  Right quantity and 
type of pesticides, 
weedicides and 
fertilizers  
159 
Constraints in 
implementing 
climate change 
adaptation 
  Socio-cultural and 
local knowledge 
barriers 
  High illiteracy 
  High initial costs of 
 
 
 
adaptation options 
(capital constraints) 
Inadequate experts 
Inadequate access to 
credit 
Inadequate 
information 
Inadequate extension 
services 
Inadequate certified 
pesticides and 
insecticides 
  Unwillingness of 
 
 
farmers to adopt new 
technology 
Knowledge and 
technology gaps 
  Link between 
agriculture 
development strategies 
with climate change 
adaptation 
  Climate change 
impacts farming 
interventions  
  Local development 
strategies on 
agriculture  
  Local climate change 
resilient and climate 
change disaster plans 
  Unreliable and 
noncurrent climate 
change data for 
agriculture policy 
formulation  
  Tools and models for 
agriculture and climate 
change decision 
making  
4.1.3. OFF-FARM ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
This  section  discusses  the  off-farm  adaptation  options  that  need  to  be  prioritized  in  the 
Assessment regions. Some of the off-farm adaptation options include but not limited to access 
to financial support, awareness and knowledge on climate change and adaptation strategies, 
capacity  development  for agricultural  extension  officers, access to  weather information and 
early warning systems for agriculture, among others.  
(a). Access to financial support 
The  Assessment  revealed  inadequate  financial  and  non-financial  support  for  smallholder 
farmers. Financial support to smallholder farmers is highly inadequate and extremely difficult 
to access. Commercial and rural banks are not providing enough credit facilities to smallholder 
farmers due to their inability to provide a guarantee or collateral. This might affect agricultural 
production and food security. Financial and non-financial support to smallholder farmers could 
enhance their resilience to the adverse impacts of climate change. This support could be in the 
form  of  soft  loans  with  no  or  low  interest  rates  and  cashless  inputs  as  well  as  agriculture 
insurance packages for smallholder farmers offered through farmer groups.  
 (b). Awareness and knowledge on climate change and adaptation strategies  
Awareness and knowledge creation on climate change will help to enhance adaptation among 
smallholder farmers. There is, therefore, the need to increase awareness on climate change in 
the four regions. This will involve community sensitization campaign and media engagement 
and communicating climate change to communities and smallholder farmers in a medium that 
they  will  understand.  The  community  sensitization  campaign  can  include  community 
workshops  and  interactive  sessions,  focus  group  discussions,  drama  and  choreography, 
development  of  toolkits  such  as  booklets,  fliers  and  posters  displaying  information  about 
climate change and adaptation strategies. Community radio programs also offer a viable avenue 
for  the  dissemination  of  information.  This  will  help  to  build  the  capacity  of  smallholder 
farmers.  
 (c). Capacity development for agricultural extension officers 
 The development of the capacity of extension officers has the potential of supporting farmers 
to adapt to the effects of climate change. The professional development and technical training 
will enable the agricultural extension officers to  effectively provide technical and extension 
support to  farmers  and  educate them on climate  change adaption strategies. The number of 
160 
extension  officers  posted  to  the  assessment  regions  also  needs  to  be  enhanced  as  many 
communities reported the lack of officers to provide services the require to effectively adapt to 
climate change.  
(d). Access to weather information and early warning systems for agriculture 
Developing climate services and increasing access to meteorological information by farmers is 
one-step  in  creating  climate-smart  agriculture  and  enhancing  farmers’  resilience  to  climate 
change. Smallholder farmers require different types of climate information during each stage 
of the agricultural production process in order to adapt to climate variability and change. Major 
climate change information includes seasonal climate outlooks, early warning signals, weather 
forecasts that could  be used for decision making regarding pest  attacks, input management, 
cultivation practices, pest and disease management, and prices.  
Better  access  to  weather  information  will  have  a  positive  influence  on  the  decision  of 
smallholder farmers to invest in their farming activities, use drought-tolerant crop varieties, 
and diversify livelihood options in response to climate change. GASIP should collaborate with 
the GMet to establish a weather information desks at the district assemblies in the Assessment 
area to provide prompt weather report so that the communities can prepare for planting  and 
mitigate any negative effect such as flood, drought and dry spells. 
4.1.4 PRIORITIZED OFF-FARM ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
Beyond  the  general  off-farm  adaptation  options  recommended  and  discussed  above  for 
evaluation and implementation at the national and regional level, specific actionable off-farm 
adaptation options at the district level are prioritized below based on gender and age (Tables 
19-22).  These  off-farm  adaptations  can  go  a  long  way  in  moderating  the  negative  effect  of 
climate-related risks and vulnerabilities. In drawing up these specific adaptation options, we 
again acknowledge that different gender and age groups are affected differently and will require 
attention at different scales. The adaptation options will also require substantial investment by 
GASIP. For this reason, we have carefully prioritized which gender and age group should be 
given the needed attention using the following priority rankings:  highest  (topmost priority), 
high (second priority) and medium (third priority).  
161 
Table 19 Prioritized off-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Brong Ahafo Region 
District 
Targeted group 
Priority adaptation options 
Income diversification 
systems 
Relocation 
Construction of erosion 
control structures 
Livestock and 
poultry rearing  
Creation of 
channels to direct 
water ways 
Easy access to 
credit 
Atebubu Amantin 
Banda 
Kintampo North 
Kintampo South 
Pru 
Sene East 
Sene West 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
PRIORITY FOR ACTION (social/gender group should be top priority for application of this adaptation strategy due to their high vulnerability based on results from our 
survey 
Highest 
High  
Medium 
162 
Table 20 Prioritized off-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Northern Region 
District 
Priority target 
group 
Priority adaptation options 
Income diversification 
systems 
Relocation 
Construction of erosion 
control structures 
Livestock and 
poultry rearing  
Creation of 
channels to direct 
waterways 
Easy access to 
credit 
Chereponi 
East Gonja 
Gushegu 
Kpandai 
Nanumba 
Saboba 
Sagnarigu 
Tolon 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
163 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Yendi Municipal 
Zabzugu 
Bunkrugu-Yunyoo 
East Mamprusi 
Karaga 
Mamprugu-Mogduri 
Sawla-Tuna-Kalba 
West Gonja 
Bole 
Central Gonja 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
164 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Kumbungu 
Mion 
Nanumba North 
Savelugu-Nanton 
Tamale Metropolitan 
North Gonja 
Tatale Sangule 
West Mamprusi 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
          Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
PRIORITY FOR ACTION (social/gender group should be top priority for application of this adaptation strategy due to their high vulnerability based on results from our survey 
Highest 
High  
Medium 
165 
Table 21 Prioritized off-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Upper West 
District 
Priority target 
group 
Priority adaptation options 
Income diversification 
systems 
Relocation 
Construction of erosion 
control structures 
Livestock and 
poultry rearing  
Daffiema-Busie-Issa 
Jirapa 
Nadowli 
Sissala East 
Sissala West 
Wa West 
Wa East 
Lambussie Karni 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
166 
Creation of 
channels to direct 
waterways 
Highest 
Easy access to 
credit 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Lawra 
Nandom 
Wa Municipal 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
PRIORITY FOR ACTION (social/gender group should be top priority for application of this adaptation strategy due to their high vulnerability based on results from our survey 
Highest 
High  
Medium 
167 
Table 22 Prioritized off-farm adaptation options for districts and social groups in Upper East 
District 
Nabdam 
Kassena Nankana 
Municipal 
Bawku Municipal 
Bawku West 
Bongo 
Builsa North 
Pusiga 
Talensi 
Priority target 
group 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Income diversification 
systems 
Relocation 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
High 
High 
168 
Priority adaptation options 
Construction of erosion 
control structures 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Livestock and 
poultry rearing  
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Easy access to credit 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Builsa South 
Binduri 
Bolgatanga Municipal 
Kassena Nankana West 
Kassena Nankana East 
Tempane 
Garu Tempane 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Women  
Men 
Youth 
Young adults 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
High 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Medium 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
Highest 
High  
Medium 
169 
PRIORITY FOR ACTION (social/gender group should be top priority for application of this adaptation strategy due to their high vulnerability based on results from our survey 
4.1.3 Costs and Benefits of Proposed Adaptation Options 
4.1.3.1 On-Farm 
The cost benefit analysis of the various on-farm adaptation options available has been done 
bearing in mind their associated potential economic, environmental and social benefits and 
costs to ensure all potential costs and benefits are considered (Table 23).  
Table 23 Potential costs and benefits of adaptation strategies 
Adaptation 
Options 
Components 
Costs 
Benefits 
Conservation 
Agriculture    
Drip irrigation (water 
bottles etc) 
Rainwater harvesting 
(channel rainwater 
from gutters to farms) 
Provision of  
agricultural inputs for 
vulnerable 
households for dry 
season farming 
  The initial 
  Low operational 
costs  
  Water is used to 
its maximum level 
by plants 
  Reduction in 
fertilizer and 
nutrient loss 
  Soil infiltration 
capacity is 
increased. 
 
improving and 
sustaining water 
services delivery 
  Ensures all-year-
round farming  
  Availability of 
water of water for 
domestic purposes  
  Access to 
improved seeds  
  access of farmers 
 
 
to modern 
agricultural inputs 
Improved on-farm 
income  
Improve farm 
productivity and 
profitability 
investment may 
be high 
  Potential damage 
to bottles by 
animals and 
humans 
 
Investing in rain 
harvesting 
facilities is 
require capital  
  Runoff collection 
may involve land 
alterations and 
soil compaction 
  Cost of 
establishment of 
community 
outlets to supply 
inputs may be 
high 
  Cost of inputs 
maybe higher as 
compared to 
income from the 
sale of 
agricultural 
produce  
Input cost may be 
higher than the 
increase in the 
 
170 
value of the 
output 
  Cost of training 
of farmers  
  Procurement of 
seedlings may be 
higher  
Training farmers in 
agroforestry, 
woodlots 
establishment, and 
afforestation from a 
community-based 
approach 
Application of 
integrated disease 
and pest 
management 
Planting drought-
resistant crops 
Planting disease-
resistant crops 
Agricultural 
Insurance  
Crop insurance 
schemes 
Community-based 
grain banks 
 
  Cost of improved 
and draught 
resistance crops  
  Cost of breeding 
technology may 
be high 
Insurance cost is 
high and may not 
directly increase 
a farmer’s 
income 
Insurance 
indemnity only 
becomes payable 
in the event of a 
claim under a 
policy 
  mobilizing 
sufficient 
insurance 
capacity to cover 
the sum at risk 
 
  Cost of 
establishing 
community grain 
banks may be 
expensive  
 
Improved 
agroforestry 
practices  
  Climate change 
mitigation  
  Enhanced 
community 
resilience  
Improved food 
security  
 
  Will reduce crop 
losses due to 
droughts to pests 
 
Insurance will 
significantly help 
to manage 
agricultural risk 
particularly to 
safeguard farm 
income losses 
under adverse 
weather 
conditions and 
similar events 
beyond the control 
of primary 
producers 
 
 
Improved 
availability of 
food 
improving local 
food security 
  Grain banks make 
food supplies 
available at the 
hardest times of 
the year at 
carefully 
controlled prices 
  Providing a 
community-based 
solution to critical 
food shortages 
171 
  Prevention of 
bushfire 
  Enhance food 
security  
  Access to 
improved seeds  
  access of farmers 
 
 
to modern 
agricultural inputs 
Improved on-farm 
income  
Improve farm 
productivity and 
profitability 
 
Improved food 
security  
  Will reduce crop 
losses due to 
droughts to pests 
 
Improved food 
security  
  Will reduce crop 
losses due to 
enhanced 
technical know-
how 
Creation of fire belts 
  Preparation of 
Provision of  
agricultural inputs for 
vulnerable 
households for dry 
season farming 
Adaptive Trials  
Demonstration 
sites  
Planting drought-
resistant crops 
Planting disease-
resistant crops 
Establishing pilot 
plots within the 
project sites 
Providing technical 
training to  farmers 
and other members  
fire breaks may 
be at a high cost 
  Cost of 
establishment of 
community 
outlets to supply 
inputs may be 
high 
  Cost of inputs 
maybe higher as 
compared to 
income from the 
sale of 
agricultural 
produce  
Input cost may be 
higher than the 
increase in the 
value of the 
output 
 
  Cost of improved 
and draught 
resistance crops  
  Cost of breeding 
technology may 
be high 
  Cost of pilot plot 
establishment 
may be high 
  Land 
tenure/acquisition 
procedure may 
present 
challenges   
172 
4.1.3.2 Off-Farm 
The cost benefit analysis of the various on-farm adaptation options available has been done 
bearing in mind their associated potential economic, environmental and social benefits and 
costs to ensure all potential costs and benefits are considered (Table 24) 
Table 24 Potential costs and benefits of off-farm adaptation strategies 
Components  
Costs 
Benefits 
Adaptation 
Strategy 
Access to 
financial 
support 
Soft loans with no 
or low interest 
rates and cashless 
inputs 
Agricultural 
Insurance  
 
  Access to timely 
and transaction-
friendly credit 
facilities may be 
difficult 
Insurance cost is 
high and may not 
directly increase a 
farmer’s income 
Insurance 
indemnity only 
becomes payable in 
the event of a claim 
under a policy 
 
Awareness and 
knowledge on 
climate change 
and adaptation 
strategies  
Community 
sensitization 
campaign and 
media 
engagement 
  mobilizing 
sufficient insurance 
capacity to cover 
the sum at risk 
  Mobilizing 
community support 
may be a challenge 
from the start   
  There is risk of not 
properly translating 
concepts in the 
local context of 
communities for 
easy 
comprehension  
 
 
Improve smallholder 
farmer adaptive 
capacity  
Insurance will 
significantly help to 
manage agricultural 
risk particularly to 
safeguard farm 
income losses under 
adverse weather 
conditions and similar 
events beyond the 
control of primary 
producers 
  Build the capacity of 
smallholder farmers.  
  Promote sustainability 
of climate smart 
agricultural 
investments and 
support  
Capacity 
development 
for agricultural 
extension 
officers 
Technical training     Cost of organizing 
  Strengthen 
training may be 
high 
  Availability of 
contributions of 
officers to climate 
resilient agriculture.  
extension officers 
may also pose 
challenges 
 
Access to 
weather 
information 
and early 
Developing 
climate services 
and increasing 
access to 
  Location specific 
climate services 
development may 
be difficult due to 
  Enhanced farmer 
decision-making 
process (investment 
options, use drought-
173 
warning 
systems for 
agriculture 
meteorological 
information 
 
time constraints and 
financial challenges 
Interpretation of 
information by 
smallholder farmers 
may not be 
effective 
tolerant crop varieties, 
and diversify 
livelihood options in 
response to climate 
change) 
4.2 GENDER-BASED INDICATORS TO MONITOR VULNERABILITY REDUCTIONS 
AND SUSTAINABILITY OF ADAPTATION MEASURES 
The extent to which people are affected by climate change impacts is partly a function of their 
gender,  poverty,  social  status,  power  and  access  to  and  control  over  resources.  The  present 
CCVA  revealed that  the impacts  of climate  change affect  women, children,  youth  and men 
differently  across  the  regions  and  districts.  Women  are  more  exposed  and  sensitive  to  the 
various climate-related hazards and commonly face higher risks and greater burdens from the 
impacts of climate change. The Assessment also revealed that the effects of the various climate-
related hazards on youth in the assessment areas, though negative was not too significant in 
terms of numbers and the youth were also found to be more mobile.  Women in the assessment 
areas are particularly vulnerable to climate change because they are highly dependent on local 
natural resources for their livelihood and are less mobile. Majority of men play leadership roles 
and hold decision-making positions at regional, district, and community levels. Women in all 
the studied regions especially in the three northern regions are credited with lower positions. 
Again,  women  have  unequal  opportunities  to  participate  in  all  capacities  regarding  climate 
change decisions.  
Any adaptation actions by GASIP should fully integrate gender perspectives at all levels. It is 
important to mainstream gender issue in climate change adaption options. Strengthening the 
integration of gender-specific adaptation  options into GASIP programs  and projects  will be 
useful  in  its  adaptation  efforts  in  northern  Ghana.  There  is  the  need  to  promote  active 
involvement and participation of women, youth, children, aged and other vulnerable persons 
in the formulation and implementation of climate change adaption projects in the districts.  
Provision of resources to the women and youth will also enhance the adaptation measures in 
the four Assessment regions. Effective climate change adaptation option requires the provision 
of  requisite  human,  financial  and  material  resources  to  climate  change  vulnerable  persons. 
Adequate financial resources such as soft loans, insurance packages, jobs training, grants and 
174 
livelihood support financial programmes must be provided to smallholder women farmers to 
enable them to adapt to the effects of climate change 
Based  on  the  integrated  findings  from  this  CCVA,  We  have  provided  some  gender-based 
indicators  to  monitor  vulnerability  reductions  and  sustainability  of  GASIP’s  adaptation 
measures in the Assessment areas. 
Table 25 Gender-based indicators to monitor vulnerability reductions and sustainability of adaptation measures 
No.  Adaptation Action  
1 
Access to financial support 
for  monitoring 
Indicators 
Adaptation Actions   
The  proportion  of  women  with  access  to  credit 
and financial support  
progress 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Access to weather information and 
early  warning 
for 
agriculture 
systems 
%  of  women  and  youth  with  access  to  weather 
information and early warning systems 
Awareness  and  knowledge  on 
climate  change  and  adaptation 
strategies 
The  proportion  of  women  who  are  aware  and 
have knowledge in climate change and adaptation 
strategies  
Adoption  of  drought  resistance 
crops 
 %  of  women  applying  drought 
agricultural practices  
resistant 
Conservation agriculture 
The proportion of women practising conservation 
agriculture  
Agroforestry 
The proportion of women practising agroforestry 
Demonstration sites 
The proportion of women and youth involved in 
demonstration sites  
Project design and implementation   Involvement  of  women  and  youth  in  designing 
and implementing adaptation projects  
9 
Decision-making 
Planning 
10 
11  Adaptative capacity  
The proportion of women and youth represented 
in all decision-making processes, at all levels of 
project implementation 
Pro-poor and gender-sensitive project planning 
The  proportion  of  women  whose  adaptive 
capacity has been enhanced  
175 
4. 3 NATIONAL CONTEXT FOR CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTION AND 
AGRICULTURE 
Climate change poses many challenges for Ghana. The government of Ghana recognises the 
potential  impact  of  climate  change  on  multiple  sectors  of  the  country’s  economy  and  has 
therefore  put  in  place  a  number  of  policies  and  strategies  to  deal  with  climate  change  and 
adaptation. These include the Ghana Nationally Determined Contribution (GH-NDC), National 
Climate  Change  Policy  (NCCP),  National  Climate  Change  Master  Plan  (NCCMP)  and  the 
National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS). These national policies and strategies 
provide  an  important  platform  for  climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation  in  Ghana.  The 
NCCP  provides  the  underpinnings  for  climate  change  adaptation  actions  in  government 
planning, budgeting and development objectives.  
4.4 INSTITUTIONAL COLLABORATION FOR EFFECTIVE ADAPTATION  
To  ensure  an  effective  implementation  of  the  adaptation  options,  there  is  the  need  for 
institutional  collaboration,  governmental  agencies,  private  sector  and  civil  society 
organizations  operating  in  the  four  regions,  districts  and  the  communities.  Within  the 
Assessment districts, there are a number of institutions such as the Environmental Protection 
Agency  (EPA),  Forestry  Commission  (FC),  National  Disaster  Management  Organisation 
(NADMO),  Ghana  National  Fire  and  Rescue  Service  (GNFRS),  District  Directorate  of 
Agriculture (DDA), Community-Based Organisations (CBOs),Ghana Irrigation Development 
Authority  (GIDA),  Community  Water  and  Sanitation  Authority  (CWSA),  Civil  Society 
Organisations which support climate change mitigation and adaptation actions. An effective 
institutional  collaboration  among  all  these  stakeholders  will  enhance  the  implementation  of 
adaptation  options  in  the  districts.  This  collaboration  will  also  strengthen  the  capacity  of 
institutions, improve synergies and avoid duplications of effort. More specifically this report 
recommends the institutions listed in Table 26 as relevant for GASIP to consult and collaborate 
with, in designing and implementing the adaptive strategies proposed. 
176 
Table 26 Institutional collaboration for coping and adapting to climate-related hazards  
Hazard Type 
Flood 
 Institutions for collaboration 
Main 
Others 
Ghana Meteorological 
National Insurance Commission, 
Agency, Hydrological 
NADMO, Water Resources 
Services Department   
Commission,  Town and Country 
Planning Departments, Ghana 
Water Company Limited, 
UNHCR, Ghana Education 
Services, Religious Bodies 
Drought 
Ghana Meteorological 
National Insurance Commission, 
Agency,  Hydrological 
NADMO, Water Resources 
Services Department, 
Commission,  Town and Country 
Water Resources 
Planning Departments, Ghana 
Commission 
Water Company Limited, 
UNHCR, Religious Bodies 
Dry spells 
Ghana Meteorological 
Savanna Agricultural Research 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Agency 
Institute (SARI), Universities 
Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture (MOFA) 
[Plant Protection and 
Regulatory Services, 
Agricultural 
Engineering Services 
Directorate] 
Ghana National Fire 
Ghana Health Services, NGOs, 
World Health Organisation, 
Food and Drugs 
Board,  Noguchi Memorial 
Institute for Medical Research  
National Insurance Commission, 
and Rescue Services 
NADMO, Water Resources 
(GNFRS),  Forestry 
Commission,  Town and Country 
Commission (FC), 
Planning Departments, Ghana 
MOFA 
Water Company Limited, 
UNHCR 
Windstorms 
Ghana Meteorological 
EPA, Universities, Information 
Agency  
Services Department, 
177 
Climate-induced erosion 
Survey Department 
EPA, Universities, Information 
Services Department, Religious 
Bodies 
Changes in rainfall pattern 
Ghana Meteorological 
MOFA, Universities, MMDAs 
Agency 
Seasonal temperature 
Ghana Meteorological 
MOFA, Universities, MMDAs, 
changes 
Agency 
Climate-induced soil 
Geological Survey 
MMDAs, Ministry of Lands and 
infertility 
Department,  
Forestry,  
Increase in temperature 
Ghana Meteorological 
MMDAs, Universities, 
NADMO 
Agency 
Information Services 
Department, Religious Bodies 
178 
REFERENCES 
Acheampong, E., Ozor, N., Owusu, E., 2014. Vulnerability assessment of Northern Ghana to 
climate variability. Change 126 (1–2), 31–44 
ALP (2014). Climate Change Vulnerability and Adaptive Capacity in Northern Ghana. Angie 
Dazé. http://careclimatechange.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/CVCA_Ghana.pdf 
Appiah-Damnyag, M, L., Blay, D., & Pappinen, A. (2010). Forest and agroecosystem fire 
management in Ghana. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,15(6), 551-
570. doi:10.1007/s11027-010-9236-z 
Armah, F. A., Yawson, D. O., Yengoh, G. T., Odoi, J. O., & Afrifa, E. K. (2010). Impact of 
Floods on Livelihoods and Vulnerability of Natural Resource Dependent Communities in 
Northern Ghana. Water, 2(4), 120-139. doi: 10.3390/w2020120 
Armah, F.A., Odoi, J.O., Yengoh, G.T., Obiri, S., Yawson, D.O., Afrifa, E.K.A., 2011. Food 
security and climate change in drought-sensitive savannah zones of Ghana. Mitigation  and 
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change  16 (3), 291–306. 
Bonye, Samuel & Jasaw, Godfred. (2011). Traditional Coping Mechanism in Disaster 
Management in the Builsa and Sissala Districts of Northern Ghana. European Journal of 
Social Sciences. 25. 
Blench, R. and M. Dendo (2007). Working paper: agricultural production and the potential 
for commodity chain expansion in the three northern regions of Ghana in 2006. Overseas 
Development Institute (ODI), London. 
Challinor, A., Wheeler, T., Garforth, C., Craufurd, P. and Kassam, A. (2007) Assessing the 
Vulnerability of Food Crop Systems in Africa to Climate Change. Climatic Change, 83, 381-
399. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-007-9249-0 
EPA. (2012). Flood and Drought Risk Mapping In Ghana. Retrieved from 
http://www.nadmo.gov.gh/images/NADMO_documents/Research_Works/aap_risk-mapping-
in-ghana-1.pdf 
Fischer, G., M. Shah, F.N. Tubiello, and H. van Velhuizen, (2005): Socio-economic and 
climate change impacts on agriculture: an integrated assessment, 1990-2080. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society. B, 360, 2067-2073, doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1744. 
Gmet (Ghana Meteorological Agency (2012). Data Collated from  Annual Temperature and 
Rainfall Recordings, GMet Office, Accra, Ghana. 
Ghana Statistical Service (2013). 2010 Population and Housing Census, National Analytical 
Report. Ghana Statistical Service, Accra 
Ghana Statistical Service (2015). Ghana Living Standards survey MAIN REPORT (Vol. 6, 
Rep.). GHANA. 
179 
Government of Ghana. (2015). Ghana’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. 
http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/ar4-wg1.htm 
http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg1/ar4-wg1-spm.pdf 
IPCC (2007a). Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
[Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L. 
Miller (Eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, 
NY, USA, 996 pp. 
IPCC (2007b). Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, 
II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
[Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K and Reisinger, A. (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 
104 
IPCC (2007c). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change (2007). The Physical Science 
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. 
Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M.Tignor and H.L. Miller (Eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. 
IPCC (2014), Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II 
and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
[Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 151 
pp. 
IPSI 
Kogan, F. N (1995). Application of vegetation index and brightness temperature for drought 
detection. Advances in Space Research, 15(11), 91–100. http://doi.org/10.1016/0273-
1177(95)00079-T 
Laube, W., Schraven, B., & Awo, M (2012). Smallholder adaptation to climate change: 
dynamics and limits in Northern Ghana. Climatic Change, 111(3-4), 753-774. 
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0199-1 
Liu, W. T., & Kogan, F. N. (1996). Monitoring regional drought using the vegetation 
condition index. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 17(14), 2761–2782. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/01431169608949106 
Ludena, C.E., Yoon. S.W. (2015). Local Vulnerability Indicators and Adaptation to Climate 
Change: A Survey. Inter-American Development Bank, Technical Note No. 857 (IDB-
TN857), Washington DC. 
McSweeney C., New M., Lizcano G. (2010).UNDP Climate Change Country Profiles: 
Ghana. UNDP Climate Change Country Profiles, School of Geography and Environment, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Available from: http://country-
profiles.geog.ox.ac.uk. 
180 
Minia, Z. (2008). Climate Change Scenario Development. In W. K. Agyemang-Bonsu, 
Editor, Climate Change Impacts, Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessments. Ghana 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology (MEST), Republic of Ghana. (2014). 
Ghana National Climate Change Policy. Retrieved from https://s3.amazonaws.com/ndpc-
static/CACHES/NEWS/2015/07/22//Ghana+Climate+Change+Policy.pdf 
MOFA [Ministry of Food and Agriculture] (2015). Agriculture in Ghana: Facts and Figures 
(2014). Accra: Statistics, Research and Information Directorate (SRID) 
NADMO (2010). Flood statistics for Buipe and Yapei, 2003-2010: Buipe, Ghana, 2010. 
NADMO (2011). Unpublished Annual Report 2011, NADMO, Accra. 
Parry, M., Rosenzweig, C., & Livermore, M. (2005). Climate change, global food supply and 
risk of hunger. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
360(1463), 2125-2138. doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1751 
Owusu,  K.  (2018)  Rainfall  changes  in  the  savannah  zone  of  northern  Ghana  1961–2010. 
Weather. 73(2) 46-50 DOI:10.1002/wea.2999 
Quiring, S. M., & Ganesh, S. (2010). Evaluating the utility of the Vegetation Condition Index 
(VCI) for monitoring meteorological drought in Texas. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 
150(3), 330–339. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2009.11.015 
Saito, O., Kranjac-Berisavljevic, G., Takeuchi, K., & Gyasi, E. A. (2018). Strategies for 
Building Resilience against Climate and Ecosystem Changes in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Singapore: Springer Singapore. 
Seiler, R., Kogan, F., & Sullivan, J. (1998). AVHRR-based vegetation and temperature 
condition indices for drought detection in Argentina. Advances in Space Research, 21(3), 
481–484. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0273-1177 (97)00884-3 
Songsore, J. (2011). Regional development in Ghana: the theory and the reality. Woeli 
Publishing Services, Accra, Ghana. 
Stieglitz, M., Rind, D., Famiglietti, J., & Rosenzweig, C. (1997). An Efficient Approach to 
Modeling the Topographic Control of Surface Hydrology for Regional and Global Climate 
Modeling. Journal of Climate, 10 (1), 118–137. http://doi.org/10.1175/1520-
0442(1997)010<0118:AEATMT>2.0.CO;2 
Wang, P. X. (2001). Vegetation temperature condition index and its application for drought 
monitoring. Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 2001. IGARSS ’01. IEEE 2001 
International, 1(1), 141–143. http://doi.org/10.1109/IGARSS.2001.976083 
Wrigley-Asante, C., Owusu, K., Egyir, I. S. & Owiyo, T. M. (2017) Gender dimensions of 
climate change adaptation practices: the experiences of smallholder crop farmers in the 
transition zone of Ghana. African Geographical Review, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19376812.2017.1340168s 
181 
Yaro, J. A., (2013). Building Resilience and reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change: 
Implications for Food Security in Ghana. 
182 
APPENDIX 1: Household Questionnaire Instrument. 
UNIVERSITY OF GHANA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOGRAPHY AND RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
Climate Vulnerability Assessment Questionnaire 
This questionnaire is designed as part of a survey to ascertain the vulnerability of selected communities 
in Northern, Upper East, Upper West and Brong Ahafo in Ghana to climate change. We humbly request 
your kind cooperation in filling this questionnaire. All information provided will be treated as confidential 
and your anonymity is assured. Your participation in this survey is voluntary so you are free to end it at 
any point in time. 
PART A: BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
A1. INTERVIEW DETAILS 
Name ofenumerator/interviewer 
Enumerator/Interviewer ID 
Date of interview 
Day: Month:Year:  
Time interview began 
: 
Time interview ended 
 : 
Community/Village 
CommunityGPS Coordinate 
Lat (N):  
 Long (W): 
District 
Region 
A2.RESPONDENT/HOUSEHOLD HEAD INFORMATION 
Name 
Gender 
Length of stay in community 
1……..Female …………….. Male 
…………. Years, ……………………Months 
183 
2. Religious Affiliation  
1= Christian 2= Muslim3= Traditional4= No religion 
Education 
3. Were you born in this community?  
5= Other……………………………………………. 
1=No formal schooling 
2=Some primary schooling 
3=Completed primary schooling 
4=Some secondary schooling 
5=Completed jh secondary school or equivalent  
6=Completed college/ pre-university  
/university 
7=Completed post-graduate 
8=Young children not of school age 
1=Yes  
4a. If No, did you move here less 
than 10 years ago?  
 2=No  
1=Yes  
 2=No 
b. If you have moved to this area as 
an adult, why did you move? Circle 
1=My wife/husband is from here 
2=They gave me land here  
3= Drought/flood or other weather related condition 
4=Other reason (Specify) 
………………………………………………………………………. 
184 
Economic activities: What are your economic activities by season? Tick all relevant activities by season and rank them by income (1 for most important crop). 
Wet season 
Dry season 
Wet season 
Dry season 
Income per annum 
Economic activity 
Economic activity 
☑ 
☑ 
☑ 
Ranking 
☑ 
Ranking 
(rough estimate 
Ranking 
Ranking 
in the past year) 
Income per 
annum 
(rough estimate in 
the past year) 
Crop farming 
Livestock farming 
Poultry 
Trader  
Petty trading 
Public servant 
Fishing 
Self-employed 
Hunting 
Artisanry 
Pito brewery 
Akpeteshie distillation 
Sheabutter processing 
Dawadawa processing 
Charcoal burning 
Groundnut processing 
Food vending 
Sale of firewood 
Businessmen/woman 
Others (Specify) 
Others (Specify) 
Others (Specify) 
185 
Profile of Other Household (HH) Members 
Gender 
1 = Male 
2 = Female 
 Months per 
year this 
person lives 
in the house  
HH-member 
Relation to 
respondent  
1=Respondent 
2=Spouse 
3 = Child 
4 = Brother/Sister 
5 = Grand Child 
6 = Other 
(Specify)_______ 
 Age 
(years) 
1= 13 - 19 
2= 20 - 30 
3= 31 - 40 
4= 41 - 50 
5= 50 - 60 
6= Above 
60 
Education  
1=No formal schooling 
2=Some primary 
schooling 
3=Completed primary 
schooling 
4=Some secondary 
schooling 
5=Completed jh 
secondary school or 
equivalent  
6=Completed college/ pre-
university  
/university 
7=Completed post-
graduate 
8=Young children not of 
school age 
If this person 
is under 16, 
are they still 
at school  
1=Yes, 
2=No 
Monthly salary 
(GHS)  
[1] < 100  
[2] 100-500  
[3] 501-1000 
[4] 1001-2000 
[5] 2001-3000 
[6] 3001-4000 
[7] 4001-5000 
[8] > 5000 
What is this person’s 
MAIN occupation  
1=Farmer 
2=Other agricultural 
laborer  
3=Artisan  
4=Civil Servant,  
5=Self-employed/own 
business  
6=Student/pupil 
7=Unemployed,  
8=Retired 
9=Other 
(specify)________ 
10=NA (e.g. for young 
children) 
What is this person’s 
SECONDARY 
occupation  
1=Farmer 
2=Other agricultural 
laborer  
3=Artisan  
4=Civil Servant,  
5=Self-
employed/own 
business  
6=Student/pupil 
7=Unemployed,  
8=Retired 
9=Other 
(specify)________ 
10=NA (e.g. for 
young children) 
Months per 
year this 
person is 
employed 
1=Full time 
2=6-11 
months/yr 
3=3-6 
months/yr  
4=Less 
than 3 
month/yr 
5= 
Unemploye
d/NA 
HHM
2 
HHM
3 
HHM
4 
HHM
5 
HHM
6 
HHM
7 
186 
HHM
8 
HHM
9 
HHM
10 
187 
PART B. LIVING STANDARDS OF HOUSEHOLDS 
This section aims to collect information on household living standards using the following indicators: Electricity 
(EL) and Assets (AS).: Flooring (FL), Sanitation (TO), Cooking Fuel (CF), improved water (WA),  
Assets [EL; AS]  
Does your household have?  
Electricity [EL]  
Radio [AS]! 
Refrigerator [AS]! 
Television[AS]  
Non-mobile Telephone [AS] 
Mobile Telephone[AS]  
Bicycle [AS]  
Yes...……...….1  
No.………….....2  
Yes...……...….1  
No.………….....2  
Yes...……...….1 
 No.………….....2  
Yes...……...….1  
No.………….....2  
Yes...……...….1  
No.………….....2  
Yes...……...….1  
No.………….....2  
Yes...……...….1 
 No.………….....2  
Motorbike/ Scooter/tricycle [AS]  
Yes...……...….1  
Car [AS]  
Truck [AS]  
No.………….....2  
Yes...……...….1  
No.………….....2  
Yes...……...….1 
 No.………….....2  
188 
House Flooring [FL]  
Interviewer Observe: Main material for the dwelling Floor 
Code:  
Natural floor  
Earth/sand……………………………..01 
Dung………………………………………02  
Rudimentary floor  
Wood planks…………………………..01 
Palm/bamboo…………………………02 
Finished floor  
Parquet or polished wood……………..01  
Vinyl or asphalt strips…………………02 
Ceramic tiles……………………………03  
Cement…………………………………04 
Carpet…………………………………05  
Other (specify)_______________ ________  
Sanitation [TO]  
What kind of toilet facility do members of your household usually use?  
Code:  
Flush / pour flush ………………01 
Flush to piped sewer system……..02 
Flush to septic tank……………… 03 
Flush to pit (latrine)…………………..04  
Flush to somewhere else…………..05 
Flush to unknown place/not sure/DK…06 
where……..……………………………..….15  
Pit Latrine  
Ventilated Improved Pit latrine ……………..01 
(KVIP)………………………………………….02  
Pit latrine with slab……………………………03 
Pit latrine without slab / open pit……………..04 
Composting toilet……………………….……..05 
189 
Bucket…………………………………………..06  
Hanging toilet/hanging latrine………07 
No facilities or bush or field………….08  
Other (specify) ________________ 96  
Sanitation: Sharing Facility [TO]  
Do you share this toilet facility with other households?  
Yes ………………………………………………0 
No ……………………………………………….1 
What type of fuel does your household mainly use for cooking?  
Cooking Fuel [CF]  
Electricity……………………..…………….01 
Liquid Propane Gas (LPG)……………02  
Natural gas…………………….……………03  
Biogas…………………………….…………..04  
Kerosene………………………….….........05  
Coal / Lignite…………………….…………06  
Charcoal…………………………….…….....07  
Wood…………………………………………..08 
Straw/shrubs/grass…………….………..09  
Agricultural crop.…………….…………..10  
Animal dung……………………..………….11  
No Food Cooked in Household……..95  
Other (specify)________________96  
190 
Primary Source of Drinking Water [WA]  
What is the main source of drinking water for the household members? 
Piped water 
Piped into dwelling………………...01 
Piped into yard or plot....................02 
Public tap/standpipe……………….03  
Tubewell/borehole………...............04  
Dug well  
Protected well……………............01  
Unprotected well…….................02 
Water from spring  
Protected spring…………………….01 
Unprotected spring………………… 02 
Rainwater ………………………………….. 
Tanker-truck………………………………..61  
Cart with small tank/drum…………..71  
Surface water (river, stream, dam, lake, pond, canal, irrigation channel) 
…………………..……………...81  
Bottled Water……………………………...91  
Satchet water………………………………92 
Other (specify)________________96  
191 
Primary Source of Non-Drinking  
Such as cooking and handwashing?  
What is the main source of water used by your household for other purposes? 
Water  
[WA]  
Piped water 
Piped into dwelling……………..01 
Piped into yard or plot…………02 
Public tap/standpipe……………03  
Tubewell/borehole………...........04  
Dug well  
Protected well…………………….01  
Unprotected well……..................02 
Water from spring  
Protected spring…………………...01  
Unprotected spring……………….02 
Rainwater collection………………03  
Tanker-truck……………………….04  
Cart with small tank/drum………..05  
Surface water (river, stream, dam, lake, pond, canal, irrigation channel) 
…………………………………81  
 Other (specify)----------------------------------------------- 
PART C.EXPOSURE, SENSITIVITY TO CLIMATIC HAZARDS  
C1. Overall Community Experience 
C1.1 How will you rate the contributions of these features of your community to climate change vulnerability? (Tick where 
appropriate)  
Community Characteristics 
Ratings: 1- Very critical; 2 – Critical; 3 – Fairly critical; 4 – Little significant influence;; 5 – 
No significant influence 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Topography 
Nearness to refuse dump 
Nearness to water body 
Nature of building structures 
192 
Drainage systems 
Others……………………….. 
C1.2 Has your community experienced any of these climatic hazards? (CHECK ALL THAT APPLY) 
Yes 
No 
# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Hazard 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
 Climate-induced erosion 
Changes in rainfall pattern 
Seasonal temperature change 
10  Climate-induced soil infertility  
11 
Increase in temperature 
12  Others specify)…………………………………………. 
C1.3 If “Yes”, how often does it happen? (CHECK APPROPRIATE BOX) 
# 
Climatic hazard 
happened 
annually 
years 
happens 
once 
Frequency of occurrence 
Has 
Happens 
> 5 
> 10 years 
Rarely 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
 Climate-induced erosion 
Changes in rainfall pattern 
Seasonal temperature change 
Climate-induced soil infertility  
Increase in temperature 
12  Others………………………………. 
193 
Climate hazards 
climate-related events has your 
frequency of this occurrence? 
severity of this hazard? 
degree of negative impact on 
degree of negative impact on your 
C2.1 Which of the following 
C2.2 How would you rate the 
 C2.3 How would you rate the 
C2.4 How would you rate the 
 C2.4 How would you rate the 
household experienced in the 
3 = High 
last 10 years? (check all that 
2 = Medium 
apply) 
1 = Low 
3 = High 
2 = Medium 
1 = Low 
your household by this hazard? 
community by this hazard? 
3 = High 
2 = Medium 
1 = Low 
3 = High 
2 = Medium 
1 = Low 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
 Climate-induced erosion 
Changes in rainfall pattern 
Seasonal temperature change 
Climate-induced soil infertility  
Increase in temperature 
Others. Specify 
…………………….. 
C3. Susceptibility of Livelihood Activities to Climate Hazards 
Please indicate the susceptibility of the applicable your livelihood activities/occupation to the climatic hazards listed.  
194 
Degree of susceptibility of socioeconomic activity [3 – Highly susceptible, 2 – Susceptible and 1- Less susceptible]. LIST THE APPLICABLE NUMBER 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry 
Pests and 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
Climate-
Changes in 
Seasonal 
Climate-
Increase in 
Others. Specify 
spells 
diseases 
inducederosion 
rainfall 
temperature 
induced soil 
temperature 
pattern  
changes 
infertility 
Livelihood activity 
(INTERVIEWER TO 
LIST OCCUPATION 
OF RESPONDENT  
FARMERS ONLY 
If respondent’s main occupation is farming, ASK the rate of susceptibility of different crops cultivated to the various climate related hazards using a scale of 1-3] [3 – Highly 
susceptible, 2 – Susceptible and 1- Less susceptible] during the farming life cycle. 
FLC 1: Early stages (sowing, manure/fertilizer application) 
Degree of susceptibility of socioeconomic activity 
Crop Cultivated  
[3 – Highly susceptible, 2 – Susceptible and 1- Less susceptible], 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
Climate-
Changes in 
Seasonal 
Climate-
Increase in 
Others. 
diseases 
inducederosion 
rainfall 
temperature 
induced soil 
temperature 
Specify 
pattern  
changes 
infertility 
# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Maize 
Sorghum 
Rice 
Millet 
Groundnut 
Okra 
195 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Cowpea 
Cassava 
Cotton 
Cashew 
Mango 
Pepper 
Cowpea 
Others…… 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
196 
FLC2: Crop management stage (on farm) 
Degree of susceptibility of socioeconomic activity 
Crop Cultivated  
[3 – Highly susceptible, 2 – Susceptible and 1- Less susceptible], 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
Climate-
Changes in 
Seasonal 
Climate-
Increase in 
Others. 
diseases 
inducederosion 
rainfall 
temperature 
induced soil 
temperature 
Specify 
pattern  
changes 
infertility 
# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Maize 
Sorghum 
Rice 
Millet 
Groundnut 
Okra 
Cowpea 
Cassava 
Cotton 
Cashew 
Mango 
Pepper 
Cowpea 
Others…… 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
197 
FLC3. Harvesting and post-harvesting (yield quality and quantity, storage, marketing) 
Windstorms 
Degree of susceptibility of socioeconomic activity 
[3 – Highly susceptible, 2 – Susceptible and 1- Less susceptible], 
Climate-
Changes in rainfall 
induced soil 
pattern  
infertility 
Seasonal 
temperature 
changes 
Climate-
inducederosion 
Increase in 
temperature 
Others. 
Specify 
# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Crop Cultivated  
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and 
diseases 
Bushfires 
Maize 
Sorghum 
Rice 
Millet 
Groundnut 
Okra 
Cowpea 
Cassava 
Cotton 
Cashew 
Mango 
Pepper 
Cowpea 
Others…… 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
198 
C4. Provisioning Ecosystem Services Use and Susceptibility to Climate Hazards  
Please rate the susceptibility ofthe variety of natural resources/provisioning ecosystem services to the following climate hazards ([3 – Highly susceptible, 2 – 
Susceptible and 1- Less susceptible], 
Climate-
inducederosion 
Pests and 
diseases 
Dry 
spells 
Windstorms 
Bushfires 
Drought 
Flood  
Changes in 
rainfall 
pattern  
Seasonal 
temperature 
changes 
Climate-
induced 
soil 
infertility 
Increase in 
temperature 
Others. 
Specify 
Whichof the ff 
does your 
household 
collect and 
use (check all 
that apply) 
# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Provisioning 
Ecosystem 
Services 
Fuelwood  
Bushmeat 
Fodder and forage 
Freshwater 
Building material 
6  Wildfood/ plants 
7  Medicinal Plants 
8 
9 
Livestock 
Poultry 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
199 
C5.Provisioning Ecosystem Services-Use Conflicts? 
Provisioning ecosystem service 
Do you sometimes have to fight 
with other households in other to 
gain access to any provisioning 
ecosystem service? 
1= Yes, 2= No 
With whom? 
Fuelwood  
Bushmeat 
Fodder and forage 
Freshwater 
Building material 
Wildfood/ plants 
Medicinal Plants 
Livestock 
Poultry 
C6. Compared to other households in this community, I would say that my household has  
Level of access 
Check Appropriately 
more access to provisioning ecosystem services 
Less access to provisioning ecosystem services 
The same access to provisioning ecosystem services 
PART D.COPING AND ADAPTIVE STRATEGIES  
D1. Source of climate-related knowledge  
Please  tell  me  the  sources  of  climate  related  information/data  for  your  household  (INTERVIEWER  TO  PROMPT 
RESPONDENT FOR ANSWERS) 
Sourceof  climate-related 
knowledge 
CHECK 
APPLICABLE  
WHERE 
use 
Do 
you 
information 
1= Yes, 2= No 
this 
If  No,  briefly  state  the 
reason 
Ghana  Meteorological 
Services 
Newspapers 
Radio 
TV 
Mobile phone 
Internet 
Family and friends 
Village expert 
Children 
Extension officers 
School/Teachers 
Visiting climate scientists 
and researchers 
Others….specify 
201 
D2. Household perception of overall coping capacity to climate hazards 
Overall, how would you rate the difficulty of coping with 
this hazard for your household? 
3= High, 2= medium, 1=low  
Climate hazards 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
 Climate-induced erosion 
Changes in rainfall pattern 
Seasonal temperature change 
Climate-induced soil infertility  
Increase in temperature 
Others specify)…………………………………………. 
202 
D3. Household coping strategies (specific measures) to climate hazards 
When your household is exposed to this climate hazard, how do you cope with the effect as it relates to your main 
livelihood activity? 
Climate hazard 
How do you cope with the effect  Reasons why you adopted 
these measures 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
 Climate-induced erosion 
Changes in rainfall pattern 
Seasonal temperature change 
Climate-induced soil infertility  
Increase in temperature 
Others 
specify)…………………………………………. 
203 
D4. Institutional, Governance and Leadership Actions 
D4.1 For each of the following statements, rate your level of agreement  
5 = strongly agree, 4 = agree, 3 = neither agree nor disagree 2 = disagree, 1 = strongly disagree,  
Statement 
Level  of  agreement  of  a 
scale  of  1-5  (PROVIDE 
APPROPRIATE 
NUMBER) 
Our community  leaders  have successfully  led  us  through  climate  hazards  in  the 
past. 
Our community leaders are interested in climate change issues and the impacts on 
our community. 
Our  community  has  leaders  who  have  knowledge  and  skills  to  effectively  take 
charge of climate change adaptation. 
I trust our leaders to lead the community through climate change adaptation. 
 Our  community  leaders/government  officials  inform  us  of  national  or  regional 
climate change policy or initiatives that may impact our community. 
 Our community leaders inform us where we can get climate‐related information. 
Our leaders suggest to us what we can do to adapt to changing climate. 
Our  leaders  can  provide  us  with  the  resources  we  need  for  climate  adaptation 
activities. 
Our  leaders  encourage  community  members  to  take  part  in  climate  adaptation 
planning. 
 My voice is heard in community planning for climate change adaptation. 
 I have had the opportunity to participate in community‐level decision‐making 
204 
D4.2 Examples of community leaders’ initiatives on climate change [not just household effects] 
Climate hazard 
Examples of specific measures initiated by community 
leaders for coping with hazard 
Is this measure 
effective? 
1= Yes 
2= No 
Flood  
Drought 
Dry spells 
Pests and diseases 
Bushfires 
Windstorms 
 Climate-induced 
erosion 
Changes in rainfall 
pattern 
Seasonal temperature 
change 
Climate-induced soil 
infertility  
Others 
(specify)…………………. 
205 
D5. Migration 
Are there any members in your household who have migrated out? Yes / No 
Who? 
(relationship  to 
the 
respondent) 
Where? 
What 
occupation? 
Permanent 
/ 
(1) 
Seasonal (2) 
Reason 
migration 
for 
Any benefitsordisbenefits 
206 
D6. Social participation and inclusion 
Name of the 
group 
 Scope of climate 
change issues 
addressed  
Have you benefitted from 
participating in the 
group(s)? 
Opportunities for 
including women 
and youth 
Are you a 
member of any 
group on 
climate change 
mitigation and 
adaptation? 
YES/NO  
D7. Credit 
Have you 
received credit? 
From whom? 
What is the 
nature of the 
credit? 
Received as 
individual or 
group? 
If group, is it only 
women / men / 
mixed group? 
For what? 
 Yes  No 
Cash / in-kind 
 Individual 
Others (Specify; 
 Group 
 ) 
 D8. Extension Service 
Any 
from 
visit 
extension  workers/ 
services?  
 Yes  No 
Who? 
 MoFA 
  NADMO 
  Health  
 NGO (Specify) 
  Others (Specify: …… ) 
How frequent do they visit 
you? 
What do you benefit from 
the extension service? 
207 
APPENDIX 2: Focus Group Discussion Guide 
The objective of this group discussion sis to identify and understand differences in knowledge, 
impacts/effects an vulnerability to climate change at community level. 
Community Group: 
Men Women Youth  
Community: 
District: 
Region: 
Number of 
Participants: 
Time Started: Time Ended: 
1.  What are the main climate-related risks, hazards events in this community? How often do these 
events occur? Are there any trends or changes in the frequency of events over time?  
2.  Please tell us the five MOST important climate-hazards affecting your livelihood systems 
3.  How important are climate factors to community vulnerability relative to others 
4.  Who (social groups) are impacted the most in this community and why do you say so? 
5.  What are current strategies to cope during the difficult events? Are they working? 
6.  How do they differ between men and women?  
7.  Have coping strategies changed based on the changing frequency of events?  
8.  Have they changed for both men and women? If not, why not? 
9.  What events do you expect will occur in the future? When?  
10.   Does this perception of future events affect your plans for the future? Do you anticipate changes to 
your livelihoods? Do you anticipate changes to gender roles and relations? 
11.  What has been the general effects of these events on the community? Which livelihood systems do 
you think are impacted the most by? 
12.  What coping strategies are currently used to deal with the hazards identified? Are they working? 
13.  Are there different strategies that women and men would like to adopt which would reduce the impact 
of hazards on your livelihoods? 
208 
14.  What resources do different groups have that would help them to adopt these new strategies? 
15.  What are the main sources of knowledge on climate related hazards? Have these knowledge sources 
been effective in the past?Role of traditional/local/indigenous knowledge in dealing with effects 
16.  What in your opinion are the likely impact of climate change in the future?. How should the impacts 
be addressed? What role do you see for different members of the community in addressing these 
impacts 
17.  Which organisations/institutions/groups (from government, civil society, private sector, religious 
groups, etc.) are found in the community and are helping you address climate change effects? 
18.  Is there cooperation with other communities to cope with and adapt to climate-related hazards 
19.  Does the community have an established social information and communication channels 
20.  Access to savings and credit schemes, and microfinance services 
21.  Access to money transfers and remittances from cities and abroad  
209 
APPENDIX 3: Total number of households interviews for the Assessment 
Table 1. Surveyed households stratified across regions and districts 
Region 
District 
Brong Ahafo 
Northern 
Upper West 
Atebubu Amantin 
Banda 
Kintampo North 
Kintampo South 
Pru 
Sene East 
Sene West 
Tain 
Total 
Chereponi 
East Gonja 
Gushegu 
Kpandai 
Nanumba South 
Saboba 
Sagnarigu 
Tolon 
Yendi Municipal 
Zabzugu 
Bunkprugu-Yunyoo 
East Mamprusi 
Karaga 
Mamprugu-Mogduri 
Sawla-Tuna-Kalba 
West Gonja 
Bole 
Central Gonja 
Kumbungu 
Mion 
Nanumba North 
Savelugu-Nanton 
Tamale Metropolitan 
North Gonja 
Tatale Sangule 
West Mamprusi 
Total 
Daffiema-Busie Issa 
Jirapa 
Nadowli 
Sissala East 
Sissala West 
Wa West 
Wa East 
Lambussie Karni 
Lawra 
Nandom 
Wa Municipal 
210 
Sampled 
Households 
40 
42 
40 
42 
40 
59 
40 
40 
343 
30 
30 
28 
30 
29 
30 
30 
25 
32 
35 
28 
28 
26 
40 
30 
30 
30 
25 
22 
25 
28 
24 
30 
32 
40 
42 
30 
30 
28 
34 
22 
30 
32 
37 
20 
20 
20 
30 
Upper East 
Grand Total 
Total 
Nabdam 
Kassena Nankana Municipal 
Bawku Municipal 
Bawku West 
Bongo 
Builsa North 
Pusiga 
Talensi 
Builsa South 
Binduri 
Bolgatanga Municipal 
Kassena Nankana West 
Kassena NankanaEast 
Tempane 
Garu Tempane 
Total 
273 
32 
38 
35 
22 
38 
36 
22 
30 
28 
18 
30 
33 
23 
28 
21 
434 
1829 
211 
APPENDIX 4: Land Use/ Land Cover Map of the Assessment area  
212 
APPENDIX 5: Other On-Farm climate change adaptation option for evaluation and 
implementation by GASIP 
No. 
Adaptation strategy 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
13 
14 
15 
16 
Construction of  dugouts for water supply 
Provision of improved seed 
Bee keeping 
Bounding of valleys for rice farming 
Aquaculture (Training of  farmers on rearing and harvesting of fish (tilapia) 
Cultivation of vegetables for urban centres 
Expansion of dams in communities in Northern, Upper East and Upper West 
Regions (E.g. Karaga dam) 
Provision of tractors for farmers to use 
Rehabilitation of existing irrigation facilities 
Establish and promote local markets for staple foods (Yam, millet) 
Establishment of small-scale agroprocessing centers (maize, groundnuts, shea 
etc) in communities 
Community warehouse and storage facilities 
Changing cropping intensity 
Reducing water use in land preparation 
Maintaining crop residues 
213 
